Rep. Roman C. Pueinski (D.—111.) called attention to an article in the Chicago Sun-Times on the Midwest’s dissatisfaction with the distribution of Federal R&D projects. President’s science adviser Dr. Donald F. Hornig said two Congressional committees were investigating whether research contract funds had been concentrated in too few areas of the country to the detriment of other regions. Dr. Hornig also said that this investigation showed that science can no longer ignore the political process. (CR, 6/10/64, A3138)
Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., former astronaut, was presented the George Washington Award for 1963 by the Freedom Foundation, in Valley Forge, Pa., ceremony. (Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/64)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D.-Ind.) said in the House: “On Wednesday we saw the successful launching of the Saturn rocket carrying into orbit around the earth 18 tons. This included the largest payload ever placed in orbit by man and exceeds the largest Russian payload by 11 tons. For several years now this Nation has been plagued with the uncomfortable knowledge that the Russians were ahead of us in the space effort. This has been based primarily on the fact that they had a greater lift capability. The United States is now ahead in lift capability and in every other phase of the space program. . . .” (CR, 1/31/64,1443)
Rep. Edward J. Gurney (R.-Fla.) included in Congressional Record a resolution by Florida Library and Historical Commission appealing to the President, the Florida Governor, and the U.S. Board of Geographic Names “to carefully consider the possibility of retaining the name, Cape Canaveral, as the geographic designation only of the easternmost tip of the land formation known as Cape Canaveral (that tip upon which no portion of the missile complex is located) thereby detracting none whatever from the widespread desire to honor our late President John F. Kennedy.” (CR, 1/21/64, A214)
NASA’s newly created Science and Technology Advisory Committee for Manned Space Flight convened for first time at John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA. Formed to advise Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, the committee met for briefings by NASA officials and tours of nasa facilities at Cape Kennedy and Merritt Island. (NASA Release 64-72)
Lunar photographs made by ranger VII and interpretations of their findings were discussed in Saturday Review by Science Editor John Lear: “The net sum of the evidence here recited is that the Congress and the people have been misled about the true significance of the Ranger VII mission. The pictures sent back home by the ingeniously constructed robot dragonfly contain no more assurance of the safety of a manned landing on the moon than existed before Ranger VII took off. On the contrary, one sure danger has been discovered that had not been suspected before. The apparent disappearance of the supposed danger of impenetrable dust is accompanied by the equal danger of a landing surface that may be as fragile as a tea biscuit. Ranger VII couldn’t possibly have seen what matters most of all when human expeditions of the moon are being weighed: the bearing strength of the lunar face. Given man’s present limited knowledge of soil physics, no photograph could tell whether the moon’s surface will hold a spaceboat or even a lone man. . . .” (SR, 9/5/64, 35-43)
At NASA Hq. awards presentation ceremony, Joseph Mandelkorn of Lewis Research Center and William R. Cherry of Goddard Space Flight Center jointly received NASA Contributions Award for development of improved (n-on-p) radiation-resistant solar cells. Mandelkorn received $5,000 cash award and Cherry, $1,000. William W. Smith, formerly of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and Bruce W. Schmitz of JPL received $1,000 award for their contribution of Trajectory-Correction Propulsion System, used recently in ranger VII lunar photography mission. Wilmer H. Reed III of LaRC received $1,500 award for his contribution of a Test Unit Free-Flight Suspension System. Howell D. Garner and Henry J. E. Reid, Jr., of Langley Research Center, received $1,700 award for their contribution of Dynamic Precession Damper for Spin Stabilized Vehicles. Awards were presented by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. HughL. Dryden. (Program)
Yuri Gagarin, Soviet cosmonaut and first man to fly in space, said in Izvestia interview that Engr. Col. Vladimir Mikhailovitch Komarov, member of voskhod i crew, had once been disqualified for cosmonaut training because of heart-beat irregularity, but had been reinstated when a heart specialist declared his heart to be sound. (Loory, N.Y. Her., Trib., 10/13/64)
Dr. Donald E. Hornig, scientific adviser to President Johnson, was quoted on the controversial MOL project and its possible merger with NASA’s Apollo: “mol is still under discussion, and the scope of it is still in a state of flux. The Air Force certainly has a role to play in space.” Sources inside the White House said Dr. Hornig was against full funding of the mol, for which project the Air Force wanted $175 million in FY1966.	(Av. Wk., 12/14/64,15)
Attempted flight of X-15 No. 3, with Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) as pilot, was aborted 10 min. before scheduled launch from B-52 mother craft because of problems with cabin pressure, (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.)
In article on “The Politics of the Space Age” in the Saturday Evening Post, President Lyndon B. Johnson essayed his views on the manner in which space exploration may bring an end to hostilities among nations on earth. In this abridgement of forthcoming volume edited by Lillian Levy entitled Space: Its Impact on Man and Society, President Johnson said; “. . . Any discussion of the ‘politics’ of the space age is, necessarily, a discussion of politics in the classical sense, not the convention-and-campaign sense. If the space age has not eliminated the smoke-filled room, it has at least opened a window and given air to fundamental and sometimes obscured values. “The fate of the free society—and the human values it upholds— is inalterably tied to what happens in outer space, as humankind’s ultimate dimension. While the response of our technology is important, no less important is the response and the role of our political institutions—both to the challenge of the present and to the opportunities of the future. “The vital role of politics in tbe space age has been evident since October 4, 1957, when the Soviet’s Sputnik I was launched. The orbiting of that first unmanned earth satellite was a feat of science. But the worldwide impact and importance were essentially political. Sputnik I was proclaimed by the Soviets as validation of Communist prophecies about the superiority of their political system. Such conclusions have been proved premature ... “Why did this occur ? Self-examination is imperative. In retrospect, the answers seem to be these: “1. Despite two decades of intensive scientific advance we had failed to establish adequate relationships between the scientific community and the political community—to the blame of each and the disservice of both. “2. Inherent in the political miscalculation toward Space exploration was the influence of the unfortunate anti-intellectualism of the early 1950’s. . . . The open contempt with which the Sputnik I success was greeted by some in positions of political trust betrayed a degeneration of the respect for intellect which is indispensable to the governing of a free and open society. “3. Perhaps the greatest failure of all was devaluation of the first— and the hardest—responsibility of elected representatives of the people in our system: the responsibility to lead. . . . “In the years since 1957 the American political system and its politicians have acquitted themselves well, as have our scientists. An orderly program of space exploration has been devised and financed without unbalancing the values of our free society. . . . “Our most important achievement politically in the space age has been this retention of basic national character, purpose and political values in our space program. It is reflected by a primary objective of our program, clearly stated at the outset, to gather knowledge for the benefit of all nations and to join with all nations in this endeavor. . . “Thus far the space age has 'been characterized as a period of competition. It is important, however, that we keep in mind the fact that the competitiveness is 'between political systems, not between national scientific communities. In the world of science the logical instinct is toward cooperation without regard to political boundaries. This impulse we must preserve. The real challenge of the space age is for the politician to tear down the walls between men which have been erected by his predecessors and contemporaries in the political field, rather than to raise its barriers higher into the free and peaceful vastness of space. If the potentials of the age of space are fully realized, this period will someday be known—and blessed by all people on earth—as the Golden Age of Political Science.” (Sat. Eve. Post, 2/29/64, 22, 24) February 29: Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col. usmc), hospitalized with minor concussion suffered in accidental fall, announced he would remain on active duty in USMC until April 1; after this retirement date, he would be free to campaign for Democratic senatorial nomination in Ohio, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/64, A2) During February; Second 30-day test of effects of 100% oxygen on men began at usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks AFB. The four subjects would remain in space cabin 42 days, with 12 days at sea-level atmosphere before change to oxygen atmosphere and pressure of about 5 psia. (Av. WL, 2/24/64,27; M&R, 2/24/64,9)
Langley Research Center announced three key management appointments: Mr. Eugene C. Draley was appointed Assistant Director for Flight Projects; Dr. John E. Duberg was named an Assistant Director in charge of the research activities of the Dynamic Loads Div. and the Structures Research Div., and Mr. Francis B. Smith was appointed Assistant Director responsible for the Analysis and Computation Div., the Instrument Research Div., and the Space Mechanics Div. (larc Release)
gao Comptroller General Joseph Campbell said that GAO would evaluate dod policies affecting nonprofit organizations performing design, technical direction, and systems engineering functions for the military services. “We have a continuing interest in finding out whether salaries higher than the government scale paid by some of these organizations are really necessary and justified or are only a way of indirectly paying higher [wages] for government work,” Campbell said. Another area of prime concern to GAO was relinquishment to nongovernment organizations of technical direction and similar activities it considered Government management functions. dod had already clamped fiscal ceilings on six of these organizations to prevent their growth and was inviting increased industry competition in the areas of technical direction and systems engineering. Campbell told Aviation Week and Space Technology that “if we are faced with any intention to sustain permanently some of these organizations as arms of government, we would have to look into the situation very carefully and thoroughly.” In commenting on NASA’s approach to nonprofit organizations, Ernest W. Brackett, Asst. Deputy Associate Administrator, noted that although NASA had “inherited” one nonprofit organization, the California Institute of Technology’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, it had not and would not establish any “captive” nonprofit organizations. Two other nonprofit organizations were also performing work for NASA—rand Corp., with contracts totaling $3.3 million, and mit’s Lincoln Laboratories, with contracts totaling over $7 million. (Av. Wk., 12/28/64, 31) December 28: Director General of the International Air Transport Association, Sir William Hildred, said in the association’s annual air traffic forecast, “Thanks to increased efficiencies and economies, the balance between revenues and expenditures should continue to improve. In fact, it just seems possible that the industry will succeed in making a positive net profit in 1965 for the first time in its life.” (upi, NYT, 12/29/64,50)
Dr. Joseph Shea, manager of msc Apollo Spacecraft Office, said that U.S. would land men on the moon before Dec. 31, 1969. He stated that in his judgment “we have a much better than even chance” of landing the first two astronauts on the lunar surface ahead of the 1970 deadline set by the late President Kennedy, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 6/6/64)
AiAA 1964 James H. Wyld Memorial Award was presented to Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf) head of usaf Titan III development program, for his work on Titan III launch vehicle, aiaa 1964 Propulsion Award was presented to David Altman, United Technology Center vice president, for his contributions to science of propulsion. (A&A, 6/64,87; aiaa “Honors & Awards”)
Sen. William Proxmire (D.-Wis.) spoke on the Senate floor on general aviation (“all aviation activity except the airlines and the military”): “Three observations about general aviation are worth sharing. “General aviation has greatly expanded our horizons for recreation, commerce, and government for a relatively small but potent and influential number of people. It can do so for many more. “General aviation has sharply increased the pace of business and political competition. By reducing the unproductive travel time of costly personnel, the airplane, particularly in general aviation, has acted as a labor creator rather than as a labor saver. By making it 766-598 O—65--22 possible to do more things, the airplane has forced people to do more things to keep ahead of the competition. “General aviation in the rest of the world suffers under an oppressive load of regulatory restriction to so great an extent that it barely exists. We must guard against burdening U.S. general aviation with similar controls producing the same result.” (CR, 9/28/64, 22241-43)
John Stack, vice president and director of engineering at Republic Aviation, predicted that early in the 1970’s a traveler flying westward in supersonic transport will be able to keep up with the sun: “Whether it is a Mach 2 plane or a Mach 3 or better, you could leave London at 8 A.M., arrive in New York at 8 A.M., refuel and be in Los Angeles before 8 A.M., refuel again and be in Hawaii at 8 A.M.” (upi, NYT, 1/8/64, 13)
At conclusion of Ranger management hearings by Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Subcommittee Chairman Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.) remarked that testimony “indicated to me that there was a serious loss of NASA liaison or NASA management. This, I think, is primarily the question that is before the subcommittee, having arrived at the conclusion . . . that the professional, technical people at Cal Tech are extremely able people. .. .” (M&R, 5/11/64,15)
Picket lines were set up at the entrances to Cape Kennedy and the Merritt Island Launch Area (mila) by United Plant Guards Workers of America. The union charged that Wackenhut Corp., subcontractor to twa at the Saturn/Apollo site, was employing nonunion guards. 1,886 of 2,597 construction workers at the Saturn V complex refused to cross the picket lines, and about 700 of 2,500 workers at the USAF Titan III site were absent. William Simkin, vice chairman of the President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission, requested that the 'building trades unions return to work, (upi, Wash. Post, 4/2/64; AP, Balt. Sun, 4/2/64; upi, NYT, 4/3/64)
National Aeronautics and Space Council Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman Dr. Edward C. Welsh said on “From the People” radio program that U.S. has “at least a 50-50 chance of getting to the moon ahead of [U.S.S.R.]. . . . I’m talking about landing on the moon and taking off from the moon and returning safely to earth. , I’m not talking about a [circumlunar] shot around the moon which they might be able to do even with this [present] equipment.” Discussing Soviet’s threeman VOSKHOD I space flight, he said the fact that the cosmonauts did not wear spacesuits was “probably one of the most significant aspects of the whole flight.” (AP, Houston Post, 10/19/64)
Senate passed H.R. 11296 (FY 1965 appropriations for independent offices), after rejecting (69-20) amendment sponsored by Sen. William Proxmire to reduce NASA funds by $68,594,000 for Research and Development; by $17,880,500 for Construction of Facilities; and by $13,525,500 for Administrative Operations. As passed by the Senate, NASA appropriations for FY 1965 amounted to $5.3 billion, divided as follows: r&d, $4,413,594,000; CofF, $262,880,500; and AO, $623,525,500. Bill was sent to conference. (CR, 8/5/64, 17554-77)
Astronaut Neil Armstrong addressed Aerospace Workshop at Drake Univ.: “We don’t feel at this time it is particularly important whether an astronaut is masculine or feminine. Astronauts are picked on the basis of experience and training. At present there are no women with the proper qualifications available. Some day we will have qualified women and I’m sure they’ll be included in the program.” (Des Moines Register, 7/11/64)
The first of three giant Pegasus satellites arrived at NASA John F. Kennedy Space Center. A Saturn I space vehicle (SA—9) would launch the 3,200-lb. satellite into an orbit visible from earth and ranging from about 310- to 465-mi. altitude, sometime in the first quarter of 1965. Primary mission of the Pegasus satellites would be to use its 2,000 sq. ft. of capacitator panels to measure, record, and transmit back to earth data on the frequency, size, direction, and speed of meteoroids in nearearth space. This information would be important to development of manned and unmanned spacecraft, (ksc Release 227-64)
NASA designer of echo i, William J. O’Sullivan, said he believed the satellite still had its spherical shape after over four years in orbit. An optical investigation made by the Goodyear Aerospace Corp. for NASA Langley Research Center indicated that the satellite’s aluminum surface—which made the balloon highly reflective of light and radar waves, regulated its temperature, and protected the plastic film from space hazards—still reflected like a mirror. From calculations using the known reflective characteristics of echo I when it was launched and his interpretation of the Goodyear measurements, O’Sullivan concluded that echo I “is still essentially spherical and that its very thin coating of aluminum has suffered no measurable degradation in specularity or reflectivity.” (LaRC Release)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.), speaking at Midwest Governors’ Conference in Minneapolis, recommended establishment of a national technology commission to award Federal research projects to promote nationwide economic development. Rep. Karth said concentration of Government R&D contracts to industries and universities on East and West coasts showed that “the broad national economic development is not being served.” (Higgins, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 9/11/64)
Sen. William Proxmire (D.~Wis.) said GAO study showed that usaf could save more than $1 million a year in administrative costs at AMR through consolidation of supply management functions. (AP, Houston Chron., 4/3/64)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D—Ind.) proposed on the House floor that NASA establish a Midwest office, similar to its North Eastern Office and Western Operations Office. “. . . The benefits of such an office to NASA would be great and certainly it would be a step in establishing a work ing relationship between NASA and the Midwest. It would also assist NASA in exploiting the potential of the Midwest. . . . “I cannot stress enough the need for a more equitable geographic distribution of our defense and space activities. It is in the national interest that steps be taken to spread these activities throughout the country. My proposal for a NASA Midwest office would be a step in that direction.” (CR, 3/11/64,4725)
X—15 No. 1 flown by John B. McKay (nasa) to 2,932 mph (mach 4.44) and 82,000 ft. near Edwards, Calif. This was first flight of No. 1 since it was modified for high-altitude flight research (wing-tip pods containing micrometeoroid and dust collectors, spectrometer, and densitron; new inertial guidance system originally designed for use in usaf X-20). Purpose of this flight was operational checkout of new equipment and evaluation of flight characteristics with the wing-tip pods added. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; frc Release)
Appointment of Maj. Gen. Alvin R. Luedecke (usaf Ret.) as Deputy Director of Cal Tech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory was announced by JPL Director Dr. William H. Pickering. General manager of aec since his retirement in 1958, General Luedecke would replace Brian Sparks effective August 1. (nasa Release 64-159)
NASA announced award of three-year contract to Bendix Field Engineering Corp. for launch support services at John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA. Contract was expected to cost about $2.8 million for the first year hut could amount to as much as $17 million for the three-year period. (NASA Release 64-256)
John H. Glenn, Jr., discussed with NASA Administrator James E. Webb the possibility of the former astronaut’s returning to NASA in advisory capacity, according to NASA spokesman, but nothing had been decided by the two. (upi, Wash. Post, 7/2/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/64, A8)
Publication of Advanced Bearing Technology (SP-38) by Lewis Research Center engineers Edmond E. Bisson and William J. Anderson, was announced by NASA. The book was described as “an important step in NASA’s Technology Utilization Program aimed at making new space technology available to all branches of industry.” (NASA Release 6458; lrc Release 64-22)
New, improved solar cell was described at Conference of Photovoltaic Specialists by Joseph Mandelkorn, head of group at NASA Lewis Research Center that developed the solar cell. The new cell was made of pure silicon with small amount of aluminum added. Before 1960, solar cells were made of silicon with small amount of phosphorus added. In 1960, Mandelkorn discovered that substituting boron for phosphorus made cells with greater radiation resistance; these cells were used on telstar i, whose orbit passed through Van Allen radiation belts. The newest cells, even more radiation resistant, were expected to have useful lifetime of 25-50 times that of silicon-phosphorus type. (lrc Release 64-51)
Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc), received his colonelcy from President Johnson in White House ceremony. Since the Senate had not gotten to the promotion list prior to adjournment, the President, after consultation with members of Congress, had made a recess appointment for Glenn, (upi, NYT, 10/28/64, 38; Balt. Sun, 10/28/64)
X-15 No. 2 flown by pilot John B. McKay (nasa) to 86,000-ft. altitude at maximum speed of 3,000 mph (mach 4.54). The flight continued checkout of the revised landing gear system on the No. 2 aircraft and checked modifications made to prevent nose gear from coming down prematurely. Total engine bum time was 76 sec. and tests performed were successful, (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.)
ComSatCorp announced that six persons had been nominated by its board of directors for election to the new board by public stockholders. They were: Leo D. Welch, Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, David M. Kennedy, George L. Killion, Leonard H. Marks, and Bruce G. Sundlun. The corporation announced that the first annual meeting of the shareholders was tentatively planned for Sept. 17 in Washington. (ComSatCorp Release, 7/8/64; NYT, 7/9/64, 43C, 45C)
Nuclear “breeder” reactor using thorium fuel, pioneered by Vice Adm. Hyman G. Rickover, was under consideration by aec and Calif. Dept, of Water Resources for a nuclear power plant, according to recent letter from aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg to Sen. John 0. Pastore, Chairman of Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy. Built around the “seed-and-blanket” design developed by the Rickover team, the thorium-fueled reactor appeared to have “unusual potential for generating economic nuclear power and for breeding.” If successful, Dr. Seaborg said, the concept would “represent a major advance in reactor technology and an important milestone in our national objective of conserving nuclear fuel resources.” (Finney, NYT, 2/2/64,1,30)
Management changes in propulsion programs in NASA’s Office of Advanced Research and Technology were effective this date. John L. Sloop, head of oart Div. of Chemical Propulsion and Power. Generation, was appointed to new position of Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, assisting Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff. Propulsion division was redesignated Div. of Chemical Propulsion, with Adelbert 0. Tischler of NASA Office of Manned Space Flight as Director. At the same time, management of M—1 engine project was transferred from omsf to Div. of Chemical Propulsion, oart. (nasa Release 64-4.)
On third anniversary of his historic space flight, first American in space Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., usn) received the Langley Medal, highest award of the Smithsonian Institution, in ceremonies at the Smithsonian, Washington, D.C. (CR, 5/5/64,9767-68)
Test of parasail spacecraft recovery system for manned space flight was conducted by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center over Trinity Bay, Tex. Unmanned boilerplate Gemini spacecraft carrying parasail system in stowed position was dropped from C-II9 aircraft at H,000-ft. altitude. Parasail deployed properly and landing rockets reduced impact to 10 fps, but because of rigging error in parachute installation the spacecraft descended straight down instead of making programed turn, msc’s John Kiker said everything functioned in proper sequence and the test was considered successful. (Av. Wk., 12/14/64, 61)
usaf and usn astronomers planned special telescopic observation of the moon on June 4 and 5 in an attempt to identify the mysterious red spots first observed by Sir William Herschel in 1738. The spots, located in the crater Aristarchus, were observed in October 1963 by astronomer J. C. Greenacre from the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Ariz. They indicate the possibility of volcanos below its barren surface. (Ubel, N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/4/64; AP, Balt. Sun, 6/5/64)
Dr. Edward Teller, nuclear physicist, testified before House Select Committee on Government Research on the Federal Government’s role in research. Dr. Teller criticized DOD’s secrecy in scientific developments, saying practice had been to keep them secret unless it could be proved without a doubt that making them public would be in the national interest. “I think the burden of proof should be on the other side,” Dr. Teller stated. “I am pretty well convinced that the Russians have all our secrets and I am even afraid they have the secrets we are going to discover in the next two years. Our industry and our citizens don’t have those secrets.” (nasa LAR III/ll; AP, NYT, 1/23/64, 9)
London betting house of William Hill Ltd., announced odds of 100-to-l against manned lunar landing by U.S.S.R. before Jan. 1, 1971 and 150-to-l against manned lunar landing by U.S. before same date. Several weeks later the firm improved their odds by changing date to Jan. 1, 1968. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/27/64; SBD, 11/12/64)
President Johnson told a Texas news conference that he would establish a seven-man advisory board for the U.S. supersonic transport (sst) development. Members of the board would be: Defense Secretary McNamara, Treasury Secretary Dillon, Commerce Secretary Hodges, cia Director John McCone, NASA Administrator Webb, FAA Administrator Halaby, and New York banker Eugene Black. Asked whether he had given the Supersonic Transport Advisory Board a specific assignment, the President replied: “The executive order will do that. It is being drawn. I wanted you to know that we are doing that. It has not been finalized yet. It may be changed in the details. But we want to have the broad spectrum of the Government interested in it, to get the best judgments of all of our people in an advisory capacity.” Asked if we were setting a deadline on the Board’s report back to him, the President answered: “No. This will be advisory. I am not asking for a report. I am asking them to advise in connection with the contracts and all the matters covered by the Black report and by the report that I made in connection with the testimony before the Congress. The Congress has already appropriated $60 million. We have already had an evaluation of the various proposals. But we just want to get this senior group of officials to sit in and counsel with us.” (Transcript, NYT, 3/30/64; WSJ, 3/30/64)
USAf’s Vice Chief of Staff General William F. McKee was presented his third Distinguished Service Medal by President Johnson. Retiring after 35 years in the armed forces, General McKee was joining NASA Sept. 1, as Assistant Administrator for Management Development. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/28/64; AP, NYT, 7/31/64, 5)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell discussed Lunar Orbiter in testimony before Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “In 1963, die Lunar Orbiter was defined and a contractor selected. This program will move into high gear this year and will require $49.3 million in Fiscal Year 1965 to meet its targeted first launch in 1966. This will be a tight schedule but because of the importance of this mission in support of Apollo, every effort will be made to meet that date. . . .” Questioned by Subcommittee Chairman Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.), Dr. Newell said NASA was thinking about adding five Lunar Orbiters to the five already approved. The proposed increase was because the Lunar Orbiter “will be a most important spacecraft not only for the support of the manned lunar landing effort, But for continuing research on the moon, on its geodetic properties, and experiments on radioactivity of the lunar surface.” Of the recently orbited echo ii passive communications satellite, Dr. Newell said: “The echo n has shown some scintillation in tfye radio wavelengths which might indicate that it has some defect in shape—perhaps a tear, maybe a dent, or something of that sort. However, it shows no such scintillation on the optical observations, which is puzzling. It remains, however, a completely adequate reflector so that whatever distortion in shape may have occurred has not interfered with its usefulness.” (Transcript)
USAF Titan III solid-fuel rocket motor was fired in static test at United Technology Center’s Coyote, Calif., test facilities. A joint in the nozzle skirt failed during last 10 sec. of the 112-sec. test, causing a fire that did only minor damage to the test stand, but all test objectives were met. afsc Space Systems Div. Deputy Chief of Staff for Manned Spaceflight Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier termed the test an absolute success. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/7/64; M&R, 8/16/64, 8)
In Washington Evening Star article, William Hines reported Georgetown Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl C. Kiess’ conviction that life cannot exist on Mars. Dr. Kiess’ spectrographic observations of the planet convinced him no oxygen or water vapor existed there. Nitrogen compounds have been detected, and Dr. Kiess believed Martian atmosphere is 97-99% pure nitrogen gas. He believed density of air at Martian surface is greater than is generally believed, meaning that nitrogen tetroxide could exist as gas, liquid, and solid—gaseous above 70° F, solid below 14° F, and liquid in between. In laboratory experiments Dr. Kiess had demonstrated that when various nitrogen compounds are subjected to temperature changes they turn color to duplicate “seasonal” color changes observed on Mars, even creating artificial “snow storm” and simulating waxing and waning of Martian “polar caps.” Dr. Kiess’ view was minority opinion, refuted by majority of scientists. Dr. Lewis Kaplan of jpl said in interview that Dr. Kiess’ conclusions were based on spectrographic analyses which had been refuted by better spectrographic analyses of Vancouver, B.C., scientists. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/4/64)
The Boeing Co. was awarded the annual Missiles and Rockets New Product of the Year Award for its development of a microminiature welder. The award was presented to Boeing officials by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council. Awards of Honor went to Kollmorgen Corp. (for compact pointing interferometer), and to Control Data Corp. (for its 6600 computer). (M&R, 8/3/64,8)
More than 2,000 high school juniors and seniors attended Student Space Conference at Northeastern Univ., Boston, where they heard remarks by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper, Bruce T. Lundin of NASA, John D. Nicolaides of NASA, Nancy G. Roman of NASA, and Isaac Asimov, writer and biochemist. (Boston Sun. Globe, 5/3/64)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, dedicated J-4 propulsion engine test cell at Arnold Engineering Development Center. He said: “In recent years, there has been much talk about a ‘space race’. There is such a race and we should not forget it for a minute. However, we must not let the pace of our national space program be determined just by the actions of others. Actually, the real opponent in the space race is time.” We must continue “to push technology vigorously,” and “recognize the importance to the national space program of adequate technical facilities.” In answer to reporters’ questions following dedication, Dr. Welsh said the U.S.S.R. still led the U.S. in the space race and was speeding up its program. (Text; Clark, NYT, 6/17/64)
Tass reported monument to mark man’s first space flight would be erected in Moscow. The monument would consist of bust of Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin and a meteorite of white metal, 'both the work of Lev Kerbel, attached to metal pylon about 80 ft. high. (Reuters, NYT, 4/10/64)
Successful static firing of 156-in. solid propellant rocket motor was conducted at Lockheed Propulsion Co., Potrero, Calif. The 110-sec. firing was considered successful in all respects. Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier, Deputy Commander for Manned Systems, afsSD, said the test signified “ a completely new era with regard to the size of solid motors for ballistic missiles, and in particular, for space boosters.” (M&R, 6/8/64, 25)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.—N. Mex.), chairman of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, issued a statement related to his letter to President Johnson [See Dec. 7, 1964] in which he had proposed a merger of the Air Force Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) and NASA Apollo-X programs: “Department of Defense and NASA officials have informed me of an agreement they have worked out in relation to the Air Force’s proposed Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) and the space administration’s proposed Apollo-X. “The Department of Defense and NASA have gone a long way toward answering the questions I raised several weeks ago. I suggested at that time that perhaps a great savings could be achieved without sacrifice to either the NASA or Air Force responsibilities in space by harmonizing mol and Apollo-X. I have been told that the Air Force and NASA will take advantage of each other’s technology and hardware development with all efforts directed at achievement of a true space laboratory as an end goal. The review underway by both agencies will strengthen the total space effort. “We should take full advantage of the technology and ground-support systems developed for Project Apollo. The object of the Senate Space Committee in raising questions about mol and Apollo-X was to accomplish the wisest use of personnel and money, not in criticism of either project.” New York Times reporter John Finney interpreted Sen. Anderson’s statement as an indication that the Administration “had gone along with his [Sen. Anderson’s] suggestions. Not lost upon the Administration was the letter’s implication that it would be difficult to defend the proposed $5.2 billion space budget on Capitol Hill unless the Administration could show it had eliminated duplication.” (Text; Finney, NYT, 12/20/64,45)
First meeting of Interim Communications Satellite Committee, with representatives of 15 nations, adjourned after four days. In its session, the committee approved rules of procedure, appointed Committee Chairman (John A. Johnson, ComSatCorp vice president for international affairs), and heard progress reports on development of global commercial communications system. (ComSatCorp Release; NYT, 10/4/64, 74)
Dr. Winston Edward Kock, vice president-research for Bendix Corp., was named Director of NASA’s Electronics Research Center to be located in the Boston area, effective Sept. 1. As director, he would have charge of fundamental work in space and aeronautical electronics. (NASA Release 64^172; upi, Wash. Post, 7/11/64)
X-15 No. 2 piloted by John B. McKay (NASA) in planned captive flight, (nasa X—15 Proj. Off.)
gao complained nasa had spent money unnecessarily by producing four basically similar films on the flight of astronaut John Glenn, three on the Alan Shepard flight, three on the Apollo lunar exploration project, two on the Ariel satellite, and two emphasizing international cooperation in the space program. The cost of the films ranged from $216,000 for one of the Glenn-flight productions to $1,500 for one of the three on Shepard’s flight. (Orlando Sentinel, 11/4/64; NYT, 11/4/64,40)
NASA announced Saturn contract modifications totaling $16,448,169 had been awarded to Chrysler Corp. Space Div., which was assembling two Saturn I first stages and 12 Saturn IB first stages at NASA Michoud Operations. One award was for expansion of Chrysler’s Saturn booster reliability testing program at Michoud. Other two awards were for increased engineering support at Marshall Space Flight Center and John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, (nasa Release 64-48)
Interviewed in Washington Sunday Star, nasc Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman Dr. Edward C. Welsh was asked how far U.S. now was on its way to the moon. “I suppose we went a good way toward the moon objective when the decision was made. Consequently, I would say that we are much more than a third of the way to the moon at the present time.” Asked about Administration policy to classify Soviet space failures, Dr. Welsh replied: “. . . The policy of classifying Soviet space failures was developed largely to protect sources of information, many of which in those days were individuals actually in the Soviet Union. “Most of the information we get today comes from sources outside the Soviet Union which need no protection. As a consequence, there is less j ustification at the present time for classifying Russian space failures than there was in the past. I am not saying that there is no justification. . . . “I think we will continue to examine this policy to see whether or not it can be relaxed, to see whether there is any justification at all for keeping from the American people information in regard to Soviet failures.” (Wash. Sun. Star, 5/24/64)
Former NASA astronaut Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc), completed 15-day assignment at El Toro, Calif., mcas, where he was on TDY for flight refresher training. {J/Armed Forces, 11/28/64,5)
A spokesman for the Senate’s Select Committee on Small Business’ Subcommittee, headed by Sen. Russell B. Long (D.—La.), reported it would meet shortly after Congress convened Jan. 4 to consider senatorial requests for an investigation of charges that NASA had given away to business firms valuable patent rights developed at public expense and worth millions of dollars. James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, claimed the agency was following Federal law and guidelines laid down by President John F. Kennedy shortly before his death. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/28/64)
DOD was reconsidering its tentative plans for a military communications satellite system, instead would rely on satellites of Communications Satellite Corp., John Finney reported in New York Times. Partly in response to Congressional pressure, Finney reported, DOD was proposing to delay development of ground stations and defer or prolong the completion of its military comsats. Final decision would be dependent upon outcome of DOD negotiations with ComSatCorp, still underway. (Finney, NYT, 1/27/64)	_
dod announced $1,245,601 contract award to B. B. McCormick and Sons, Inc., for road work at Merritt Island Launch Area, John F. Kennedy Space Center, nasa. The NASA-funded contract was awarded by Army Corps of Engineers, (dod Release 699-64)
Postmaster General John A. Gronouski revealed plans for issuance of Robert Hj Goddard air mail commemorative stamp this year. The stamp would honor 50th anniversary of Dr. Goddard’s first patent registrations in 1914 for solid/liquid fuel methods and multi-stage rocket designs. (nsc Ltr. 4/1/64; Goddard News, 4/20/64,3)
Formation of a National Academy of Engineering under the charter of the NAS was announced by Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of the National Academy of Sciences, and Dr. Augustus B. Kinzel, President-elect of the National Academy of Engineering. Among the founding members were Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, and Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, (nas-nrc Release; Wash. Post, 12/12/64, 20)
House of Representatives voted (283-73) to approve nasa FY 1965 budget authorization of $5,193,810,500. It defeated the only two amendments offered: one proposed by Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R.—111.) to delete the $14 million for the new Electronics Research Center in the Boston area; and one proposed by Rep. Henry S. Reuss (D.-Wis.) to eliminate the $24.7 million for aeronautic R&D on supersonic transport aircraft. (CR, 3/25/64, 6071-6123)
Aviation Week recounted an exchange between Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and Sen. J. William Fulbright (D.-Ark.) in which McNamara stated that the Apollo program had psychological value but no direct military worth. In response to a question about the effect of the Apollo program on the mission of dod, McNamara said: “... if a psychological victory that might result from the Soviets arriving at the moon first leads to a shift in attitudes in the world, tending to reduce the belief in the strength of the West, and in increasing the Soviet’s view of the weakness of the West, this is bound to have a military effect. This is exactly what occurred in connection with our space programs, and it led to a very costly response by this country.” (Av. Wk., 7/20/64)
First of series of background briefings on scientific and technical aspects of NASA programs was held at NASA Hq., with Dr. John E. Naugle, Director of Geophysics and Astronomy Programs, reviewing the broad scientific objectives of the space program. Dr. Naugle revealed NASA planned to ask three separate companies for independent design studies of Advanced Ogo’s and Oao’s (Orbiting Geophysical Observatories and Orbiting Astronomical Observatories). The Advanced Oso (Orbiting Solar Observatory) design work by contractor Republic Aviation was progressing, and Aoso should be in operation in 1969. (NASA Memo; SBD, 3/6/64, 360)
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf) was appointed to newly established position of Deputy Commander for Manned Systems, afsc Space Systems Div. In this capacity he would be responsible for all aspects of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory program. (SBD, 3/13/64,399; M&R, 3/23/64, 9)
The impact of budgetary restraints upon the Nation’s research and development programs was marked in industry, Government agencies, and the university scientific community, John Finney claimed in the New York Times. Employment in the aerospace industry dropped from 1,186,000	in August 1963 to 1,112,000 in September 1964, and manufacturers were forced to turn to civilian products to augment sales. Limiting of NASA funds forced postponement of some of the follow-up programs for Apollo, such as a manned orbiting laboratory. Universities whose research programs depended heavily on Federal research support were having difficulty in obtaining funds to complete projects already undertaken and could no longer expect liberal Government support for their research proposals. (Finney, NYT, 1/11/65)
Sen. William Proxmire (D.-Wis.) inserted into the Congressional Record an editorial from the Wall Street Journal concerning Government participation in financing the supersonic transport: “. . . The question, as we see it, is not whether there will eventually be operational supersonic airlines, or even whether the Government has any business in that business. Rather, it is a question whether the Government is trying to rush the thing before its economic time, with too few charts and too little knowledge. “A more cautious flight into the unknown could well make for speedier progress in the end—not to mention sounder investments.” (CR, 3/3/ 64, 4067)
Washington Star was informed of voskhod i’s safe landing 25 min. before Soviet Government made the official announcement, when Edward Baskakov of the newspaper Soviet Russia called from Moscow for a reaction to the flight. “Beat” of the Star was based upon their editorial on sputnik I in 1957.	(Wash. Eve. Star, 10/13/64)
Scientists at Aerospace Medical Div., Brooks Afb, said in paper presented by Maj. William B. Clark at space medicine conference that, with proper reconnaissance training, astronauts in space could easily spot missile bases, encampments, troop movements, and “unsuspected targets of opportunity” from outposts 100-mi. high. The scientists’ report was based on studies of visual reports of six U.S. astronauts who made space flights and relied heavily on accounts by Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper (Maj., usaf) . (AP, N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/5/64; AP, Phil. Eve. Bull. 2/6/64)
Joseph A. Darr, Jr., and John Reeves of NASA Flight Research Center received plaques from President Johnson for their dollar-saving contribution to the X—15 research rocket airplane. Darr and Reeves were cited for the design and construction of a portable engine inspection cart that was used to check the systems operation of the LR—99 rocket engine which powered the X—15. Use of the cart saved 500 man hours and about $150,000, NASA estimated, (nasa Release 64-303)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (USMC), said during the career guidance clinic held at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center that there was a need for a national information center to make new space knowledge available to educators. (Lee, Houston Post, 11/17/64) Dr. James A. Van Allen, for whom the Van Allen radiation belts were named, said in a speech that radiation from solar flares would have been dangerous to space travelers only three days in the past four years. After his address, Dr. Van Allen told reporters “there would be no serious danger to travel to any point in the solar system caused by solar flares.” Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of the Astrophysical Observatory of the Smithsonian Institution, said that explorer xvi experienced 55 meteoroid punctures during a seven-month period. However, all were in patches of the satellite’s skin made very thin to assess the collision hazard. The patches, made of beryllium copper, were of three thicknesses: 1/1,000, 2/1,000, and 5/1,000 of an inch. None of the cells with the thickest skin was pierced. It was thought that the puncturing particles hit at typical meteor velocities of about 15 mi./sec. Dr. Whipple told reporters that the chances of a spacecraft being seriously damaged by meteoroids was about the same as being struck by lightning. Dr. John W. Firor, Director of the High Altitude Observatory at the National Center for Atmospheric Research at Boulder, Colo., said astronauts on the moon would have to be exposed to solar flare radiation for “many hours” before they would suffer serious damage. Attempts to forecast solar flares accurately “have not shown any success,” Dr. Firor said. (Maloney, Houston Post, 11/17/64; Sullivan, NYT, 11/17/64,16) Dr. Frank J. Malina, chairman of the Lunar International Laboratory (LIL) program at the International Academy of Astronautics in Paris, said: “The principal justification for the operation of a manned center on the moon on an international basis may well be a financial one.” He explained that it was estimated that with present rocket technology, it would cost about $5,000 per pound of payload carried from the earth to the moon, and that one man-hour on the moon would cost as much as $80,000. Dr. Malina also mentioned that plans for LIL' were begun before President Kennedy announced this country’s intention of going to the moon before the end of the decade. (Maloney, Houston Post, 12/19/64) Soviet scientists reported that the entire voskhod i space flight was conducted by the three-man crew without spacesuits. U.S.S.R. space physiologist, Dr. O. Gazenko, said that the absence of spacesuits made it possible to perform a number of experiments using sensors directly on the skin, even during boost and re-entry. Among these were measurements of the electrocardiogram, respiration rate, electroencephalogram, eye movements, and seism ocardiogram. Dr. V. V. Antipov, a radiologist, said that voskhod preliminary results indicated a substantial contribution to knowledge about the effects -of space flight factors upon biological organisms. He said that significant changes revealed in tissue experiments showed that new, spherical fragments occurred in cells in all stages of division and had only been duplicated in Soviet research under extremely high g forces, such as 4,000 g. They had thus far been tied to the boost and descent phase of the flight, with the greatest number of changes occurring during the first hours of flight, and the least just before re-entry. Antipov also disclosed that in one voskhod experiment, a number of cells were flown which had been flown on previous space flights. He said this indicates that the tissues could maintain viability with repeated exposures, and possibly that some selection took place. By studying the ones which “selected themselves,” he said, a great advantage would be gained in calculating what happened to human cells. Missiles and Rockets reported that during an interview Dr. Gazenko stated that due to the thermal and decompression advantages it offered, helium would eventually 'be used as a diluent gas for spacecraft atmosphere instead of the nitrogen gas that had been used on all Soviet space shots to date. He said the subject is a matter of scientific controversy in the U.S.S.R., but that “undoubtedly” there would be a shift to helium at some time in the future. (M&R, 11/23/64, 14-15) At a press conference, Dr. 0. G. Gazenko reiterated that the voskhod crew did not use space or pressure suits at all. He was asked when the Russians plan to rendezvous and dock two spacecraft and if they would both be manned. “We will, of course, try to do this as soon as possible, but I have the feeling that it would be very nice to have two humans meet in space. . . . It is possible one will be a man and one will be a woman.” His answers were relayed to reporters by Dr. Boris Mandiovsky, a librarian from the Library of Congress. Dr. Gazenko, giving an oral summary of his much longer paper, said medical results of seven Russian manned space Eights had not shown any insurmountable barriers to space flight. “The analogy of the physiological data obtained during manned orbital flight of up to five days duration proves that man, specially selected and trained, can satisfactorily tolerate all orbital flight stresses,” Dr. Gazenko continued. “However, as can be seen in the material, important individual variations are noted. We have to devote special attention to this factor in future cosmonaut selection and training,” he said. He told scientists that there are problems still to be solved for true long space flights, and expressed the hope that between Russia and the United States there could be closer cooperation in solving these problems. (Houston Post, 11/18/64) Col. Charles E. Yeager, Commandant of the USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School at the Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards afb, Calif., called for an end to the use of heavy work-retarding pressure suits. “We are relying entirely too much on the suit to pull the guy out of a problem,” he said. (Houston Post, 11/19/64) Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter called for a “new approach” in development of wearing apparel for astronauts in space. He termed the pressurized spacesuit “the greatest single handicap we have to operations in space. To do useful work is almost impossible. I’m sure there is a better way.” Carpenter said that he had proposed an investigation of a “spray-on” spacesuit that would permit astronauts to move freely about die cabin of the capsule. (Webb, Boston Globe, 11/17/64; Houston Post, 11/18/64; NYT, 11/18/64,24) Maj. Herbert H. Reynolds (usaf), Chief of the Comparative Psychology Branch of the Aeromedical Research Laboratory at Holloman AFB, N. Mex., said that chimpanzees had performed so well within an almost total vacuum that there was hope space travelers could survive a vacuum caused by a puncture of their vehicle long enough for the hole to be plugged. Research was conducted at Holloman for NASA. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/19/64,19) Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma, biochemist at NASA Ames Research Center, told newsmen that “there is a very good possibility of finding the answer to the question of the existence of life in our own planetary system by an inspection of the planets with our immediate or remote sensors.” [Houston Post, 11/17/64)
William J. Schulte, Assistant Administrator for General Aviation, faa, was named 1964 winner of National Business Aircraft Association Award for meritorious service to aviation. (Av. Wk., 9/14/64, 23)
Britain had expressed interest in joining U.S. and European countries in financing and use of global communications satellite system, John Finney reported in New York Times. After months of favoring cables for international communications in the immediate future, British Post Office expressed approval of participation in global satellite system and urged similar decisions by European nations, at meeting of satellite committee of European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administration in Karlsruhe, Germany. (Finney, NYT, 1/26/64, 1)
Revival of George H. Darwin’s 1879 theory that moon was formed by breaking off the earth, by two independent scientists, was reported in Newsweek. Geologist Donald U. Wise believes that when earth was molten mass, heavy material flowed into core, causing instability in its rotation and irregular elongation of its form. Then centrifugal forces pulled smaller knob away, sending it into orbit to become the moon. Fragments breaking away at same time fell on moon and caused pock-marked surface. Related theory offered by A. G. W. Cameron, Canadian physicist at NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, was that earth lost at least half its mass, “enough material for ten moons,” in large chunks, some of which clumped together to form the moon while others shot out to become asteroids. (Newsweek, 1/27/64)
Rep. Roman C. Pucinski (D.-Ill.), Chairman of House Subcommittee on National Research Data Processing and Information Retrieval Center, wrote in Washington Daily News article: “The greatest challenge in this changing world is the solution of the problem of handling scientific and technical information. “I am deeply concerned with the staggering acceleration of scientific and technical information which is the life-blood in the heart of our research and development effort. ... “I am convinced somewhere in the mountainous scientific literature there is a cure for cancer, a solution for harnessing limitless energy from nuclear fusion and a way to solve the food requirement of a growing world population.” (Wash. Daily News, 4/21/64) April21: Rep. John Brademas (D.-Ind.) inserted in Congressional Record an editorial on Rep. J. Edward Roush’s proposal that NASA establish a Midwestern office, broadcast by station WOWO: “. . . . We agree with Congressman Roush that if it is in the best interests of NASA to operate liaison offices to aid potential contractors in securing NASA business, then every area of the United States should qualify for this aid. . . .” (CR, 4/21/64, A1998-99)
General Creighton W. Abrams, Jr. <USA), presented the Distinguished Flying Cross to four of five Army pilots who recently broke ten world records for helicopters, including two records previously held by the Russians. The recipients were: Capt. William A. Welter, Jr.; Capt. Michael N. Antoniou; cwo Emery E. Nelson; and cwo Joseph C. Watts. The fifth pilot, Maj. John A. Johnston, was absent on an overseas assignment. The records were for speed, distance, and time-to-climb in class E-l, E-ID, and E-IE helicopters. With official recognition of the new records, the U.S. would hold 26 marks (52%), the U.S.S.R. 14 (28%), France 9 (18%), and Czechoslovakia 1 (2%). (dod Releases 793-64 and 824-64; NYT, 11/7/64,53)
Roscoe Drummond, in his Washington Post column, said success of Saturn I SA-5 “. . . means that the major advantage which the Soviets have had so long and which has yielded them their principal space spectaculars—the long Russian lead in rocket power—is now a thing of the past. ... “There should be no minimizing what the Soviets have already done. . . . “But the United States accomplishments have been more diverse. We have put almost four times as many spacecraft into orbit as the Soviets. We have made far more progress in the application of space technology in communications, weather, and navigation. We both have compiled a large volume of scientific data about outer space and neither is significantly ahead. “As Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, puts it, ‘the space race continues and it will be a long one.’” (Drummond, Wash. Post, 2/1/64, in CR, 2/1/64, A44I)
Frederick R. Kappel, chairman of the board of AT&T, was named recipient of the 1965 John Fritz Medal by United Engineering Trustees, Inc., for “leadership in the pioneering of space communications. . . .” (Av. Wk., 9/14/64, 23)
U.S. Army announced that the Lockheed-California Co.’s XH-51A compound helicopter (a helicopter having wings as well as rotor blades) had flown 242 mph—“the fastest known speed of any rotor craft in the world.” The flight was made by a test pilot, Donald Segner, off the Southern California coast. (AP, NYT, 12/14/64, 32)
NASA issued its first exclusive patent license to Satellite Div. of Union Carbide Corp. for commercial development of a nickel alloy invented by John C. Freche, metallurgist at NASA Lewis Research Center. For as long as it develops the alloy for commercial use, Union Carbide agreed to spend at least $20,000 a year for not more than three years. After fully developing it, Union Carbide would hold exclusive marketing rights for not more than four years, at which time exclusive license would expire and product would be made fully available to the public. (nasa Release 64-30)
Retiring science editor of New York Times William L. Laurence was honored at dinner in New York by wide range of scientific societies. Laurence was science journalist for 34 years, winner of two Pulitzer Prizes. (NYT, 1/21/64,1)
Seventh anniversary of the Space Age—orbiting of sputnik i by the U.S.S.R. on Oct. 4, 1957. Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin said in Trud interview that U.S.S.R. was preparing a manned space flight: “We are working and making studies and are preparing for a new launching. It is not our custom to advertise, but I’ll tell you that new and more complicated research work is in store for us.” (upi, Chic. Trib., 10/5/64)
The Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (llrv) , piloted by Joseph A. Walker of NASA’s Flight Research Center, attained an altitude of 30 ft.—the highest point in five brief flights—and landed safely. Walker said he was highly pleased with the craft’s performance. The flight was conducted at Edwards afb, Calif. (AP, NYT, 11/26/64, 9)
Balloon launched from Holloman AFB, Tex., carried telescope and instrumentation to 86,000-ft. altitude, where it focused on the planet Venus for more than three hours. Financed by usaf contract, the experiment was second such study of Venus this year by Johns Hopkins Univ. team headed by Dr. John Strong. Scientific results would be ahinounced later this year (see Dec. 7). (Fenton, Balt. Sun, 12/7/64; Sullivan, NYT, 12/8/64)
At closing plenary session of 15th Iaf Congress in Warsaw, Dr. William Pickering, Director of Cal Tech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, was named new iaf president. At the iaf banquet, Dr. Leonid I. Sedov (U.S.S.R.) said: “When we tell people we can land on the Moon by 1971, they say to us ‘why so long, what is holding you up?’ ” Also at the banquet, Dr. Wallace O. Fenn, thirty-five years prominent in biological sciences and Dept, of Physiology of Univ. of Rochester Medical School, and Secretary General of International Union of Physiological Sciences since 1959, was awarded the iaa’s Guggenheim International Astronautics Award for 1964. (Wash. Post, 9/13/64; M&R, 9/21/64, 16; iaa Annual Rpt. 1963-64)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell said in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications that some of the byproducts of space research included cure for some types of stuttering, diet that can sustain a man for a month on one cubic foot of synthetic chemicals mixed with water, and “fail-safe” method of producing oxygen and food for orbiting space stations through electrolytic splitting of water into hydrogen and oxygen. (AP, Houston Chron. 2/26/64) Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R.—111.) noted in the House that House Committee on Science and Astronautics had approved NASA’s report providing for electronics research center in the Boston area. “There is, in my mind, still considerable question as to the need for this center. Furthermore, there is considerable question in my mind as to whether, if such a center is needed, as opposed to developing additional electronics capability at existing centers, the criteria used for selecting Boston as the site were sound. . . .” {CR, 2/25/64, A878)
Dr. Donald F. Homig, Director of President’s Office of Science and Technology, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research and Development in its hearings on geographical distribution and indirect costs of Federal R&D. Dr. Hornig said Congress was cutting administrative overhead funds in Federally financed research at universities, and universities were forced to divert funds from other needs to help pay for Federally sponsored research. “Since the university has many scholarly functions to perform, while Federal funds are devoted generally to the sciences or to areas within science, it does not seem to be in the national interest to pursue a policy which diverts private funds from the education of students or the performance of scholarly research in non-scientific areas.” Dr. Homig stated Federal support of research in past decade had produced “a dispersal of university strength,” adding that Southeast and Mountain regions now were producing proportionately more doctorates than 10 years ago. (nasa lar III/102; NYT, 5/22/64,8)
Addressing American Ordnance Association in Washington, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “It is my thesis that mutual disarmament—and prudence dictates that there should be no other kind—would greatly increase the flow of funds and effort into space exploration and into the building of greater space capability. This does not necessarily mean a full transfer of all available resources to space applications. But, just for illustration, suppose that there were a 10% decrease in weapon systems spending. With good planning at least half of it could be diverted smoothly and efficiently into an increased space effort. With greater difficulty, the remainder might be directed toward mending other inadequacies in our society. . . . “I am an avid supporter of the private competitive enterprise system. I also am an avid supporter of a responsible government which creates a climate in which the private system can work efficiently. My proposal to accelerate space activity to offset decreases in weapon system activity does not conflict with my support of private enterprise. In fact, it supports it, even though the funds would pass through government hands in ffie process. The basic objective is to strengthen our country. . . . “In conclusion, let me emphasize: “First. Disarmament, in the form of decreased production of weapon systems, does not need to cause an economic depression. “Second. Resources made available as a result of decreased production of weapon systems could most effectively be applied to accelerated development of space systems. “Third. While it is important to keep private industry healthy, government financing of research and development is not in conflict with such objectives. In fact, it may well stimulate increased production and increased employment by private companies. “And finally, I do not suggest that there should be a sharp increase in spending for space. But I do believe space spending should increase at a rate at least consonant with the increase in our gross national product, not only because increase in the gnp makes resources available for more space activities, but also because space exploration itself stimulated the gross national product.” (Text)
Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, appointed William B. Rieke, president of Lockheed Aircraft International, Inc., as his deputy. Rieke would succeed George M. Low, who had become Deputy Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, (nasa Release 64-261)
Industry sources revealed only one more Ranger lunar probe could be launched before NASA’s contract with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory expired in December. If Ranger 7 failed, the sources said NASA might remove JPL from Cal Tech’s management, might remove Director William H. Pickering from his post, and might hire a “hard-headed businessman” to manage the facility. (AP, Boston Globe, 4/6/64)
At Manned Spacecraft Center press conference, MSC Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth announced Astronauts Gus Grissom and John Young would be prime pilots for the first manned Gemini space flight (GT-3), with Astronauts Walter Schirra and Tom Stafford as backup pilots. Also at the press conference it was disclosed that Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was suffering from labyrinthitis, msc’s Dr. Charles Berry emphasized that Shepard’s inner ear inflammation was not caused by space flight but by infection that spread into his inner left ear. (msc Press Conf., msc Historian)
NASA employees Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., and Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr., were among the 10 outstanding young men in Government service awarded the 1963 Arthur S. Flemming Awards. Kraft was Assistant Director for Flight Operations, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center; Townsend, Assistant Director of Space Science and Satellite Applications, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (NASA Notice)
nasa announced selection of Trans World Airlines for negotiation of contract to provide base support services at John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA. Under this contract twa would provide general maintenance, utilities operation, and supply operations on a cost-plus-incentive-fee basis; and janitorial, fire protection and prevention, security, and medical services on fixed-price basis, (nasa Release 64-32; ksc Release 13-64)
Edward Z. Gray, Director, Advanced Manned Missions Program, Office of Manned Space Flight, addressed the National Space Club: “From [the objectives of the Space Act of 1958], the objectives of the Manned Space Flight Program are . . . derived. They are: “1. The conduct of manned scientific space flight missions ... as an integral part of a total program to expand our knowledge of the universe. “2. The development of launch vehicles, spacecraft, lunar and planetary surface equipment . . . and a broad foundation of industrial support, all of which are required to support manned space flight. “3. The utilization of the space environment to provide direct benefits to the earth. . . . “4. The application of manned space flight activities to promote the national security and to stimulate the national economy, scientific achievement, technological growth, and educational capability.” (Text)
General William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.) was sworn in as Assistant Administrator for Management Development, NASA. In this position, General McKee would be responsible for review and development of recommendations concerning major management matters and would report directly to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, (nasa Release 64-216; nasa Announcement 64-190)
Unnamed NASA officials were quoted as saying U.S. had detected Soviet failure within the last week in an attempt to launch a probe to the moon, by John Finney in New York Times. Failure was said to have occurred within minutes after rocket booster rose from launch pad near the Aral Sea. (Finney, NYT, 4/30/64,9)
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), usaf Space Systems Div. Deputy Commander for Manned Systems, said at AIAA space station symposium in Pasadena that USAF planned to assign to a single contractor the task of integrating the Gemini spacecraft and the manned orbiting laboratory (mol). He said astronaut transfer from the Gemini to the mol was a major problem and described several alternative methods of transfer being studied. (Av. Wk., 4/20/64, 39)
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf) told Aviation/Space Writers’ Association that usaf would seek bids for the Manned Orbiting Laboratory i(mol) by Dec. 1. dod had released $6 million for the project May 1, opening the door to preliminary study. Under present schedule, he said, hardware development could begin in about a year, with first unmanned flight late in 1967 or early 1968. (Benedict, AP, 5/27/64)
C. Leo de Orsey, attorney for the seven NASA Mercury astronauts, revealed former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Lt. Col., usmc) had turned down a $1,000,000 contract with private industry in 1963. (St. Louis PostDispatch, 10/7/64)
Large manned space station design was described before Orange County, Calif., Section of AAIA >by Edward H. Oiling, head of MSC Space Station Program Office. The 24-man station would be 150 ft. in diameter with three radial modules, rotate at maximum speed of 4 rpm. Lifetime would he from one to five years. Saturn V could launch it into orbit and Saturn IB would launch logistics vehicles. (M&R, 4/20/64, 22)
X-15 No. 3 was flown by John B. McKay (NASA) to altitude of 87,000	ft. and speed of 3,716 mph (mach 5.58), in flight near Edwards, Calif. During the flight, heat transfer and noise level measurements were made on the aircraft’s skin. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, NYT, 8/27/64)
In recent interview Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, had complained: “American military radar is seriously interfering with our studies of the universe.” In the 406-410 megacycle band, he said, radar signals were interfering with Jodrell Bank radiotelescope’s listening to radio waves from distant points in the universe. The interference had 'been occurring over the past 9-12 months, and “we’ve had to stop one program because of it.” Sir Bernard and other astronomers indicated the 406-410 megacycle band was “the only relevant band” for studying quasi-stellar objects (“quasars”). U.S. Government officials acknowledged receiving similar complaints from astronomers at Cambridge Univ. However, according to William E. Plummer, acting chief of frequency management in U.S. telecommunications coordinating office, “No radar of any kind is authorized to operate on that band.” (Toth, L.A. Times, 10/4/64)
After examining Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc), U.S. Air Force doctors at San Antonio said the former astronaut was on the way to “virtually complete recovery” from his inner-ear injury resulting from accidental fall last February. (AP, NYT, 10/2/64,62)
Sen. John Stennis (D.-Miss.), Chairman of Senate Armed Services’ Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee, said he had directed his staff “to up-date and review the current information and data relating to the reliability and dependability of the Nation’s long range ballistic missiles as soon as possible.” (AP, Wash. Post, 1/17/64; Raymond, NYT, 1/17/64, 13)
Aerospace Medical Association honored Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II and CoL William K. Douglas at its meeting in Miami. Dr. Lovelace, President of Lovelace Foundation for Medical Education and Research and recently appointed NASA Director of Space Medicine, received the 1964 Theodore C. Lyster award, and Dr. Douglas, Assistant Deputy for Bioastronautics at AFMTC and formerly personal physician to the original seven Mercury astronauts, received the Louis H. Bauer Founders award. (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/14/64)
Search for fragments from the moon would be conducted this spring in six western Iowa counties by NASA and U.S. Dept, of Agriculture, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist Dr. John A. O’Keefe announced. Western Iowa was chosen after Dr. O’Keefe had found some “promising” specimens there on an exploratory trip last summer. Residents of select counties were requested to turn over any unusual stones found during spring plowing of loess soil areas to local usda offices. Stones seeming most likely to have nonterrestrial origins would be forwarded to GSFC for further scientific examination and study, (gsfc Release G-6-64)
X-15 No. 1 piloted by John B. McKay (nasa) reached only 98,000ft. altitude and 3,375-mph speed (mach 5.10) in flight near Edwards AFB, Calif. Within seconds after launch from mother ship, all guidance equipment on the rocket aircraft failed, forcing Pilot McKay to cut back speed and altitude. Flight had been planned to reach 180,000-ft. altitude and 3,550-mph speed in test for future X-15 flights to photograph the stars from above atmospheric interference. The rocket engine burned 83 sec. (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.; Wash. Post, 7/1/64)
Sen. J. William Fulbright (D.-Ark.) inserted in Congressional Record a Wall Street Journal article on the “declining demand” for engineers, and said: “According to the Wall Street Journal article, the current slump in demand for engineers results primarily from uncertainty about future spending on defense and space programs. Although the defense budget for the next fiscal year calls for a reduction of only $1.3 billion, the space budget is $200 million above last year’s appropriation. If this minute shift in defense spending is sufficient to bring about a severe curtailment in the demand for engineers and other skilled technicians, it makes one wonder what will happen to our economy when there is more than a token cutback in defense outlays....” (CR, 2/27/64,3666-67)
Dr. Joseph F. Shea, manager of Apollo Spacecraft Office at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said in Milwaukee speech that the most probable date for U.S. manned lunar landing was late in 1968 or early in 1969. He discussed goals of Ranger TV probes, Surveyor lunar lander, and Lunar Orbiter probes, which would provide information about the moon preparatory to manned lunar landing. If these should fail, he said, NASA would plan manned Apollo reconnaissance flights to orbit the moon before the landing flight. “It might set our landing back six months to a year, but if the other programs don’t work, we aren’t dead.” (Pease, Milwaukee Journal, 2/4/64)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said at Washington press luncheon that the two astronauts in Project Apollo’s Lunar Excursion Module would stand up during the descent to the moon. He described support gear—like elasticized parachute harness—which would cushion the landing for the crewmen. Elimination of chairs and rearrangement of Lem’s gear permitted weight reduction of 1,000 lbs., he said. (Halsell, Houston Post, 2/4/64)
Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., left the hospital and returned home to Seabrook, Tex., where he would convalesce from inflammation of his inner ear. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/4/64)
It was announced that in the first two-man Gemini flight, set for Feb. 1965, Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom might become the first man in space to alter the orbit of his own spacecraft. .The change would be after about 90 minutes of flight in the first orbit over Guaymas, Mex. Major Grissom, the command pilot, would be sitting on the left side of the spacecraft and Lt. Cdr. John Young, pilot, would be sitting on the right side. (AP, Sunday Oregonian, 11/1/64)
Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, touring Copenhagen, predicted that U.S.S.R. would conduct another manned space flight sometime this year. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/4/64) March 5:1,300-lb. instrumented payload was carried to 97,000 ft. by balloon in Coronoscope II project, sponsored jointly by ONR, nsf, and NASA. Released from National Center for Atmospheric Research near Palestine, Tex., the balloon traveled about 105 mi. eastward, then doubled back to travel another 100 mi. before dropping its instrument payload on radio command signal, 50 mi. from the launch site. Dr. Gordon Newkirk of High Altitude Observatory at Boulder, Colo., said photographs made by the instruments were expected to aid in study of effects of sun’s corona upon earth’s magnetic field and upper atmosphere. (Houston Chron., 3/6/64; Houston Post, 3/6/64)
It was reported that President Johnson would give special attention to science and technology programs in budget-making conferences at his Texas ranch. Dr. Donald S. Hornig, the President’s special assistant for science and technology, said in Austin Press Conference that the significance of his presence as a participant in all meetings was that Johnson was looking at the “totality” of the various Government enterprises supporting science and technology in an effort to pursue a balanced program. Hornig said the Federal government was spending about $15 billion—roughly 15% of its budget—on scientific research, technical development, test, and engineering programs with about half this amount spent by dod. Dr. Hornig also said he believed the hundreds of millions of dollars going into the effort to put an American on the moon by 1970 was well spent because “the moon is a very interesting place scientifically.” It will “take a lot of going” to achieve that goal, he said, but present schedules “will allow it.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/23/64)
According to norad Commander-in-Chief Gen. John K. Gerhart (usaf), manned Soviet satellites have passed over North America 44 times. He added:". . . strong modern aerospace defenses are indispensable; they are a vital part of deterrence—they are essential to survival and they are our insurance to victory.” (J/Armed Forces, 10/24/64,6)
John H. Boynton of MSC discussed pilot’s role in Mercury space flight systems failures, in paper to aiaa first annual meeting. He summarized: “For the two unmanned missions, MA-4 and MA-5, control system difficulties made impossible the successful completion of a three-pass orbital flight, which was the design mission for the Mercury spacecraft. But in both cases, the presence of a pilot and the capability to control the spacecraft attitudes manually would have made die three-pass mission possible. This fact was demonstrated in the MA—6 mission in which a similar malfunction occurred but in which the astronaut completed the flight by using his manual control modes. . . . “For the MA-6 mission, . . . the flight would undoubtedly have been terminated before the planned time because of an excessive rate of fuel consumption in the automatic control mode. In the successful MA—7 flight, manual initiation of the retrorocket-ignition sequence prevented the horizon scanner malfunction from significantly delaying this critical event. Although an error in yaw angle caused the spacecraft to land somewhat beyond the planned landing area, this error would have undoubtedly been much greater had the pilot not been present. The six-pass MA—8 mission was successful, although a problem of an abnormal increase in suit temperature could have terminated the flight early had no means been available for reducing this temperature. The pilot, however, was able to correct this situation by manual adjustment of his coolant flow valve. Short circuits in the automatic control circuitry during the MA-9 flight made it essential for the pilot to control the spacecraft manually during retrofire and reentry.” (Text)
Msc began 10-day series of short weightlessness tests with Gemini spacecraft installed inside a KC-135 jet aircraft. Astronaut John Young took part in the tests along with four usaf and McDonnell Aircraft Corp. test pilots. (Houston Chron., 5/19/64)
Dr. John J. Brennan, Jr., speaking for Committee to Preserve Cambridge (Mass.) Industries, said he would petition court to decide that proposed Kendall Sq. site for NASA. Electronics Research Center did not meet urban renewal standards. Dr. Brennan said he received reply from White House to his letter of protest in which Presidential aide Kenneth O’Donnell said Kendall Sq. would have to meet all legal requirements for urban renewal before NASA could locate there.	(Boston Globe,
NASA Lewis Research Center employees Robert Steinberg and William B. Schwab won $700 NASA incentive award for invention of method and device for rapidly mapping neutron flux of each section of nuclear research reactor. Other LRC awards: John W. Macomber won $500 for invention of nuclear reactor control rod assembly with improved driving mechanism; Joseph M. Savino and Chester D. Lanzo, $200 award for developing simulated fuel assembly for nuclear reactor; and John C. Sturman, $100 award for transistorized logic circuit to handle data accumulated by satellites and transmit it back to earth, (lrc Release 64-8)
Two mathematicians at Lawrence Radiation Laboratory of Univ. of Calif. achieved first accurate description of the orbit of Mars, Univ. of Calif, announced. The mathematicians, Joseph L. Brady and Edna Vienop, calculated the planet’s orbit with aid of computers used to develop nuclear weapons. Brady said calculation left Mercury as the solar system’s only planet without accurate description of its orbit. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/2/64, A3)
Lt. Col. John D. Peters (usaf), engineer at Arnold Engineering Development Center, said in San Antonio that the four-legged landing gear designed for Apollo’s Lunar Excursion Module (lem) was “needlessly risky” and should be replaced by an inflatable “doughnut” to cushion the lem’s landing. Tube at lem’s base could be inflated just before landing, would allow a safe landing even if exact nature of lunar surface is unknown. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/20/64; SBD, 10/22/64,283)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, addressed Texas City Chamber of Commerce, discussing these summarized points: “1. The space program is a sound investment to improve the economic health of the country and is not a wasteful expenditure of funds so long as the program is handled on a business-like basis. “2. The space program is being carried out as a partnership with private enterprise and requires cooperation with communities throughout the country. “3. The space program does not and should not drain resources from other important projects, such as schools and housing; in fact, it stimulates both. “4. The space program is essential to our national security—through both its NASA activities and its Department of Defense activities. “5. The lunar program is a key feature in the space program, as it provides a clear objective and it requires the orderly development of a wide range of competences, all of which will have value for future space performance. “6. International cooperation in our space program can be mutually beneficial and will not impair our national security or inhibit the development of our own space capabilities. “7. The space program stimulates the supply of trained scientists and engineers, but does not require them in such quantities as to interfere with the constructive employment of the vast majority of them in other lines of endeavor.” (Text)
Soviet Premier Khrushchev was quoted by former U.S. Senator William H. Benton (now U.S. representative to UNESCO in Paris) as saying: “If you wish, I can show you photos of military bases taken from outer space. I will show them to President Johnson if he wishes.” Mr. Benton said Premier Khrushchev suggested that U.S. could maintain adequate inspection of Cuba with satellites and therefore should discontinue its aerial reconnaissance flights over the island. (Middleton, NYT, 5/30/ 64,D
William B. Bergen, president of Martin Baltimore, said U.S. had closed the so-called “space gap” of Russian competition “without fanfare, and almost without knowing it ourselves.” Addressing National Space Club in Washington, Bergen said that, with all the “Hollywoodian propaganda” about enormous Soviet satellites, “there seems little doubt that the objective part of the scientific world is now convinced that our modest-sized couriers into space have brought back far more useful information than has been collected by the Russians’ more massive messengers.” (AP, Houston Post, 7/23/64)
NASA pilot Joseph A. Walker flew Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (llrv) at NASA Flight Research Center. Total free-flight time in this first test was less than one minute, the llrv rising 10 ft. (M&R, 11/16/64, 8)
Dr. John P. Meehan, physiologist at Univ. of Southern California, announced he would begin experiment in which 15 young men would lie flat on their backs for 30 days, then be put in a centrifuge and be subjected to forces eight times normal gravity while attempting to operate simulated space capsule controls. Purpose of the experiment was to duplicate effect of long periods of weightlessness in space on body’s heart-blood system and to devise ways of overcoming it. (AP, Balt. Sun, 7/9/64)
In White House Ceremony, President Johnson awarded 1963 National Medal of Science to the recipients: Drs. Jerome B. Wiesner, Cornelius B. van Neil, Luis W. Alvarez, Vannevar Bush, John R. Pierce, and Norbert Wiener. (Simons, Wash. Post, 1/14/64)
msc reported that Astronaut Alan B. Shepard had had a small benign tumor removed from his thyroid gland by surgery. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/17/64,
Chief engineer of Air Transport Association’s Supersonic Advisory Committee, John T. Dyment, estimated it would cost half-again as much as the $1 billion estimated by the Government to develop the U.S. supersonic transport and test it adequately. He criticized plans to take steps toward manufacturing before prototype testing was completed: “We must have supersonic transports built and flying for a year or so to gain the experience and the reliability before we even start a production line. This is essential. . . .” Detailed findings of the committee’s two-day meeting in New York would be reported to iata Technical Committee May 5. (Clark, NYT, 3/25/64,65)
James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, talked and dined with Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., at the home of Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of MSC, in Houston. Afterwards, Col. Glenn told an interviewer: “We talked about a number of different areas in which I could work. I want a part-time job, a consulting job.” (NYT, 7/12/64)
With nuclear explosives new sea-level canal could be built across Isthmus of Panama for $500 million or less, according to Lawrence Radiation Laboratory’s Gerald W. Johnson, Director of AEC Project Plowshare. Technical and economic feasibility of such a project was discussed in letter from Johnson to Sen. John 0. Pastore (D.-R.I.), Chairman of Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy. Use of nuclear explosives to dig new Panama canal had been under study since 1958, when Panama Canal Co. requested Lawrence Radiation Laboratory for preliminary feasibility study of the project. (Finney, NYT, 1/21/64, 1°) .
A Gemini-type spacecraft was successfully landed at Edwards AFB in first manned test of the new paraglider recovery system. North American Aviation test pilot Donald F. McCusker guided the capsule back to earth following a four-and-a-half minute flight beneath the inflated wing, after being released from a helicopter at an altitude of 8,500 ft. McCusker was slightly injured when the paraglider landed at about 25 mph—faster than had been anticipated. (L.A. Times, 12/20/64; San Diego Union, 12/20/64; naa s&id Skywriter, 12/31/64, 4) ,	.
Sidney J. Dagle, 29, Ball Brothers technician, died of injuries caused by ignition of X—248 rocket motor three days earlier at Cape Kennedy. This was the first death among the 11 injured personnel. Next day, John W. Fassett, 30, succumbed to bums sustained in the accident. An engineer in GSFC Field Projects Branch, Fassett was the only NASA employee among the 11; the others were employees of Douglas (booster contractor) and Ball Brothers (Oso satellite contractor). One other man remained in critical condition. (AP, NYT, 4/18/64, 12; upi, NYT, 4/19/64, 80; Goddard News, 4/20/64, 3 ; gsfc pio, 5/13/64)
Interviewed in Missiles and Rockets, Presidential Science Adviser Donald F. Hornig replied to question about U.S. space goals after Project Apollo: “There are clearly a series of successively more difficult scientific objectives which we will pursue with unmanned spacecraft. It’s very difficult, though, to document a convincing case for a national commitment on major space goals that are far in the future. In any case, I can’t believe that the momentum gained by our space program is going to be allowed to be lost when we achieve the first major objective.” (M&R, 4/20/64, 35)
Addressing Aerospace Industries Association Council in Seattle, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, summarized future aerospace trends. He foresaw no immediate substantial decrease in dollar amount of defense spending, but said industry should be able to shift emphasis from production of weapon systems to “other useful types and forms of economic activity”— which he said should be toward an expanding space program and an increase in r&d of advanced weapons technology. Of space program values he said: “The space program has been a catalyst, a stimulus to education at all levels, with particular attention to science and engineering. How much is it worth to have raised the educational sights of our young people and at the same time to have increased significantly the wealth of knowledge with which to condition them? I cannot put a price on it, but I believe its value will exceed the total cost of the space program. “The contribution of our space program to our national security is also considerable. How much more secure are we, due to improved communications, more accurate navigation, more complete weather information, and better world-wide mapping? How much is it worth to be better informed about potential sources of danger? How can we assess the advantage of developing competence to detect and offset possible aggression from space? I cannot put a price on these contributions to national security, but I am confident that their value also exceeds the total cost of the space program. “The space program stimulates the development of new products, new productive processes, and new managerial techniques. I cannot place a precise value upon such innovations, but I would estimate that such investment will repay itself many times over. “A substantial difference in influence in world affairs evolves from whether a country is in a first position or a second position in power. To a significant degree, a nation’s relative position depends on how it stands in advanced technology. . . . “Combining, as the space program does, the best talents in management, in engineering, and in science, with the most modem facilities available, the net result is the production of progress. A program which stimulates education, expands research and development, augments total productivity, increases employment, and improves our international relations, is a program of the greatest economic significance. . . .” (Text)
House passed and sent to the Senate $1.6 billion military construction authorization bill for FY 1965 (H.R. 10300). Discussing the bill on the floor, Rep. William H. Bates (R.—Mass.) observed: “This year, research, development, testing, and engineering for our Federal Government projects will approximate $15 billion. This represents about 17 percent of our entire Federal budget and a much larger percent of those funds over which we actually have control. “In the various military services in fiscal year 1965, we will spend approximately $7.6 billion on research, development, testing and engineering. In the bill before you today about $90 million is set aside for research and development facilities. . . .” (nasa lar III/50; CR, 3/18/64, 5356)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., said in informal press gathering in Washington that when nasa had decided on 30 trainees for its astronaut pool, it had anticipated losing 4 of the 30 men, for various reasons, before completion of Project Apollo. Commander Shepard said, “we figured on two casualties as a result of space flight,” explaining that the figure was “just pulled out of the air” but was considered a reasonable guess. NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden emphasized “We have no idea what the casualty rate will be. We’re hoping it will be zero.” (Troan, Knoxville News-Sentinel, 2/21/64)
William G. Gisel, President of Bell Aerosystems Co., said before N.Y. Society of Newspaper Editors, Niagara Falls: “I cannot contemplate the space exploration project , . . without a tremendous surge of pride in the human race. We are going to the stars, gentlemen. The human race will travel to the planets and, in time, to other solar systems and in doing so will fern the spark of greatness which in spite of ourselves has carried us from the cave to the threshhold of space. Man can go to the moon in this decade. The important question is, will it be an American?” (nasa r&sc Div.)
Dr. Donald F. Hornig, President Johnson’s Special Assistant for Science and Technology, arrived in Moscow with a six-man group that would make a two-week tour of scientific and industrial institutions in Moscow, Leningrad, Minsk, and Novosibirsk to study Soviet methods of planning and coordinating scientific research. (NYT, 11/6/64,19)
DOD announced award of $1,692,001 contract for construction of dual vertical checkout and pneumatic test station Saturn S-II facility at Seal Beach, Calif, (dod Release 788-64) Franklin P. Dixon, NASA Director of Manned Planetary Mission Studies, said in a speech: “Our studies indicate that the next major phase in manned earth orbital operations should be a space station with a 6-9 man capacity. This would be specifically designed for long-duration earth orbital flights and would directly further the routine exploitation of near earth space for peaceful purposes. The studies on this concept have shown that the basic station module should have a usable total volume in the order of 8,000 cubic feet with continuous ‘floor’ areas of not less than 300 square feet.” (Text) Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke at the awards banquet: “There is a wonderful thing about the space business. It has a vitality and a deep sense of challenge, which most other activities do not have. If it is not a way of life, it is at least a way of looking at life. The space program is the program for the optimist, the person who is willing to look ahead with confidence, the individual who sees no limits to what can be done and no horizons to the scope of doing. One of the greatest benefits already obtained from the space program is its revitalizing effect upon our whole economy—our whole educational system— our whole attitude toward the future. Let us use all our power of persuasion against any individual or any group who would slow down the pace of this program.” Referring to statements that the military possibilities of space have been “downgraded,” Dr. Welsh said: “During the four-year period of 1957 through 1960, space expenditures for the dod totaled $1 billion. On the other hand, during the last four years, that is 1961 through 1964, the dod spent about $4.6 billion on its space responsibility. The fact is that the Department of Defense is annually spending about a billion and a half dollars in space research and development. This includes projects in navigation, communications, observation, detection, booster development, scientific instrumentation, command and control techniques, interception, and manned and unmanned space flight.” He would make no prediction regarding next year’s space budget, but suggested that “space expenditures over the coming years, even with occasional plateaus, would be characterized by an upward trend.” Dr. Welsh confirmed the Russians were relying heavily upon unmanned Vostok spacecraft in their Cosmos program. He said the Vostoks had accumulated “more than 2500 orbits”; since the seven Soviet manned flights to date accounted for only 10% of this, the balance must have been achieved in the more than 20 Vostok flights from Tyuratam range at the 65° inclination. Unlike the Cosmos satellites, these unmanned Vostoks had been recovered after as much as two weeks in orbit. Dr. Welsh also disclosed that Soviet launching reliability was “comparable” to the 85% attained by U.S. in past three years. (Text; A&A, 11/64,116; Dr.EdwardC. Welsh) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, staff member of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, in a comparison of U.S. and Soviet space flights, said that 262 military and civilian launch vehicles had been launched by this country between 1957 and October of this year as opposed to at least 81 launched by the Russians. Of the total U.S. launch attempts, 192 were successful, and 231 payloads were put into earth orbit, eight were injected into escape trajectories, and 84 were listed as failures. (Text) Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier, AFSC Space Systems Div. deputy for manned systems, said that studies by Jet Propulsion Laboratory and by General Electric, under JPL contract, showed that payload capacities of both Surveyor and Mariner could be doubled if the Titan III, rather than the Atlas-Agena, were used to launch them. The GE study, he said, determined that the Voyager Mars soft-landing mission objectives could be accomplished more effectively if the lander and or-biter were launched as two separate Titan III payloads, rather than as a combined package atop a Saturn IB. (Av. Wk., 11/9/64, 27) aiaa made the following awards: 1964 Astronautics Award to Walter C. Williams, vice president and general manager of the Manned Systems Div. of the Aerospace Corp. and until April 1964 NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Operations, for “outstanding and continuing achievements in successful aerospace systems operations”; Octave Chanute Award to Fred J. Drinkwater and Robert C. Innis, usaf pilots at NASA’s Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif., for their work on the V/Stol and Stol aircraft; John Jeffries Award to Dr. Eugene Konecci of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, until Oct. 1964 NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human Research, for his contributions to life sciences; Robert M. Losey Award to Col. Robert C. Miller (usaf) , Kansas City Weather Bureau, for his work on turbulence. (Av. Wk., 11/16/64,19; msc Roundup, 11/11/64,1) Joseph A. Walker, project pilot for NASA’s Flight Research Center, described the first flight of the Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (LLRV). Walker said this was the first of several pilot familiarization and checkout flights. Simulated lunar missions were scheduled for early 1965. The first flight consisted of three separate take-offs and landings. Total free flight time was just under one min., with a maximum altitude of approximately 10 ft. He used only the jet engine for lift power and did not activate the lift rockets. All eight of the standard control rockets were operated briefly. The llrv was equipped with a jet engine that could be automatically regulated to counterbalance five-sixths- of the vehicle’s weight to compensate for the gravitational difference between the moon and earth. This engine was also used to provide take-off power. During forthcoming checkout flights, two hydrogen-peroxide rocket motors, capable of delivering from 100 to 500 lbs. thrust each, would be used to regulate lift. The program, in support of Project Apollo, was designed to study the piloting and operational procedures involved during the final phases of a manned lunar landing and during the initial portion of the lunar take-off. (frc Release 28-434) Paper on launch vehicle engines by A. O. Tischler, Director of NASA oart Chemical Propulsion Div., and Leland F. Belew, Manager of msfc Engine Program Office, covered current status of solid- and liquid-propellant rocket engines for Saturn and Titan launch vehicles. The authors reported that the F-l engine represented “the largest thrust engine fired to date. Started in early 1959 the F-l engine has been under development for six years. Five F-l’s will be used in the first stage of the Saturn V vehicle to produce a take-off thrust of 7,500,000 pounds. . . . “Nominal firing duration is 150 seconds and we expect better than 15 times that life to be in the engine at qualification. . . . “[Design refinements to correct combustion-driven oscillations] have produced an engine which in the last five months has accumulated almost as much test time as in the previous five years. . . .” (Text) November 4: Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa’s Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, cited during a luncheon of the AIAA Third Manned Space Flight Meeting in Houston four important decisions made in the past ten years: “The first was in 1954 when as the result of the Von Neumann Committee’s recommendations we began the ballistic missile program on a top-priority basis. . . . The second decision a year later was to undertake the Vanguard program as the second priority effort, completely separate from the ballistic missile program. . . . The third decision . . . was the passage of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958. . . . The fourth major decision was President Kennedy’s 1961 proposal to expand and accelerate United States space activity.” Dr. Mueller said that there is no such thing as unmanned exploration of space. “As sensor, manipulator, evaluator, and investigator in space, as the scope and range of our activities continue to increase, the role of man assumes increasing importance. Our challenge is to capitalize on his presence in space.” (Text) 766-598 0—65----25
Awards at 1964 Air Force Association national convention included H. H. Arnold Trophy to General Curtis E. LeMay (USAF CofS), who was named “Aerospace Man of the Year” for his “enlightened and aggressive leadership in behalf of the status and welfare of fhe military man”; David C. Schilling Trophy to Maj or Sidney J. Kubesch, SAC B-58 pilot, for his record Tokyo-to-London flight in October 1963; and Theodore von Karman Trophy to Clarence L. Johnson, Vice President (Advanced Development Projects) of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., for designing theYF-12A (A—11) aircraft. Among the citations of honor: Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman, nasc, was cited for his “broad understanding and vigorous pursuit of aerospace goals.” Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), deputy director of Apollo program in NASA Hq., was cited for his contributions to Minuteman icbm program in previous assignment with afsc/bsd. Chief M/Sgt. Frank M. Davis (usaf) and Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) were named outstanding airman and outstanding officer of 1964 by afa. Davis was cited for leadership in desert survival training including program for Gemini astronauts, among other citations. Engle was cited for “his active and aggressive” role as an X-15 test pilot. (AF Mag., 10/64, 33; Wash. Post, 9/12/64)
1964 would be a year of development test on individual systems which provide capability to carry out Project Apollo lunar landing, according to Dr. Joseph Shea, Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. He cited the test of Apollo launch escape and earth landing systems at White Sands Missile Range last May and launch of Apollo boilerplate aboard Saturn I (SA-6) also last May as two important development flight tests—milestones marking the gradual transition of Project Apollo to flight test phase. “However, there is still much ground testing to be done.” (naa s&id Skywriter, 9/11/64,4)	....	.
Navy Secretary Paul H. Nitze formally approved the retirement of Marine Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. The retirement was set for Jan. 1. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 11/5/64; NYT, 11/5/64,11)
Former astronaut Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (USMC) announced his decision to withdraw from the Democratic primary campaign for Senate candidacy in Ohio. Colonel Glenn was still convalescing from severe injury to his vestibular system in the inner ear sustained when he accidentally slipped and struck his head on a bathtub Feb. 26. In Houston, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth said: “The news of John Glenn’s continued illness is upsetting. Our first concern is for his recovery. . . . We will be happy to discuss with John and the-commandant of the Marine Corps his future if John so desires. . . . We wish him a speedy recovery.” (AP, NYT, 3/31/64, 1,18,19; Burkett, Houston Chron., 3/30/64)
John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, announced 14,760 visitors to the facility during 1963. (ksc Release 16-64)
The day after RANGER vn’s historic photographs of the moon climaxed a “textbook flight,” President Johnson was briefed on the mission by NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell and Jet Propulsion Laboratory Director Dr. William H. Pickering. Discussing the lunar surface photographs, Dr. Newell said the principal investigators (Dr. Gerard Kuiper and Dr. Eugene M. Shoemaker) had tentatively concluded that “because there exists such sharp little craters here on the surface, this indicates that there is not a deep layer of dust in this area. There would be expected to be a layer of dust on the lunar surface . . . there has been much speculation about how deep it would be. . . . Some people had speculated as much as a thousand feet. Many as much as 30 or 40 feet. Others had said no, it can’t be. And those who said no, it can’t be, Dr. Shoemaker now thinks were right. At least as far as this area is concerned.” Asked by the President whether the ranger VII success confirmed “that you folks had known what you were doing,” Dr. Pickering replied: “Yes, I think it does. “First of all, it confirms we know what we are doing technically when we design something to do this job. Secondly, that as far as the Apollo Program is concerned, it confirms that the basic assumptions that they were making about the sort of surface we are going to have to land on is probably correct.” The President asked, “What similar achievements, scientific achievements, can be compared to this?” and Dr. Newell replied: “Dr. Kuiper was asked this question yesterday. He stated he felt this was comparable to the photographing of the sun in the ultraviolet light by the Naval Research Laboratory a number of years ago. “Someone else said that this amounts to a big jump in lunar science, equivalent to the jump that occurred when Galileo turned the telescope on the heavens.” President Johnson said: “If we were to conclude—if I were to conclude, if the Budget were to conclude, or if the American people should conclude—that we want to effect a savings here of a few billion dollars, would it he your opinion, Doctor [Pickering], that we would be pennywise and pound-foolish?” Dr. Pickering replied: “It would indeed, sir, because I believe that this is truly an investment not only which is needed to demonstrate our leadership in the relatively near future, but it is a long-term investment for the future. ” (NASA Transcript)
None of the supersonic transport bidders was willing to assume the prescribed share of cost of the joint Government—industry-funded sst program, John P. MacKenzie reported in Washington Post. Under plan presented by President Kennedy, sst would cost $1 billion, with Government paying 75% of the cost and manufacturers paying remaining 25%. MacKenzie said none of the six bidding manufacturers had met the 25% participation challenge, and “some manufacturers said the plane could not be developed for $1 billion.” Officials were reported to be studying independent report by Eugene R. Black, former president of the World Bank, which unnamed sources said recommended Government finance 90% of the development cost. Report also was said to have proposed transferring sst program from faa to an independent agency, slowing pace of the sst development and avoiding international “race” with U.K.-France Concorde development. (MacKenzie, Wash. Post, 2/11/64; N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/13/64; Newsweek, 2/17/64)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, delivered keynote address at the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner. He compared U.S. and Soviet space accomplishments:	“1. As regards that key feature of booster power, the Soviets are ahead on an operational basis, although we are moving up rapidly, having attained the current weight-lifting record on a test shot by the Saturn I. “2. We have placed almost four times as many payloads into earth orbit, while they continue each year to increase their absolute lead in total weight of net payloads orbited. “3. Our numerical progress in orbiting payloads is impressive. Last year alone, the U.S. put more payloads into earth orbit than the USSR has since Sputnik I in 1957. “4. The increasing reliability of our launchings is also impressive. During the past three years, we placed successfully into earth orbit 82% of all the payloads which we attempted to put there. The Soviet record, while not identical, is comparable. “5. The Soviet heavy Vostok class of vehicle has accumulated some 1600 orbits, as compared with 37 for our smaller Mercury. . . . “6. The Soviets have devoted more of their attention to far-out space than we. have. As a percentage of total space launching attempts, they have devoted five times as much effort to escape-missions to the moon and planets as we have. The opposite is true as to near-earth orbits, in which the U.S. emphasis has been much greater than theirs. “7. Both countries have made impressive strides in accumulating scientific data about space. We may even be ahead in this regard, but it is not safe to assume so. “8. The U.S. is clearly ahead in world-wide sharing of space research in cooperative programs, and in direct application of space technology to practical use in communications, weather reporting, geodesy, and navigation. “In summary, we have made enormous gains in the past few years in the race with our able and aggressive competitor. “. . .1 want to emphasize that the Soviets have a strong orderly program, with every indication that it is continuing vigorously, apparently unaffected by adverse economic factors in their country. Wishful thinking to the contrary, we dare not slow down unless we are willing to pay the terrific price of second place. . . .” (Text)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight began hearings on Project Ranger. Subcommittee Chairman Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.) remarked that “the action that precipitated these hearings are letters which Mr. Webb addressed to the chairman of the two space committees” (March 31 letters to Senator Anderson and Representative Miller outlining problems with Ranger spacecraft). (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/64)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center named Capt. James A. McDivitt (usaf) and Capt. Edward H. White II (usaf) as pilot and copilot for the second manned space flight of Project Gemini (GT—4), a four-day earth-orbital mission in early 1965. Astronauts named as backup crew for the flight were Maj. Frank Borman (usaf) and Lt. Cdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn) . All four were “second generation’’ astronauts selected for the NASA program in Sept. 1962. (msc Roundup, 8/5/64,1)
President Johnson personally congratulated scientists and technicians responsible for the successful flight of ranger vii. He congratulated Dr. William Pickering, Director of JPL, and Dr. Homer Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, and then issued a statement on the experiment. He called the flight “a basic step forward in our orderly program to assemble the scientific knowledge necessary for man’s trip to the moon. . . . The pictures obtained of the lunar surface should prove extremely useful. ... They will be a guide in constructing the lunar excursion module and in planning the trip. Now we shall be able to better map out our descent route. We’ll be able to build our lunar landing equipment with greater certainty and knowledge of the conditions which our astronauts will encounter on the moon. I recognize that this great success has come only after a number of failures and partial failures in our efforts to send probes to the moon. This success should spur us on to added effort in the future. . . . On behalf of a grateful nation, let me again congratulate you on this magnificent achievement. All of you today have helped further the peaceful exploration of space.” (NYT, 8/1/64)
The U.S. Fighter Aces Association awarded Astronauts Walter Schirra, Alan Shepard, Virgil Grissom, and Donald Slayton honorary memberships. (Houston Chron., 5/14/64)
JPL dedicated its new Space Flight Operations Facility at Pasadena, Calif., the facility to act as command center for future unmanned space flights to the moon and planets. Participating in dedication ceremonies were Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Rep. George P. Miller, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Dr. Homer E. Newell, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, and Dr. William H. Pickering. At dedication ceremony, radar signal was bounced off planet Venus, the 83 million mi. round trip taking seven minutes and 25 sec. (SBD, 5/14/64,75-76; AP, Houston Post, 5/14/64) 9 At the dedication of the jpl Space Flight Operations Facility, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, remarked: “Often in our discussions of the Space Program we refer to the ‘manned program’ and the ‘unmanned program.’ We even talk about manned space science and unmanned space science. Strictly speaking, this is loose talk. There is, in fact, no such thing as unmanned science. Man and his thinking are the prime ingredients of science. “In the Space Program, it becomes simply a matter of where the man is in relation to his instruments and measuring devices. For those space missions that we call unmanned, man is back on earth while his eyes and ears and other senses are extended electronically and mechanically far out into space by the spacecraft and its instrumentation. From his remote position, he must monitor, issue commands, receive and record data, make routine or emergency decisions as required in a continuing interchange with his inanimate partner out in space. “It is to make this partnership effective and productive of data, measurements, observations, and information that a centralized facility like the sfof is necessary. . . .” (Text)
Senate received President Johnson’s nomination of Dr. Donald F. Hornig to be Director of Office of Science and Technology, succeeding Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner. (CR, 1/14/64, 371)
Cosmonautics Day in the Soviet Union, commemorating the day when Yuri Gagarin made the first space flight in 1961. U.S.S.R. announced steerable spacecraft polet n had been placed in orbit. Purposes of the launching were said to be to “further improve space vehicles capable of maneuvering extensively in all directions, and to work out questions concerning the problem of space rendezvous.” After being placed in initial orbit, polet II was maneuvered in various directions by means of special engine system. “As a result of one of these maneuvers in the area of the equator, the space vehicle substantially changed the angle of inclination of its orbital plane.” After the progranted space maneuvers, polet n was in the following orbit: apogee, 500 km. (311 mi.); perigee, 310 km. (193 mi.); period, 92.4 min.; and inclination to the equator, 58.06 degrees. (Tass; Shabad, NYT, 4/13/64, 4)
Colonel John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc), was declared fully recovered from inner-ear injury by usaf doctors in San Antonio, Tex. The former NASA astronaut was expected to resign from usmc and become an active director of Royal Crown Cola Co. (upi, NYT, 10/31/64, 11)
Communications Satellite Corp. announced its Board of Directors had elected John A. Johnson as Vice President-International. Mr. Johnson had been Director of International Arrangements of ComSatCorp since Dec. 9, 1963. From October 1958 until he joined ComSatCorp in 1963 he had served as General Counsel of NASA. (ComSatCorp Release)
Col. John C. Nickerson (USA), 47, a key figure in USA-USAF Thor-Jupiter controversy, died in automobile accident in Alamagordo, N. Mex. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/3/64, A2)
Rep. Olin Teague (D.-Tex.), chairman of Subcommittee on NASA Oversight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, held special hearings “to emphasize our interest in seeing that there is progress” in advanced propulsion systems. At opening session, representatives of four industrial firms recommended development of nuclear rocket power be accelerated and amplified. Officials testifying were George H. McLafferty, United Aircraft; William C. House, Aerojet-General; Dr. Woodrow E. Johnson, Westinghouse Astronuclear Laboratory; and Dr. Theodore B. Taylor, General Dynamics. (SBD, 3/19/64, 433; M&R, 3/23/64, 12)	....
Senator John Stennis (D.—Miss.) said on the floor of the Senate:	* “In exploring space, our Nation as well as any other nation is straining at the state-of-the-art and technology. We are moving into a medium where relatively little is known. As we move into such a medium we are confident that we can stay abreast in the field of scientific discovery and its application to space with any other nation. In this medium it is not a case of being able to defend ourselves by building ten planes to every five planes of a potential aggressor nation or five ships to two ships or three tanks to one tank in order to establish our superiority. By staying abreast of advancements in science and technology our Nation will be able to prevent any surprise in this new medium. Our national space program is geared to this accomplishment. As for the present, our Nation subscribes to the philosophy that space should be explored for peaceful purposes, and we will do so. However, should an aggressor attempt to utilize this medium for warlike activities in the future, I am confident that our Nation will be prepared to defend itself.” (CR, 8/5/64)
X—15 No. 3 flown by Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) to 97,000-ft. altitude and 3,820-mph speed (mach 5.69) from Edwards afb, Calif. During the flight, a new protective coating on underside of plane’s tail was tested for aerodynamic heating, for possible future application in X-15 No. 2. (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 9/29/64; M&R, 10/5/64,11)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics was briefed on comparative U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs by National Aeronautics and Space Council Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh and NASC staff members. Committee Chairman Rep. George P. Miller (D.-Calif.) said the executive session gave the committee a better appreciation of Soviet scientific space exploration and reaffirmed his belief that the U.S. “must keep up its effort to stay in the space race.” (Av. Wk., 4/20/64, 30)
X-15 No. 2 piloted by John B. McKay (nasa) in planned captive flight. (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.)
Controller General Joseph Campbell said that the Federal Government could have saved $60 million by buying rather than leasing electronic data-processing systems for use on Government contracts. He recommended that a central management office be set up with authority to decide on the least expensive methods of obtaining data-processing equipment. (NYT, 11/4/64)	_
Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson visited NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, where she toured the facilities, witnessed a Saturn I and an F-l static firing, presented awards to msfc employees, and was honored at luncheon and tea with her Alabama relatives. At awards ceremony, Mrs. Johnson presented 30-year service pin to Michael J. Rahatin, program coordination officer, and a 20-year pin to Mrs. Mary Derryberry, engineering designer. She presented five invention awards: $300 to Robert J. Carmody for invention of highly flexible cellular structure; $400 to Klaus Juergensen for invention of bilateral energy transfer system; $400 to Lester Katz and Jack J. Nichols for force measuring instrument; and $300 to Benjamin M. Saunders for self-latching handle. Group achievement award of $500 went to Walter F.	Gillespie and Alonza J. Davis for contributions to recoverable motion picture camera system developed for the Saturn ISA—5, SA-6, and SA-7 launch vehicles. Mrs. Johnson also presented a $250 Sustained Superior Performance award to Mrs. Hazel T. Atchley, contracts assistant. In letter to msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun, the First Lady described her visit as “stimulating, exhilarating, informative. . . . The significance of the Saturn has come home to me.” (Marshall Star, 3/25/64, 1, 4; Robertson, NYT, 3/25/64; Marshall Star, 4/1/64, 1)
Quasars (quasi-stellar objects) were subject of discussion at American Physical Society meeting in Washington. Too large to be stars, too small to be galaxies, quasars emanate tremendously strong radio waves even though they are billions of light-years away. Dr. Peter Bergmann of Yesbiva Univ. said pulsing quasar 3C-273 must have been shining for at least a million years, because it must have taken at least that long for the jet of luminous gas protruding from one side to reach its presently observed length. Dr. Bergmann presented his theory that quasars shine because of gravitational collapse—transformation of mass to energy by gravitation rather than stellar fusion. Dr. Louis Gold and Dr. John W. Moffatt of Martin Co.’s Research Institute for Advanced Studies rejected theories that quasars operate on stellar fusion principle, theorized that “ordered oscillation” was operating inside the vast gaseous envelopes rimming quasars. Laser effect, or coherence of particles, occurred in the gaseous envelope, which was about 1 to 10 light years thick. Dense core of quasar must act as fusion furnace, providing particles which acquire coherence on their way to the outside. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/29/64,15; Haseltine, Wtish. Post, 4/29/64; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/29/64)
Shipments of nearly six million pounds of large components for NASA Langley Research Center’s $12.5 million Space Radiation Effects Laboratory began arriving. Beginning in mid-1965, the new facility would be operated by Virginia Associated Research Center (varc), comprised of representatives of the College of William and Mary, U. Va., and vpi. (LaRC Release) During April: NASA awarded contract modification exceeding $12 million to North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. for further work on Saturn V’s S—II stage. (Marshall Star, 4/22/64, 4)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb informed Mayor Edward A. Crane of Cambridge, Mass., that 29-acre site offered by Cambridge had been selected for NASA’s new Electronics Research Center. Decision was result of four-month study of 160 proposed sites in the greater Boston area by nasa committee. (NASA Release 64-208)
Five surviving men among the eight Army Air Service pilots who took part in the first flight around the world 40 years ago were honored by Explorers Club at dinner in Beverly Hills, Calif. A week later, the men were honored in ceremonies at afsc Hq., which also honored Donald W. Douglas, Sr., designer and builder of the four Douglas World Cruiser open-cockpit biplanes. (AP, Balt. Sun, 9/21/64)
Nuclear submarine John Adams, submerged off Florida coast, successfully fired Polaris A—2 missile about 1,500 mi. to its target in the Atlantic Ocean. This was last American missile-firing submarine to be equipped with the A-2 model, (upx, NYT, 6/24/64, 38)
ranger VI crashed onto the moon on target in the Sea of Tranquility, but its onboard camera system failed to return TV photographs of the lunar surface. Indications were that the two TV systems responded to Central Computer and Sequencer (cc&s) command to warm up, but the cameras did not complete the warm-up to picture taking. RANGER Vi’s cameras (two wide-angle and four narrow-angle) were to have made more than 3,000 photographs during its last 10 min. The photographs were to have provided scientific data on lunar topography and supported the Surveyor unmanned soft-landing spacecraft and Apollo manned lunar landing program. Dr. William Pickering, Director of JPL which is responsible for Ranger project management as well as its tracking and communications through Deep Space Network, said of ranger vi: “It was a sad finish to something that was going so good. “Our accuracy was a very significant achievement. The failure of the camera system isn’t going to discourage us. I’m quite confident in our ability, and we will succeed in exploring the moon on a future shot.” NASA planned three more Ranger TV flights this year. (Witkin, NYT, 2/3/64; upi, Wash. Post, 2/3/64; AP, Wash. Post, 2/3/64)
NASA announced 1964-65 Alfred P. Sloan Fellowships in executive development were awarded to three NASA employees: Walter C. Scott, Chief of Chemical and Solar Power Generation Branch in Office of Advanced Research and Technology; Edward J. Lievens, Jr., member of Technical Staff, Plans and Analysis, in Office of Manned Space Flight; and Neal A. Holmberg, Aerospace Technology Program Manager at NASA Western Operations Office, (nasa Release 64-94)
Soviet military newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda (Red Star) announced that Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin had been assigned head of its new “Cosmonauts’ Desk” (AP, Wash. Post, 4/9/64)
Vice Adm. William F. Rabom, Jr. (usn, Ret.), told industry delegates to conference at Georgia Tech that primary purpose of nuclear and space exploration was “the maintenance of national defense to guarantee a continuation of our way of life.” Technology assures “not so much a better texture for our bread but the fact that we will have that bread to eat,” he maintained. Conference was sponsored by Southern Interstate Nuclear Board and Georgia Tech’s School of Nuclear Engineering in cooperation with aec and NASA. (Rutherford, Atlanta Const., 4/3/64)
dod announced $2,641,430 contract to Akwa-Downey Construction Co. for construction of NASA test buildings at John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, Merritt Island Launch Area (mila). Contract was awarded by Army Corps of Engineers, (dod Release 688-64)
usaf Titan III-A space booster was launched from Cape Kennedy and executed its first completely successful test flight. Midway in its first orbit, approximately 115 mi. above the earth, the 5,250-lb. “transtage” (a third stage with multiple start-stop-restart capability and ability to transfer a payload from one orbit to another) performed a 360° somersault to align the platform’s inertial guidance system gyroscopes. At the end of its first 100-min. orbit, explosive charges automatically kicked a 3,750-lb. cylinder-shaped dummy satellite into a separate orbit. After the Titan III-A firing, Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier, project director, said: “The success confirmed our confidence in the system. We feel that the Air Force now has a real purpose in accomplishing space missions.” (AP, Balt. Sun, 12/11/64; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/11/64; AP, NYT, 12/11/64,20)
Interview with General John P. McConnell (usaf), Vice Chief of Staff, usaf, in The Airman. General McConnell gave his opinion of USaf’s future role in space: “First, to augment the existing defense capabilities of the U.S. land, sea, and air forces by using space systems for such things as better communications, weather reporting, and navigation. Second, to develop a military capability for protection of U.S. interests in space. “I think the Air Force, by virtue of its overall mission and experience, as well as its DOD-assigned responsibilities for space developments and boosters, must seek to obtain space capabilities for our defense as quickly as they become economical and practical. “Our role to support the national goals of both the scientific exploration and the high-priority defense projects should continue. “I also visualize that in the long run, future manned vehicles will play an increasingly vital role. It is essential that the Air Force vigorously pursue space research and development as well as operations.” (Airman, 9/64,12-15) During September: Writing in U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, Capt. R. C. Truax (usn, Ret.) described early naval rocket development work at Engineering Experiment Station, Annapolis. Captain Truax was in charge of all rocket propulsion work for usn Bureau of Aeronautics from 1946 to 1949.	(U.S. Naval Inst. Proc., 9/64, 82-108)
Lt. Col. Andrian G. Nikolayev had replaced Col. Yuri A. Gagarin as head of Soviet cosmonauts, Krasnaya Zvezda reported, (upi, NYT, 2/22/(A, 10) . .
Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman of Malaysia toured John F. Kennedy Space Center. Rahman stated after his tour: “I can’t say what impressed me most. Everything impressed me. It was so scientific.” (AP, N.O. Times-Picayune, 7/27/64)
Dr. John Strong, Director of Johns Hopkins Astrophysics and Physical Meteorology Laboratory, announced definite evidence of water vapor around and on the planet Venus. His determination was made as the result of a Feb. 21 daytime balloon flight to study Venus by means of a unique robot telescope system. The study was made under research grant for usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories. “Since it is known that carbon dioxide exists on Venus, proof of water vapor forces us to re-examine every previous calculation made concerning the possibility of some sort of life existing on the planet,” Dr. Strong said. Amount of water vapor in the air above the Venusian cloud level was established with a relative precision of 5%. Launched from Holloman AFB, N. Mex., the balloon carried the telescope to altitude of 87,000 ft. (oar Release 4-64-2)
Appearing before Special Subcommittee on Air and Water Pollution of the Senate Committee on Public Works, NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology John L. Sloop said: “The NASA activities having a bearing on air and water pollution are almost entirely in the area of nuclear and chemical propulsion. Even in this area, however, only a fraction of the work offers a pollution threat. “With regard to water pollution, it is standard practice at NASA Centers and in the rocket industry to capture water used in test operations and, if necessary, treat it before re-use or discharge. “In considering air pollution, the NASA uses two approaches:
President of the Delaware Academy of Science, John S. Seney, reported experiments he hoped would lead man to fly under his own power, like a bird. He had captured a turkey buzzard which he hoped to put through a series of tests in a wind-tunnel in the basement of his home. “If we’re going to fly, the only way to do it is to find out what this bird’s got . . . and then put all this together in relation to what modern materials are available. Then maybe we’ll come up with some sort of flying suit.” {NYT, 12/28/64,51)
In Columbus, Ohio, Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., first American astronaut to orbit the earth, announced that he would he a candidate for the Ohio Democratic nomination for U.S. Senator in the May 5 primary. He added that he was retiring from the U.S. Marine Corps after 22 years of service. After explaining his party affiliation, he said Congress “is an area in which I have had a life-long interest. To serve in a body whose actions help mold the destiny of America and the free world is certainly a challenge and a high calling.” Regarding his departure from the space program, Glenn said: “It could very well he wishful thinking on my part to train for another six or seven years for flights for which I might be too old. “I have chosen this course because I feel that it provides the best opportunity to make use of the experience I have gained in 22 years of Government service. Today, well over half our national budget goes toward the support of our military forces, our space program and other research and development activities. These are areas with which I am well acquainted. . . .” (AP, Parks, Wash. Post, 1/18/64, Al; Finney, NYT, 1/17/64,17)
William C. Schneider, Gemini program deputy director, NASA Hq., discussed flight readiness of Gemini launch vehicles and spacecraft in Data interview: “The launch vehicle is leading in flight readiness and this is as it should be. The Air Force Titan II has been under development for over four years, and 33 flights have been made in the program. NASA has benefited fully from the results of this extensive qualification flight test program that is now complete. The spacecraft, however, is still in the developmental phase of testing and is simply a younger program. In addition, the GLv’s will be essentially identical throughout the Gemini Program. This is not true of the spacecraft. . . {Data, 10/64,15-21)
Eighty-three scientists, engineers, and operating groups received medals, citations, and cash awards totaling 87,900 for outstanding contributions to U.S. civilian space program, in NASA’s 6th Annual Honor Awards Ceremony. Recipients of awards for exceptional scientific achievement: William R. Lucas, msfc; Ernst Stuhlinger, msfc; Frank B. McDonald, gsfc ; and Daniel G. Mazur, gsfc. Recipients of award for outstanding leadership: Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director, ksc; Dr. Harry J. Goett, Director, gsfc; and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director, msfc. Group achievement awards were accepted by Dr. Debus for ksc and by Dr. von Braun for msfc. Recipients of awards for exceptional service: I. Edward Garrick, Oran W. Nicks, and Leonard Jaffe of NASA Hq.; Hans F.	Gruene of ksc; and Wesley L. Hjornevik of msc. Public service awards went to Bernie P. Miller, of rca, and Harris M. Schurmeier and Allen E. Wolfe, of JPL, for their work on ranger vii lunar-photography mission. Special award was presented to Newton W. Cunningham, Hq., for his work on ranger vn. Cash awards for inventions and contributions were presented to personnel from Ames Research Center, Lewis Research Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Personnel from Hq., frc, LaRc, lrc, msc, and msfc received Presidential citations for contributions to economy and efficiency in Government. (Program; NASA Release 64-263)
Col. John M. Stapp (usaf) said at iaf congress in Warsaw that pigs and bears had been used in tests to determine best position for astronauts to be in when Apollo spacecraft returning from the moon hits the earth. Human volunteers were used in 146 test runs, but anaesthetized bears and pigs were used in tests which were considered too dangerous for human subjects. Results: safest position would be landing backwards at 45° angle to the line of impact, (upi, Chic. Trib., 9/11/64)
Speaking at the dedication of a monument at Cape Kennedy honoring Project Mercury and the nation’s seven original astronauts, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Acting Chairman and Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council said: “Mercury served to lift the selfrespect of our nation when it badly needed such a boost. I know that we still have widespread public support of our national space programs in spite of the criticism of some short-sighted individuals.” (NYT, 11/11/64, 48; AP, Balt. Sim, 11/9/64; Rossiter, upi, Miami Herald, 11/11/64)
Dr. John Peter Minton of the National Cancer Institute confirmed that infrared laser rays had killed certain malignant tumors in mice. Dr. Minton had conducted several months of experiments in conjunction with engineers of the U.S. Army Missile Command engaged in laser research, (dod Release 237-64)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.) addressed the National Space Club in “The great promise for the future of the space and defense industry is to turn some of the tremendous imagination, some of the talents and energies of your management, your scientists and engineers, to the major social and economic problems of our country. “Your industries, I submit, are eminently qualified to cooperate in this entirely different kind of takeoff because of your unique experience in solving inter-disciplinary problems through the technique of systems analysis. . . .” Emphasizing’that “space is not a WPA program,” he said he would not support accelerated space expenditures merely to stimulate the economy depressed by reduction in defense spending because of disarmament. (nsc Release)
Royal Crown Cola Co. president W. H. Clenn announced Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., former NASA astronaut, had heen elected a director of the company. (Hammer, NYT, 10/20/64,49)
Second flight-test of XB-70 aircraft was conducted at Edwards Afb, Calif., with pilot Alvin S. White (North American Aviation, Inc.) and copilot Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf) . The aircraft reached 600 mph instead of planned 700 mph and attained 28,000-ft. altitude instead of planned 35,000	ft. It was forced to land prematurely because of hydraulic system problems. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/6/64; Av. Wk., 10/12/64, 29)
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs Arthur Sylvester denied statement made yesterday by Communications Satellite Corp. President Joseph Charyk that DOD had demanded, at the last minute, unmeetable conditions for military-civilian comsat cooperation. Sylvester said: “The Department of Defense stated at the outset of negotiations that it would require assurance that the international agreement be so drafted as to protect the technical and security requirements of the national communications system.” (AP, NYT, 8/13/64,17)
Lt. Col. Yuri A. Gagarin said in Moscow press conference that he and other Soviet cosmonauts were training for new space flights. “When we go and who will go—that we do not know. We will wait and see.” (AP, NYT, 4/8/64,10; AP, Wash. Post, 4/8/64, C6)
Examining the failure of ranger vi as well as previous Ranger lunar probes, William Coughlin pointed out in Missiles and Rockets editorial that Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Ranger project manager, is “the only NASA facility where NASA owns all the land, owns all the equipment, pays all the bills and allows a non-profit corporation to run the facility. . . . “An academic environment is neither comparable nor conducive to the kind of hard-driving industrial atmosphere required to make complex space hardware function in a highly reliable manner ... we think Congress should reopen the whole question of the JPL-Cal Tech relationship.” (M&R, 2/10/64,50)
It was reported that NASA was considering diverting money from some of its other programs in an effort to save the National goal of landing men on the moon in the 1960’s. Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Associate Administrator of NASA, said in an interview that the agency “faced a real uphill battle in the next five years” to achieve a lunar landing before 1970. He stated that the probability of success was “not as high as we’d like it to be, since this is a national commitment.” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in interview that any further schedule slippages would inevitably throw the lunar landing into the 1970’s. Space officials were still holding to the 1969 goal, and, he added, “We haven’t given this up yet.” At the current time NASA was $217 million short of the bare minimum it had requested for FY 1965. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 7/19/64)
NASA announced the next U.S. manned space flight, Project Gemini GT-3, had been delayed into 1965 because of time lost as result of lightning damage to GT-2 launch vehicle and removal of the rocket from launch pad during hurricanes Cleo and Dora. Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said GT—2 unmanned suborbital mission would be made in last quarter of 1964. GT-3, with Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John Young as crew members, was scheduled for first quarter of 1965. (nasa Release 64-233)
Safety of jet airliners had improved sevenfold since 1959, William W. Moss told 17th international air safety seminar of the Flight Foundation in New York. Capt. Moss, a Pan American World Airways pilot, said there was average of one fatal accident per 690,000 flying hours in first nine months of this year, whereas there was one per 85,000 flying hours in 1959. (NYT, 10/13/64, 74)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, NASC Executive Secretary, delivered an address on occasion of the Martin Co. Honors Night Banquet. He suggested that private industry was not doing its share in the job of educating “the public to the value, the significance of space progress, space leadership, and space benefits. It should not be possible for anyone to take seriously the public diatribes against the national space program. Anyone who knows anything about ‘crash programs’ or the space program would never talk [about ‘moondoggle’]. Crash programs have unlimited funds, unlimited overtime, and parallel approaches to the end objective. None of these aspects applies to the space program or even to the lunar project.” Dr. Welsh said that in educating the general public, the contribution of the space program to education, national security, technological and managerial innovations, international status, and the national economy should be emphasized. He concluded: “The national space program is a creative force in our society. As we marshal our progressive strengths, let us use them to stamp out the evils of ignorance and misunderstanding. . . .” (Text)
One of U.S.S.R.’s top test pilots, Col. Sergei G. Brovtsev, was killed in accident while testing helicopter. (Av. Wk., 8/3/64, 15)
Nuclear physicist Dr. Edward Teller criticized DOD for failure to proceed with flight-testing the nuclear-powered Low Altitude Supersonic Vehicle (lasv) . Speaking at Air Force Institute of Technology, Wright-Patterson afb, Dr. Teller said: “For the sake of an economy that amounts to less than 1% of the Air Force budget this has been canceled. I believe this is the biggest mistake we have made since the years following World War 2 when we failed to develop the ICBM. . . .” (Av. Wk., 8/17/64,65)
Rep. Joseph M. Montoya (D.—N. Mex.) said Aug. 28 test of Kiwi B-4A nuclear reactor was “the culmination of seven previous tests—first begun in 1959. The Kiwi project has had as its basic objective the development of basic graphite nuclear rocket technology. With the completion of the Kiwi project, Los Alamos [Scientific Laboratory] will be directing its future nuclear rocket efforts to development of advanced, higher power, graphite reactor technology under the project name, Phoebus. . . . “In a great sense the groundwork for nuclear space propulsion has been laid through the success of the Kiwi project. We are on the brink of witnessing a great event—the beginnings of the nuclear space age. We might even compare the success of the Kiwi project in the space age with the combustible engine and its profound effect on the motorcar industry. “It is altogether fitting that this revolutionary accomplishment in the space age took place in Los Alamos—the Kitty Hawk of the nuclear age. And the birthplace of the atomic-bomb. . . .” (CR, 9/16/64, A4719-20)
Donald K. Slayton, Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations, msc, announced specific assignments for astronauts. Included in assignments was that of Alan Shepard, Jr., who was named chief of Astronaut Office, taking place of Slayton, who had been acting in the position in. addition to other duties, (msc Roundup, 7/8/64,1)
Edward Z. Gray, Director of Advanced Studies in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, said in Space Business Daily interview that when NASA builds a manned space station it would be “more sophisticated” than the dod Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL), nasa now has 13 studies dealing with concepts leading toward development of an orbiting manned space station; when these studies are completed, NASA would be able to appraise “the space station requirements and what will be the best method of pursuing the development of a manned orbiting space station system.” (SBD, 1/8/64, 34)
Michael L. Garbacz was appointed Program Manager, Meteorological Flight Projects, in NASA Hq. Office of Space Science and Applications. Garbacz had served as Acting Program Manager since Sept. 1963. (NASA Announcement 64-59)
Soviet scientist Sergei Vernon said at Moscow press conference that the zond I space probe was launched to study radiation hazards in space. The probe would “provide information about more remote areas of space we know little about.” (Balt. Sun, 4/8/64)
Seventeen of the buildings programed for the John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, in the Merritt Island spaceport area had been completed or were about ready for occupancy, ksc announced, (icsc Release 69-64)	'
Western Devices, Inc., was awarded SI,615,111 nasa contract for work at Launch Complex 39, John F. Kennedy Space Center Merritt Island Launch Area. Contract was awarded by Army Corps of Engineers. ( dob Release 605-64)
John Driscoll, Chairman of Massachusetts Turnpike Authority, met with James E. Webb, NASA Administrator, “to assure him we are ready, willing, and able to discuss with him and to negotiate with NASA for our turnpike location [of NASA' Electronics Research Center in Cambridge] in the event the Kendall-Sq. site is not selected.” After the meeting Mr. Webb repeated that the Kendall-Sq. location “better meets the requirements” of NASA than any other proposal. Meanwhile, in Boston, Dr. John J. Brennan, Chairman of the Committee for the Preservation of Cambridge Industry, said in press conference that the committee would use every available legal means to prevent location of the NASA center in Kendall Sq. (Boston Globe, 10/2/64)
Reporting its findings after series of hearings, Senate Subcommitte on Employment and Manpower forecast “a leveling off or actual decline” in the present $55 billion annual expenditure for weapons and space programs. Among the report’s predictions: thousands of scientists and engineers may have to seek jobs outside the aerospace industry; thousands of skilled workers may have to learn now trades; at least 10 states should plan now for converting to non-government markets. Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D.-Pa.), subcommittee chairman, said studies showed that “nearly one-tenth of the Nation’s work forces is employed in defense-related enterprise.” (Haakinson, AP, Wash. Post, 4/5/64)
House passed H.R. 11296 by voice vote, making FY 1965 appropriations for independent offices but excluding the $5.2 billion for NASA. Because Senate had not yet acted upon NASA authorization legislation for FY 1965, Congressional rules permitted any member to block appropriations on a point of order. Rep. John W. Wydler (R.-N.Y.) objected to the construction and administrative operation appropriation—because of $60 million included for electronics research center in Boston—and his objection was sustained. Then Rep. Olin E. Teague (D.—Tex.), Chairman of Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, objected to remainder of the NASA appropriations, thus blocking any attempts to cut them further. (NASA LAR ni/102; CR, 5/21/64,11241 ff)
X—15 No. 1 was piloted by Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) to 112,000-ft. altitude at maximum speed of 3,500 (mach 5.11) mph to test scientific instruments (a densitron and daytime sky background experiments) carried in pods recently installed on the craft’s wing tips and to sample density of upper atmosphere. The flight also served as a checkout of the newly installed Honeywell inertial guidance system. (NASA X—15 Proj.Off.; NYT, 12/11/64,25)
NASA Astronaut Coordinator Donald K. Slayton said in World Book Encyclopedia Science Service feature article that physical training of U.S. astronauts differed greatly from that of his Soviet counterparts. He pointed out: “There is a basic difference in philosophy between Soviet and United States flight crew selection and training. The Soviets select and train bodies as biological specimens for space experiments. The United States selects and trains engineer-pilots as integral operators of spacecraft. Our emphasis is on intelligence and skill as opposed to physical prowess.” (wbe Sci. Serv., Ind. Star, 10/8/64) 7-66—598 0—65-----23
Dr. William A. Mrazek, Director of MSFC Propulsion and Vehicle Engineering Laboratory since 1956, was appointed chief engineer of Saturn launch vehicle project in MSFC Industrial Operations. (Marshall Star, 3/18/64,1)
It was reported that former astronaut John Glenn had recovered sufficiently from his inner ear ailment to work in his yard and walk around the neighborhood. (Phil. Eve. Bull., 6/13/64)
X—15 No. 3 flown by NASA pilot John B. McKay near Edwards afb with a microphone embedded in the X—15’s side to record noise of turbulent air sweeping over the surface, to help in prediction of metal fatigue. The X—15 reached maximum speed of 3,239 mph (mach 4.91) and peak altitude of 76,000 ft. This was 102nd flight of the X-15. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; upi, Wash. Post, 3/14/64; upi, NYT, 3/14/64, 39)
usaf Athena missile misfired in its first overland test flight from Green River, Utah, and pieces of the vehicle and instrumented payload landed in sparsely populated southwest Colorado. No person or property was damaged, and usaf officials apologized immediately to Colorado Governor John A. Love. The 8-ton, 50-ft. missile was supposed to have made 450-mi. flight from Green River to White Sands Missile Range, N.	Mex. usaf sources later indicated that the missile’s nosecone was released when pyrotechnic charges were actuated by a short circuit in second-stage junction box. As result of damage to forward wires, signals for first-stage jettison were lost and second stage ignited with first stage still attached. Pressure forced off the stage fairing as well as second-stage fins, but the vehicle continued to travel—20° off course. (AP, Balt. Sun., 2/11/64; upi, NYT, 2/11/64, 26; M&R, 2/24/64,11; Av. Wk., 3/2/64,36)
Amendment to $17 billion military procurement and r&d authorization bill to cut $52 million for development of new manned bomber was offered by Senators George McGovern (D.-S. Dak.), Gaylord Nelson (D. Wis.), and William Proxmire (D.—Wis.). Senator McGovern quoted minority report by the dissenting members of the House Armed Services Committee which pointed out that “the $52 million is just the beginning of a program which will cost close to $5 billion before it is completed,” said his amendment would “reduce the bomber funds to the $5 million level requested by the President and the Secretary of Defense.” (CR, 2/26/64,3602-04)
NASA announced award of three-year, $3.6-million contract to Federal Electric Corp. for instrumentation support services to the Merritt Island Launch Area of the John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, (nasa Release 64-156)
Among persons listed by Aviation Week and Space Technology for significant contributions to the progress of aerospace in the U.S. during 1964 were: Harold Finger and Milton Klein, manager and deputy respectively of the joint AEC—NASA Nuclear Space Propulsion Office for “pushing the Rover program through four successful tests of a nuclear rocket reactor using liquid hydrogen and demonstrating the technical feasibility of nuclear propulsion for manned interplanetary flights of the future.” Harris “Bud” Schurmeier, Ranger program director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and his technical team for “their tremendous technical success with the Ranger 7 that produced the first detailed photographs of the lunar surface.” Paul F. Bikle, Director of NASA Edwards Flight Research Center, and pilots Milton Thompson and Jack Mackay of NASA and Maj. Robert Rushworth and Capt. Joe Engle of USAF for “their continued operation of the North American X-15 research aircraft into a wide variety of unexplored areas both in performance and equipment testing.” John Mengel of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center for “direction of the global NASA tracking and data acquisition network which produced an average of 50 mi. of taped data per day from payloads in space.” Col. Harold W. Robbins, usaf Space Systems Div., for “technical direction and support of the large solid rocket program that culminated this year in the successful demonstrations of 156-in.-dia. motors and the initiation of a 260-in.-dia. program.” (Av. Wk., 12/28/64, 9) December 28-30: Dr. John H. Wolfe of NASA Ames Research Center suggested the probable source of Van Allen belt radiation at the meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Seattle. Dr. Wolfe said the Van Allen radiation belts probably had their source in the cometlike tail of the magnetosphere extending from the dark side of earth away from the sun. Spiraling protons and alpha particles emitted by the sun were shielded from solar wind in this area. Affected only by the geomagnetic field, they were picked up by the magnetic lines of force and conveyed to the Van Allen belts. New data collected by particle energy spectrometers and other instruments aboard explorer xxi imp-b (Interplanetary Monitoring Platform) and ogo I (Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) led to this conclusion. Data collected from as far into space as 96,000 mi. revealed that interaction of the solar wind and the geomagnetic field around the sunlit side of earth created a boundary region 2^ earth diameters thick at a distance of five earth diameters from the point on earth closest to the sun. This expanded to six diameters thick 90° around earth. Hydromagnetic effects in this boundary deflected solar radiation around earth and prevented it from penetrating directly to the relatively low altitudes of the Van Allen belts except during the more energetic solar storms. Satellite data also indicated that the comet-like tail of earth extended directly along the line from the sun through earth, rather than being slightly deflected as had been believed. Wolfe said the tail seemed less tapered and more nearly cylindrical than had been expected, and extended at least as far as the orbit of the moon, (arc Release 65-2; AP, Detroit News, 1/8/65; M&R, 1/18/65, 28)
nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh said at dedication of Aerojet General’s Dade County (Fla.) plant: “Leadership in propulsion is . . . synonymous with leadership in space—for both military and non-military purposes. We cannot afford to relax in this area. There is no room for complacency, only room for urgency. . . . “In supporting the thesis that there is real danger from complacency, I list the following points: “1. The USSR is having some economic difficulties, particularly in agriculture. Yet, their space program is expanding. “2. The USSR is far ahead of the United States in manned flight experience. Even their female cosmonaut has flown more orbits than all of our astronauts combined. “3. The USSR has flown their heavier Vostok spacecraft in manned and unmanned flights some 45 times as many earth orbits as we have flown our much smaller Mercury. “4. Practically all of the competences developed for space could be used for aggression as well as for peaceful purposes. “Please do not misunderstand what I am saying. We have made great strides, particularly in the past three years. We are actually ahead of the Soviets in some applications of space, such as communications and meteorology. We are, however, not yet ahead overall. But, our rate of progress is very impressive. “Probably what I am warning about more than anything else is the danger that we might slow down our rate of progress—that we might heed the voices of defeatism and impracticality. This is the one thing we cannot afford. We cannot afford to lose the momentum which stems from a growing program. To slow down is to be content with second place. This we should not do. In fact, we dare not do it.” (Text)
NASA announced that Joseph T. Dickerson, Jr., was appointed Special Assistant to Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Mr. Dickerson would assist Dr. Mueller in the areas of management, labor relations, and Government-industry relationships. (nasa Release 64-119)
Titan II rocket booster for first manned Gemini space flight (GT-3) was turned over to the Government in ceremonies at Martin Co.’s Baltimore plant. Charles W. Mathews, Gemini project manager of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said parachute landing system and spacecraft’s ejection seats were all that remained to 'be flight-qualified, and GT-3 was still planned for first quarter of 1965. Mathews disclosed msc had been experimenting for more than a year with braking rockets to enable manned Gemini spacecraft to land on land instead of water. Para-sail also would be used in such a landing. Among other officials present were GT-3 crewmen, Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John Young. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/29/64; Witkin, NYT, 10/29/64)
Michael V. LighthiU, director of British laboratory involved in developing Anglo-French supersonic airliner Concorde and reputable expert on sonic booms, spoke optimistically in interview about outcome of recent U.S. sonic boom experiments. Lighthill said that although there was not yet enough information from the Oklahoma City studies, preliminary reports were “very encouraging.” Damage from sonic booms was apparently less than many experts had feared. (Simons, Wash. Post, 8/8/64)
Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy voted $14 million in aec’s FY 1965 budget for flight test of Snap-lOA reactor. This action followed Budget Bureau letter to the Committee acknowledging that “reasonable and well informed men can differ” on such issues as the Snap flight test and stating that the Administration would conduct flight test if Congress authorized the funds, as long as the Administration’s $2,651,542,000 request for aec was not exceeded. Late last year the Administration had canceled orbital flight-test because of lack of specific mission for the Snap; leaders of the Joint Congressional Committee, Sen. John 0. Pastore (D.—R.I.) and Rep. Chet Holifield (D.— Calif.), had protested the decision, urging President Johnson to approve the flight test. (NYT, 3/26/64,24)
Water-cooled space suit, employing plastic tubing sewn into long underwear, was in research and development at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Begun by Royal Aircraft Establishment in 1962, suit was undertaken by MSC in 1963 when Dr. John Billingham left RAE to join msc. Dr. Billingham said, “In operation and in theory the suit looks acceptable. But we must test it much more for reliability.” (M&R, 6/22/64, 28) During June: Detailed report on global satellite weather prediction system, “Swami” (Stanford Worldwide Acquisition of Meteorological Information), was completed by 31-man team of Stanford Univ. students. Three 1,200-mi. circular polar orbit satellites orbiting 120° apart would receive meteorological data from global network of weather balloons, transmit the stored information after each two-hour orbit to a single ground command station. (M&R, 6/22/64,25)
Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier, Deputy Chief of Staff for Manned Space Flight, afsc, said that usaf would sharply increase its participation in NASA’s manned space flight program; usaf astronauts might be assigned for training as crew members on some Gemini and Apollo flights, and 100 officers would help staff Integrated Mission Control Center (imcc) at msc. [George Low, msc Deputy Diricetor, denied this claim three days later (see June 9).] General Bleymaier disclosed that: (1) flight crews of Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) would come from nine Dyna-Soar pilots now at Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards afb; (2) usaf would begin discussing specific flights aboard Gemini and Apollo when Sec. of Defense Robert S. McNamara gave approval for production of mol; (3) 17 Titan III—C launches were planned, two allocated to MOL; (4) payloads of 6,000 lbs. would contain scientific research projects, with NASA experiments to be accommodated. (Houston Post, 6/10/64; M&R, 6/15/64, 12)	_
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced that Gen. John Paul McConnell would be nominated to replace Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, who would retire as Air Force Chief of Staff on Jan. 31,1965, after 35 years in the armed forces. Gen. McConnell would assume his new position Feb. 1. (NYT, 12/23/64, 11; Barrett, htns, Wash. Post, 12/23/64, 2) December 23: NASA announced realignment of its manned space flight organization, designed to (1) provide a central organizational element with the overall operations responsibility for manned space flight programs, and (2) make a single organization responsible for the assembly, checkout, and launch of the total Apollo space vehicle in manned space flight programs at Cape Kennedy and the Merritt Island Launch Area (mila) . Key organizational changes would be effective Jan. 1,1965: (1) appointment of E. E. Christensen to a new position, Mission Operations Director, in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, supported by two Mission Directors with overall responsibility for the individual mission to which they were assigned; (2) creation of an Operations Support Requirements Office, headed by Porter Brown and staffed by representatives of each NASA program office, appropriate centers, and Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition; (3) transfer of Manned Spacecraft Center’s Florida Operations to Kennedy Space Center; and (4) establishment at ksc of the position of Director, Launch Operations. Dr. Kurt H. Debus would also act as Director, Launch Operations; G. Merritt Preston, head of msc Florida Operations, would become Deputy Director, Launch Operations. Resident offices were provided at ksc for msc and msfc program managers. (NASA Ann. 64-301; ksc Release 224)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator, was presented the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy for 1964, at National Space Club’s annual Goddard Memorial Dinner in Washington. Other Space Club awards: Dr. Harold A. Rosen and Donald D. Williams of Hughes Aircraft Co. received the astronautics engineer award for contributions to conception and development of Syncom satellite. Tulane Univ. received a $1,500 grant to further advanced education in the field of science and astronautics; McDonnell Aircraft Corp. and General Dynamics/ Astronautics received Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award for performance on Mercury spacecraft and Atlas booster of Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper’s 22-orbit flight; editors and staff of Fortune magazine received the Space Club’s press award for series of articles “which provided provocative insights into the motivations and accomplishments of the nation’s space-exploration programs”; Robert P. Walker, mathematics and physics student at Univ. of Maryland, received $1,500 Goddard Scholarship; and Robert Cargill Hall, historian of Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., received $200 Goddard Historical Essay award for second straight year, (nsc Release)
Interviewed in Houston, where he toured NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh commented that U.S.S.R. leads U.S. in “total manned [space] flying hours, aggregate weight lifted into space, and some phases of biomedicine. “But we are ahead in space navigation, communications, weather satellites, and boosters. “I doubt that they now can equal the thrust of Saturn I, although I think they eventually will do so.” (Houston Chron., 1/31/64; Houston Post, 1/31/64)
NASA and dod established the National Space Station Planning SubPanel of the NASA—dod Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board ( aacb ), charged with studying and then making recommendations to aacb on the best configuration for follow-on manned space station to the mol. Co-chairmen were Dr. Michael I. Yarymovych of NASA Advanced Manned Missions Office and Col. Kenneth Schultz, Deputy Director of Development Planning for Space, Hq. usaf. (M&R, 3/9/64, 13; SBD, 3/11/64,383)
usaf launched Titan III-A space booster from Cape Kennedy, and the first two stages burned perfectly; however, because transtage engines shut down prematurely, the Titan III—A fell slightly short of orbiting its 3,750-lb. dummy lead payload. AFSc’s Brig Gen. Joseph Bleymaier said preliminary investigation showed malfunction of onboard helium pressure valve was to blame for the shortened burn time from programed 406 sec. to about 391 sec. He also said the test was 95% successful—all primary objectives and most secondary objectives had been met. (dod Release 625-64; M&R, 9/7/64,11; Av. Wk., 9/7/64, 32)
H. J. High Construction Co. received $1,012,800 NASA contract for construction of third-floor addition to Operations and Checkout Building, John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA (Merritt Island). Army Corps of Engineers awarded the fixed-price contract, (dod Release 357-64)
At aiaa former American Airlines’ vice president William Littlewood said problems of sonic boom and economics might postpone introduction of supersonic airliner from 1970 target date to some time between 1975 and 1980. Problems of practicability and noise would have to be solved before supersonic transport became reality, Mr. Littlewood said:	(Finney, NYT, 7/2/64, 28)
At aiaa, William G. Huber of msfc outlined NASA’s plans for space projects beyond Apollo project. According to one set of plans for the 1970-1990 period, space program costs would be $6,970,000,000 per year for 20 years. This figure was highest yet publicly discussed by a NASA official. Huber was outlining possibilities for the future in his discussion of large post-Saturn launch vehicles. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/3/64)	_
NASA Telephone and Data Distribution Center became first technical support element of the John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, to become operational on Merritt Island, KSC announced. Some buildings were being serviced by telephone service through the Center and other buildings would be phased in as required. Fully equipped to handle all types of communications, the Center participated in its first technical support operation during launch of Saturn I SA-5, when it provided closedcircuit television service to Washington and other areas, (ksc Release 11-64)
First large batch of unusual stones arrived from Iowa at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center for analysis in Project Moon Harvest. Residents of six Iowa counties were gathering the specimens, which GSFC scientists were analyzing to determine if they were of lunar origin. Dr. John A. O’Keefe, project scientist, theorized that pieces of the moon’s surface were chipped off the moon by meteorite impapt and attracted by gravity to the earth. (Goddard News, 4/20/64, 4; GSFC Release G—13-64)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman, spoke at 10th National Symposium on Reliability and Quality Control on misconceptions about national space policy: “First, the lunar project should not be confused with our total space effort. Of course, it is a complex, expensive, and difficult task, but it’s just a part of our young and growing national space program. Its major significance is that it sets a goal for an orderly development of competences—all of which will be useful for a wide range of space activities in the future. “Second, the national security aspects of space are not being neglected. The National Aeronautics and Space Act requires that they receive attention and they are receiving it. Careless thinking prompts critics to assert that practically nothing is being done by the military in the space field. For example, about two-thirds of all our space flights in the past two years have been launched by the Department of Defense. And just as careless thinking assumes that a larger space budget for NASA than for Defense means a neglect of the latter. While one need not be satisfied with the rate of progress in either the civilian or non-civilian aspects of space, nevertheless it is worth noting that national security objectives are being pursued by both nasa and the Defense Department. ... The fact that we do not plan space programs for aggression does not mean that we have a national security space gap or that we will allow one to develop. “Third, there is another misconception to the effect that the national space program is employing an unduly large portion of our engineering and scientific manpower. Added to this misconception is the parallel view that the space program is creating a shortage of such talents which otherwise would be applied in our civilian economy. Actually, profits in private enterprise are at an all-time high and, in general, higher in the non-space and non-defense companies than in those whose business is primarily government-financed for space and defense. If those very profitable companies do not hire scientists and engineers to engage in research and development, it is not because they can’t get them as their profit position gives them remarkable bargaining power. Rather, failure to employ such scarce talents in large numbers is the result of deliberate decisions on the part of private entrepreneurs and not because there are no such persons available. . . . Furthermore, government-financed research and development—particularly in such challenging fields as space—is having a salutary effect in stimulating an increase in the number of highly trained scientists and engineers. “Fourth, there has also been some criticism and confusion on the subject of international cooperation in the space program. We have formed a useful base for peaceful and constructive relationships with some 60 other countries in space activities. The benefits are mutual. Some of our projects could just not have been conducted successfully without the tracking facilities, sites, and other cooperative efforts of countries around the world. In no case do we impair our national security through such cooperation, and we do not plan to do so. . . . “Fifth, there are those who argue that it would be better to slow down—or even stop—our space effort in order to divert the resources to education, slum clearance, medical research, and other such purposes. As much as we need to do more in those important areas, it is unrealistic to believe that the resources are transferable—even if it were desirable to attempt the shift. . . . What is more, there is no assurance that the Congress would vote more funds for education or public housing just because it voted less for space. . . (Text)
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and NASA announced the award of a contract for master planning of NASA’s $60 million Electronics Research Center to the joint venture firms of Edward Durell Stone, New York City; Giffels and Rossetti, Detroit; and Charles A. Maguire Associates, Boston-Providence. The contract was awarded by the New England Division of the Corps of Engineers, which had been designated by the Electronics Research Center as NASA’s design and construction agent for the buildings to be located on a 29-acre site at Kendall Sq., Cambridge, Mass, (nasa Release 64-307)
Reported that John Stack of Republic Aviation believed U.S.S.R. probably would beat the West with supersonic transport. Stack revealed Soviets had developed 1,200-mph delta-wing bomber, “the Bounder,” which could quickly be converted into transport “because the Soviets have lower performance standards than the U.S. for their aircraft and are not worried about the effects of sonic booms on their cities.” (Parade, 5/31/64) During May: Sylvania Electric Products, Inc., recommended to NASA that a data collection satellite system could be provided by a single satellite in polar orbit between 500 and 700 n. mi. altitudes. Satellite would collect meteorological and oceanographic data from about 1,200 sensors per day, store the information on magnetic tape, then relay it upon command to ground station. Sylvania’s study was performed under $97,000 contract awarded last year by NASA. (M&R, 6/1/64, 11; SBD, 5/13/64, 68) . During May: Sert I (space electric rocket test) payload began final series of tests in large vacuum tank at NASA Lewis Research Center, in preparation for space flight later this summer. (Lewis News, 6/5/64, 2)
John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, announced major reorganization. KSC Director Dr. Kurt H. Debus said objectives of reorganization were to: (1) realign Apollo program management functions in accordance with concept of NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller that these functions be standardized at NASA Hq. and the three manned space flight centers; (2) separate and strengthen administrative and technical support functions; and (3) reduce number of offices reporting to Dr. Debus and delegate more authority and responsibility to Assistant Directors. Under realignment there were five Assistant Directors, with authority to act for Center Director within their areas of responsibility: Program Management, Administrative Management, Launch Vehicle Operations, Technical Support Operations, and Instrumentation. Program Management was divided into two areas, Plans and Program Support Office and the Apollo Program Management Office, which was aligned as counterpart organization with Apollo program offices in NASA Hq. and the other manned') space flight centers (Manned Spacecraft Center and Marshall Space Flight Center). Unaffected by the change were Launch Support Equipment Engineering Div., Facilities Engineering and Construction, and five staff offices. New NASA Hq. office, NASA Regional Inspections, was attached to KSC. msc’s Preflight Operations Div. was renamed msc Florida Operations but its basic relationship to KSC was unchanged. Other NASA Center elements attached to KSC, such as GSFC Field Projects Branch, remained unchanged, (ksc Release.10-64)
Yuri M. Vorontsov, Soviet delegate to U.N. Legal Subcommittee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, said orbiting of three-man voskhod i spacecraft represented “a great achievement of Soviet science and the Soviet people ‘on behalf of all mankind.’ ” Dr. N. M. Sissakian, member of presidium of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said in Paris that U.S.S.R. Hoped to present scientific results of voskhod i space flight to international symposium on manned space flight in Petris next June. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/13/64; Sullivan, NYT, 10/13/64, 18)
NASA Lewis Research Center program of metal fracture toughness testing was helping make supersonic transport possible, according to William F. Brown, Jr., Chief of lrc Strength of Materials Branch. Co-author of paper on fracture toughness test methods with John E. Strawley, Head of Fracture Section at lrc, Brown said listening to amplified sounds of metal cracking under stress was one of the techniques of testing fracture toughness, (lrc Release 64-59)
In its first five years of powered flight, the X-15 aircraft amassed total of 17 hrs., 52 min., 7.1 sec. of flight, of which 4 hrs., 8 min., 16.8 sec. was powered flight. The rocket-powered research aircraft accrued 4 hrs., 13 min., 11 sec. of flight at speeds above 2,000 mph (mach 3), far more flight time at mach 3 than any other aircraft. It achieved a total of 2 hrs., 39 min., 47.4 sec. at macn 4 (about 2,700 mph), a speed impossible for any other manned aircraft; 40 min., 45.1 sec. above mach 5 (about 3,400 mph); and 11.6 sec. above mach 6 (about 4,000 mph). The X-15 was built for top speed of 4,000 mph and altitude capability of 250,000	ft. Piloted by Joseph A. Walker (nasa), the X—15 set unofficial world speed record at 4,104 mph and unofficial world altitude record of 354,200 ft. It held current official FAI world altitude record of 314,750 ft., set July 17, 1962, with Maj. Robert M. Rushworth (usaf) as pilot. The No. 2 aircraft, modified to provide longer engine burn time, was expected to attain much higher speeds—possibly as high as mach 8 (more than 5,000 mph). In its first five years the X-15 made 116 flights. It was expected that the three aircraft would bring the total to twice that many within about five more years, (nasa Release 64-265)
Analyzing impact of voskhod i flight, John Finney said feeling of U.S. Government officials was that voskhod i “probably was the prelude to a longer flight sometime soon and to the unveiling of a more powerful rocket for launchings.” In itself, voskhod i flight was considered of more psychological than technical significance. (Finney, NYT, 10/ 14/64, 18)	.....
Gen. Thomas S. Power (usaf) retired as Commander-in-Chief of the Strategic Air Command (sac) . He was succeeded by Lt. Gen. John D. Ryan, formerly sac Vice Commander-in-Chief. Ryan would be made a four-star general. (NYT, 12/1/64, 46)
Two-man crew and backup crew for first manned Gemini space flight would be selected in May or June, according to Astronaut Donald K. Slayton at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Flight was expected in late 1964. (Houston Chron., 2/16/64)
Sen. John Tower (R.-Tex.) said in Houston he favored continuing exploration of space and landing a man on the moon as soon as possible, thus differing with Republican Presidential candidate Sen. Barry Gold-water. Sen. Tower said: “I believe, knowledge is needed for the sake of knowledge. ... I would continue space expenditures at their present level.” (Houston Chron., 9/17/64)
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, announced U.S. Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife would administer for NASA the entire buffer zone Merritt Island lowlands, nearly 40,000	acres, (ksc Release 34-64)
Rep. John W. Davis, (D.-Ga.) said dod had turned over the large solidpropellant rocket motor project to NASA, the decision made because no definite military mission was assigned for the technology. In FY 1965 NASA will cover cost of the large-motor rad; in FY 1964 usaf carried the cost. NASA officials said they planned to request $13 million for the project, with about half that going to contractors Thiokol Chemical Corp. and Aerojet-General. (Atlanta Const., 1/24/64)
GSFC announced engineers Barbara Lunde and William D. Hibbard had invented a valve with no moving parts for controlling flow of liquid propellants to satellite reaction jets. Valve freezes and thaws the propellant in the feed line. (Goddard News, 5/18/64,2)
