Vice President Humphrey and the gemini iv astronauts, Maj. James A. McDivitt (usaf) and Maj. Edward H. White II (usaf), won cheers and applause from visitors to the International Air Show at Le Bourget, France. Attendance at U.S. pavilion, which had been poor, picked up appreciably. Also present were nasa Administrator James E.	Webb, and Charles Mathews, manager of the Gemini program. A scheduled formal meeting between the American astronauts and Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin, first man in space, fell through when the Soviets announced that Col. Gagarin would be “too busy.” However, at an official luncheon, Gagarin stopped at White’s table and the two astronauts shook hands and spoke briefly, (ap, NYT, 6/20/65, 38; UPl, Wash. Daily News, 6/19/65; ap, Hudgins, Wash. Post, 6/20/65, A28)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb was one of four persons named honorary chairmen of the Robert Hutchings Goddard Library Program at Clark Univ. The other three were Mrs. Robert H. Goddard; Dr. Charles G. Abbot, former fifth Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution; and Mr. John Jeppson, executive vice president of the Norton Co. and Chairman of the Board of Trustees of Clark Univ. Mr. J. L. Atwood, president of North American Aviation, was named general chairman of the Library program. (Goddard, 7/65)
New York’s Mayor-elect John V. Lindsay announced formation of a Science and Technology Advisory Council composed of representatives of universities, foundations, and corporations. Council would attempt to attract science-oriented industries into New York City and assist those already there. It would meet monthly with the Mayor and conduct studies into the scientific and technological advances that might affect industries in the city. {NYT, 12/22/65, 12)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander, named B/Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier as commander of the usaf Western Test Range with headquarters at Vandenberg afb. Presently deputy commander for manned systems at afsc Space Systems Div., General Bleymaier replaced B/Gen. Jewell C. Maxwell, recently named head of the faa Supersonic Transport Program. In his new command, General Bleymaier would be responsible for maintaining, operating, and modifying as needed, the western portion of the national range in support of dod, NASA, and other agency programs, (afsc Release 130.65)
Discussing Russian-American cooperation in space in a letter to the editor in the New York Times, Donald Spero, a student at Columbia Univ. School of Engineering, said: “. . . technical integration of the U.S. and (assumed) Russian lunar programs is out of the question. Hardware for every phase of the Apollo program has already been designed and built. . . . “The integration of a Russian booster and an American capsule would be a technical impossibility. . . . The only plausible alternative for initial lunar exploration would be to include a Russian cosmonaut in the Apollo crew or one of our astronauts as a member of the Russian expedition. Even if problems of language and pilot training could be overcome, political and propaganda considerations eliminate this alternative. “Realistic possibilities for cooperation lie in the areas of unmanned probes, communication and weather satellites, and eventually manned planetary exploration and establishing of lunar bases.” (NYT, 6/14/65)
Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White, II (Maj., usaf) of the June 3-7 gemim iv flight received usaf astronaut wings from Gen. John P. McConnell, usaf Chief of Staff, in an Air Force ceremony at the Pentagon, x-15 test pilot Joseph H. Engle (Capt., usaf) also received USAF astronaut wings, thus becoming the 12th American to receive the award and the fifth to wear the insignia for suborbital flight. Meanwhile the Senate Armed Services Committee approved President Johnson’s promotion of Astronauts Walter M. Schirra from commander to captain and John W. Young from It. commander to commander. (dod Release 458-65, 7/14/65)
17-yr.-old John J. Breaux, who exhibited a “soundovac” that could “solve any mathematical problem when a formula was available,” and 17-yr.-old Douglas A. Whithaus, who based his exhibit on development of a liquid-gaseous-propellant rocket engine, were entrants in the Greater St. Louis Science Fair selected to compete in the National Science Fair, May 6-8. (St. Louis Post Dispatch, 4/10/65).
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Col., usmc, Ret.), visited Pope Paul vi at Vatican City and accepted a medal commemorating the Pontiffs October 4 visit to the United Nations. (Reuters, NYT, 10/14/65, 32; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/14/65, A-2)
Death-ray use of the laser was impractical, the 72nd annual meeting of the Association of Military Surgeons of the U.S. was told by Dr. Donald H. Glew, Jr., George Washington Univ. surgeon who had conducted laser research for the Armed Forces. Dr. Glew said that, with present sources of laser beams at least, such rays would be impractical as weapons because the necessary equipment would be “far too massive for field use.” (ap, Wash. Post, 11/16/65, C5)
nasa pilot William Dana flew x—15 No. 1 to 80,200-ft. altitude at 2,795 mph (mach 4.22) in a pilot-checkout flight which also carried a slightly modified horizon scanner and device for measuring microscopic atmospheric pressure, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
Christopher C. Kraft, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center director of flight operations, said the three-orbit Gemini gt-3 flight with astronauts Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) and John W. Young (usn) would be much safer than Project Mercury orbital space flights. The astronauts would not depend solely on the braking rockets to bring them back to earth. They would make maneuvers during the first and third orbits to bring the spacecraft back through the atmosphere even if retrofiring braking rockets failed. Toward the end of the third orbit, near Hawaii, Grissom would fire the rockets for about two minutes, sending the Gemini spacecraft into a 54-mi. orbit which would be a reentry path. Over Los Angeles, the main braking rockets would be fired to drive the spacecraft down to a landing about 70 mi. east of Grand Turk Island in the Atlantic Ocean. Kraft said if the braking rockets did not fire, the gt-3 craft would land about 1,000 mi. due west of Ascension Island. (Galveston News-Tribune, 2/16/65)
Speaking on safety in the Space Age, John L. Sloop, NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, told the 22nd Annual Greater Akron Safety Conference that “for the past ten years, the naca and NASA have had a frequency rate (injuries per million man hours work) ranging from 3.2 to 2.1. The national industrial frequency average, I am told, is 6.12 for 1963 and the average for all of Federal government is 7.9.” (Text)
f-111b, usn version of the F-lll multipurpose fighter designed for use by both usaf and USN, was displayed for the first time during a rollout ceremony at the Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. plant at Peconic, L.I. Secretary of the Navy Paul H. Nitze was the principal speaker. Test pilots demonstrated the variable-sweep wing which could extend almost perpendicular to the fuselage for take-offs, landings, and slow flight, and then pivot back sharply for supersonic flight. In a news conference, Brig. Gen. John L. Zoeckler (usaf), F-lll project manager, acknowledged that f-111b was 500-600 lbs. “overweight,” but said that “very substantial strides” had been made in we'ight reduction. He added that “some compensation” in performance would be achieved in later USN models by addition of high-lift devices. The two-man, all-weather, supersonic aircraft was designed to fly at about 1,600 mph. (dod Release 285-65; Hudson, NYT, 5/12/65,18)
ranger ix underwent a midcourse correction maneuver at 7:03 a.m. est that would aim the spacecraft more accurately for impact on the moon crater Alphonsus on Mar. 24. The maneuver consisted of a series of radio signals that changed the spacecraft’s attitude and then, through a 31-sec. burn of a small jet engine, speeded up its flight by 40.6	mph. ranger ix was then 175,416 mi. from earth, traveling at 2,943 mph. Newly estimated impact point was 12.9° south latitude and 2.3° west longitude—only four miles from the original target point of 13° south latitude and 2.5° west longitude. Before the correction maneuver, ranger ix was headed for a point about 400 mi. north of Alphonsus. JPL Director Dr. William H. Pickering said during a press conference that the landing should be well out of the shadow of the towering peak in the center of Alphonsus—a possibility that had caused JPL scientists some concern since light was needed for the picture-taking. (L.A. Times, West, Wash. Post, 3/24/65; Hill, NYT, 3/23/65, 1)
U.S.S.R. dominated the International Air Show at Le Bourget, France, with premiere showing of 11-62 186-passenger jetliner, powered by four turbofan engines, each developing 23,100 lbs. thrust, and display of the M—110 crane helicopter reported to have set an unofficial world’s record last month by hoisting 25 tons more than 8,000 ft. into the air. Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin answered questions in the Soviet pavilion. (upi, Miami Her., 6/11/65)
NASA’s increased use of real-time planning in the Gemini program, in contrast to the “cast-in-concrete” planning of the Mercury program and the first Gemini flight, was praised by William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. He said this new elasticity had made possible the “revolutionary reprogramming” of the Gemini VI and Gemini VII missions where “quick and drastic re-thinking of almost every aspect of space flight operations was required. Also required was the junking of a great many shibboleths, not the least important being the fixed opinion long weeks of launching-pad checkout must precede liftoff of a mancarrying rocket. . . .” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/4/65, A12)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator since 1958, died of cancer at age 67. He was a former Director of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, a former Associate Director of the National Bureau of Standards, and—for forty-five years—an ordained minister in the Methodist Church. An internationally renowned scientist-engineer who once said he and the airplane grew up together, he was recognized for his leadership in the development of aeronautics and astronautics. He generally was regarded as the man who guided the United States into the space age. Dr. Dryden served the U.S. Government with distinction since 1918 in science and technology, as an administrator, and more recently as a skilled diplomat in negotiating international agreements for cooperative efforts in the peaceful exploration of space. The recipient of many awards and honors, Dr. Dryden was especially known for his scientific contributions to fluid mechanics and boundary-layer phenomena. At Johnson City, Tex., President Johnson said that the death of Dr. Dryden “is a deep personal loss and a reason for national sorrow. . . . No soldier ever performed his duty with more bravery and no statesman ever charted new courses with more dedication than Hugh Dryden. Whenever the first American space man sets foot on the moon or finds a new trail to a new star, he will know that Hugh Dryden was one of those who gave him knowledge and illumination.” From Great Falls, Mont., Vice President Humphrey, Chairman of the nasc, said: “The death of Dr. Hugh Dryden is a sad loss to all of us, and especially to those of us who have been guided by his wisdom, experience, and great common sense in planning the nation’s space program. “We shall miss him sorely as we plot our course for the decade ahead. So much of what this nation has been able to do in aeronautics and space over the past 40 years we owe to the creative science and the confident, skillful leadership of this great public servant. I know of no finer example of modern man in all his versatility than Dr. Hugh Dryden, whose vision, courage, and lifetime of service have helped to lead the way into the Space Age. . . .” nasa Administrator James E. Webb said: “Dr. Hugh L. Dryden was a man of his time—of the air age, of the nuclear age, of the space age, with all the implications of modern science and technology for the accomplishments of his time. He was also a man for all times because his courage in undertaking the conquest of air and space, his scientific, engineering, and administrative competence and his qualities of humanity and leadership mark him as one of the truly great men who have contributed over the years to these fields. He will be sorely missed in nasa, in the nation and, indeed, in many nations.” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “The country has lost one of its greatest scientists and one of its most dedicated citizens. The country will have to continue with its space and aeronautics programs without him —but will not be able to carry on as well without his inspiring leadership and ability.” (Texts)
Dr. Donald Hornig, President Johnson’s science adviser, told the Associated Press in Washington, D.C., that the Government planned to proceed with Project Mohole despite mounting costs. The project called for sinking a metal drill six miles through Pacific Ocean and floor about 100 mi. northeast of Maui in the Hawaiian Islands.	(Wash. Post, 9/28/65, A5)
In a special report on Project Apollo, Edward Kolcum wrote in Aviation Week and Space Technology that NASA was now driving to simplify Apollo spacecraft systems, subsystems, and components, and had embarked on an educational program with one goal: to stop the mushrooming tendency to build elements that were more complex and did more than was necessary. (Kolcum, Av. Wk., 11/15/65, 55)
U.S. Justice Dept, opposed “at this time” the enactment of measures involving the Government’s rights to inventions discovered by private research and development contractors working with Government funds. The Department set forth its view in a letter from Deputy Attorney General Ramsey Clark to Sen. John L. McClellan (D-Ark.), Chairman of the Senate Judiciary Patents Subcommittee. (Mintz, Wash. Post, 7/30/65, A12)
A new theory stating that molecules adsorb on the surfaces of ionic (electrically-charged) surfaces by unbalanced electrical fields of force had been developed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory under sponsorship of the NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology, NASA announced. Knowledge of the exact mechanics of gas adsorption would be vitally important in innumerable scientific, industrial, and medical fields. (NASA Release 65-340) During October: jpl Director William H. Pickering, describing mariner iv’s Mars mission in Astronautics and Aeronautics, wrote: “This mission has proven to be of immense scientific and engineering importance. New scientific information is now available on regions of the solar system never before penetrated with instruments. Observations from the vicinity of Mars suggest entirely new concepts about the nature of that planet. Spacecraft performance has shown our ability to design and construct a remotely operated device of astonishing complexity. Its continued operation establishes a standard of reliability seldom, if ever, attained. Even maintaining two-way communications over distances exceeding 100-million mi. remarkably demonstrates advances in communication technology which were not thought possible a decade ago. “The design concepts underlying Mariner date back to 1959 when the Jet Propulsion Laboratory began the Vega program. In 1960, Vega was modified to become Ranger. The Mariner series took its present form in 1961, when a mission to Venus was planned for the planetary opportunity in August 1962. . . .” (Pickering, A&A, 10/1965,20-21)
Dr. William W. Hagerty, president of Drexel Institute of Technology, was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, in university/industry relations, (nasa Release 65—291)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara administered the oath of office to four new defense officials in a Pentagon ceremony: Dr. Harold Brown, Secretary of the Air Force; Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering; Norman S. Paul, Undersecretary of the Air Force; and Thomas D. Morris, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower, (dod Release 666-65)
Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf) flew x-15 No. 1 to 266,500-ft. altitude at 3,580 mph (mach 5.08). The flight carried a slightly modified horizon scanner and device for measuring microscopic atmospheric pressure, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
Special NASA awards ceremony was held at MSC, with NASA Administrator James E. Webb making the presentations. Rep. Olin Teague, Chairman of Manned Space Flight Subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, also was present for the occasion. NASA Distinguished Service Medal, NASA’s highest honor, was presented to Donald K. Slayton, Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations, MSC, and to Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Command Pilot for GEMINI VI mission. Slayton’s award was for “his outstanding performance in directing NASA flight operations and for his leadership of the continuous and rapid adaptation of NASA’s astronaut training activities to the experience gained from Mercury and Gemini flights. . . .” Schirra’s dsm cited “his courage and judgment in the face of great personal danger, his calm, precise and immediate perception of the situation that confronted him and his accurate and critical decisions that made possible the successful execution of the Gemini VI mission.” This ceremony marked the first time the top NASA medal was presented away from Washington. (With these two presentations, all seven original Mercury astronauts had received the Distinguished Service Medal.) nasa Exceptional Service Medal was presented to the crews of gemini VII (Astronauts Borman and Lovell) and VI (Astronauts Schirra and Stafford); William C. Schneider, Deputy Director of the Gemini Program for Mission Operations, omsf; and John T. Mengel, Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Systems Directorate, gsfc. Group Achievement Awards were presented to the following groups from the Cape: ksc Launch Operations; ksc Spacecraft Operations; Martin Co. Gemini program group; McDonnell Aircraft Corp. Gemini program group; Gemini Launch Vehicle Div., afsc 6555th Aerospace Test Wing: and afetr Test Operations Div. (msc Gemini VII/ Gemini VI Fact Sheet; Exec. Secy., msc Awards Committee; nasa Proj. Off.)
William Hines commented on the economy of low bidding in an article in the Washington Evening Star: “The lowest bidder still produces hardware for Uncle Sam’s space effort, and this arrangement does not always prove the most economical in either time or money. A glaring example has developed at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, where America’s moonport is rapidly nearing completion. “The lowest bidder has built two huge tank-like vehicles called ‘crawler-transporters’ there, at a saving of almost $3 million below a competitive bidder’s price. The only trouble is that the crawlers will not do the job they were designed for, which is to carry a Saturn V moon rocket on a mobile launching tower some three miles from an assembly building to where the rocket will actually blast. “Trouble has been traced to some tapered roller bearings. . . . “There seems to be nothing wrong with the bearings, which are produced by the biggest and best known manufacturer of such items. The fault apparently lies in incorrect design assumptions which result in overloads sometimes being imposed on the bearings, causing them to fail. “Since the design—offered by the contractor, Marion Power Shovel Co.—was approved by NASA technical experts, the government will probably have to pay for the redesign necessary to make the crawler work. These redesign costs could well wipe out the difference between Marion’s bid and the higher proposal of Bucyrus-Erie, another large builder of heavy mobile equipment. . . . “As it turns out, the false economy of low bidding in this instance may cause the United States to miss its stated goal in space: men on the moon in the ’60s. Entirely aside from whether this is a worthwhile goal, it is a national objective and the national prestige is riding on it. . . .” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/9/65)
Gemini v backup crew members, civilians Neil Armstrong and Elliot M. See, Jr., began a training exercise in Gulf of Mexico waters designed to teach the astronauts the proper methods to leave the spacecraft after touchdown. Primary crew members Maj. L. Gordon Cooper (usaf) and Cdr. Charles Conrad (usn) would take the same training July 21. (ap, Houston Chron., 7/16/65)
First Negro to receive usaf astronaut training, Capt. Edward J. Dwight, Jr. (usaf), denied Ebony magazine’s charges that he had been eliminated from selection by the NASA program because of his race. Dwight said the charge “apparently had some information out of context.” A statement released by NASA in response to queries about Dwight said:	“A formal objective rating system based on flight experience, academic background and supervisory ratings was developed and used by a preliminary selection committee in rating the candidates to make sure that the best qualified were selected as finalists to be considered for the 14 available astronaut positions. Of the 136 candidates, 102, including Capt. Dwight, were eliminated by the primary selection committee, leaving a group of 34 finalists of whom the 14 best were chosen. “Selection is made on a best qualified basis without regard to race, religion or sex. “Capt. Dwight did possess the basic qualifications; he did not score sufficiently high to be selected under the rating system.” (upi, NYT, 6/3/65; WSJ, 6/3/65, 1; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/3/65)
Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf), youngest holder of Air Force astronaut wings, was honored by his hometown of Chapman, Kansas, with a parade. Engle fle>v the x-15 to peak altitude of 282,000 ft. on June 29, qualifying for the astronaut wings, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/7/65, A-2)
Dr. John J. Brennan, Jr., Chairman of the Committee for the Preservation of Cambridge Industries, said he would take to Washington the committee’s fight to keep the NASA Electronic Research Center out of Cambridge. Dr. Brennan said the City of Cambridge’s claim that the renewal project would cost the Federal government $15 million was way off. He said costs would be between $40 million and $50 million. In a letter to the House and Senate Appropriations Committees and the House and Senate space committees, Brennan stated: “We are taking every proper course of action, legal and otherwise, to stop this senseless destruction. . . .We do not believe that the overall destruction will bear judicial scrutiny.” Paul Frank, director of the Cambridge Urban Redevelopment Authority, said Brennan’s figures were inaccurate and that the $40-$50 million figure was wrong. He claimed the overall cost would bring it down to $14,500,000. Of this figure, the Federal government cost would be $9,600,000 with the remaining $4,900,000 paid by the City of Cambridge, he asserted. (Boston Globe, 1/11/65) During the week of January 11: Titan ill program director Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf) said at a meeting of the New York Academy of Sciences that the launch of the Titan iii-a, on Dec. 10, 1964, may have gained the most accurate orbit ever achieved in the U.S. space program. The vehicle achieved an orbit with 102-n. mi. apogee and a 99-n. mi. perigee against a planned 100-n. mi. nominal orbital altitude. Deviation from a true circle was 0.00075 against a predicted value of 0.00050. Time for a single orbit was 88.2 min., within 0.04 min. of the time predicted. (M&R, 1/18/65, 10)
Presidential Press Secretary William D. Moyers announced from the Texas White House that the U.S. would launch Gemini 6 and Gemini 7 about 10 days apart and have them rendezvous in space. The double launching would probably take place in January with the two spacecraft scheduled to maneuver within a few feet of each other but without touching. Astronauts Walter M. Schirra (Capt., usn) and Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf) would be in Gemini 6, whose Oct. 25 mission was canceled after an Agena vehicle with which they were to dock exploded in space. In Gemini 7, set for a 14-day orbital journey, would be Astronauts Frank Borman (Maj., usaf) and James Lovell (Lcdr., usn). (Pomfret, NYT, 10/29/65, 1; Chapman, Wash. Post, 10/29/65, Al)
mariner iv, 78,277,013 mi. from earth at 9 a.m. est, had covered 251,691,170 mi. along its orbit. The Mars probe was travelling 46,214 mph relative to earth and was returning data and scientific information continuously, (nasa Release 65-159) President Johnson transmitted to Congress a plan to merge the Weather Bureau, the Coast and Geodetic Survey, and the Central Radio Propagation Laboratory of the National Bureau of Standards into an Environmental Science Services Administration. “The new administration will then provide a single national focus for our efforts to describe, understand, and predict the state of the oceans, the state of the lower and upper atmospheres and the size and shape of the earth ... as well as enhance our ability to develop an adequate warning system for the severe hazards of nature . . . which have proved so disastrous to the Nation in recent years.” He added that Federal agencies “concerned with the national defense [and the] exploration of outer space” would receive improved services and that combining of offices and technical facilities would save money, (White House Release) Gemini GT—4 countdown rehearsal at KSC with Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White ii (Maj., usaf) was delayed because of a minor fueling problem. Launch of the GT—4 mission was scheduled for June 3. (ap, Galveston News-Tribune, 5/14/65) An Emeraude rocket was successfully fired by France from the Hamma-guir range, Algerian Sahara, to a planned altitude of 112 mi. It was topped by a mockup of the Topaze rocket which was to be the second stage of the Diamant launcher that France was developing. (Reuters, NYT, 5/18/65; Root, Wash. Post, 5/18/65; M&R, 5/31/65, 11) NASA Goddard Space Flight Center researchers Dr. John B. Schutt and Charles M. Shai announced development of a new series of inorganic spacecraft paints with promise of commercial application; report given at a meeting of the Philadelphia Society for Paint Technology and the Philadelphia Section of the American Chemical Society. The paints would utilize an alkali-metal silicate as a binder and an inorganic phosphate as a wetting agent. They would adhere to most metals and non-metals; would not crack, peel, chalk, flake, or fade when subjected to temperatures between 1,800°F and —320°F; would be washable; could be made in any color; and would have a long shelf life, (gsfc Release G-13-65) American Broadcasting Co. notified the Fee it was preparing plans for a domestic communications satellite to relay network television programs to affiliated stations for rebroadcast, thereby raising for the first time the question of a company other than ComSatCorp owning and operating a comsat. (Gould, NYT, 5/14/65, 1) NBC announced it would televise the June 3 Gemini GT^l spaceflight in color. It would be the first live-color coverage of a space flight, (Doan, N.Y. Her. Trib., 5/14/65) Cornell Univ, astronomers at Arecibo radiotelescope facility revealed that their radar observations of the planet Mercury April 25 indicated that Mercury rotated on its axis once every 59 days, rotating in the same direction as its orbit. This new study confirmed clearly that Mercury did not have a retrograde rotation and laid to rest the classic view that Mercury did not rotate on its axis at all. The astronomers had reported their findings on Mercury’s rotation in Washington last
Reported that Dr. William I. Donn of Columbia Univ.’s Lamont Geological Observatory, Dr. Wilbur G. Valentine of Brooklyn College, and Dr. Bertram D. Donn of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center had challenged presently accepted ages of the earth (4.5 billion yrs.) and the sun (5 billion yrs.). They had asserted that the oldest of continental rocks were so very ancient that the sun’s and the earth’s ages allowed too little time for continent formation by earthly processes and from earthly materials. Two alternative explanations were proposed:	(1) either the sun and the earth must be much older, perhaps by a half-billion years or more; or, (2) the original continents were thrown down upon the planet’s surface when objects from space— hundreds of miles across in size—crashed into the earth. Research results had been published in the Bulletin of the Geological Society of America. (Abraham, Phil. Eve. Bull., 4/13/65)
DOD selected the first eight of a planned 20 astronauts for USAF’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory program: Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) ; Maj. Albert H. Crews (usaf) ; Lt. John L. Finley (usn) ; Capt. Richard E. Lawyer (usaf) ; Capt. Lachlan Macleay (usaf) ; Capt. F. Gregory Neubeck (usaf) ; Capt. James M. Taylor (usaf) ; and Lt. Richard H. Truly (usn). Formal training would begin at Edwards afb, early next year, (usaf Release)
(4) To explore, map and survey the Moon. Throughout these extended Apollo missions, the primary emphasis will be on science and applications experiments. “The foundation for any long-range and broad national space program is a strong manned Earth-orbital program. For example, the approach to future manned planetary missions will depend not only on what is learned from unmanned missions such as Mariner and Voyager, but also what we can learn in Earth orbit about the effects on crew members of long-term confinement and reduced and/or intermittent artificial-gravity fields, as well as on the Earth-orbital qualification of extended-duration life support and power systems. “Man’s greatest contributions in space will come when he can bring his intelligence to bear on the spot. . . .” (Text) Michael Stoiko, technical director of Martin Co.’s Gemini advance design section, suggested to the IAF congress that an international space rescue service to aid astronauts stranded in orbit be devised. The U.S. and Russia would organize the service with available equipment, and eventually rescue would be conducted on an international basis. Stoiko said the Martin Co. estimated 280 manned spaceflights would be flown by various nations in the next 20 yrs., with crews totaling 800 men. There was a “reasonable probability” that one or more U.S. crews would be stranded in orbit and a 62% probability that at least seven space ships with crews totaling 22 astronauts and cosmonauts would have to be rescued, (ap, N.Y. Her. Trib. 9/15/65) Paper on “Research and Systems Requirements for a Lunar Scientific Laboratory” was presented at the iaf congress by C. William Henderson, nasa Office of Manned Space Flight, and Grady L. Mitcham of the Boeing Co.: “It is our obligation to define a meaningful lunar laboratory program which will extract the maximum scientific return for the investment of resources. Our scientific methods may have to change radically in order to achieve this goal of efficiency; perhaps by using the mantime on the moon only for the extraction of data, leaving the analysis of this information to the far less costly man power on earth. Most probably, leading scientists will not be, themselves, on the lunar surface, but rather will be at earth-based television consoles directing and guiding their counter-parts on the moon. . . .” (Text) Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev reported at the IAF congress that the exit of cosmonauts into space from orbital stations to relieve the crews and perform work in space would be made only through air locks,	making it	possible	to	avoid dehermetization of	the spacecraft. Belyayev said visual acuity of astronauts was lessened by from 20-30% during spaceflight. Sensitivity of the eye to color was also affected. Drop of 50% occurred in the case of green and purple. Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov described in his report the functioning of the self-contained life-support system he wore in open space. He was able to regulate the atmosphere in his spacesuit, maintaining with- • in it	an excess	pressure	of	0.4 atmospheres or 0.27	atmospheres. When he stepped out of VOSKHOD II, Leonov said, the excess pressure in the spacesuit was 0.4 atmospheres and before reentry into the spacecraft, he said: “I once more set the pressure back to 0.27 atmospheres.” Data obtained, he summed up, permitted the conclusion that stepping out into open space does not cause serious specific changes in psychophysiological functions. Of the future of the Soviet space program, he said: “In time there will be many space laboratories, with crews being periodically exchanged. Then there will be a spaceship for the moon, and a landing on the moon, followed by shots to other planets.” (ap, Wash. Post 9/17/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 9/17/65; National Zeitung, 9/16/65, 3) A voyage in a seven-man spacecraft, past Venus to land on Mars, was proposed by Robert L. Sohn of the Space Technology Laboratories in a paper at the 16th Congress of the International Astronautical Federation in Athens. Sohn said the flight could be conducted in the 1980’s using launching equipment and spacecraft already in development, including Saturn launch vehicles and modified Apollo spacecraft. He further claimed that the billion-mile, 400-day trip would cost about $20 billion. A 400,000-lb. craft would be assembled in earth orbit after component parts were placed into orbit by four or five separate launches.	(NYT, 9/14/65) Soviet Professor Savenko reported to the congress about the study of primary cosmic rays by proton i, launched July 16, 1965. Volume of information radioed back to earth was 60 million units daily. Equipment was sensitive to particles of energy of “billions and more of electron volts which makes it possible for the station to explore the depth of matter.” Design of the ionization calorimeter in proton I permitted improved methods of research, Professor Savenko said. Information relayed from proton i processed so far showed that distribution of cosmic ray particles of very high energies differed from picture obtained by indirect measurements. (Tass, 9/17/65) Mstislav Keldysh, president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, received the International Academy of Astronautics’ 1965 Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award. The congress elected the leadership of IAF and reelected Dr. William H. Pickering as president. (Hines, Wash. Sunday Star, 9/12/65; Tass, 9/18/65)
x-15 No. 2 was flown by pilot John McKay (nasa) to 92,600-ft. altitude at a maximum speed of 3,260 mph (mach 4.80) to obtain data on the landing gear modification and on stability and control. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; FRC Release)
Dr. Thomas L. K. Smull, Director of NASA Office of Grants and Research Contracts, was temporarily assigned as Special Assistant to Administrator James E. Webb. He would be concerned with examining, in depth, the progress made in the development and conduct of university activities. Dr. John T. Holloway would serve as the Acting Director of the Office of Grants and Research Contracts, (nasa Ann.)
Lowell Thomas, news commentator, explorer, and author, was named the fifth Honorary Chairman of the Robert Hutchings Goddard Library Program (Clark Univ.). The four other honorary chairmen were previously announced [see July 16]. Appointments to the Goddard Library’s International Sponsors Committee were announced:	Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator; Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director; and Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director. (Goddard, 8/65)
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), Deputy Commander for Manned Space Systems of afsc’s Space Systems Div., announced at a Washington, D.C., luncheon for Aviation/Space Writers that two used Gemini spacecraft would be flown by usaf in tests for a Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol). This would be the first time that a Mercury or Gemini spacecraft had been flown twice. Both Air Force flights would be unmanned and would test the effect of cutting a hatch into the heat shield on the capsule’s blunt end. (NYT, 4/15/65, 8)
x-15 No. 1 was flown by pilot John McKay (nasa) to 153,600-ft. altitude at a maximum speed of 3,750 mph (mach 5.40). Purpose was to check out landing gear revised recently, give pilot experience at higher altitude, and get apparatus data, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
Announcement was made at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center that Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Cdr., usn) and Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf) had been selected for the first Gemini docking and rendezvous mission, scheduled for launch “the first quarter of 1966.” Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf) and John Young (Cdr., usn) would be the backup crew. (Transcript)
Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf) qualified for the military rating of astronaut by piloting the x-15 No. 3 research aircraft to an altitude of 280,600 ft. at a maximum speed of 3,432 mph (mach 4.94). By exceeding 264,000	ft. (50 mi.) Engle, 32, met the USAF astronaut requirements. Purpose of the flight was to use a scanning device to obtain measurements of the earth’s horizon. The measurements would be used to establish the design criteria for navigational systems for future spacecraft. (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; nasa Release 65-201; X—15 Flight Log)
The John Young Award, a medal specially struck by the citizens of Orlando, Fla., was presented to the astronaut as a highlight of the John Young Day celebration. The medal would be used in future years to honor Orlando residents for outstanding achievements, but would not necessarily be awarded annually. (Orl. Sent., 4/18/65)
Writing about Surveyor lunar probe in the Washington Evening Star, William Hines said: “Surveyor will give science a view of the moon that will be different not just in degree but in kind. A ‘soft’ landing, with the spacecraft braked by automatic rockets, should enable scientists to learn—rather than infer—much about the lunar surface. “Even the first Surveyor . . . should tell a lot and this one will lack most of the cleverly designed scientific instruments of later probes. Equipped with television, the initial Surveyor may settle many points of contention over surface conditions . . . “Assuming success with Surveyor 1, scientists are hoping that its findings won’t evoke a repetition of the short-sighted clamor for ‘economy’ that followed the successful flight of Ranger 7 in July 1964 . . . owing to the mistaken impression that when you’ve seen one moon picture you’ve seen them all. “To suggest that photographic and physical evidence obtained by one Surveyor in one isolated spot could yield results characteristic of the whole moon is senseless. . . . "Since the safety of asironauts reaching the moon a few years from now may well depend on the wise selection of their landing site, it would be advisable to get as much first-hand Surveyor-type data as possible and let the nation’s best qualified scientists study this information as thoroughly as they know how.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/14/65, A12)
Wright Brothers Medal for 1964 was presented to three NASA LaRC scientists—Marion 0. McKinney, Jr., Richard E. Kuhn, and John P. Reeder —at the meeting of the Society of Automotive Engineers in Los Angeles. Cited “for meritorious contribution to aeronautic engineering,” the scientists were selected for their paper “Aerodynamics and Flying Qualities of Jet/Vertical Takeoff-Landing and Short TakeoffLanding Airplanes,” presented in 1964 at the SAE-American Society of Mechanical Engineers meeting in New York. (LaRC Release)
Establishment of a communications satellite system for commercial purposes is a matter entrusted to the Corporation under the Communications Satellite Act,” was the reply of ComSatCorp President Joseph Charyk to the FCC regarding the American Broadcasting Co.’s proposal to launch its own satellite. The fcc had requested the views of ComSatCorp on the proposal. (ComSatCorp Release)
Gemini gt-3 Astronauts Maj. Virgil I. Grissom and LCdr. John W. Young were given traditional heroes’ welcome from New Yorkers at a parade given in their honor. Honored with the astronauts was Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Associate Administrator of NASA. They were met by Mayor Wagner and the city’s official greeter, Commissioner Richard C. Patterson of the Department of Public Events. Mayor Wagner presented gold keys to the city to the astronauts and Dr. Seamans at a ceremony at City Hall. He also presented the city’s Gold Medal of Honor to Major Grissom and Dr. Seamans and the Silver Medal of Honor to Commander Young. At the United Nations, Secretary General U Thant presented medals and two autograph sets of U. N. outer space commemorative stamps to the astronauts. (Sibley, NYT, 3/29/65, 36; Talese. NYT, 3/20/65, 1: Orl. Sent., 3/30/65)	'
The Soviet Union, with its May 9 display of missile and space might, has dealt a major blow to the complacency of those persons in the United States who consistently have underestimated the competence of the Russians in these fields,” wrote William J. Coughlin in an editorial in Missiles and Rockets. He continued: “The appearance of Soviet solid-fuel missiles of a type similar to the U.S. Minuteman ICBM indicates that the Soviets finally have overcome the chemical roadblock which until now has made possible the U.S. lead in solids. . . . “In a film which the Moscow correspondent of the New York Times estimated to be at least three years old, the Soviets also displayed launchings from an underground silo. The combination of these events suggests the Soviets now are in a position to rapidly close the missile gap with the United States to tbe point where it is of no consequence in military calculations. . . . “In the film release, the Russians for the first time showed their anti-missile missile in action. One sequence was of intercept of an ICBM. . . . “The increasing Soviet confidence also is indicated in the space field. The Soviets let it be known more than a month in advance that their next space spectacular could be expected May 9. . . . The launch of LUNIK v obviously was right on schedule. The acknowledgement after launch but in advance of impact that its goal was a lunar soft landing also is a more realistic approach to space developments than previously shown. “This shift toward a franker attitude is supported by the open admission of the Zond II Mars probe failure by Soviet scientists attending the Space Exploration Symposium in Chicago on May 4. “At the same time, the Russians released more information on the Soviet space program at the Chicago meeting than heretofore. “All of this points toward greater maturity in both Soviet missile programs and Soviet space programs. The competition therefore is far keener than many persons in the U.S. have been willing to admit. “The conclusion is clear. The U.S. cannot afford to let down or it will be far outdistanced in areas which will continue to be vital in its national security and well-being for many, many years.” (Coughlin, M&R, 5/17/65, 74)
XB-70a experimental supersonic bomber broke world aviation weight and speed endurance records during a one-hour 40 min. flight. It took off weighing 500,000 lbs., the heaviest at which any aircraft had been flown, and flew at continuous supersonic speeds for 80 min., longer than any other aircraft had. It cruised at a top speed of 1,400 mph and was piloted by A1 White and Van Shepard, (ap, Wash. Post, 3/25/65; NYT, 3/25/65; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/26/65)
Missile lead of the U.S. was put at three to one in an article by Richard Fryklund in the Washington Evening Star: “U.S. intelligence estimates are that the Soviet Union has 245 to 295 intercontinental ballistic missiles on launchers ready to be fired. “The United States has 900.” (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/26/65, 2) NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, delivering the keynote address, said: “The rate of growth of space activities in the first six years of the space age has been unprecedented in the history of a new field of science and technology but there are signs of attainment of a certain degree of maturity. The most obvious is the establishment, following several years in which available funds nearly doubled each year, of a level of five to five and a quarter billions for congressional appropriations to NASA, or about seven billions for space activities of all agencies at the suitable level. . . . “Maturity is also indicated by the drastic reduction in the number of unsuccessful missions, the result of increased knowledge and experience in the previously unknown field of space. Thus in calendar year 1958 in the first three months of NASA, four missions were attempted without a single success. In the following year eight of fourteen were successful, whereas in 1964 twenty-five of thirty more difficult missions were successful, a percentage of 83 which has been maintained now for three years. . . .” (nasa Release 65-83; Text, nasa Release 65-165) Answering the query “What does the future hold in store?” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the Symposium about future manned flight options: “In near-earth space, missions could include low and high inclination, polar, or synchronous orbits to accomplish research, technological, and applications objectives. . . . “In a low inclination orbit, below the Van Allen belts, the basic problems of keeping men in space for extended periods can be studied, rendezvous and resupply problems could be worked out, and scientific experiments conducted. “In synchronous orbit, where the spacecraft hovers over a fixed area of the earth all the time, experiments could be carried out which involve manned observations over a given portion of the earth or which use man to assist in the operation of various experimental systems. “In polar orbit, scientist-astronauts could monitor and observe the entire surface of the earth as it passes beneath the spacecraft, mapping it and surveying most of the world’s resources. . . . “In earth orbit ... a medium-size manned orbiting research laboratory might be developed. Such a space station would accommodate six to nine men and remain in orbit for up to five years. . . . Resupply vehicles, or space shuttles, could be used for crew rotation and for delivery of equipment and supplies. The laboratory would provide roomy quarters with a shirt-sleeve environment for conducting a wide variety of experiments in space. It would also contain a centrifuge, should it be found essential for reconditioning crew members to withstand the effects of gravity after periods of weightlessness. “Following this a larger permanent manned orbiting research laboratory accommodating 20 to 30 men, might then be developed, by assembling three or four of the medium-size laboratories in space. Artificial gravity could be provided in the laboratories by rotating them about their axes. “Possibly the most challenging long-term goal of the entire space program is manned exploration of the planets—especially of Mars.” (Text) Comparing the space programs of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “1. In number of earth-orbiting payloads the United States has launched almost three times as many as has the USSR, although the 1965 rate is less than two to one. “2. In the weight of such payloads, the USSR has put up almost three times as much as has the United States. “3. In propulsion, the Soviets have from the beginning enjoyed an operational advantage over the United States. However, we are currently making great strides in this regard and it is hoped that we will keep moving up the propulsion ladder so as not to be overtaken again. “4. In manned space flight, the USSR is ahead of the U.S., not only in hours of flight but also in multi-manned flight and extravehicular activity. So far, the U.S. astronauts have completed 40 orbits of the earth, the Soviet cosmonauts have completed 342 such orbits. Moreover, as our Gemini schedule proceeds and contributes continued progress, we must look for much more activity on the part of the Soviets. “5. In the application of space developments to directly useful purposes, the United States is well ahead, particularly in such fields as weather observations, navigation, and communications. However, the Soviets have potential capabilities of these types and have already begun to show some actual experience in space communications. “6. In lunar and interplanetary activity, the U.S. may have an edge with the spectacular success of the Rangers and Mariners. We have developed this advantage, even though the Soviets have made a greater relative commitment in this regard, both from the view of absolute numbers of launches and also in regard to weight of payloads. “7. Based upon clear knowledge of our own program and upon assertions by the Soviets about theirs, one can reasonably conclude that both countries have manned lunar landing projects under way. It would be impossible to state definitely who is ahead in this regard but I am hopeful that we will turn out to be. “8. As regards the collection of scientific data from space, both countries have made impressive strides, resulting in a possible advantage to the USSR regarding the effects of space environment on human beings. “9. Both countries are in a position to make many observations from space, but both countries have pledged not to orbit weapons of mass destruction and have stressed that their programs are dedicated to peaceful uses. I can only speak for this country in regard to our intent and do state that we will maintain our defenses while pledging not to use space for aggressive purposes.” Dr. Welsh warned: “Let us not expect our space program to proceed indefinitely without some tragedy involving our astronauts.” (Text) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said: “In assessing our growth in space capability in terms of three steps from earth to earth orbit, from earth orbit to moon, and from moon to planets, it is important to recognize that the first two steps rest on essentially the same technologies. These are technologies which have evolved for decades and which are familiar: chemical energy conversion, relatively common engineering materials, measurement and control systems generally consistent with aircraft and ground technology and microwave communications. However, the third step will demand performance and efficiency well beyond the first two. An entirely new level of technology is needed; nuclear energy conversion, new refractory materials, accuracy of sensors—improved by orders of magnitude—and laser communications. There are the underlying requirements of higher reliability and longer lifetimes than have yet been demonstrated, together with low specific weight. “The requirement for improvement in this spectrum of space-related technologies will drive them well beyond their present level. The presence of difficult goals can have a profound influence on earth-bound consumer products through the advancement of common fields of technology in addition to opening the gateway to deep space. The NASA program of advanced research and technology embraces most of these elements at least in their fundamental forms. Without this research the space program would soon wither and die. With it, by the year 2000, an enormous influence can be exerted on national prestige and strength.” (Text) Discussing space projects of the future at the Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said: “The reusable vehicle seems to be the key to development of an economical earth-to-orbit transportation system. Passenger conveniences must be improved so that scientists, engineers, technicians, military personnel—and even politicians and journalists—can make the trip. “One of the methods we have been studying several years combines the experience gained in the x-15 rocket plane program with present Saturn know-how, for building a high performance two-stage rocket “plane”—called the Re-Usable Orbital Transport. It appears entirely practical to develop a vehicle that would not subject passengers to more than three g’s in ascent or descent. “In the orbital transport under study, the first stage would fly mission paths similar to the X-15, with the second stage, carrying passengers and cargo, launched from a piggy-back position. The second stage would fly into and out of orbit, gliding to a power-off landing after re-entry in the same manner the X-15 does now as routine procedure. “It would offer passengers who are in a hurry transportation over global ranges with about one-hour flight time. If we can develop a single or two-stage chemical rocket aerospace vehicle and learn to fly it over and over before it is worn out, the high-income traveler should find the operational cost acceptable. But, of course, the thing we must have is the demand—the traffic, cargo, and passengers to make the system economical. “After we have tried our wings in the immediate earth environment, our next major step in exploring and utilizing the solar system is the moon. And after that, the planets.” (Text) Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp president, announced at the Space Symposium that the corporation might invite the aerospace industry to submit detailed proposals for satellites that would connect the television networks to their affiliated stations and would provide new facilities for airplane companies to communicate with aircraft in flight. Dr. Charyk’s disclosure was a consequence of the American Broadcasting Company’s recent proposal to put up its own comsat to relay TV shows to affiliated stations for rebroadcast to home viewers. Dr. Charyk said a satellite to relay television programs to affiliated stations involved no new basic engineering problems and offered “real potential, sound economic basis.” He envisioned a television satellite equipped with 12 channels, three of which would serve each of the four time zones. A satellite of essentially the same design could serve the airplane companies, he noted. (Gould, NYT, 5/29/65, 55)
President Johnson nominated John S. Foster as Director of Defense Research and Engineering. Dr. Foster, formerly director of the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, would replace Dr. Harold Brown, who would become Secretary of the Air Force on Oct. 1. (White House Release)
Paraglider, in its first successful manned free flight, demonstrated it could guide a spacecraft to preselected landing site. Test pilot Donald F.	McCusker landed a Gemini-type test craft at Edwards afb, following a four-and-one-half-minute flight suspended beneath the wing. He put the previously-inflated paraglider and simulated spacecraft through a series of turn and pitch maneuvers enroute to his landing, after being towed aloft by helicopter and dropped at approximate 8,000-ft. altitude. In actual spacecraft recovery, the paraglider would be stored in a ten-cubic-foot canister onboard the spacecraft. After reentry when the vehicle would be slowed by the earth’s atmosphere and parachute drogue, the paraglider would be deployed to its full size—31 ft. long with a 31-ft. span—using an onboard nitrogen supply. The astronaut would control his glide through an onboard flight-control system. North American Aviation, Inc., was conducting the paraglider program for NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, studying the feasibility of a controlled earth landing system, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 9/3/65, 1)
Gemini vii would be launched Dec. 4 and Gemini vi Dec. 13 in a combination long-duration, rendezvous mission, NASA announced. Astronaut Frank Borman (l/c, usaf) would be command pilot and Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr. (Cdr., usn), pilot, on a 14-day mission to determine the effects of long-duration spaceflight on man; 20 scientific, medical, and technological experiments would be performed. Astronauts Edward H. White ii (l/c, usaf), and Michael Collins (Maj., usaf) would be Gemini vii’s backup crew. Gemini vi mission would be nearly identical to the original rendezvous flight postponed October 25 when the Agena Target Vehicle failed to achieve orbit, and would demonstrate rendezvous of two vehicles in space. Command Pilot Walter M. Schirra (Capt., usn) and Pilot Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf) would maneuver the Gemini 6 spacecraft within close proximity of Gemini 7 during the fourth revolution and station-keep for a period of time, but would not dock. Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom (l/c, usaf) and John W. Young (Cdr., usn) would be Gemini Vi’s backup crew, (nasa Release 65-347; UPl, NYT, 11/10/ 65)
Joseph Campbell, Comptroller General, reported to Congress that the decision of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center to lease rather than buy two electric substations from the Potomac Electric Power Co. had resulted in $174,000 of unnecessary costs thus far. Campbell explained, “We believe that the Center failed to make this determination because of the Administration’s failure to provide guidelines to its employees, setting forth pertinent factors necessary for consideration in making decisions whether to lease or purchase property.” He added, however, that NASA had agreed with GAO findings and would purchase substations as provided for in contract. The matter was nevertheless reported to Congress because it “further illustrates that significant unnecessary costs can be and are being incurred,” when agencies do not make complete lease-versus -purchase studies. (Wash. Post, 2/28/65)
Dr. Donald F. Hornig, science adviser to President Johnson, told the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that a manned Mars expedition would take from four hundred to six hundred days. He continued: “The longest manned mission we are currently planning is some 14 days. Whether such a long mission is physiologically or psychologically feasible is almost impossible to judge before we have more experience with Apollo, AES, and other manned systems. In any case, we would have to build systems of greater complexity and reliability than we have yet dreamed of. “. . . if we compare the probable scale and technical difficulties of a manned Mars expedition with Apollo it is hard to conclude that its probable cost could be much less than perhaps five times that of Apollo—that is, of the order of one hundred billion dollars.” (Text)
x-15 No. 2 flown by pilot John McKay (nasa) to 102,100 ft. altitude at maximum speed of 3,541 mph (mach 5.17) to obtain data for stability and control evaluation, star tracker checkout, advanced X-15 landing dynamics, and landing gear modification checkout. (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
Rep. Oren Harris (D-Ark.), in France for the International Air Show, endorsed the idea of an international exhibition at Dulles International Airport in 1966. Harris, who headed the House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce which would handle any American counterpart of the Paris show, made his statement after comment by American aircraft builders participating at Le Bourget that the U.S. had let the Soviet Union “steal the show.” During the first days of the exposition, the Russians had displayed the prototype of a 720-passenger commercial aircraft to be ready in two years. Also, Yuri Gagarin, first man in space, was on hand. The U.S. had recovered some lost ground during the final weekend by flying in Vice President Hubert Humphrey and Astronauts Edward White II (Maj., usaf) and James McDivitt (Maj., usaf). American jets had also put on spectacular acrobatic demonstrations. Rep. Harris said the project had been discussed at the White House but that further studies by the FAA and the Budget Bureau would be necessary, (upi, Bruns, Wash. Post, 6/22/65)
Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Apollo Program manager at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, announced at a press conference at North American Aviation’s Tulsa facilities that the Tulsa plant would build 16 Apollo service modules. Apollo contract work there totaled more than $61 million. (Leslie, Tulsa Daily World, 4/15/65)
usaf and NASA were finishing plans for joint lifting-body tests, reported William Normyle in Aviation Week and Space Technology. He said a joint usaf-nasa Flight Test Group was being formed at Edwards afb and would include NASA and usaf pilots who would flight-test three lifting-body configurations in a program to be monitored by NASA. Two configurations, the m-2 and the hl-10, were NASA designs built by Northrop Corp’s Norair Div. Third configuration, usaf’s sv-5, was developed by Martin Co. (Normyle, Av. Wk., 6/28/65, 19)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center’s Public Affairs Officer, Paul Haney, announced that daily newspapers might have VoAit. interviews with the crew of the GT^l flight on the same basis as television networks and wire news services. Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White (Maj., usaf) would spend two full days in personal interviews at MSC early in May. There would be a mass press conference for all news media in Washington, D.C., on April 30. Without such an arrangement, the only newspapers that would have had personal interviews would be those that subscribed to the service that paid astronauts for their stories. (Houston Post, 4/23/65)
A mouse-size “algatron,” life-support system designed to make outer space habitable for astronauts on prolonged missions, was demonstrated by Univ. of California scientists Dr. William J. Oswald and Dr. Clarence G. Golueke. In the system bacteria break down animal wastes, algae live off the result, and emit oxygen while absorbing carbon dioxide. According to the scientists’ report, the algatron, in which a mouse lived for six weeks and could have stayed indefinitely, would weigh about 1,000 lbs. in a man-sized version. (Wash. Post, 5/14/65)
freedom 7 Mercury spacecraft, flown by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., USN), on May 5, 1961, was put on exhibit at the Science Museum in London. (Reuters, Boston Globe, 9/17/65)
A Gemini circumlunar flight had not been approved but the idea was receiving serious study, Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Deputy Manager of the Gemini Project Office at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, told reporters. The Gemini capsule could circle the far side of the moon—• 240,000	mi. from earth—and then return to its home planet, a round trip of about six days. Kleinknecht said if the proposal were accepted, a Titan m-C rocket equipped with two upper stages called “transtages” would place one of the transtages in orbit. A Titan II would send the Gemini craft after the transtage and the two would be docked in orbit. Gemini then would use the transtage propulsion system and its maneuverability for the lunar voyage. The feasibility was being studied by NASA; the Martin Co., systems manager for Titan Iir-c; and Aerojet-General, which builds the transtage. “We are always studying possible future missions for Gemini,” Kleinknecht added. (Benedict, N.O. Times-Picayune, 7/26/65) July 26: NASA announced the addition of two new pilots to the joint nasa-usaf x—15 research program: Capt. William J. Knight (usaf) and William H. Dana, civilian. They were expected to make their first flights this fall, (nasa Release 65-244; frc Release 16-65)
John W. Findlay, Deputy Director at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, Green Bank, W. Va., had been named Director of Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory in Puerto Rico for a one-year term beginning in the fall. He would succeed William E. Gordon. (NYT, 3/7/65, 75)
Cape Kennedy and Moscow’s Red Square were linked in a British television program, “East Meets West,” marking U.S. and Soviet space achievements. First part of the program showed the triumphant return to Moscow of Cosmonauts Pavel Belyayev and Aleksey Leonov. Then the scene switched to Cape Kennedy to show preparadons for the gt-3 flight of Astronauts Virgil Grissom and John Young. Both parts were screened "live”—the Moscow scenes via Eurovision and the Cape Kennedy one via comm unications satellite. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 3, 2-1/65! starch 24: tiAVRKK IX photograph of moon, 38.fi seconds before impact and 58 miles above lunar surface. March 24; After transmitting 5.814 close-up lunar pictures to earth, ranger ix. traveling at 5.677 mph, imparted the moon at 0:08 a.m. EST at 12.0° south latitude and 2.-10 west longitude in the crater Alphonsus. The 10-ft,, 800-lb. spacecraft, last in the Ranger series, was only four miles off Larget. NASA had made real-time TV coverage available and the three major networks broadcast “live7’ pictures during the last ten minutes of ranger tx’s flight. First pictures, taken as the photographic probe was 1.300 mi. from the moon, had about the same degree of detail as telescopic views from earth. Those taken a few seconds before impact defined objects as small as 10 in, across, including close-ups of canal-like rilles on the floor of the crater and dimple-like depressions at points along the rilles. Photographs shown on television were taken by the “B” camera, one of two wide-angle cameras used. Four narrow-angle cameras took other shots. Pictures were received on 85-ft. antennas at Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Goldstone Tracking Station in the Mojave Desert and recorded on both 35mm film and magnetic tape for detailed analysis. Simultaneously signals were relayed by microwave to the JPL laboratory in Pasadena where an electronic scan converter “translated” electronic impulses from the 1,152-lines-per-picture of the ranger IX signal system to the standard 500 lines of commercial television. The Ranger program had begun inauspiciously in 1961 with a series of failures and near-misses. Rangers 1 and 2 had been designed to test the spacecraft and launch vehicle but were not injected into the desired orbit, ranger iii, iv, and v were to rough-land a seismometer package on the moon to record moon quakes, and to transmit closeup photos of the moon to earth by radio. None of the missions was successful, ranger VI, first of the reworked and redesigned spacecraft, impacted within 17 mi. of its point of aim—but its television system failed. On July 31, 1964, ranger vii successfully relayed to earth 4,316 high-quality close-up photos of the lunar surface, ranger viii, launched on Feb. 20, 1965, transmitted 7,137 pictures. Total number of photographs from ranger vii, viii, and ix was 17,267. (nasa Release 65-96; Sullivan, NYT, 3/22/65, 1; ap, Dighton, Wash. Post, 3/25/65, Al, A12, A16; Hill, NYT, 3/25/65, 1, 23; nasa Proj. Off.)
John G. Lee, pioneer aircraft designer and former director of research for United Aircraft Corp., had joined nasa as a part-time consultant to nasa Administrator James E. Webb on aeronautical research, (nasa Release 65-143)
The first close-up picture of Mars transmitted by NASA’s mariner IV in an eight-hour broadcast over a distance of 134 million mi. clearly showed the edge of the planet. Transmitted to earth as a series of 5 million radio signals representing zeroes and ones, the picture was received at the Madrid and Johannesburg tracking stations and relayed to jpl. A jpl computer reconstructed the digits to produce images consisting of a series of dots of varying darkness. With transmission at 8.3 dots a second, 8/4 hrs. were required to receive the photograph. The photo sequence began when the bright edge, or limb, of Mars was seen by a light sensor which triggered MARINER iv’s magnetic tape recorder. Initial information came from an experimental device called a “cluge” which built up a rough pattern of the photo on a monitor screen as it was relayed from the tracking stations to jpl. Taken at a low angle with an oblique view, the first photograph did not show the detail expected in later photographs. At a news conference at jpl, Dr. J. A. Van Allen, Univ. of Iowa, said that during its Mars flyby, mariner iv had discovered with a variety of detectors that Mars had little or no magnetic field and, therefore, no radiation belts. This would indicate that the planet lacks a liquid core and thus differs basically from earth. Lack of a metallic core, liquid or solid, would be evidence that the planet never went through the churning internal processes that gave the earth its layered structure. Mars would not have continents formed of lightweight rocks and ocean basins underlain with basaltic rock as found on earth. W. M. Alexander, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, explained that there was no evidence of a belt or unusual concentration of cosmic dust around the planet, nor, pointed out Dr. H. S. Bridge, mit, was there any evidence of a shock wave caused by solar wind flowing across the planet. The solar wind was the steady outflow of thin, hot, high-velocity gas from the sun. Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of jpl, when questioned by newsmen on the possibility of higher life existing on Mars, pointed out that the absence of a magnetic field indicated the planet’s atmosphere was hit with all types of radiation and the existence of life would depend on how deep the atmosphere was and the extent of radiation that reached the surface. Asked if he were discouraged about the possibility of finding life on the planet, Dr. Pickering replied: “No, I have always felt we will find some sort of life on Mars.” Dr. Pickering pointed out that one explanation for the reddish hue of Mars might be the presence of limonite, an iron oxide. This would suggest that iron was uniformly spread through the planet rather than being largely concentrated in the core, as on earth. (Transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 1/16/65, 1, 10; Miles, Wash. Post, 7/16/65, A1,A3; Sullivan, NYT, 7/17/65,1, 6)
At NASA Hq. Annual Honors Ceremony, Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator, said: “Mine was the relatively easy task of putting together an organization. Yours has been the much more difficult task of making good the promises we held out, at times so naively, to the Congress and the people of this Nation and the world. But handling these heavy responsibilities cannot be the duty of just one man, or a small group of men at the top. “This Agency’s success attests to the skill with which NASA employees have been and are carrying out their jobs. ... To all of you and to the thousands of NASA people working at their tasks at whatever location throughout this nation and the world, I am proud to say— well done! And I am confident that the hard won leadership position you have attained will be maintained throughout the years ahead.” (Text) NASA Administrator Webb presented Exceptional Scientific Achievement Awards to H. Julian Allen, Ames Research Center; Leslie H. Meredith and William Nordberg, gsfc; Dan Schneiderman and Eber-hardt Rechtin, JPL. Smith J. DeFrance, Ames Research Center, and Bruce T. Lundin, lrc, received Outstanding Leadership Medals. Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented Exceptional Service Medals to John R. Cassani, jpl; Seymour C. Himmel, lrc; and William Lilly, Hq. He presented Group Achievement Awards to the Agena Project, lrc; Florida Operations Team, ksc; Launch Support Equipment Engineering Div., KSC; and Scout Project Office, LARC. Seventeen thirty-year service awards were presented by Earl D. Hil-burn, Deputy Associate Administrator, (nasa Release 65-315)
A new kind of scientist—an interdisciplinarian to transcend specialization— was needed to solve many of the problems created by specialists, said Dr. John H. Heller, director of the New England Institute for Medical Research, in a lecture at American Univ., sponsored by the Metropolitan Washington Board of Trade. He said the interdisciplinarian would receive as much training in depth as a scientific specialist but would be instructed “far more broadly in depth.” (Wash. Sun. Star, 11/14/65, A3)
U.S. should build a supersonic transport regardless of the fate of the Concorde or any other country’s effort because “this is the next technological step in air transportation,” faa Administrator William F. McKee told the House Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices requesting $140 million for the project for FY 1966, according to Aviation Week and Space Technology. The House subcommittee responded by approving the money request. Acting Chairman Joe L. Evins (D-Tenn.) said: “Once we have made a basic decision to go forward with this program, I think we ought to go forward with it. This continual question of reservations as to whether we are going to build a supersonic transport is disruptive to continued progress.” {Av. Wk., 10/18/65, 28)
New York World’s Fair opened for its second season. It featured NASADOD U.S. Space Park, containing two and one half acres of full-scale rockets and spacecraft. Among the exhibits were a full-scale Gemini model, an X-15 model, full-scale reproductions of Tiros, Nimbus, Relay, Telstar, and Syncom satellites, and aurora 7 Mercury spacecraft. An honorary astronaut card signed by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (Cdr., usn), the first American in space, and Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf), the first astronaut to make two trips into space, was available at the U.S. Space Park to young visitors taking a ride in the full-scale animated Mercury spacecraft on display there. (Press Release)
Laboratory research prompted by weight losses of American and Russian spacement on orbital flights had indicated a relationship between a person’s water-drinking habits, working ability, and real or imagined stresses and strains, reported William J. Perkinson in the Washington Evening Star. American astronauts had lost between three and five percent of their body weight in orbital flights; Russian cosmonauts had lost less—between one and three percent—partly because they perspired less in the shirt-sleeve environments of Soviet spacecraft than Americans did in spacesuits. One NASA report on hypohydration— condition when a person drinks too little water—noted a 5% weight loss due to water imbalance was tolerable, but a 10% loss could cause gross mental and physical deterioration. (Perkinson, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/10/65, B10)
Jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering, speaking to the National Space Club in Washington, D.C., on “Exploring the Planets,” < :J: “Scientists interested in the solar system point out that all of the planets of the solar system present interesting challenges to the explorers. A study group at Woods Hole in Massachusetts this summer has set priorities on the exploration of the planets in the order of Mars, Venus, Mercury, Jupiter. We hope to make exploratory flights to all of these planets.” (Text)
At a press conference, Maj. Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) and LCdr. John W. Young (usn) described the three-orbit gt-3 flight of Mar. 23, as busy, exhilarating, near-perfect, and short on surprises. They said it was highly significant for future flight in space since it proved that a spacecraft could be maneuvered precisely, at will, and more independently of the ground than before. They said it also proved that man can eat and safely dispose of wastes as they will need to do on long flights. Major Grissom suggested two possible reasons that the “Molly Brown” had undershot the target landing area: one was that something might have gone wrong during the final orbit change or when subsequently the braking rockets were fired to start the spacecraft’s descent; the other was that there might have been a miscalculation of the craft’s center of gravity, (nasa Transcript)
Launch of Gemini VI from Eastern Test Range on a two-day mission no later than Oct. 25 was announced by NASA. It would be man’s first attempt to rendezvous and dock with an orbiting spacecraft. Pilots for Gemini VI were Astronauts Walter M. Schirra (Capt., usn) and Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf). Backup pilots were Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf) and John W. Young (Cdr., USN). This would be Schirra’s second space flight. His first was Oct. 3, 1962, a six-orbit flight in Mercury spacecraft SIGMA vi (nasa Release 65-307)
John F. Mason outlined in Electronics the dramatic changes underway in U.S. tracking and communications stations around the world. “Before the end of the year, 85% of the telemetry gear on the Atlantic missile range will be replaced. Everywhere, new communications equipment is going in, new pulse radars are being installed and continuous-wave radar networks are being expanded. Slowly, the separate ranges are becoming an integrated global network. . . . “Besides the work going on at the ranges, research and development effort for programs of the future continues at an active pace at the various government and industry centers throughout the United States. “The reason for this general overhaul of the missile ranges is to support Apollo, the manned lunar mission, and approximately 70 other ambitious missile and space programs already under way. . . .” (Electronics, 2/22/65, 94—105)
A system for the docking and sealing together of two orbiting spacecraft, designed to allow men and tools to be moved back and forth between the two vehicles while they were joined, was granted a patent. Invented by John P. Dunn, Martin Co. engineer, the equipment was being built in full scale for tests in Martin’s rendezvous and docking simulator (Jones, NYT, 8/21/65, 25)
Dr. John T. F. Kuo, associate professor at Columbia Univ. Henry Krumb School of Mines, was studying the earth’s gravity from each of the Empire State Building’s 102 floors. Kuo was using a gravimeter sensitive to weight differences of one-billionth of a pound to measure gravitational acceleration on each floor. He felt that extrapolations from his figures might help in the “design of instrument measuring the gravitational acceleration on space vehicles as they hurtle through the universe.” (NYT, 3/15/65, 29)
x-15 No. 3 flown by pilot Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf) to 244,700 ft. altitude at maximum speed of 3,404 mph (mach 4.66) to measure ultraviolet radiation and noise intensity of the boundary layer of air. (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
Passage of bills concerned with freedom of information was urged by William J. Coughlin in an editorial in Missiles and Rockets: “Intent of the bills is to establish a Federal public records law and to permit court enforcement of the people’s right to know the facts of government. Providing for sensible exceptions in the case of sensitive and classified information, the proposed law would require every agency of the government to make all its records promptly available to any person. . . . “The onus for restrictive news management usually falls on the Dept, of Defense, and rightly so, but there are a number of individuals in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration who are inclined to regard the agency as a preserve which should be off limits to the press. It is to the credit of Administrator James E. Webb that he has a consistent record of correcting abuses of press freedom that are called to his attention. The same cannot be said of his counterpart in the Defense Department.” (M&R, 4/25/65)
President Johnson nominated Gen. William F. McKee to be Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency. He made the appointment after signing a bill that exempted General McKee (usaf, Ret.) from the requirement that the faa administrator be a civilian, (ap, NYT, 6/25/65)
“A manned expedition to Mars within 15 years seems entirely feasible,” North American Aviation, Inc., Space and Information Systems Div. President Harrison Storms told William Hines of the Washington Evening Star. In charge of building the spacecraft for the Apollo moon landings, Storms offered an approximate timetable for a Mars expedition: “Start planning for it in 1970, start cutting metal in 1975 and go in 1980.” A recent report from the National Academy of Sciences had suggested 1985 as a feasible target date. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/20/65)
Rep. John R. Schmidhauser (D-Iowa) commented upon and inserted in the Congressional Record an article which appeared in the Davenport Times-Democrat about the Davenport Alcoa plant and the construction of Pegasus satellites. It said:	“A unique arrangement of special equipment that senses infrared energy—thus indicating which part of the satellite is facing earth—enables scientists to determine the direction each meteoroid is traveling when it strikes Pegasus. Such information will tell spacecraft designers the extent of possible damage from hits, enabling them to build manned craft which will be relatively unaffected by meteoroids.” (CR, 2/23/65, A77374)
President Johnson told Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young during a telephone call: “Your mission . . . confirms once again the vital role that man has to play in space exploration, and particularly in the peaceful use of the frontier of space. I am sure you would be the first to say that on this flight, as well as on our other manned flights in space, there were heroes on the ground as well as in space, and the record made by men like Jim Webb, Dr. Dryden, and Dr. Seamans, as well as all of those at the Cape, Cape Kennedy, and around the world, is a very proud record under Project Mercury and now on Project Gemini. And to all of those who have helped to make our space flights safe and successful, I want to . . . say ‘Well done’.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/24/65)
Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, the first man to fly in space, said in an interview with Krasnaya Zvezda that an increasing number of professions would take part in future spaceflights. He noted that pilots, engineers, a scientist, and a doctor had already flown in Soviet spacecraft. Gagarin described recent American spaceflights as “a major achievement,” but said it would be a simplification to interpret U.S. accomplishments as “first steps on an unexplored way.” He said Soviet spacecraft vostok iii and vostok iv had flown in formation in August 1962. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/31/65, A2)
USAF has come up with something for NASA to reckon with, commented William Hines, concerning the Titan iii-c success, in an article in the Washington Evening Star: “It is the Air Force position—which NASA will now be forced to try to disprove—that anything Saturn IB can do, Titan m-c can do better. “The Air Force, for its part, must now try to prove Titan m-c’s reliability over the long haul . . . Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier Jr., head of the Titan m-c program, said it is his goal to make every one of the 12 shots in the Titan ill—C development series a 100% success. “Equally important with reliability is cost. Bleymaier says the Titan iii-c can be produced in quantity for $12.8 million, or just a little more than half the $22 million it is estimated nasa’s Saturn IB will cost. Titan m-c’s $800 million development cost is but a fraction of what NASA will have spent to get the first Saturn IB off the ground.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/19/65)
Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II, NASA’s Director of Space Medicine, said NASA physicians screening future astronauts were eliminating people with heart and spine defects so slight they would be insignificant on earth. “We are interested in finding minute defects between the left and right heart,” he explained. “If you lose pressure and you have this defect, thousands of little air bubbles may find their way up to the brain. If there is no defect, they are removed from the lungs. We are also looking for congenital defects of the spine. When someone experiences the acceleration astronauts do, however, a small defect may be magnified in effect.” (Kass, Houston Post, 3/11/65) Senators and Representatives from all three states that had helicopter service testified in support of subsidies. Sen. Robert F. Kennedy (D-N.Y.) said: “I think that, really, if we don’t do it now [continue subsidy] it won’t be done and that will affect not just New York and the other two cities but the entire country.” Opposition came from Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) who argued for a “user tax on the people who use helicopters . . .” (Clark, NYT, 3/11/65, 55; Clark, NYT, 3/12/65, 66)
Gemini 5 Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (Lt. Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad (LCdr., usn) and their backup pilots Neil Armstrong and Elliot See met a news briefing at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center on the Gemini V mission, scheduled for August 19. Cooper explained that during the flight the astronauts would try to sight a USN Polaris missile to be launched from the East Coast and an unidentified missile to be launched from the West Coast. It was not disclosed at what point during the mission either of the launches would occur. In addition, Cooper said he and Conrad would attempt to sight rocket engines ignited on a rocket sled at Holloman afb, N. Mex. Also on the program would be an attempt to rendezvous with a Rendezvous Evaluation Pod (Rep) which would be ejected from the spacecraft and would drift to a distance of about 60 mi. from the spacecraft. The radar equipment onboard would then assist in performing maneuvers to achieve rendezvous with the Pod, although actual contact was not planned. Cooper said that backup system for reentry would not be used again because the thrust fuel would be used in the rendezvous experiment. No extravehicular activity would be performed during this mission. The astronauts announced they would attempt to communicate with fellow astronaut Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) participating in the USN Sealab ii experiment beneath the Pacific. Flight plans called for a landing in the West Atlantic. Both astronauts felt that personal hygiene would be one of the main problems of the flight. (Transcript)
Inventors of Lunar Landing Research Vehicle, lunar landing simulator referred to as “the belching spider,” in use at NASA Flight Research Center, were granted a patent. Built by Bell Aerosystems Co. under contract to NASA, the research craft had a jet engine that supported five-sixths of its weight; the pilot would manipulate lift rockets that would support the remaining one-sixth. The craft’s attitude would be controlled with jets of hydrogen peroxide. Inventors were Kenneth L. Levin and John G. Allen, Jr., of the Bell staff. (Jones, NYT, 7/3/65, 23)
We’ll be lucky if we have nuclear propulsion around 1980,” and electric propulsion is still further down the line for sometime after 1985, according to Dr. John C. Evvard, Deputy Associate Director for research at NASA Lewis Research Center. Evvard gave his views on advanced propulsion systems at the sixth annual Space Technology Series sponsored by the Canaveral Section, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, at Brevard Engineering College, Patrick afb, Fla. A pioneer in electric propulsion and advanced nuclear rocket studies, Evvard believed such concepts should not be considered for Mars missions of under 100 flights per year. Only frequent flights would increase the need for higher specific impulse and would justify the expense, he said. Meanwhile, he predicted, chemical rockets of less than 500 sec. specific impulse would lift men to Mars, not by direct ascent but through a succession of parking orbits and assembly of hardware in space. Evvard told the meeting that since May 13, 1964, at least nine tests on Kiwi, Nerva, and Phoebus nuclear reactors had proved out a thrust greater than 50,000 lbs., at a specific impulse in excess of 750 sec. (Text)
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), Deputy Commander (Manned Systems) of afsc Space Systems Div. and head of the Titan iii-c program, and project leaders Cols. David V. Miller (usaf) and Otto C. Ledford (usaf) were honored by Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk (usaf) for the success of the Titan-m program. General Bleymaier’s commendation for the Legion of Merit was for “outstanding service to the United States.” Colonels Miller and Ledford were awarded Commendation Medals. The ceremony was conducted at Eastern Test Range one hour after launch of Titan m-c-1. (Clark, NYT, 6/19/65, 1, 11)
President Johnson nominated Astronauts Walter M. Schirra (usn) and John Young (usn) for promotions. Commander Schirra was nominated for captain and Lt. Commander Young for commander. Each had received his current rank in 1961, before the space flights. All the original astronaut team had now been promoted, (ap, Wash. Post, 6/23/65, A12)
Wendell F. Moore of Textron’s Bell Aerosystems Co. was recipient of The Franklin Institute’s John Price Wetherill Medal for his invention of small rocket lift device, Franklin Institute announced. (Av. Wk., 9/13/65, 23; Franklin Institute)
At the United Nations, Astronauts James A. McDivitt (L/'Col., usaf) and Edward H. White II (L/Col., usaf) presented Secretary General U Thant a small U.N. flag carried by White on his June 4 walk in space, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/5/65)
Sir John Eccles, professor of physiology at Australian National University, cautioned Australia and New Zealand against overconcentration of scientific energy on space. At a scientific congress in New Zealand, he warned: “. . . we are spending too much of our resources, especially our intellectual resources, on the exploration of space when we have the much more important problem of life, and of man and his brain.” (NYT, 2/21/65, 9)
Edward L. Hays, chief of crew systems at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, announced that the crew of the Gemini GT-4 flight would wear the qualified Extravehicular Activity (Eva) spacesuit during their flight. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/19/65; M&R, 4/26/65, 7)
Roy William Johnson, first director of DOD’s Advanced Research Project Agency (arpa) in 1958 died at the age of 59. Johnson said at the time of his appointment: “Space will tax the imagination of the whole world for the next 100 years.” He retired in 1959. (JPash. Post, 7/23/65, B8)
usaf would train about 15 astronauts to operate manned orbiting laboratories, the Washington Post reported. Trainees would be chosen from graduates of the Aerospace Flight School, Edwards afb. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier (usaf), Commander of Western Test Range, suggested that in later Gemini flights the two-man crew might include one USAF astronaut, (ap, Wash. Post, 8/27/65, A7)
In a speech to the Interact Conference of First Rotary District 696 in Orlando, Fla., ksc’s Richard E. Dutton, said: “. . . NASA’s major launch facility for space vehicles and unmanned and manned spacecraft [is] the John E. Kennedy Space Center and its new Merritt Island Spaceport. I hope you noticed that I used the term Spaceport, instead of Moonport, as it is often referred to in the news media. We call it a Spaceport because its basic concept is not to exist as a research and development facility for any one mission only; it is being created to function as an actual port, with a space vehicle launch rate that may be some day as high as one manned launch per month. “However, just as important to consider is the spaceport’s capacity for growth. It can accommodate launch vehicles with up to 40 million pounds of thrust, 32.5 million pounds more than the Saturn V here can deliver. Because of this, the United States has not invested three quarters of a billion dollars in a facility which will serve only to launch a manned lunar mission. It has acquired a permanent installation which will serve the requirements of the National Space Program for years to come. “But these facilities, like the lunar landing mission, are themselves only a manifestation of a greater entity—people. At present, 2,500 NASA and 6,300 contractor employees work at the Center. By 1967, when the spaceport becomes operational, 3,000 government employees and 10,000 contractor employees will be employed.” (Text)
First observance of Robert H. Goddard Day. On the floor of the Senate, Sen. Stuart Symington (D-Mo.) spoke of Dr. Goddard’s achievements as summarized by G. Edward Pendray in Technology and Culture (Fall 1963) : “Dr. Goddard— “Was the first to develop a rocket motor using liquid propellants (liquid oxygen and gasoline) during the years 1920-25. “Was first to design, construct, and launch successfully a liquid-fuel rocket—the event we mark today. “First developed a gyrostabilization apparatus for rockets in 1932. “First used deflector vanes in the blast of a rocket motor as a means of stabilizing and guiding rockets, also in 1932. “Obtained the first U.S. patent on the idea of multistage rockets, in 1914. “First explored mathematically the practicality of using rocket power to reach high altitude and escape velocity, in 1912. “Was first to publish in the United States a basic mathematical theory underlying rocket propulsion and rocket flight, in 1919. “First proved experimentally that a rocket would provide thrust in a vacuum, in 1915. “Developed and demonstrated the basic idea of the bazooka near the end of World War I, although his plans lay unused until finally put to use in World War ii. “First developed self-cooling rocket motors, variable thrust rocket motors, practical rocket landing devices, pumps suitable for liquid rocket fuels. “Forecast jet-driven airplanes, and travel in space.”	(CR, 3/16/65,
A fuel cell system had successfully operated for more than 1,300 hrs.— the time it would take a spacecraft to make nine trips to the moon and back—producing electricity and drinking water from hydrogen and oxygen, John L. Platner of the Allis-Chalmers Research Div. told the 19th annual Power Source Conference in Atlantic City. Platner gave details of the cell’s performance in reporting on an advanced 2,000-watt fuel system being built by Allis-Chambers for NASA, (upi, Wash. Post, 5/19/65, A21)
XB-70 research aircraft, flown from Edwards AFB by North American Aviation pilots Alvin S. White and Van H. Shepard, reached 1,920 mph (mach 2.9) for five minutes. Purpose of 123-min. flight was to test the XB-70’s stability and control at nearly triple sonic speed and the effect of 556°C heat from air friction on the aircraft’s surface, (ap, Virginian-Pilot, 12/15/65)
U.S. would withdraw in six months from the Warsaw Convention limiting the liability of international airlines to $8,300 for each passenger killed or injured in air accidents, unless a new agreement was reached substantially increasing carrier liability, the State Department reported. U.S. had refused to ratify a 1955 amendment to the Convention raising the limit to $16,000, was arguing for a $100,000-limit liability. (U.S. State Dept. Release 268) “. . . advancing our competence in nuclear technology is of critical importance to the future of the national space program. Nuclear power and nuclear propulsion are musts for the more complex and long duration missions of the future. . . . “We all know that the nuclear going in space won’t be easy. . . . Yet I am confident that the technical problems are resolvable and the investments warranted. . . .” Dr. Welsh delivered a warning to “space planners” to stop sitting on nuclear propulsion concepts and to expedite development programs. “We must not wait for clear-cut space requirements for these nuclear systems before moving forthrightly with their development. If we wait for precise mission definitions the technology will not be available when it’s needed. Moreover, we can be sure that our Soviet competitors will take positive actions, whether we do or not. For this country to sit back on its technological haunches and let someone else, bolder and more imaginative, show us the way is unthinkable to me.” (Text) and procedures. We hope that by 1971 ... we will have made three significant improvements in the international system. First, we hope to improve the ability of the system to observe the global atmosphere and to provide fuller data for weather forecasting. In part this improvement will rest on the Tiros Operational Satellite System . . . which the United States will launch into orbit next year. Second, we hope to extend the benefits of modern computer technology throughout the world—by utilizing the computer to prepare weather analyses and forecasts routinely for the entire globe. And third, we hope to develop an international communications network for the timely exchange of raw data and for the rapid dissemination of analyses and forecasts.” (Text) Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa LaRC, delivered a keynote address on “Advances in Aircraft Technology.” He discussed the importance of scientific research to the continued leadership of the U.S. in the field of air transportation with particular reference to the next decade. Representing NASA Flight Research Center at the technical sessions was Joseph Walker, Chief of Research Pilots, who spoke on the X-15 research airplane as a tool for progress in hypersonic flight. (LaRC Release)
NASA Lewis Research Center scientist Charles A. Low, Jr., was corecipient (with William R. Mickelsen) of a patent for a radio-isotope generator with attached propulsion system. Low and Mickelsen would use a colloidal particle thrustor to provide the propellant. Research was underway at lrc on use of colloidal particles as propellant in various thrustor designs. The system could cut interplanetary flight durations by as much as one-half or increase interplanetary payloads by substantial amounts, (lrc Release 65-39)
Two more MARINER IV close-up shots of Mars were released by NASA. The first three photographs showed an almost unbroken strip of terrain more than 600 mi. long. They revealed features down to two miles in length, including several crater-like objects, a kidneyshaped depression 20-30 mi. in width, and ridges and depressions similar to those on the moon. None of them showed straight-line features that might have been taken by earth-based observers to be canals. Except for the suggestion of an arid, wind-swept, desert-like terrain, the pictures did not bear directly on the question of life on the planet. During a press conference held at JPL, Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of jpl, said that mariner iv had been a “magnificent success.” The computer which had reconstructed the numbers transmitted by mariner iv into photographs had proved capable of cleaning up and intensifying the image to a remarkable degree. The pic tures were of a high quality, and, in addition, the lighting conditions were expected to improve the detail in later photographs. Comparison of overlapping areas—one picture in a pair exposed through a green filter and one through a red filter—might reveal some things about color on Mars that would not otherwise be obtainable. (Transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 7/18/65, 1, 50; Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 7/18/65. Al, A6; WSJ, 7/19/65, 1)
The Senate, in a 46-20 vote, gave final Congressional approval to a bill waiving the restriction barring military men from the post of Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency, clearing the way for President Johnson to appoint Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.) of nasa. (CR, 6/17/65, 13541; WSJ, 6/18/65, 8)
usaf’s xc-142a V/Stol, designed and built by Ling-Temco-Vought, made its first public flight at Grand Prairie, Tex. piloted by John Konrad. Designed to take off and land vertically, the experimental aircraft had a wing that could be moved in flight from the normal horizontal position to a vertical position, enabling it to hover, fly backwards, sideways, and rotate 360° in either direction over the same spot. It could fly forward as slowly as 25 mph without stalling and could be flown at maximum speed of 425 mph; cruising speed was 250 mph. Five of the airplanes would be delivered to Edwards afb for further tests. (Wash. Post, 2/5/65; Clark, Houston Post, 2/5/65; A&A, 4/65, 8)
According to Missiles and Rockets, Dr. Joseph Shea, director of Apollo spacecraft program at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said Apollo spacecraft was having no weight problems. He explained that the current weight of 89,000 lbs. was under 90,000 lbs. goal and there was room for additional growth since Saturn V booster had increased estimated payload capability to 95,000 lbs. Weight of Lem was increasing in early development stage, but new evaluation stemming from NASA decision to make it as safe in terms of redundancy as command and service modules, could raise weight from 29,500 lbs. to 32,000 lbs. Shea commented that a stable baffled injector had been selected for service module’s propulsion system and it was currently undergoing qualification test series. Recent tests of heatshield in reentry tests with Scout (Aug. 18, 1964) achieved high total heat of 250 Btu’s per square foot—about 80'/< of the heat expected to be encountered during return from moon. (M&R, 3/8/65, 14)
Astronaut Edward H. White II (L/Col., usaf) and David S. Lewis, president of McDonnell Aircraft Corp., launched Operation Zero Defect at the McDonnell plant in St. Louis, Mo., county. They addressed an outdoor gathering of 3,400 employees, asking them to continue doing a good job of producing spacecraft and Phantom F—4 jet fighters for usaf, usn, and the Marines. (St. Louis PostDispatch, 8/2/65)
mariner tv approached within 5.500 mi. of Mars and took the first close-up pictures in history of that planet. At 10:28 a.m, edt, a signal from the tracking station at Johannesburg, South Africa, had commanded mariner iv to turn on the encounter equipment. Obeying the command 12 min. later—the time it took the signal to reach the spacecraft across 134,000,000 mi.— mariner iv’s scan platform with TV cameras and two Mars sensors began searching for the planet; the tape recorder began a 10-hr. warmup. By 1:10 p.m., the spacecraft’s sensors had found the proper angle from which to photograph Mars. On orders from JPL, the Johannesburg tracking station ordered the camera and its light sensor to stop the scan at 7/10 of a degree of the optimum aiming point. Throughout the day, the spacecraft continued transmitting scientific and engineering information via the telemetry system. At 7:50 p.m., the Mars probe made its first “sighting” contact with the planet. The telemetry system then shifted and began sending only information from the scientific experiments. At 8:20 p.m. edt, the first light from Mars struck the light sensor aligned with the camera and the 25-min. picture-taking sequence began. 21 frames were exposed and recorded on magnetic tape to be telemetered to earth over a 10-day period. Transmission of each picture would require 8 hrs. 25 min. Near the end of the fly-by, signals received at Goldstone tracking station had indicated a malfunction in the tape system. Telemetry received after the pass, however, showed no indication that trouble had occurred. At 10:12, mariner iv flew behind Mars, remained obscured for 53 min., and re-emerged beyond the planet, its transmitter beaming radio signals through the Martian atmosphere. From this occultation experiment, scientists might be able to gauge the depth, thickness, and component gases of Mars’ atmosphere by measuring how much these signals were bent and their speeds changed. Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, told a news conference that signals indicated all instruments on the spacecraft had performed properly during the flyby, (nasa Release 65-227; Sullivan, NYT, 7/15/65; Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib., 7/15/65; AP, Balt. Sun, 7/15/65) July 14: A 44-day test of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Space Environment Simulator (Ses) had just ended, gsfc announced. In this project, the early performance of a scientific spacecraft in orbit around the earth was compared to the performance of a sister craft “orbited” inside the Ses: the uk-d scientific spacecraft—backup model for ARIEL II (uk-ii) launched successfully into earth orbit by U.K. March 27, 1964—was “flown” inside the Ses; flight plan for UK-D followed general flight plan of initial flight days of ARIEL n. Preliminary data indicated operation of the Ses was good throughout the test period. The spacecraft inside the simulator even experienced the same minor malfunction its sister spacecraft had experienced in orbit, (gsfc Release G-17-65)
x-15 No. 3, piloted by Capt. Joseph Engle (usaf), reached maximum speed of 3,550 mph (mach 5.20) and a maximum altitude of 271,000 ft. The purpose of the flight was to obtain data on the boundary layer noise, and reentry maneuvering techniques. (NASA x—15 Proj. Off.; X—15 Flight Log)
The U.S. should take the lead in establishing an international patent system, Dept, of Commerce Deputy Assistant Secretary for Science and Technology William W. Eaton said at a patent conference in Washington, D.C. At present, an inventor must take out separate patents in each of several foreign countries or run the risk of his idea being exploited. The new system would eliminate this problem by having one international patent cover each invention, Mr. Eaton said. (Sci. Serv., NYT, 6/27/65, 53)
The three-orbit flight by Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young was in some ways the most remarkable space trip yet accomplished by this country’s astronauts,” said an editorial in the New York Times. “Particularly impressive was the apparent success of a series of maneuvers to change the Gemini’s orbit—maneuvers that will be required to join two spacecraft in orbit, notably on the return leg of the projected manned flight to the moon.” (NYT, 3/24/65, 44)
nasa’si gemim hi spacecraft ('’'Molly Brown*1). with Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf) as command pilot and Astronaut John W. Young (LCdr., USN I as pilot, was successfully launched from Eastern lest Range on three-orbit GT-3 mission by a two-stage Titan II. Within six minutes alter Jitt-olT. GEMIM ill and its two astronauts were injected into elliptical orbit with apogee. 224 km. (139 mi.lt perigee, 161 km. (100 mi.): period. 83 min. Speed of spacecraft was 16.600 mph. Toward the end of the first orbit. 03 min. after launching, the first maneuver was performed: Grissom fired two small thruster rockets that pushed ‘’backward” on the spacecraft, slow ing it down by about 45 mph. Lessened velocity caused GEMINI III to drop in altitude to a near-circular orbit with apogee, 169 km. (105 mi.): perigee, 153 km. <93 mi.). Second maneuver occurred during second orbit: Astronaut Grissom used the thrusters to turn the spacecraft broadside to its Right path. Then he gave a burst that pushed the craft about 1 50th of a degree from the original course; short hursts, fired rapidly, slowed the craft ami he turned it Into a course nearly parallel to his original one. Third maneuver came in the third orbit: Grissom fired the spacecraft thruster rockets, dropping into an orbit with perigee of 82 km. (52 mi. I. Manually controlling reentry, the astronauts turned the spacecraft's blunt end forward, ejected the section carrying the retrorockets. Four hours and 53 min. after launching, GEMINI in safely landed in the Atlantic Ocean off Grand Turk Island, considerably off target and some 50-60 mi. away from the recovery ship, Intrepid. Navy frogmen from hovering aircraft fastened a float around gemini iii. Original plans had called for the spacecraft, with the astronauts still inside, to be hoisted aboard the recovery ship and immediate medical checks made. When Grissom became seasick the men were picked up by helicopter and landed on the Intrepid; the spacecraft was recovered later. The astronauts helped perform two experiments. One was the irradiation of human blood to test the combined effects on it of weightlessness and irradiation. The other was to squirt small jets of water into the plasma sheath that surrounded the spacecraft as it reentered the earth’s atmosphere, testing a theory that a fluid flowing through the ionized layer of atoms would permit radio signals to penetrate the communications blackout common to reentry. Gemini officials said that, so far as was known, this was the first time a manned spacecraft had maneuvered in orbit, changing its orbital path, (nasa Release 65-81; nasa Transcript; Clark, NYT, 3/24/65, 1, 22; Simons, Wash. Post, 3/24/65; Bishop, WSJ, 3/24/65)
William C. Foster, Director of U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, said in testimony before House Foreign Affairs Committee that radioactive leakage from Soviet underground nuclear test Jan. 15 was apparently accidental. The radioactive fallout apparently did not violate the intent of the 1963 nuclear test-ban treaty.	(FonF, 1965, 61) . .
In an article in the New York Times discussing the “marriage” of medicine and electronics, William D. Smith said the monitoring of the astronauts’ health while in flight had produced several electronic medical systems. He added that NASA was expected to spend about $50 million during 1965 on electronic medical equipment. (Smith, NYT, 10/24/65, FI)
Sen. William Proxmire | D-Wis.) spoke on the floor of the Senate on potential dangers to universities from Federal research programs and advocated giving more decision-making responsibility on allocation of funds to the universities. (CR, 7/13/65, 16075-77)
Sir William Hildred, Director General of the International Air Transport Association, said in an address at the Association’s 21st annual meeting that proposed supersonic jet airliners would face stiff competition from giant subsonic jets expected on international airways by 1967. Sir William said the airlines favored supersonic airliners, such as the planned British-French Concorde, if they could provide faster transportation “without insuperable financial, technical or operational problems.” He said the Concorde was likely to be available in 1971-72, and its American counterpart in 1973-74. But before that, Sir William continued, giant air buses, “stretched” subsonic jets seating up to 250 passengers, would be available. (NYT, 10/25/65, 66) During week of October 25: First two H-l rocket engines uprated to 205.000	lbs. thrust were delivered from Rocketdyne’s Neosho, Mo., plant to Chrysler Corp.’s Space Division in New Orleans. Later, at the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, H-l engines would be installed in Saturn ib vehicles to be used in the early stages of the Apollo program. The uprated engines would add a total of about 40.000 lbs. thrust to nasa’s Saturn ib booster, increasing the total thrust of the eight-engine cluster to 1,640,000 lbs. (msfc Release 65-269)
Test model of the I.nnar Landing Research Vehicle designed to simulated lunar landing was flown by former nasa x-15 pilot Joseph Walker to 300-ft. altitude. Built by Bell Aerosystems Co. under contract to Nasa, the research craft had a jet engine that supported five-sixths of its weight; the pilot manipulated solid-fuel lift rockets that supported the remaining one-sixth. The craft’s attitude was controlled with jets of hydrogen peroxide. ( Wash. Post, 10/9/65, AT; ap, Houston Chron., 10/9/65)
In answer to the query, “What is an orbital analyst?” an article in The Airman said: “The complex tasks of the analyst involve the use of a high order of mathematics, laws of celestial mechanics, and adaptation of orbital analysis problems to high-speed scientific computer solutions. These highly specialized activities are absolutely essential to carrying out the vast mission of the Air Force SPACETRACK system: detection, tracking, and identification of all man-made objects orbiting the earth.” (Airman, 7/65, 24) During July: Fortune magazine recounted the story of the development of the Lear jet—a small jet aircraft for the corporate market. William Lear, said the article, became the first man in history to design, build, and win certification for a jet airplane—all with his own money. {Fortune, 7/65, 137-140, 185)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced at a press conference during the 23rd annual Hampton County (S.C.) Watermelon Festival that the Gemini V manned space flight would be an eight-day mission—the time required to fly to the moon, explore its surface, and return to earth. Webb also disclosed that NASA would announce next week the selection of six scientist astronauts. Speaking at “Mendel Rivers Day” ceremony, Webb pointed out that Congressman Mendel Rivers, Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, “has steadily supported the Nation’s effort to build strength in space.” Webb also said: “Thoughtful students of national power and its uses are increasingly aware that America’s security as well as her leadership of the Free World, depends directly upon our progress in mastering and using space. “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration cooperates closely with the Department of Defense, to ensure that the technological progress we make in developing the peaceful uses of space will be drawn upon as needed to help keep the peace—in space and on earth. “As you can readily understand, the development of military space systems follows those basic research fields which provide the scientific understanding and technological capability to make such systems possible. It is NASA’s job, as the space research and development agency, to provide this basic knowledge and know-how.” Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young accompanied Webb to this festival, (nasa Release; Text; Aerospace Historian, 10/65, 111-14)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began a two-day seminar with a panel discussion on science and technology, with specific reference to aeronautics. Speaker of the House John W. McCormack opened the seminar. Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences began executive hearings on the subject of launch vehicles. (NASA LAR iv/17)
Dr. John D. Nicolaides, Chairman of Notre Dame’s Aerospace Engineering Dept., formerly Special Assistant to the NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, told National Space Club at a Washington, D.C., luncheon that we must realize we were “not yet first in the race for space supremacy. . . . The [Soviet] lead in both numbers and weights of unmanned launchings continues to increase. They are publishing just as many scientific papers as we are and they are just as good.” Nicolaides added that he was not including their work in life sciences “which is well ahead of ours by virtue of the simple fact that they have been experimenting in space.” Dr. Nicolaides said he was alarmed by the U.S.S.R.’s “extensive planetary program.” They started early and continued a truly massive effort compared to ours, he said. “They are launching their heavy spacecraft at each opportunity to both Mars and Venus, while we have abandoned Venus completely and are only studying scientific measurement on Mars in 1971. . . .” (nsc Newsletter, 2/65)
A crowd of two million gathered in Chicago during the parade and motorcade honoring Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White n (Maj., usaf), accompanied by Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey. Honorary citizens medals were presented the astronauts at a special City Council meeting. Civil rights leaders postponed a demonstration protesting de facto school segregation in deference to the celebration, (ap, Wash. Post. 6/16/65; Wehrwein, NYT, 6/15/65)
At the request of Labor Secretary W. Willard Wirtz and chief Federal mediator William Simkin, the International Association of Machinists authorized 200 strikers to resume work on the Gemini spacecraft at Kennedy Space Center. The machinists struck McDonnell Aircraft Corp., Gemini’s builder, on Nov. 18 in a dispute over wages and working conditions. Not only had the strike threatened to ground Gemini vn, scheduled for launch December 4, it had also halted, and continued to halt, work on the f-4 Phantom jet fighter at the McDonnell St. Louis plant, (ap, Wash. Post, 11/23/65, A8; Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib., 11/23/65)
xc-142a V/Stol, flown by Ling-Temco-Vought test pilots John Konrad and Stuart Madison, made a flawless first transition flight. The transport aircraft took off like a helicopter, adjusted its wings for conventional flight, and then circled the field, reversed the process, and made a vertical landing. The xc-142a’s first transition flight came only six flights after its initial hover flight on Dec. 29, 1964. It was the Nation’s first V/Stol built for operational evaluation rather than research, (ap, CSM, 1/13/65)
A projection of the U.S. space program was outlined by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, at the Building Products Executives Conference in Washington, D.C.: “1. After we have made initial landings on the moon, we will, if conditions warrant, make many other trips to explore the various parts of the lunar surface and possibly to establish one or more bases there. “2. Not only will unmanned probes be sent throughout the solar system, but manned expeditions will visit the planets whenever that becomes scientifically promising and practicable. “3. We will develop a family of useful manned earth-orbiting stations, growing from relatively small orbiting laboratories to large multi-manned permanent stations. Regular ferry service will transfer personnel and supplies to and from such spacecraft. “4. Global communications via satellites will become a fact in the very near future and will be followed by direct broadcast of both voice and TV by satellite to home receivers throughout large sections of the world. “5. Orbiting spacecraft will increase annually in numbers, in size, and in sophistication. Through such activity we will greatly increase our knowledge about the earth as well as about the heavens. “6. We can expect a marriage of the major features of both aeronautics and astronautics . . . lifting bodies and winged spacecraft with maneuverable reentry ability will be launched into near and distant space by means of recoverable and re-usable launch vehicles. Drastic reduction in the mileage cost of space travel will result. “7. Spaceports for the coming and going of spacecraft will be built in a number of parts of this country as well as elsewhere. “8. Improved propulsion—faster, more powerful rockets using nuclear as well as chemical energy—will characterize space transportation. Planetary trips which today would take many months will be done in perhaps a week’s time or less, while carrying substantial payloads of passengers, equipment, and supplies. And, “9. As competence in space increases ... we can expect to see greater economic progress and international cooperation. Then we can truly say that our space efforts have made major contributions to world peace. . . .” (Text)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc, Ret.), would make a three-week goodwill trip to Western Europe in October, the White House announced, (upi, Wash. Post, 9/18/65)
Smithsonian Institution disclosed architectural plans for a national air and space museum to be built in Washington, D. C., opposite the National Gallery of Art. Designed by Gyo Obata, a St. Louis architect, the building would be modern in concept with an internal design that would provide a sweeping vista of exhibit areas. Smithsonian officials hoped to receive Congressional authorization to build the museum at a cost of $42 million. (NYT, 1/31/65) During January: Reviewing Apollo program progress, Dr. Joseph Shea, Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said that NASA had characterized the program as a series of phases. He explained that 1963 and 1964 were years of detailed designs and initial developmental testing; 1964 and 1965 were years of extensive ground tests and qualifications for flight; from 1966 on, ground tests would be supplemental to extensive flight tests, initially on the Saturn IB and later on the Saturn V. From his visits to almost all of the major Apollo hardware contractors, Dr. Shea said he could report that all of the subsystems associated with the command and service modules “are well along in their ground test programs. “Almost all elements are on schedule and the test results indicate that the designs will meet our program objectives. By early this year, all subsystem hardware will be undergoing the rigorous qualification tests which we require before certifying such hardware ready for flight. ... By the end of 1965, there will be three Apollo spacecraft in continuous ground testing. 1964 was, in retrospect, a year where milestone by milestone, we have achieved Apollo objectives.” (naa S&1D Skywriter, 1/15/65, 1, 4; Witkin, NYT, 1/24/65, 60)
Russian Cosmonaut Lt. Col. Aleksey Leonov, first man to walk in space, was quoted as calling the Gemini iv flight of Majors James A. McDivitt (usaf) and Edward H. White n (usaf) “a very interesting one.” During an interview with the Bulgarian news agency, he congratulated the Gemini crew, wished them “a happy landing back on earth,” and said “no doubt the experience from our flight must have helped the U.S. space program very much in preparing and executing the flight.” (Reuters, NYT, 6/7/65)
William E. Simkin, director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, reported that “some progress” had been made in efforts to settle the I am strike against McDonnell Aircraft Corp. which began Nov. 18. Union had demanded changes in job specifications and was dissatisfied with machinery for filing grievances against management. McDonnell was prime contractor for the Gemini spacecraft at Cape Kennedy. (Jones, NYT, 11/21/65, 43)
At NASA Industry Briefing on Computer Procurement, held at Hq., NASA briefed representatives of 14 leading companies in the automatic data processing industry on NASA’s present and future plans and policies for the procurement of large-scale computing systems. William Rieke, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, pointed out that NASA’s principal purpose in future Adp procurements would be to increase competition throughout the computer industry. Citing the growing concern in recent years over expanding Adp inventories and increasing dollar expenditures for computers throughout Government, Rieke outlined a three-point plan to improve the exchange of information between NASA and the computer industry: (1) NASA would hold annual industry briefings to inform computer firms of its long-range plans, problems, needs for improved system technology, and projected procurements with the first to be held next May; (2) individual computer manufacturers would be given an opportunity to conduct annual briefing for NASA’s personnel to inform NASA of their plans, problems, and developments; (3) in connection with large or unusual Adp procurements with restrictive requirements, NASA would hold prespecification briefings for interested companies in advance of issuing requests for proposals. Edmond C. Buckley, director of NASA’s Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, outlined NASA’s methods for long-range planning on computer acquisition and utilization, and emphasized that the agency’s future Adp procurements would be for computing systems rather than just hardware. nasa Administrator James E. Webb traced the cooperative history of the NASA-Industry-University “team” in contributing to NASA’s accomplishments since 1958. He emphasized the importance of the computer industry’s contribution to the space effort, in particular, and solicited the industry’s continued cooperation in carrying out NASA’s mission, (nasa Release 65-391)
x—15 No. 2 piloted by nasa research pilot John ti. McKay attained a speed up to 3,659 mph (mach 5.19) and an altitude of 212,600 ft., photographed Gamma Cassiopeia with four 35-mm. cameras. Purpose was to verify theoretical data on the physical composition of the stars, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
U.S. Junior Chamber of Commerce named Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) one of the ten outstanding young men of 1964. Captain Engle, the youngest of the X-15 pilots, had logged nine flights in the X-15. Awardees would be honored at an awards congress Jan. 15—16 in Santa Monica, Calif, (ap, Des Moines Register, 1/12/65)
William Hines, science writer and columnist for the Washington Evening Star, was presented the AAAs’s top award for science writing in 1965 at the Association’s annual meeting in Berkeley, Calif. His award-winning entry was a series of articles on the journey of mariner iv to Mars. The articles appeared from Nov. 6, 1964, to Aug. 12, 1965. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/17/65, A2)
In its 11th test flight, the XB-70 aircraft reached a speed of 1,630 mph and an altitude of 62,000 ft.—both records for the XB-70. The aircraft’s total time in the air was 14 hrs. 41 min. Flight was made from Edwards afb with naa pilots Alvin S. White and Van Shepard. (Clark, NYT, 4/29/65)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., was sworn in as a consultant to NASA by Administrator James E. Webb. His duties would include taking part in conferences, making speeches in the U.S. and abroad, and checking on projects under way. (nasa Release 65-67)
The Gold Hodgkins Medal for pioneer work in space age science, plus a cash award, was presented to three scientists during the second week of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s 75th anniversary observance in Cambridge, Mass.: Prof. Marcel Nicolet, National Center for Space Research, Brussels; Dr. Joseph Kaplan, UCLA; and Dr. Sydney Chapman, Geophysical Institute, Univ. of Alaska, (ap, Houston, Chron., 8/18/65)
Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said in an article in Astronautics and Aeronautics for January: “. . . With Ranger 7, the prime factor was the expectation that the Apollo mission would choose a landing area on one of the smooth ‘maria.’ So it was of great value to this program to find out as much as possible about the mare topography. In particular, it was necessary to know if these areas were really lava flows and, if so, how much was exposed lava and how densely the small craters were scattered over the surface. “Ranger gave some of the answers. In some areas, at least, small craters were indeed strewn very thickly. Probably such areas lie along the rays which radiate from some of the more recent large craters. Between these ray regions the surface of the mare appears to be quite smooth. No large rocks or fissures are apparent, although the general roughness may be comparable to some terrestrial lava fields where the lava is of the ‘pahoehoe,’ or fluid variety. However, the absence of any significant number of features showing edges with a small radius of curvature, and the presence of small craters which have been filled with debris, point to erosion as a significant modifier of the primeval lunar surface. This erosion could arise from meteoric bombardment and the effects of solar radiations. Estimates of the depth of surface which has been eroded away range from 5 to 50 ft. . . .” (A&A, 1/65, 18-20) During January: GAO charged that mismanagement of the Nimbus meteorological satellite project resulted in unnecessary costs of $1.2 million. The report claimed that Nimbus’ project manager at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center “did not effectively carry out his responsibility” for flight planning when it became evident that the spacecraft had become overweight and that he allowed the contractor to continue working toward the original design goal “even though it was clear [the effort] would be futile” because of booster limitations. Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, rebutted the GAO allegations: “The costs which were incurred on the Nimbus project during the 5V2 months between May 1961 and November 20, 1961, were for the development of the fully redundant Nimbus system to satisfy the requirements of the Plan for a National Operational Meteorological Satellite System. . . . Our effort to achieve the redundant system in the first Nimbus flight was continued as long as possible. ... we did not want to take the step of dropping the redundant system, even for the first flight, until we were sure we had to.” (gao Nimbus Rpt., 1/65; M&R, 2/8/65,9)	_
Man can withstand spaceflights as long as 30 days without suffering serious biological damage, L/Col. Edward C. Knohlock, director of the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research and member of the medical debriefing team for Project Mercury flights, told the annual convention of the American Association of Clinical Chemists in Chicago. Although gemini v relayed signals on the rate of breathing, body temperature, heart beat, and perspiration, the more sophisticated equipment needed to reflect the astronauts’ body chemistry would be available on the proposed 14-day flight of a larger manned orbital laboratory. (Powers, Chic. Trib., 9/2/65)
Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White II (Maj., usaf) were flown from Mayport, Fla., to Ellington afb near Houston for reunion with their families. (Clark, NYT, 6/10/65, 1,47)
U.S. suspended practice firing of Little John missiles in the foothills of Mt. Fuji at the request of the Japanese government to avoid clashes with about 2,000 farmers demonstrating near the target area. The farmers claimed that practice firing of the Little John, capable of carrying nuclear warheads, would lead to nuclear armament of Japan and would involve Japan in the Vietnam war. Little John was a short range, Army battlefield support missile,	(ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/65, A21; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/65, A13)
A Cairo newspaper revealed that the United Arab Republic was training men for space flight. No date for a possible launching was given. (upi, Milwaukee ]., 4/16/65) Noting areas of disagreement among scientists, theoretical astrophysicist Thomas Gold of Cornell Univ. tried to explain why the Ranger pictures resolved so little: “The Ranger pictures are like a mirror. Everyone sees his own theories reflected in them.” Prof. Gold saw a moon covered with dust; young craters composed of solid rock while older craters had somehow gone soft; and vast sheets of ice locked under compacted sediment beneath much of the lunar surface. Dr. Harold C. Urey, Nobel prize-winning chemist from the Univ. of California, referred to evidence of widespread collapse of the lunar surface, probably due to underground movement: “The ranger ix’s pictures scared me more than anything. There’s all sorts of evidence that some of these craters are sinking.” Dr. Eugene Shoemaker of the U.S. Geological Survey said that chances that the moon’s surface was too soft for the 15-ton Lem were “almost vanishingly remote.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/16/65; Clark, NYT, 4/16/65) Dr. Ewan A. Whitaker agreed with findings in the paper he presented for his colleague, Dr. Gerald P. Kuiper of the Univ. of Arizona’s Lunar and Planetary Laboratory. Dr. Kuiper concluded that the lunar surface had a bearing strength of between one and two tons per square foot. His calculations, made from data extracted from RANGER IX photographs, was based on the size of rocks ejected from a given impact crater and the distance they traveled. Other tentative findings were that the dark portions of the maria were due to some unknown fluid flows and not lava or ash flows; that the maria were not completely covered with lunar dust; and that the moon’s surface exhibited a remarkable series of fracture patterns which could be due to polar contraction, tidal effects, or some other force. (Clark, NYT, 4/16/65; Simons, Wash. Post, 4/16/65; Av. Wk., 4/26/65, 34) Boris J. Levin, section chief of the Institute of Earth Physics, U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, said studies based on radioactive emissions from meteorites and on lunar data indicated that the interior of the moon partially melted some two million years after the formation of that body began: “If you assume the moon is of the same material as meteorites, it is necessary to assume that the interior at one time was partly molten.” Prof. Levin said the moon was formed simultaneously with the earth and was not originally part of it. It was about 10 earth-radii distant and later shifted to the present position. He added: “We believe that there is a lava flow not covered by dust.” (Wash. Post, 4/17/65: Milwaukee /.. 4/17/65: CSM, 4/26/65; Av. Wk., 4/26/65, 34) Dr. John Clark, NASA Director of Space Sciences, said that a year ago nasa officials had hoped that Ranger would tell something about the topography of the moon: “That in turn would tell something about the geometry needed for the landing vehicle. Ranger has done this and now we look to the Surveyor spacecraft to tell us the bearing strength of the moon’s surface.” (ap, Houston Post, 4/17/65; Clark, NYT, 4/17/65) Dr. Fred Whipple of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory said the moon’s surface might be lower than had been calculated: “The data indicates that ranger vii and vih, and maybe ranger ix, landed one second late because the moon was one mile small. The moon’s surface at the point of landing was lower by two kilometers fa mile and a quarter) than the average lunar radius.” ( ap, Houston Post, 4/17/65; Milwaukee /., 4 17 65)
Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.), NASA Assistant Administrator for Management Development, was named to succeed Najeeb E. Halaby as Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency. (Wash. Post, 4/28/65)
X-15 No. 2, piloted by John B. McKay (nasa), reached 239,000-ft. altitude and 3,511-mph speed (mach 5.16) in a flight to obtain information on the reaction augmentation system, to check out star-tracking ultra-violet stellar photography experiment, and to gain information on advanced x-15 landing dynamics and pilot altitude buildup, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
Dr. Thomas F. Bates, professor of mineralogy and director of the Science and Engineering Institute at Pennsylvania State Univ., had been named science advisor to Interior Secretary Stewart L. Udall, it was announced. He would succeed Dr. John C. Calhoun, Jr., who was returning to his post at Texas a&m. ( upi, NYT, 3/16/65, 4)
More than 900 representatives of news media had been accredited, making the GT-3 mission of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young the most intensely covered event in the history of space exploration. Nearly 1,200 newsmen had requested credentials from NASA. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/23/65)
Col. John H. Glenn (usmc, Ret.) was guest of honor and elected to membership at the 148th annual dinner of the New York Academy of Sciences. He said that 100 yrs. from now “space travel will not be a form of international competition, nor will it have political implications; it will be the beginning of the greatest exploration period in world history.” (NYT, 12/3/65,42)
Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) urged the Subcommittee on NASA Oversight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics to consider priorities in the U.S. space program. He noted that the Agena Target Vehicle failure which postponed the Oct. 25 Gemini vi mission might have been avoided if the modified Agena had undergone flight-testing before the Gemini mission attempt. Reiterating his view that “the last two Pegasus [satellites] shots were not clearly necessary,” he suggested: “. . . this modified Agena rocket could have been test fired by means of utilizing the last two Saturn I rockets, which carried the additional Pegasus satellites instead. Such a test might have avoided the failure. . . .” (CR, 11/2/65, A6259)
Pilot John B. McKay (nasa) flew x-15 No. 3 to maximum altitude of 239,000	ft. at maximum speed of 3,545 mph (mach 5.03) to obtain data on pilot altitude buildup, (nasa x—15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight
Meteoroids probably would not be unduly hazardous to spacecraft flying for short periods in the near-earth environment, a NASA report indicated. Based on data from explorer’s xvi and xxm and pegasus i and II, report was presented by Charles T. D’Auitolo, NASA Hq. Office of Advanced Research and Technology; William H. Kinard, Langley Research Center; and Robert J. Naumann, Marshall Space Flight Center, at the Symposium on Meteor Orbits and Dust conducted in Cambridge, Mass., by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. EXPLORER XVI, launched Dec. 16, 1962, had registered 62 meteoroid penerations during its lifetime. explorer xxiii, launched Nov. 6, 1964,. had reported 103 penetrations, pegasus i, launched Feb. 16, 1965, carried three thicknesses of panels but mechanical malfunctions had destroyed the usefulness of data on the .008- and ,016-in.-thick panels; 104 penetrations had been reported from the .0015-in.-thick panels, pegasus ii, launched May 25, 1965, was returning useful data from all three thicknesses of panels and had registered 61 penetrations. The higher frequency of penetrations recorded by pegasus ii was thought to have been caused by a meteoroid shower, pegasus III, launched July 30, had not had time to return significant data, (nasa Release 65-205)
Astronauts McDivitt and White, onboard the carrier Wasp for medical debriefing, received a congratulatory telegram from Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, first man in space: “We send you our congratulations after the success we witnessed of the spaceflight in ship Gemini 4. We express hope that spaceflights will be to serve the world and make progress for humanity.” (ap, Haughland, Wash. Post, 6/10/65, Al, All)
usaf Chief of Staff General John P. McConnell, speaking at a meeting of the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., said: “. . . As airmen, all of us in the Air Force look at space with real concern. Will it someday become an area of military operation? If so, what will be the U.S. posture? In military language, what is our readiness? . . . “Space exploration is the responsibility of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. . . . The act which created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration gave NASA broad responsibilities for meeting many of the broad needs of the nation. It also stated that the Department of Defense should be responsible for and direct those space activities peculiar to or primarily associated with the development of weapon systems, military operations or the defense of the United States. “So we have both NASA and Air Force assigned specific responsibilities. We have the basis of a partnership. And a partnership it is in carrying out the national program as recommended by the President and authorized and funded by Congress. The intent of Congress is very clear. The members wanted the broad space capabilities of the nation to be built up as rapidly as possible without unnecessary duplication of effort or of waste. This we are attempting to do. And while I would not ordinarily try to speak for Jim Webb, the NASA Administrator, I think I can speak for him today on this subject, in saying, that it is a very well understood mutual objective between the Air Force and NASA.” Asked his opinion about spending of $20 billion to reach the moon, McConnell said: “I think it is necessary for us to get everything we can out of space. And I think we should get it as rapidly as we can at as reasonable cost as we can. But you can’t get it rapidly and at the same time cheaply . . . going to the moon is just the end product of what we are getting out of it. If we were just going to the moon, I wouldn’t think it would be worth 20 billion dollars to go to the moon. But I don’t hesitate to say that all of the other things which we have to do, the preliminaries, and the things that we’re going to learn in the process of achieving that goal is well worth the expenditure of whatever money is required to attain the knowledge which we will attain as a result of this project.” (Text)
American Academy of Arts and Sciences awarded its Rumford Prize to Dr. William D. McElroy for his analysis and isolation of chemicals that cause bioluminescence in the firefly and other organisms. He identified luciferin, luciferase, and adenosine-5-triphosphate (atp). From his research he concluded that bioluminescence had evolved “as an accidental consequence of chemical reactions” in the organisms as they adapted to changing conditions in the environment. Dr. McElroy was head of the McCollum-Pratt Institute of Johns Hopkins Univ. and a member of the President’s Science Advisory Committee. (SR, 4/3/65, 45-47)
Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), Deputy Commander for Manned Systems, afsc Space Systems Div., was cited by President Johnson for cost reduction efforts on the Titan III program. The citation said his efforts had enabled the Air Force to achieve on time all major program objectives with fewer test flights than programed, “thus reducing defense costs $33 million in fiscal year 1965.” (dod Release 487-65)
Aerospace Corp.’s $22 million expenditure to construct buildings in California when space was available in nearby U.S. facilities was criticized by Comptroller General Joseph Campbell in his testimony before the House Armed Services Special Investigations Subcommittee investigating Aerospace. Campbell said that Aerospace had also incurred “certain questionable costs which appear to be of interest.” (ap, NYT, 5/5/65)
Statement made by President Johnson on the death of the NASA Director of Space Medicine: “A day of great achievement in space was marred by news of the death of Dr. William R. Lovelace, II. His life was too short, although his legacy to space medicine will endure and will be a resource of assurance to future astronauts whose names and deeds are yet unknown.” (Pres. Doc., 12/20/65, 593)
Rep. Westen E. Vivian (D-Mich.) told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications that he intended to request adoption of a policy to award one half of all NASA Phase 1A contracts to companies in areas presently receiving less than one half of NASA business. Chairman Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) said that although fiscal expedience demanded that procurement contracts go to industralized areas, geographic distribution should be seriously considered in the allocation of research and development funds. He said the Subcommittee would consider Vivian’s proposal. (Transcript, 3/9/65)
Senate confirmed the nominations of Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.) as Federal Aviation Agency Administrator and David D. Thomas as his deputy administrator. President Johnson formally accepted the resignation of McKee’s predecessor, Najeeb E. Halaby, with a “Dear Jeeb” letter praising Halaby’s “vigorous and dynamic leadership,” particularly in supersonic transport development. (CR, 6/30/65, 14824; upi, Wash. Post, 7/1/65)	_ _
Dr. John W. Salisbury and Joel Adler of Cambridge Laboratories reported to 132d meeting of the AAAS in Berkeley, Calif., that American astronauts landing on the moon might encounter lunar dust that would stick like wet snow to their windows, faceplates, and camera lenses. Salisbury and Adler said they had reached those conclusions by two separate experiments. (Wash. Post, 12/30/65, A4) Medical and physical data from the two-week GEMINI vn flight indicated that man could withstand a lunar mission without any serious harm, reported Dr. Charles Berry, Chief of Medical Programs for NASA MSC, at the AAAS meeting. Dr. Berry revealed that the astronauts’ heart rates and blood pressures during the flight had remained within normal ranges and that within 10 hrs. after splashdown, Borman had regained 4.8 lbs. of the 9.6 lbs. he had lost; Lovell, who had lost 5.9 lbs., had regained 6.6 lbs. Berry, who doubted the astronauts could have endured 14 days in spacesuits, attributed much of the success of the mission to the freedom of flying in underwear. He reported that the electroencephalogram studies recording brain wave activity had shown no abnormalities during the first two flight days, but that the electrodes on the astronauts’ scalps had come loose before the end of the planned 4-day experiment. As to the radiation dosage hazards on the 14-day flight, Dr. Berry said the measured amounts were “peanuts.” The calcium balance studies which required measurements of calcium loss to sweat, blood, urine, and feces might take “several more months to complete,” he added. Astronaut Edward H. White (L/Col., usaf) accompanied Dr. Berry to the meeting to brief scientists on preparations necessary to plan and execute successful space missions. (Haseltine, Wash. Post, 12/30/65, Al)
JPL Director Dr. William Pickering held up some fuzzy photographs of patches of the moon during a JPL press conference and said this was the best quality to be expected from the mariner iv television system. The pictures should be better than any ever obtained from earth if the system operated as planned, he said. Each of the mariner iv pictures would consist of 200 rows of 200 dots. Each dot would be sent as a number ranging from 0 to 63, designating the darkness of the dot. Reconstruction of the picture would be done by a computer at JPL. Because the first views would scan the planet obliquely, it might not be until the third image that one was received showing any obvious surface features. This, according to Dr. Pickering, might mean that no pictures would be displayed publicly until July 16. (Sullivan, NYT, 7/15/65, 1)
Donald E. Gault and William L. Quaide, NASA Ames Research Center scientists, believed the moon’s surface was a loose layer of fine sandlike material at least 10 ft. and possibly “tens of meters” deep, reported Associated Press. Their theory was based on laboratory experiments in which they closely matched the moon crater pictures transmitted to earth by the Ranger spacecraft. Laboratory results were confirmed in field tests, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/65)
Quasi-stellar radio sources (“quasars”), cosmic x-ray sources, and neutron stars were discussed at NAS meeting in Washington. Jesse L.	Greenstein of Mt. Wilson and Palomar Observatories suggested quasars were signs of galaxies forming—“the first condensation” of intergalactic gases. William A. Fowler of Cal Tech revived his earlier theory (proposed with Fred Hoyle) that these sources were huge energy masses created by explosive contractions of gigantic stars. Herbert Friedman of NRL presented new evidence that cosmic x-ray sources and neutron stars were not the same things. (Scientists at nrl had earlier suggested that some cosmic x-ray sources were the theoretical neutron stars.) Edwin E. Salpeter of Cornell Univ. reiterated the neutron star hypothesis. He suggested neutron stars could be oscillating stars which generate such great amounts of gravitational energy that the x-rays are produced. (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/29/65, A5)
Funeral in Washington for late Deputy Administrator of NASA, Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, attended by hundreds of friends and high Federal officials. Pallbearers were Gen. James H. Doolittle (Chairman of the naca, 1956-58), Dr. T. Keith Glennan (nasa Administrator, 1958-1961), and Astronauts Scott Carpenter, Gordon Cooper, James McDivitt, and John Glenn, (eph)
It was too early to set a realistic date for man’s landing on the moon, Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, said during a Moscow press conference devoted to the zond iii mission. He explained: “. . . we have . . . learned quite a lot about the surface of the moon. Yet this does not seem to be a great deal . . . where the choice of a landing spot is concerned. . . . Our knowledge of the soil of the moon is still somewhat contradictory, and I think it is much too early to start looking for a future landing site . . .” Yuri Khodarev, engineer in the Soviet space program, revealed that zond ill had used photographic film instead of magnetic film to record pictures for later playback on earth command. The mission had been essentially a test in which the spacecraft would continue to play back the moon pictures repeatedly at increasingly greater distances up to “hundreds of millions of kilometers,” Khodarev said, adding, “we have created a new, compact photo television system intended for photographing and transmission of images of planets under conditions of prolonged space flight.” The wide-angle camera lens had a 106.4mm. focal length at a relative aperture of 1:8. A 25-mm. film was used with exposures of l/100th and l/300th of a second. Describing the zond ill television system, Khodarev said zond III had taken 25 photos of the far side of the moon in little more than an hour. Only one command had been given from earth—to start taking the photographs. All remaining operations occurred automatically. The zond III photographs confirmed earlier conclusions concerning the scarcity of dark depressions on the moon’s reverse side, but also revealed sea-like formations up to 500 km. (310.5 mi.) across and about as long as the maria. These formations differed structurally from the maria and lacked their characteristic dark color. The northern part of the side of the moon was occupied by a bright elevation pitted with craters. Concentration of craters throughout the reverse side of the moon was high. Soviet astronomer Alla Masevich said the moon photographs were as good as those taken of the visible side from earth-based observatories: “They show beautiful half-tone transitions, reflecting the character of detailed surface relief.” Alexander A. Mikhailov, director of the Pulkovo Observatory, attributed the observed difference between the moon’s visible side and its reverse side to geological rather than astronomical factors. He noted the appearance on Zond photographs of chains of craters along elongated fracture lines which he attributed to volcanic activity. Prof. Keldysh noted that the trajectory of zond ill had passed far from the planets but said that “the experience we gained in launching this probe into remote space will be used in subsequent launchings to photograph the planets.” He said the U.S.S.R. had already begun preparations to achieve a soft lunar landing. Experiments aboard the spacecraft were for study of magnetic fields, solar wind, low-frequency radio emission of the galaxy, micrometeors, cosmic rays, and the infrared and ultraviolet spectra of the lunar surface. (Tass, 8/23/65; Shabad, NYT, 8/24/65, 1)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey and his party, which included Rep. Carl Albert (D-Okla.) and Sen. Fred Harris (D-Okla.), visited NASA Manned Spacecraft Center and were briefed on the Gemini program by Charles W. Mathews; on the Apollo program by Dr. Joseph F. Shea; and on the life support systems by Richard Johnston of Crew Systems. Mr. Humphrey—it was his first visit to MSC—took a “ride” in the Gemini docking trainer with Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Cdr., usn) and then he and his party observed a simulated Gemini liftoff at the Mission Control Center and a portion of a mission, (msc Roundup, 7/23/65, 1; Houston Post, 7/14/65)
House voted to allow Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.) to serve as Administrator of the Federal Aviation Agency and retain his military status. Effect of the legislation, if it were to become law, would be to let McKee draw reduced military retirement pay of $8,404 annually in addition to the Administrator’s salary of $30,000. Without the bill, he would have to give up his military status and retirement benefits. (CR, 6/3/65, 11961; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/4/65)
Gemini Astronaut John W. Young (LCdr., usn) was presented the Navy’s astronaut wings by Secretary of the Navy Paul H. Nitze. (ap, Wash. Post, 5/4/65)
usaf scientist Dr. John W. Evans received DOD’s Distinguished Civilian Service Award for his research on the physical processes of solar magnetic fields, mass motions of the solar photosphere, and growth and development of solar flares, (oar Release 5-65-1)
Dr. Smith J. DeFrance, Director of nasa Ames Research Center, would retire Oct. 15 after 45 yrs. of service, announced NASA Administrator James E. Webb. “Dr. DeFrance’s leadership at Ames has brought about many engineering and scientific achievements in our country’s aviation and space programs,” Webb said, “and we all owe him a great debt of gratitude.” Following distinguished service as a combat pilot in France during World War I, DeFrance served for 18 yrs. at Langley Research Center. He became director of arc, when it was created in 1940. In 1947 he received the Presidential Medal of Merit for designing and building the Center. H. Julian Allen, present Assistant Director at ARC, would succeed Dr. DeFrance. Allen was recognized as an international authority on reentry physics, having conceived a solution to the reentry heating problem. In 1957, he received naca’s Distinguished Service Medal for this work. Allen received the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award in 1955 from the Institute of Aerospace Sciences “for contributions and leadership in solving problems in the design of supersonic airplanes and missiles, especially thermal problems at hypersonic speeds.” John F. Parsons, Associate Director of Ames, would remain in this post, (nasa Release 65-298)
President Johnson announced during an impromptu visit to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center—his first—that he had nominated Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White II (Maj., usaf) for the rank of lieutenant colonel. In a speech before nearly 5,000 MSC employees, Mr. Johnson said: “The race in which we of all generations are determined to be first is the race for peace in the world. “In the labors of peace—as in the explorations of space—let no man doubt for the moment that we have the will, and the determination, and the talent, and the resources required to stay the course and see those labors through.” (Text; Stern, Wash. Post, 6/12/65, A3; Semple, NYT, 6/21/65; msg Roundup, 6/25/65, 1)
Astronauts Frank Borman (Maj., usaf) and James A. Lowell, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), had been assigned as the prime flight crew for the Gemini 7 mission scheduled for the first quarter of 1966, NASA announced. Backup crew for the flight, which would last up to 14 days, would be Astronauts Edward H. White, n (Lt. Col., usaf) and Michael Collins (Maj., usaf). Borman and Lovell had been the backup crew and White the pilot for Gemini iv. (nasa Release 65-218)
William F. R. Ballard, chairman of the New York City Planning Commission, had proposed in a letter to Robert C. Weaver, administrator of the Federal Housing and Home Financing Agency, that a major study be made of land use problems around New York metropolitan airports. Ballard sought Federal aid for the proposed study, which called for an inquiry into methods for reducing disturbances to home owners rising from the noise of aircraft, under the Housing and Urban Redevelopment Act. (NYT, 10/30/65, 14)
Robert V. Reynolds was named Assistant FAA Administrator for General Aviation Affairs by faa Administrator William F. McKee. Reynolds would serve the growing needs of general aviation which had more than 88,700 out of a total of 90,935 active civil aircraft. FAA had forecast that the general aviation fleet would grow to 105,000 by 1969.	( faa Release 65-58)
XB-70a research aircraft No. 2 made its sixth flight, reaching a speed of mach 2.23 (about 1,460 mph) and altitude of 54,000 ft. During the one-hour-and 44-minute flight (32 min. of which were at supersonic speeds), several studies were conducted: runway noise-levels were studied, sonic-boom tests conducted, experiments related to supersonic transport program made, and aircraft’s air-inlet control system was operated. Pilots were A1 White, chief test pilot, and Van Shepard, co-pilot, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 10/1/65, 1)
Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young had congratulated Soviet Cosmonauts Pavel Belyayev and Aleksey Leonov on the voskhod II flight, Izvestia disclosed, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/28/65)
Senate defeated by 61-to-16 the proposed Proxmire amendment to make an across-the-board reduction of 5% in the NASA appropriations bill. This left the Senate bill, still to receive its final vote, at $5.19 billion. The House had passed a $5.16 billion appropriation. Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) had contended that the manned lunar landing program constituted an “excessive waste.” Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D-Pa.) had felt the problem was not one of waste or inefficiency but felt that more of the nation’s resources should be put into education, housing, pollution abatement, and other urban problems. Sen. Wayne Morse (D-Ore.) had supported the reduction but had proposed that the cut be 25 c/ or 50%. “The American people have been thoroughly taken in by a TV spectacular,” he said and charged that the space program “is all for the purpose of gratifying our national ego.” Senator Morse had indicated that no other single agency conducted programs “with such vague objectives with such little return to the national Government.” Proxmire had charged that NASA was the prime example of an agency whose expenditures Congress had difficulty in controlling, that certain project costs within the NASA program could be reduced, and that NASA used too great a proportion of our monetary, material, and manpower resources. The 16 Senators voting for the Proxmire amendment were Boggs, Clark, Cooper, Douglas, Fullbright, Gruening, Kennedy (N.Y.), McGovern Miller, Morse, Morton, Mundt, Nelson, Proxmire, Williams (N.J.), and Williams (Del.). {CR, 7/12/65, 15927-40)
More than 250 scholars and theologians met in New York to discuss means of attaining world peace and “to lay groundwork for a theology for the dawning age of cybernation.” Moral and technological implications of Pope John xxm’s encyclical Pacem in Terris were studied. Meeting was sponsored by Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions and the Fellowship of Reconciliation. (NYT, 3/2/65, 28; NYT, 3/3/65, 24)
Izvestia, official Soviet newspaper, said that the “walk” in space by Astronaut Edward H. White n (Maj., usaf) had given an impetus to U.S. plans for using outer space for military purposes and cited a recommendation by a Congressional committee for an orbital laboratory run by the Pentagon: “These are the evil ‘uses’ of man in space being thought up here by some influential people in Washington where, incidentally, not one official word has been said about the peaceful purposes of the flight of Gemini 4.” (ap, NYT, 6/6/65, 82)
In a newspaper interview, Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin expressed surprise that the U.S. had shown primarily military aviation equipment at the Paris International Air Show. He said he regretted he could not meet longer with American astronauts McDivitt and White. (Tass, Zarya Vostoka, 7/4/65, 3)
Dr. Joseph Charyk, president of Communications Satellite Corporation, speaking in Kaanapali, Hawaii, said the geographic location of Hawaii ensured that the impact of Early Bird comsat would be “more profound there than in any of the other states of the union.” Hawaii, he noted, would not have to wait, as it does now, to see mainland television programs. Dr. Charyk envisioned a full global communications system by 1967. He predicted Hawaii would become a center for communications traffic of all types. (NYT, 1/31/65, 13)
NASA Hq. announced appointment of William C. Schneider as Deputy Director, Mission Operations and Gemini Mission Director, effective immediately. Schneider, formerly Deputy Director of the Gemini Program, was replaced by LeRoy E. Day, who became acting Deputy Director of the Gemini Program. (NASA Release 65—331)
usaf xb-70a research bomber was flown from Edwards Afb by naa pilot Van A. Shepard for 155 min.—10 min. longer than on any of its previous 28 test flights, (ap, Wash. Post, 12/23/65, A3)
Basing his judgment on successful Feb. 27 firing of Thiokol’s 156-in. solid propellant rocket motor, Harold W. Ritchey, President of Thiokol Chemical Corp., predicted U.S. could produce within 30 months a flya-ble rocket capable of generating 7 million lbs. of thrust. Brig. Gen. Joseph J. Bleymaier (usaf), Deputy Commander (Manned Systems) of usaf Space Systems Div., commented: “. . . this firing provides us with final proof that we can configure an all-solid space booster of tremendous capability when the requirement presents itself.” (Appel, NYT, 3/5/65)
NASA officially confirmed the six scientist-astronauts named in the Nation’s press June 27. They were Owen K. Garriott; Edward G. Gibson; Duane E. Graveline; Lt. Cdr. Joseph P. Kerwin (usn) ; Frank Curtis Michel; and Harrison Schmitt. (NASA Release 65-212)
Editorializing in the Washington Evening Star about “lean years” beginning for the aerospace industry, William Hines said: “. . . Since the ’50s, aerospace companies have become accustomed to a diet of caviar, filet and champagne. The government has poured something like 100 billion into rockets, missiles and spacecraft since the Soviet Union’s Sputnik went up in October, 1957. The torrent of funds is now being reduced, if not precisely to a trickle, certainly to a more moderate flow. . . . “The aerospace crisis is serious enough that the management-consultant firm of Arthur D. Little, Inc., has just published a study, ‘Strategies for Survival in the Aerospace Industry.’ It makes the following revealing point:
A new alloy known as NASA Modified TaZ-8 had been developed by NASA Uewis Research Center scientists John C. Freche and William J. Waters for use in modified x-15 nose sensors. The new material, which contained tantalum and zirconium, was necessary because the increased speed of the modified aircraft (x—15 No. 2)—up to 5,000 mph— would cause greater dynamic heating. (Lewis News, 2/5/65, 1)
Final approval for the Aug. 19 launch of Gemini V on an eight-day orbital mission was given by Mission Director E. E. Christensen. Astronauts L.	Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad (Lcdr., usn) passed a final physical examination, weather conditions were favorable, and the tracking network was in good operating condition. The astronauts and their backup pilots, Neil Armstrong and Elliot See, Jr., went through a complete review of the mission, (ap, NYT, 8/18/65, 12C)
William Cohen, Chief of Solid Propulsion Experimental Motors in NASA’s OART, discussed the great strides in large solid-propellant rocket motors taken in the past few years, in Astronautics & Aeronautics article. Among the new technologies he mentioned were maraging steels, ablative nozzles, vector control, and the cast-cure-test facility. Looking toward the future, Cohen said among the advanced concepts associated with large solids showing promise of success were reusable motor cases, insulation, and nozzle component; and failure-warning systems. (A&A, 2/65, 42-46)
Former astronaut Col. John Glenn (usmc, Ret.) was suffering no effects from last year’s ear injury, reported the Wilford Hall Air Force Hospital in Houston. (Houston Chron., 7/23/65)
A pressurized suit identical to that worn by Astronaut Edward H. White II (L/Col., usaf) during his walk in space June 4, was donned by George C. Wiswell, Jr., founder and head of Marine Contracting, Inc., for a repair job 200 ft. below water at the American Electric Power Co.’s Smith Mountain Dam near Roanoke, Va. Wiswell headed a team of divers who lived in a pressurized tank for a week at the bottom of the dam, using a pressurized diving bell while making the necessary repairs. “The job could have been done by conventional methods,” Wiswell asserted, “but the divers would each have been limited at that depth to 20 min. of work a day.” With the David Clark Co.’s “aquanaut” suit, four hours work each day for each man was possible, he said. (Smith, NYT, 8/9/65, 35) During August: Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander, announced the assignment of B/Gen. Daniel E. Riley as commander of the USAF Contract Management Div. (afcmd) at Inglewood, Calif. General Riley replaced Col. Fred L. Rennels, who had been commander of AFCMD since its activation in January 1965 and who was named vice commander to General Riley, (afsc Release 132.65)
U.S.S.R. had kept the U.S. under relatively continuous surveillance with photo reconnaissance satellites launched as part of the Cosmos program, said Edward H. Kolcum in an article in Aviation Week and Space Technology. In 1964 14 such satellites were launched, he asserted. The article continued: “Soviet photo reconnaissance payload is believed to be an unmanned version of the Vostok spacecraft, which successfully carried cosmonauts into orbit six times. The unmanned camera mission uses the same launch facilities and same recovery techniques developed from Russian manned satellites. The recoverable section is the pressurized cabin, which weighs about 5,000 lb. when it is ejected from the main spacecraft for a parachute descent on land. . . . “Six of these payloads were recovered after eight days; two after seven days, one after six days and another after five days. One came down after 24 hr. in orbit; one remained up five weeks, another eight and a half weeks, and another, launched Aug. 29, is still in orbit. Departures from the norm are believed to indicate retrofire malfunctions or failures. Most recent Soviet reconnaissance satellite was Cosmos 52, launched Jan. 11 and recovered Jan. 19. . . .” He stated that 11 of the 14 reconnaissance satellites orbited in 1964 were orbited at 65° inclination. The remaining three orbited at 51° inclination—“an inclination that also permits the payload to sweep over the entire continental United States.” The other Cosmos satellites, orbited at 49° inclination, had remained in orbit until they decayed naturally. They were “believed to be scientific applications and military development payloads.” (Av. Wk., 2/22/65, 22)
[Dr. Robert H.] Goddard’s dream was the object of derision 39 years ago. Who, we must wonder, is the dreamer today who is being ignored? Where is he? What is he working on that will change this world so vastly 39 years from now? . . .” These were queries in an editorial by William J. Coughlin in Missiles and Rockets. Coughlin lamented the fact that much of the U.S. technological progress in the missile'space field Mas directly keyed to a race with the Soviet Union* Ho said that "if we do not provide the atmosphere and support required for the acceptance of bold new challenges, the onward pace of U.S. science and technology will falter, then stop.” tM&R, 3/22/65, 46 i
A blotting material to absorb excess moisture, which might have caused the eye and nose irritation of Astronauts Edward White (L/Col., usaf) and James McDivitt (L/Col., usaf) during the June 3 Gemini IV flight had been eliminated from the Gemini v spacecraft, msc spokesmen said. (Houston Chron., 8/11/65)
Reporting on the Lunar International Laboratory, under consideration by the International Astronautical Federation meeting in Athens, William Hines, in the Washington Evening Star, said the case for Lil had been outlined this way: “1. A spaceship is horribly expensive; it costs $15,000 now to boost one pound of instruments to the moon, and will cost $180,000 a man hour to sustain scientists in space in the 1970s. “2. The precedent exists for international scientific efforts: nuclear physicists already are discussing a trillion-volt atom smasher of which the world needs only one. “3. The concept of international science has been accepted by the United Nations since 1946. . . . “4. While the Russians have not taken an official stand, Sedov and others last year openly discussed Soviet studies on moon construction. “[C. Stark] Draper [Director of MIT Instrumentation Laboratory] ... has called for a computer center on the moon to collect data there and pass it on to earthly campuses and laboratories with information literally unavailable here. The Lil program has not yet reached the cost effectiveness and design stages yet, but at the rate the Apollo program to land men on the moon by 1970 is going, backers say only 10 to 20 years is needed. A curbstone opinion is that $20 billion to $30 billion . . . comparable to the Apollo costs—would handle the construction and start of Lil operations.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/65, A8)
Among the aerospace pioneers selected for San Diego’s new International Aerospace Hall of Fame were Scott Crossfield, Charles A. Lindbergh, Gen. James H. Doolittle, Astronauts John Glenn and Alan Shepard, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Orville and Wilbur Wright, Robert H. Goddard, Jacqueline Cochran, and Amelia Earhart. Representatives of 287 organizations from throughout the world were on the nominating committee. Oil paintings of the honorees were unveiled at a dinner given in conjunction with San Diego’s Space Fair 65 observance. (naa S&ID Skywriter, 3/19/65, 1)
Thirty-six msfc employees received a variety of awards, including a Presidental Citation and six inventions awards, in a local ceremony observing NASA’s seventh anniversary. Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of MSFC, addressed the gathering and William Rieke, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, presented the invention awards, (msfc Release 65-273)
In January, Dr. Donald F. Hornig began his second year as science adviser to President Johnson and director of the White House Office of Science and Technology. In interview he mentioned that his job was created to prevent a recurrence of the kind of official surprise that greeted Russia’s launching of the sputnik i on Oct. 4, 1957. Hornig said the policy questions that he encountered were not ones of “right or wrong, but wise or less wise.” (Av. Wk., 1/11/65, 16)
Dr. John Strong of Johns Hopkins Univ. told the Fifth Annual Space Conference at vpi that Venus was almost as hot on the side facing away from the sun as on the side facing the sun because the entire planet was kept warm by snowfalls. An instrumented balloon launched in 1964 had identified ice crystals in the Venusian atmosphere. Strong speculated that a 120-mph wind on the surface of the planet dragged the ice crystals around to the back side where they presumably became a “warming snowfall.” Dr. Strong, who intended to launch another instrumented balloon during 1965, said that an automated, unmanned balloon was preferable to a manned vehicle, (ap, Wash. Post. 8/24/65)
A dummy model of the Gemini spacecraft, dropped from 11,000 ft. altitude by a c-119 aircraft, parachuted into the Atlantic Ocean and was recovered by three usaf pararescue men. This was a practice mission in case Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) and John W. Young (usn) had to abort their gt-3 flight during the launching phase, (ap, Orl. Sent., 3/11/65)
Maj. Virgil I. Grissom and LCdr. John W. Young, the Gemini astronauts, returned home to Houston and to an enthusiastic welcome by a crowd of some 12,000 persons. The astronauts walked by much of the crowd, shaking hands. “We’ve had a pretty tough week, then came a couple of days of debriefing, then three parades, but today is the best of all—when we get to come back home,” Major Grissom said. Commander Young said, “We’re sure happy to see all you smiling Texans.” (upi, NYT, 4/2/65, 12)
An escalation of the war in Vietnam might consume the military men and equipment currently at NASA’s disposal for spaceflight recovery operations, suggested William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. He said that L/Gen. Leighton I. Davis (usaf), head of spaceflight recovery operations, had commented on the possibility: “I’m sure if there were (a diversion from Viet Nam to support space flights) the NASA officials would be the first to relieve us of the requirement for support.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/23/65, 27)
Move begun within usaf to offer all scientific experiments previously proposed for Mol to nasa was reported by Donald E. Fink in Aviation Week and Space Technology. Proposal was that NASA fly these experiments in its Apollo Extension System (Aes) program. (Fink, Av. Wk. 9/20/65, 26)
It is time now to put the manned military control of space on a crash basis equal in priority to the Apollo program,” said Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.), member of the House Science and Astronautics Committee, in a letter U> the editor in the New York Times. He suggested the following steps be taken:	“The first M.O.L. flight is scheduled from two and one half to three years from now. This should be speeded up at least a year and the necessary sacrifices made to achieve it. The Gemini capsules required for the M.O.L. project should be ordered at once. To achieve our goals effectively the manned earth orbiting program should be placed under military control. . . . “I believe the only way the Department of Defense can meet its responsibilities in ‘near space’ is to assume direction of the manned earth orbiting program. It should reorganize the U.S. Air Force into the U.S. Aerospace Force and make it truly that. . . . “The decision we must make is not whether there will be military control of space but rather whether that control will be Russian or our own. . . .” (NYT, 6/19/65, 28)
Eleven of America’s 34 astronauts left NASA Manned Spacecraft Center for a 10-day field trip into the volcanic regions of Iceland. Making the expedition were Edwin Aldrin, William Anders, Charles Bassett, Alan Bean, Eugene Cernan, Roger Chaffee, R. Walter Cunningham, Donn Eisele, Russell Schweickart, David Scott, and C. C. Williams. The trip would be part of the astronauts’ training in the type of geological formations they might find on the moon, (upi, Orl. Sent., 7/7/65)
The 1965 International Space Electronics Symposium was held in Miami Beach. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary, National Aeronautics and Space Council, told the Symposium that electronics would continue to play a prime role in the U.S. space program. Emphasizing the difficulty and complexity of the electronic problems which would be encountered in manned planetary exploration, Dr. Welsh noted that for manned Mars travel “we’ll need reliability for at least 400 days contrasted with more immediate goals of 14 to 30 days; we’ll need electrical ‘on board’ power measured in kilowatts instead of today’s tens of watts; we’ll need the data rates of 5 million bits per second instead of the current capability of 8 bits per second; and there is a still debatable possibility that we will need laser beam pointing accuracy several magnitudes better than what we now have. In components, we shall require new or improved concepts such as self-healing, self-checking, and accurate failure prediction to give the greatly increased reliability required. . . .” (Text) Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, told the Future Space Programs panel that the use of satellites for scientific research and the development of practical applications in meteorology, communications, navigation, and geodesy were important components of the total progress of the space program. He said science had been the prime beneficiary of skills developed for using satellites and space probes as scientific tools: “The vitality of space science has been its close association with various disciplines of science, and its ability to offer those disciplines new ways of solving old problems, while at the same time opening up new horizons.” (Text) The military space program had established the feasibility of using space as a medium for military support missions and now had the initial techniques to exploit the military usefulness of space, M/G Jerry D. Page, AFSC, told the panel on Future Space Programs. Application of these capabilities involved: (1) programs to provide near-term applications such as the Nuclear Detection Satellite program, a research-oriented effort which, at the same time, provided a global nuclear detection capability; and (2) consideration of multi-mission satellites for the future, (afsc Release)
Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) flew x-15 No. 3 to 98,200 ft. altitude and a maximum speed of 3,886 mph (mach 5.7) in a test to determine how ablative material reacted to intense heat. (NASA X-15 Proi. Off.: upi, Wash. Post, 2/3/65; X—15 Flight Log)
Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.) was sworn in as Federal Aviation Agency Administrator—less than 24 hrs. after confirmation by the Senate—in a White House ceremony. President Johnson, presiding, announced that General McKee’s primary task would be development of a supersonic transport (Sst). Mr. Johnson had approved five recommendations of the President’s Advisory Committee on Supersonic Transport: “Those five recommendations . . . are: first, the next phase of design covering an 18-month period beginning about August 1, 1965; second, the four manufacturers—Boeing Company, Lockheed Aircraft Company, General Electric Company, Pratt & Whitney Division of United Aircraft—be invited to continue this phase of the program; third, the FAA Administrator be authorized to enter into contracts with the airframe manufacturers to undertake detailed airframe design work and test them over the next 18 months; fourth, the FAA Administrator be authorized to enter into contracts with the engine manufacturers to construct and test over the next 18 months demonstrator engines to prove the basic features of the engines; and five, and finally—and very importantly—that the Congress be requested to appropriate—Senator Magnuson—the necessary funds to initiate the next phase of the program. And for this purpose I shall request an appropriation of $140 million.” Ira C. Eaker commented in the San Antonio Express: “When McKee succeeds in his SST mission, as I believe he will, any citizen will be able to buy a $50 ticket for a flight from Washington to Los Angeles in 55 minutes, or purchase for $55 air passage from New York to Paris in one hour. Of course, there will be cynics who will ask: ‘Who wants to fly to Paris in an hour?’ The answer is: Most of the people who want to go to Paris. “There is one predictable human trait. People will always go for the fastest transport. Not long after man got on a train, he took his freight out of the covered wagons and off the oxcarts forever. When people took up with automobiles, they soon put their produce, their pigs and their poultry on trucks. “There is also some algebraic or arithmetic relation between the speed of travel and the number of people who travel. About 10 times as many people fly the Atlantic now in five hours as crossed when the trip took five days. No doubt 10 times more people will cross the ocean when they can do it in an hour.” (White House Release; Eaker, San Antonio Express, 7/8/65, 14)
NASA named an Agena Review Board to try to identify the causes of the failure which prevented the Agena stage from fulfilling its mission in the Gemini vi flight Oct. 25. Board would be headed by co-chairmen Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center; and Maj. Gen. 0. J. Ritland (usaf), Deputy Commander for Space, Air Force Systems Command, (nasa Release 65-342) October 27: x-15 No. 3 was flown to 236,900-ft. altitude and top speed of 3,477 mph (mach 5.06) by nasa research pilot John B. McKay to obtain data on the NSL scanner, boundary layer noise, and horizontal stabilizer loads, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
At a Special Awards Ceremony at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, the Presidential Citation was presented to John H. Robinson of Resources Management Div. Robinson was one of the three individuals responsible for organizing a control center, preparing all Pert networks, and operating this control center. Operation was so effective that USAF was able to complete a modernization program far ahead of schedule with a monetary saving of several million dollars, (msc Roundup, 7/9/65, 3)
Techniques for weather predictions reliable up to two weeks were discussed at Geophysics Corp. of America in Bedford, Mass., by Dr. D. Q. Wark of the U.S. Weather Bureau, Dr. William Nordberg of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and Dr. Jean I. F. King of gca. These scientists had successfully utilized radio waves to collect weather data and were planning to build a new weather satellite which could log greater amounts of data and provide constant coverage. They proposed placing weather buoys in the oceans and weather balloons in the atmosphere equipped to relay data to the orbiting satellite which, in turn, would relay data to ground stations. (Hughes, CSM, 5/6/65)
NASA was seeking buyers for rocket launches, and the improved Delta, incorporated into the launch package, might prove most economical, William S. Beller reported in Missiles and Rockets. Cost of launching the Delta, either to low-earth orbit or into interplanetary space, would be the same. Cost to send a package to the moon would be $16,000/ lb.; on a Mars flyby, $21,000/lb. Beller’s article continued: “It is ironic that the fabulously successful series of Delta rockets is based on much of the hardware and concepts used in the presumed failure called Vanguard. In 1959, the Air Force took the upper two Vanguard stages, mounted them on Thor, and called the combination Thor-Able. NASA then made minor modifications in the vehicle’s coast attitude-control system and put in a new auto-pilot control system; but the basic Thor-Able shell was used. This was the Delta that failed in its first firing in 1960 with an Echo satellite payload. The subsequent Deltas orbited their payloads in 22 successive launchings. “The Vanguard program, too, besides giving birth to Delta was probably one of the most economical buys of the U.S. space program. Originally budgeted for a total cost of $20 million, Vanguard ended up costing $105 million, which was paid not only for development of the Vanguard hardware and several launchings but also for setting up the worldwide Minitrack network used in Project Mercury. “Improvements in Delta from 1960 to the present involved using more energetic propellants, lengthening the second-stage tanks, replacing the third-stage motor for a more active one, adding solid strap-ons to the first stage, and again enlarging the second stage. “The result is an inexpensive and reliable bus whose launch can be bought for less than $3.5 million.” (Beller, M&R, 8/16/65, 24)
Dr. Willard Libby, UCLA, recommended development of a nuclear spaceship in his address before the Aerospace Instrumentation Symposium in Los Angeles: “The only possible way of reaching into the deep reaches of space is by accelerating to incredible speeds, speeds that go far beyond those which we have obtained so far in the space program, and it is completely clear that the only way of reaching these speeds is by using atomic energy.” Libby specifically recommended consideration of a reactor complex capable of supplying 10,000 megawatts of power to an engine with a designed thrust of 15,000-20,000 lbs. Such a spaceship would cost billions of dollars and be a decade in the building, but “with it we could expect literally to explore the Solar System,” Libby said. He noted that Project Orion—the use of atomic explosions to propel massive space platforms—might be useful for delivering freight to the moon, but the shock of the explosions would pose difficulties for manned spaceflight. He was pleased with the success of the Rover-Phoebus thermally-heated atomic engines and felt they might be used to propel ships and run a ferry service to a moon base. (Text) In a press conference, Dr. Libby urged a program to put more science into space exploration because “the dominant factor so far in the manned space program has been the drive to establish good engineering technology.” He suggested: (1) NASA establish a six-man scientific task force to live and work for a year with training astronauts; (2) close cooperation between scientific research at outstanding universities, engineering efforts at aerospace industries, and NASA facilities; and (3) a mutually-happy “marriage” between space and education to attract and inspire students. (M&R, 10/11/65, 23) Jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering told the Symposium that adaptive instrumentation was an important requirement for future unmanned interplanetary missions. In view of the increasing number of instruments on interplanetary spacecraft, more effort should be concentrated on the onboard data handling and command system, he suggested. This might transmit data only when meaningful changes were recorded by sensors. Also, the data system should monitor the performance of instruments and take corrective action should a failure occur. (Pay, M&R, 10/11/65, 36)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said before the New York Academy of Sciences that “scientists should not set themselves up to judge the overall value” of the national space program. Past advice from scientists had not always been sound advice, he noted. “. . . Organized science has not always been outstanding for its courage, its vision, or its optimism regarding goals for human efforts. Elements of conservatism, parochialism, and even reactionary thinking do appear among scientists just as they do among many other groups in our society.” Dr. Welsh was also critical of the practice of criticizing the space program “by narrowly comparing” the dollars spent for space with what those same dollars might accomplish “if devoted to other endeavors, scientific or otherwise.” He said that often such dollars were not transferable; that space dollars might change the general climate to one favoring broader aid to the whole spectrum of science; and that since space expenditures sought broader goals than those of science, “the comparison may well be invalid on the face of it.” He continued: “The visionaries, whether primarily scientists or policy makers, must be given the opportunity to point out the many benefits which can flow from the manned and unmanned uses of aerospace. But, given such opportunity, they should use it effectively and affirmatively. Regardless of their motivations, the pessimists who cry out against aerospace research and technological endeavors have clearly set themselves against progress. The United States can no longer relax and rest on its past industrial laurels. The race for survival, literally and philosophically, is on. Of course, we would all like to believe in the solely non-aggressive uses of aerospace by all countries which have the needed technology. However, the realities of life dictate adequate preparation to preserve our national and Free World security. We should follow the axiom that a pound of prevention is worth mega-tons of cure.” Howard Simons commented in the Washington Post that these remarks were probably precipitated by a report from a committee of the American Association for the Advancement of Science which had charged that social, economic, military, and political pressures were distorting the traditional values and effectiveness of science. The report was highly critical of Project Apollo: “The Apollo program, in its present form, does not appear to be based on the orderly, systematic extension of basic scientific investigation.” (Text, CR, 1/28/65, A36T-65; Simons, Wash. Post, 1/12/65)
William B. Rieke, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator (Management) for Manned Space Flight, was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, replacing George Friedl, Jr. Prior to his appointment to nasa in 1962, Rieke was president of Lockheed Aircraft International, Inc. Friedl would continue to serve nasa as a consultant. ( nasa Ann.)
At the aiaa Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Honors Convocation in New York, awards were made to men who had made valuable contributions to development of the aerospace industry: Dr. Eugene N. Parker, associate professor at the Enrico Fermi Institute of Nuclear Studies, Univ. of Chicago, received the Space Science Award “for distinguished individual research on the causes and properties of the solar wind.” Arthur E. Raymond, responsible for the design of the Douglas DC series of commercial transports received the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award. He was honored for “numerous and distinguished contributions to the aeronautical sciences and the development of aircraft during the last 30 years.” Igor I. Sikorsky and Michael Gliihareff were given the 1964' Elmer A. Sperry Award. Mr. Sikorsky was cited as a helicopter pioneer for “the concept and development of a new form of aerial transportation capable of carrying and placing large external loads over any terrain.” Mr. Cluhareff was honored for his engineering contributions in the development of the multipurpose helicopter. Dr. Wallace D. Hayes, professor of aerospace engineering at Princeton University, received aiaa’s fourth annual Research Award for his leading role in the development of supersonic and hypersonic flow theory. Sir Frank Whittle, British engineer, was named first recipient of the Goddard Award for his “imagination, skill, persistence, and courage in pioneering the gas turbine as a jet propulsion aircraft engine, thus revolutionizing military and commercial aviation for all time.” Harry F. Guggenheim, who had supported aerospace endeavors, received a special commendation for his “contributions, encouragement, and personal participation in the development of aviation and rocketry.” (NYT, 1/21/65, 53M; NYT, 1/27/65, 58; NYT, 1/9/65, 50; Av. Wk., 1/25/65; Av. Wk., 1/11/65, 13; Langley Researcher 1/29/65)
In an article discussing preparations for the Gemini VI flight, William Hines noted in the Washington Evening Star: “Total propellant load of a ready-to-go Titan 2 consists of 13,700 gallons of a fuel called aero-zine-50 and 15,900 gallons of an oxidizer, nitrogen tetroxide. Their principal combustion product is nitric acid.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/11/65, A2)
Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young gave the official name “Gemini 3” and the nickname “Molly Brown” to the spacecraft they would ride into orbit Mar. 23. (msc Historian; AP, Miami Her., 3/17/65)
During the planned 4-day flight June 3, Astronaut Edward H. White (Maj., usaf) would leave the Gemini 4 spacecraft for 12 min. “if conditions are favorable,” msc officials announced at press conference. He would be secured to the craft by a 25-ft. safety line. NASA said the decision had been delayed “so final qualification tests could be completed on the spacecraft, spacesuit, secondary life support pack and umbilical.” The 12-layer protective suit that Astronaut White would wear had been worn for more than 200 hrs. and White himself had worn it during more than 60 hrs. of tests. Among other things, it had had pellets fired at it at a speed of 30,000 fps to simulate the impact of small meteoroids. The flight’s command pilot, Astronaut James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) would not open his hatch but would take movies of White through a spacecraft window. Astronaut White would take a 35-mm. still camera loaded with color film on his “walk” in space. Although he had practiced acrobatics, White had no planned program and would “use his own judgment as to what to do while outside the ship.” Exit from the spacecraft was planned for the second orbit. (Transcript; Clark, NYT, 5/26/65, 1, 11; upi, Wash. Post, 5/26/65, A3)
Dr. John C. Evvard, Deputy Associate Director for Research at NASA Lewis Research Center, discussed possible propulsion systems for future space-flight beyond the moon before the Conference on Civilian and Military Uses of Aerospace sponsored by the New York Academy of Sciences. He cited a manned Mars project as a prime example of a mission that could be performed by a number of different propulsion concepts. For example, manned trips by chemical rockets would be weight-restricted, but chemical rocket systems would have the advantage of having been extensively flight-tested on many other missions. Although the reactor for planned nuclear propulsion systems had only been ground tested, evaluations of complete nuclear rocket engine systems were expected within the next few years. Electric propulsion systems for manned spaceflight were even further in the future and might not be ready by 1980; but by then the mission capability of the nuclear rocket would have been so thoroughly demonstrated that it would be more attractive than chemical engines for those missions requiring increased propulsion capability. Even further into the future were nuclear systems such as the gaseous-corecavity reactor which would yield higher performance, (lrc Release 65-5)
In an article in Foreign Affairs entitled “Slowdown in the Pentagon,” Hanson W. Baldwin said: “The sprawling bureaucracy of big government; the control of major military or paramilitary projects by agencies over which the Defense Department has no direct authority, including the Atomic Energy Commission, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Bureau of the Budget; congressional legislation and executive regulation—social, political and economic; the tremendous size and complexity of the Armed Forces; overcentralization and overregulation in the Pentagon; too much service rivalry and not anough service competition—all these and other factors have become builtin roadblocks in defense development and contracting. “The creation of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration has provided another type of problem. NASA stemmed from the same kind of political philosophy that nurtured the AEC. Atom bombs were too powerful to allow the generals to play with them; ergo, a civilian agency must control nuclear power—and it must be channeled away from nasty military purposes. The same scientific-political pressure groups that advocated this concept helped (with President Eisenhower’s approval) to establish NASA, again on the theory that space efforts must be controlled by civilians and that space must not be used for military purposes. . . . “But in the case of NASA, the problem has been compounded. For while the aec is essentially a research and production agency, NASA is an operating agency as well. From a small highly efficient aeronautical research agency, it has now expanded into a gargantuan multibil-lion-dollar empire, with tentacles all over the country, managing the biggest program on which the United States has ever embarked—to place a man on the moon. “In its early years, NASA was sluggishly if at all responsive to military needs, and the Pentagon itself was inhibited from any effective space developments (though, curiously, the only effective space boosters available were military ballistic missiles). Gradually the liaison, due to Dr. [Edward C.] Welsh and others, has been greatly improved. Numerous military officers, active and retired, now hold some of the most important positions in NASA, and in addition the Armed Forces have furnished most of the astronauts and by far the most important part of the facilities and services used by the agency. The two-headed control still offers difficulties, but today the main stumbling blocks to the rapid development of military space projects are Secretary McNamara and his Director of Defense Research and Engineering, Dr. Harold Brown, who in his new political role in the Pentagon has become a remarkably unadventurous scientist. “Often the President’s Scientific Adviser, whose contacts with Pentagon and other Government scientists cut squarely across organizational lines, has also acted as roadblock to new developments. He exercises tremendous power without either specific responsibility or specific authority; therefore, his intervention often not only delays but confuses. The Adviser’s great power stems largely from his White House status; unfortunately around him has grown up a small but important office manned by men more impressive as bureaucrats than as scientists, who represent, in effect, another echelon of delay. . . .” {Foreign Affairs, 1/65; CR, 2/4/65, 2007) During January: Committee assignments for both parties were made in both Houses of Congress. New members on the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), Joseph Tydings (D-Md.), Len B. Jordan (R-Ida.), and George D. Aiken (R-Vt) •	.	. New members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: Roy A. Taylor (D-N.C.), George E. Brown, Jr. (D-Calif.), Walter H. Moeller (D-Ohio), William R. Anderson (D-Tenn.), Brock Adams (D-Wash.), Lester L. Wolff (D-N.Y.), Weston E. Vivian (D-Mich.), Gale Schisler (D—111.), and Barber B. Conable, Jr. (R-N.Y.). (Comm. Off.) During January: Marvin L. White. AFCRL’s Space Physics Laboratory, predicted the sun was encircled by “rings” of electric current totaling nearly 200 billion amps. Although total current was high, White postulated that the current density was low because the current was spread over a large area; he predicted current density to be about three trillionths of an ampere per square centimeter, the same order of magnitude as in the earth’s atmosphere. White’s calculations were based on particle flux data from mariner ii. (oar Research Review, 1/65, 1-2) With launch of two balloons to 87,000-ft. altitudes from Chico, Calif., AFCRL began one-year series of high-altitude balloon flights to measure moisture in the stratosphere. Series would consist of vertical soundings—25 in all, at the rate of two per month—in which all data would be obtained in recoverable instrumented payload parachuted to earth when balloon descended to 30,000 ft., and horizontal soundings—five 11-day flights at float altitudes averaging 75,000 ft.—in which data gathered over thousands of miles would be telemetered every two hours to ground stations, (oar Research Review, 5/65,15—16) In an article on detecting extraterrestrial life, William R. Corliss in International Science and Technology described some of the plans for collecting data on possible life-forms elsewhere and some of the factors making the search for extraterrestrial life so challenging. He noted the complications for Martian life-detection if retrorockets were necessary to brake the landing of a scientific package: “First, of course, they add weight to the landing package, right where it hurts the most. Also, their control adds complexity and increases the chance of failure. Finally and perhaps most importantly, they would make the problem of life-detection more difficult and any results more ambiguous; the rocket exhaust would tend both to fuse the surface of the landing area (maybe even killing any existing organisms), and to add combustion contaminants of its own in the most crucial area—around the lander.” He listed the variety of experimental instruments proposed for detecting extraterrestrial life (or clues of life) and explained why the dependability of these instruments—based on different physical and chemical principles—varied widely. (Int. Sci. & Tech., 1/65, 28-34)
Three Univ. of California (Berkeley) scientists concluded on the basis of their laboratory studies that Dr. William M. Sinton’s spectroscopic evidence of organic matter on Mars was not valid. Dr. Sinton of Lowell Observatory had made spectroscopic studies of Mars in 1959 that suggested infrared radiation from dark portions of Mars was comparable to that produced by some terrestrial plant life. The California chemists—James S. Shirk, William A. Haseltine, and George C.	Pimentel—concluded Dr. Sinton had detected vaporized “deuterated water” (TLO plus heavy hydrogen—deuterium) rather than plant-produced molecules, (upi, S.F. Chron., 2/28/65)
Four were honored with aiaa awards for achievements in manned flight at the aiaa 4th Manned Space Flight Meeting in St. Louis: the 1965 Astronautics Award to b/g Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), Commander of the Western Test Range, for “exceptional direction to Titan III space booster R&D program”; the Octave Chanute Award to Alvin S. White, Chief Engineering Test Pilot/xB-70 Project Pilot, North American Aviation, for “continued significant contributions to the aerospace sciences in the development of flying skills and techniques necessary to flight of an advanced aircraft at unprecedented speeds, altitudes, and weights”; the John Jeffries Award to Col. William K. Douglas (usaf), Director of Bioastronautics, usaf National Range Div., for “outstanding contributions to the advancement of aeronautics and astronautics, his writings, lectures, and research, and his continued dedication to the study of medical problems relating to the aeronaut and astronaut”; and the Robert M. Losey Award to George P. Cressman, Director of the Office of National Meteorological Services, Weather Bureau, for “his rapid and effective application of numerical weather analysis and forecasting techniques to aeronautical operations.” (A&A, 11/65)
First flight of North American Aviation’s xb-70a No. 2 from Palmdale to Edwards afb was almost 100 per cent successful; the drogue chute failed to deploy on landing, but the aircraft braked to a stop in the normal distance. The No. 2 xb-70 reached a speed of mach 1.4 and an altitude of 40,000 ft. Wing tips were folded to the full 65° during the flight, the movable windshield ramp was operated, and some stability and control tests were carried out. Aircraft was piloted by Al White, chief naa test pilot, and Col. Joseph Cotton, usaf xb-70a test director.	(Av. Daily, 7/20/65)
Dr. Donald P. Burcham, Voyager project manager at jpl, told the Christian Science Monitor in an interview that NASA had decided to launch the Voyager spacecraft with the Saturn V booster instead of the Saturn IB. “This,” Dr. Burcham said, “means we can put a heavier retro-rocket pack on the spacecraft. It will enable us to release the lander after the spacecraft has gone into orbit around Mars instead of 10 days before reaching the planet, as planned earlier, and that will give us a better chance of putting a lander on the surface.” (Cowen, CSM, 12/1/65)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Col., usmc, Ret.), in Western Europe on a three-week goodwill tour at the request of President Johnson, saw the Berlin wall during a helicopter sightseeing trip. (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 10/4/65)
Charles W. Mathews, manager of the Gemini program, and Astronauts James McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward White II (Maj., usaf) received NASA’s Exceptional Service Award from President Johnson in a special White House ceremony. Introducing the President, NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “. . . we . . . should never forget that at the beginning of the space age, in 1957, the challenge of this new frontier which was laid down to us was first met by the man who is now the President of the United States and who has so graciously invited us here today to indicate again his interest in, and the importance he attaches to, the new systems we have developed for building our national competence in space and using the science and technologies acquired to work toward a peaceful world and a better world. “This great leader of our nation, and of the Free World, is still pioneering, this time on an even more difficult frontier where we must learn to master the restrained but decisive use of the powers which technology gives our nation. Those of us who are responsible for the build-up of our new base of technology believe that power, based on advanced technology, can provide new means to hold back those ruthless forces which answer not to the need of all men for security, freedom, dignity, and opportunity. The pioneering which President Johnson is engaged in today on this new frontier is, if anything, more important than his pioneering actions in 1958 to create our national program in aeronautics and space. “Seldom in the history of the world has one man had to play so vital a role in developing the tools of modern science and technology and then in the development of a national capability to use them to achieve cooperation toward a world consistent with our own ideals and those we have sought for others as well as ourselves.” Accompanying citations noted “outstanding contributions” and singled out Major White as “the first man to engage in self-propelled extra-vehicular activity.” Terming the three “the Christopher Columbuses of the 20th century,” Mr. Johnson said their work had nudged the world toward greater international cooperation. “Men who have worked together to reach the stars are not likely to descend together into the depths of war and desolation,” he said. Later, the recipients were guests at a luncheon held by Vice President Humphrey and received accolades in both the House and Senate. A crowd estimated at 50,000	applauded the motorcade as Mathews and the astronauts rode to the Capitol. In the evening, Majors White (usaf) and McDivitt (usaf) narrated a 20-min. film of the GEMINI IV flight for the chiefs of foreign diplomatic missions. President Johnson, in a surprise appearance, told the astronauts to “take the Presidential plane and travel outside this country again.” He said: “Many people in many lands were thrilled by what you have done. I want you to join our delegation in Paris and go out among the friendly peoples of the earth to share with them the excitement and thrills of your experience.” Astronauts White and McDivitt then returned to the White House where provisions had been made for them and their families to remain overnight. (Text; Clopton, Wash. Post, 6/18/65, Al, A3; upi, N.Y. Her. Trib., 6/18/65; Semple, NYT, 6/18/65, 1, 13; Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 6/18/65)
GSFC announced management changes “designed to meet the increasing demands of advanced space programs by strengthening lines of authority and responsibility at the Center.” Dr. John F. Clark was Acting Director and John W. Townsend, Deputy Director! Three additional Assistant Directorships and a Chief of Advanced Plans Staff were created. GSFC personnel were appointed to fill these posts: Herman E. LaGow, Assistant Director for Systems Reliability; Daniel G. Mazur, Assistant Director for Technology; George F. Pieper, Jr., Assistant Director for Space Sciences; Robert E. Bourdeau, Acting Assistant Director for Projects; and William G. Stroud, Chief, Advanced Plans Staff. Dr. Michael J. Vaccaro and John T. Mengel continued as Assistant Directors. Dr. Vaccaro’s responsibilities were expanded to include Technical Services as well as Administration. Mengel’s position as Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Systems was unchanged. (gsfc Release G-22-65)
Parallel problems facing astronauts and aquanauts were noted by Assistant Manager of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. Bioastronautics Div., Dr. J. A. Kraft. “These problems are both biomedical and mechanical. Because of their similarity, we have in the ocean a readily available laboratory environment. In it we can investigate the more significant problems common to both. . . .” One parallel is the changed pressure of the environment: for the aquanaut, pressure problems involve return from extremely heavy pressure to normal pressure at earth’s surface; for the astronaut, pressure problems involve functioning in lower pressure of spacecraft and vacuum of space itself. Other shared biomedical problems: dysbarism, oxygen toxicity, trace contamination, and anoxia. (Macomber, CNS, San Diego Union, 9/19/65) During week of September 19: Medical checkup indicated that Astronaut Alan B. Shepard (Capt., usn) still suffered from labyrinthitis—an inner ear infection. Because of the illness, Shepard had not been selected for any of six Gemini flight crews. He also could not fly aircraft alone, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/28/65, A10)
gemim m Astronauts John W. Young (foreground) and Virgil 1. Grissom in spacecraft immediately prior to launch.
U.S. would put a supersonic airliner into the skies no later than 1974, William F. McKee, Federal Aviation Administrator, told the Aero Club of Washington. He said faa had a target date of no later than 1974 for finishing all tests before regular passenger flights, (upi, NYT, 10/27/65,95)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said in an address to the American Ordnance Association:	. . In the case of the most recently announced space project, the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, we again have an example of a highly valuable exchange of technology and experience by two operating agencies of the Government. In this instance, NASA’s considerable success in manned space flight and in the development of spacecraft will assist the Air Force substantially in carrying out the Manned Orbiting Laboratory project. Such interagency cooperation will tend to improve rather than impair the peaceful image which this country has established. “Since I have mentioned the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, it is worth pausing right now to challenge forthrightly those who have asserted or intimated that it has something to do with a weapons race. We expect misinterpretations of that sort to come from unfriendly countries and sometimes from ignorant domestic critics. However, I was disappointed to find that a few otherwise well informed publications and invididuals have asserted that the MOL is a weapons carrier and a project contrary to our peaceful progress in space. “I assert as positively as I can that the MOL is not a weapons system, is not a means by which aggressive actions can be perpetrated, and is in no way in conflict with the established peaceful policies, objectives, or methods of the United States. Rather, it is a program that will increase our knowledge of man’s usefulness in space and will relate that ability to our national defense.” (Text)
“One absolute certainty is that if the atomic bomb had not gone off at Alamogordo 20 years ago tomorrow, the spacecraft Mariner 4 would not have flown past Mars yesterday,” wrote William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. He continued: “Space and the atom are more closely interrelated than most people realize. We are in a space race today because—and only because—big rockets were developed by the East and West starting about 15 years ago. . . . Solely to carry atomic (and later hydrogen) warheads. There would have been no space race without big rockets because the staggering development costs for space applications alone could never have been justified. “The ‘aerospace business’ of the non-atomic ’60’s, then, would have been ‘airplane business’ pure and simple—and airplanes would be much different than they are today. There would be no ‘atomic energy industry,’ of course—and these two differences would have a measurable economic impact. Probably a million jobs nationwide depend either directly or indirectly on space and the atom. “Equally obviously, two vast bureaucracies dedicated to ‘running’ space and the atom would not exist. The Atomic Energy Commission has about 7,300 employes and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration about 33,000. Together they ‘own’ something like $18 billion worth of property.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/15/65)
Participants in the World Peace through Law Conference in Washington, D.C., agreed that advances in international communications, including early bird i communications satellite, were important milestones on the road to world peace. John A. Johnson, vice president of ComSatCorp, told the international communications panel that early bird I had provided a case study of progress in “the development of legal principles and institutions which further international cooperation.” He said global coverage in the satellite communications system was planned for 1967. Prof. Ivan A. Vlasic, McGill Univ., warned we may be facing “a proliferation of competing, possibly even antagonistic communications systems. Given the present state of international relations the chances of conflict are considerable.” Jean Evensen, Norway’s government broadcasting system adviser, felt “a pressing need for ways of enforcing international communications rules. One rebel, one nonconformist . . . can create havoc ... to the damage of the rest of the world,” he said. (Bullen, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/15/65)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., and his wife left for Europe on a goodwill tour ordered by President Johnson. Cities on the schedule included London, Berlin, Bremen, Hamburg, Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Genoa, Rome, Naples, Florence or Venice, Madrid, and Lisbon. (Wash. Eve. Star, 9/29/65)
Supreme Court Justice William 0. Douglas told Philadelphia Rotary Club members that money being spent to put a man on the moon could be better spent ending water pollution in the United States. He claimed that costs for equipping the Nation with adequate sewage disposal was about equal to that of sending a man to the moon in the Apollo project, (ap, Galveston News-Tribune, 4/15/65)
The last of 800 usaf Minutemen I icbms became operational at Warren afb, Wyo. Weighing about 65,000 lbs., the three-stage solid propellant missiles would have a range of more than 6,300 mi., a speed of over 15,000 mph, and would carry a nuclear warhead. The missiles were housed in individual blast-resistant underground launch sites and could be stored for long periods with a minimum of maintenance. (afsc Release 97.65) During June: First patent for production and separation of plutonium was granted to aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg and co-inventors the late Dr. Joseph W. Kennedy and Dr. Arthur C. Wahl. The patented procedure included treatment of uranium in a reactor to produce plutonium—first synthetic element to be seen by man—and to separate and recover the plutonium by a method called oxidation reduction. (Jones, NYT, 6/26/65, 33) During June: Interviewed in Data, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff discussed basic research in the NASA program: “The term basic is employed for two reasons. The basic research program involves elements which undergird everything we do in aeronautics and space. Such areas as materials, fluid physics, electrophysics and applied mathematics form a common base for all of our work. In addition, most of this program is carried on at a fundamental level, that is, at the atomic and molecular level. If we select, for example, the field of materials we can observe that nearly everything we do in atmospheric and space flight is limited in some way by materials. . . Asked about the role of industry in NASA’s advanced research and technology program, Dr. Bisplinghoff said: “About 75 per cent of the oart research and development budget is spent outside the NASA organization. This money goes to university and research institutes and to industrial contractors capable of carrying out the advanced work making up this program.” (Data, 6/65, 22-25) Five-week study of atmosphere contaminants in a closed environmental system was concluded at usaf School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks afb, Tex. The three phases of the test: determining leak rate of the main test cell; checking the manneu, iuuy Operational chumbc unmanned 19 cabin; and checking the In the third taViB.se four volunteer airmen lived inside the cabin in the strictly controlled experiment. They were not allowed to shave or wash; they subsisted on liquid nutritional compounds; they kept logs of diet consumed and waste volume and time; they occupied themselves only by operating psychomotor test panels or, for recreation, watching television. Study was conducted in cooperation with NASA, (afsc amd Release 65-125)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center engineer John H. Kimzey told a meeting of American Institute of Chemical Engineers that fires during simulated spaceflight had the puzzling habit of burning fiercely initially, dying out so the flame disappeared, but flaring to life when force of gravity took over. Kimzey speculated that in weightless conditions, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and water vapor created by the fire might surround the flame and cut off both oxygen and fuel. Motion pictures of the “dead” fires had shown no indication of either light or infrared heat energy coming from fire locations. (Burkett, Houston Chron., 2/10/65)
Dr. John A. O’Keefe, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, said previous Russian efforts to land a vehicle on the moon had failed because they could not slow it up enough at the point of contact. Dr. O’Keefe also advanced the view that the moon originally broke off from the earth and eventually assumed its present position in the universe. He spoke at the monthly meeting of the Catholic Laymen’s First Friday Club in Washington, D.C. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/4/65, A3)
President Johnson telephoned the Nation’s thanks to Gemini Astronauts James McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White II (Maj., usaf) and told them that they had written their names “in history and in our hearts.” He concluded: “What you’ve done will never be forgotten. We can hope and pray that the time will come when all men of all nations will join together to explore space together and walk side by side toward peace. And you two outstanding men have taken a long stride forward in mankind’s progress, and everyone in this nation, and I think in the free world, feels in your debt.” The astronauts, aboard the carrier Wasp in the Atlantic for medical tests, were invited to spend the week-end with the President at his Texas ranch. (Kilpatrick, Wash. Post, 6/8/65, A14)
In a Washington Evening Star article, “Costs Soar in Lagging TFX Project,” Richard Wilson wrote: “Here’s the latest word on that $8 billion miracle airplane program, the tfx. It is costing about $5 million per plane instead of the estimated $2.2 million. It is too heavy for the Navy to use. It could have been ready now but it isn’t because the Kennedy administration lagged a year while evaluating and reevaluating the aircraft so that General Dynamics Corp. could get the contract. . . . “Nobody knows for sure that the Boeing plane would have worked out any better but the top military men all thought so. . . . So far as realizing any billion dollars savings as was at first advertised, this doesn’t appear very likely if the Navy has to have a lighter version. In view of the nearly doubling of cost per plane, it does not seem likely in any case. . . .” (Wilson, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/65) September 13-18: International Astronautical Federation’s 16th Congress was held in Athens. Participants were greeted by King Constantine of Greece. Introductory speeches were made by the president of the IAF, Dr. William H. Pickering; chairman of the International Academy of Astronautics, Dr. Charles S. Draper; and president of the International Institute of Space Law, Dr. I. Pepin. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/12/65; Izvestia, 9/14/65, 5, atss-t Trans.) Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, reported at a plenary meeting of the Congress that the Apollo program had now passed the half-way point and was moving forward at full momentum. He listed three primary commitments: “—the first Saturn V carrying an unmanned Apollo spacecraft is scheduled to be launched in 1967. “—the first Saturn V carrying a manned Apollo spacecraft is scheduled to be launched in 1968. “—the manned lunar landing is scheduled to be accomplished prior to 1970.” Following his presentation, von Braun told a news conference that “many Soviet and American scientists will participate to lay the foundation for extensive cooperation on the moon.” He said there were indications that the moon’s surface was solid enough to bear the weight of the spacecraft. Soft spots had been identified and would be avoided. He estimated that a landing on Mars would occur 15 yrs. after a successful lunar landing. (Text; NYT, 9/15/65, 24) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, outlined broad objectives of the Saturn-Apollo applications missions, earth-orbital and lunar: “(1) Evaluate and extend man’s capabilities to operate in space effectively as an astronaut and as a scientist. “(2) Conduct observations of the Earth, extra-terrestrial phenomena, and experiments dependent on the space environment. “(3) Qualify systems and crews for subsequent long-duration space missions.
Experiments at NASA Ames Research Center by Dr. John Young and Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma indicated that Mars may lie under a steady rain of edible sugars produced photochemically in the Martian atmosphere. It was speculated that the sugars and other compounds might drift to the Martian surface, seep into the soil, and form underground reservoirs of nutrients. Results of tests for survival of 50 strains of earth bacteria in simulated Martian atmosphere indicated that the strains of bacteria which form hard spores and are thus most likely to survive space flight are most sensitive to the freeze-thaw extremes of temperature that prevail on Mars. Thus, while the bacteria might survive on Mars in spore form, they would not grow there and would not contaminate the planet. Other bacteria would die en route. (S.F. Chron., 1/28/65)
Rep. Joseph Karth (D-Minn.) told the House that the flight of GEMINI V had successfully tested not only the high qualities of Astronauts Gordon Cooper, Jr., and Charles Conrad, but the reliability and suitability of many items involved in America’s space program, including food. He inserted into the Congressional Record: “The Pillsbury items scheduled by NASA for the Cooper-Conrad mission—each ready to eat and requiring no reconstitution—were brownies, gingerbread, pineapple fruitcake, date fruitcake, apricot cereal bars, strawberry cereal bars, toasted bread cubes and cinnamon toast. “Cooper and Conrad were programed to eat 4 meals each day, providing a daily average of approximately 2,500 calories. The selected menu . . . was designed to maintain body weight at zero gravity under light physical activity. The 8 Pillsbury items were designed to provide a high energy source that supplemented the rehydratable foods in the menu for each meal. They required no preparation time and provided solid food consistency. . . .” {CR, 9/9/65, A5095)
Commenting on the Project Surveyor report of Rep. Joseph E. Karth’s (D-Minn.) Subcommittee on nasa Oversight [see Oct. 8], William J. Coughlin said:	“. . . the really amazing thing is that what the Karth report calls the ‘stormy dV-j-year history’ of the project has not been stormier. Given a limited budget to accomplish the impossible, anyone will have difficulties. . . . “The Karth report, in fact, acknowledges this when it states: ‘In essence, insufficient preliminary work was done prior to the decision to go ahead with the project, and the award of a contract for development of the Surveyor spacecraft.’” (Coughlin, M&R, 11/1/65, 46)
Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John W. Young were honored in a White House ceremony where President Johnson conferred NASA Exceptional Service Medals on both men and pinned a cluster on the NASA Distinguished Service Medal awarded Major Grisson for his July Zl, lyoi, suDormtai mercury night. first man to ma!c€ two space flights. NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans received the NASA Distinguished Service Medal for his direction of space efforts. Harris M. Schurmeier received an Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal for his direction of the Ranger program. President Johnson said: “A sense of history is present strongly here today. All of us are conscious that we have crossed over the threshold of man’s first tentative and experimental ventures in space. . . . “Since we gave our program direction and purpose seven years ago, many successes have been achieved through the efforts of a great American team, which now numbers 400 thousand men and women in industry, on campuses, and in government. And this team is inspired and stimulated and led by a former Marine and a great public servant —Jim Webb.” Following the ceremony, a motorcade bearing Vice President Humphrey, the astronauts, and their party took the Pennsylvania Ave. parade route, where thousands had gathered to cheer them, to the Capitol; a luncheon in their honor was jointly sponsored by Sen. Clinton Anderson (D-N.Mex.) and Rep. George P. Miller f D—Calif.), chairmen of the Senate and House space committees. At 5 p.m. the group returned to Capitol Hill for a Congressional reception hosted by House Speaker John McCormack (D-Mass.). (NASA Release 65-98; Text; Carmody, Wash. Post, 3/26/65; NYT, 3/27/65, 1)
Rep. William S. Moorhead (D-Pa.) spoke on the floor of the House on the problem of collecting and using information for decision-making in government and industry: “Experts say that the human mind has difficulty in considering more than 10 or' 20 factors at the same time in making decisions. Yet, the unsolved problems of our society may require thousands or hundreds of thousands of factors or subfactors to be considered. Industry has learned to simulate mathematically a given environment. By varying the input assumptions or by varying subdecisions the decision maker can be given rational basis on which to make alternative decisions.” (CR, 9/21/65, 23755)
In its 150th flight, the X-15 (No. 3) was flown to 295,600-ft. altitude and top speed of 3,682 mph (mach 5.33) by NASA research pilot John B. McKay. Altitude marked the fourth highest reached by the X-15, Purpose of flight was to measure boundary layer noise; test a horizon scanner; and measure aerodynamic and structural loads on the horizontal tail surfaces. (NASA Release 65-310; X-15 Flight Log) *	Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (LCdr,. usn), after a record 30 days 205 ft. below the surface of the Pacific, said he was convinced “men can Sepfem&er 28: John B. McKay, pilot of 150th flight, in front of X-15 No. 3. live forever—any length of time they wish—beneath the surface of the ocean.” He told a news conference of the beauty, pain, and hard manual labor and added: “The ocean is a much more hostile environment than space. I worked much harder in Sealab 2 than in the Mercury capsule. More energy is required just to stay warm, because of the 50-degree cold. But the real key is the isolation. I think men can live as long in underwater habitats as they can in dewline stations or any place else where they are isolated.” (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/29/65)
Civil Aeronautics Board (cab) authorized Pan American Airways and Trans World Airlines to subsidize New York Airways’ helicopter service temporarily, cab also announced that two stockholders in New York Airways, Robert G. Goelet and John Hay Whitney, had lent a total of $165,000 to the company, (ap, NYT, 6/26/65, 42)
NASA released a photograph of the gemini iv spacecraft taken by Astronaut Edward H. White n (Maj., usaf) during his walk in space. The picture was one of an unannounced number that Major White recorded with a 35 mm. camera mounted atop a space gun that he used for maneuverability. Films of Astronaut White floating in space would be made available for public showing “sometime within the next month.” (ap, NYT, 6/11/65, 12)
A home-made U.S. flag, carried by astronauts Virgil I. Grissom (Maj., usaf) and John W. Young (LCdr., usn) on the March 23 Gemini iii flight, was hoisted at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center the moment Astronauts James A. McDivitt, (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White ii (Maj., usaf) went into orbit. Flag w'ould be flown only while astronauts were in spaceflight, (ap, Knoxville News Sentinel, 6/3/65)
Honorary Doctor of Astronautical Science degrees were conferred on Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White n (Maj., usaf) by their alma mater, the Univ. of Michigan where Maj. White received his bs degree in 1959 and Maj. McDivitt, his ms degree in 1959. The astronauts then attended a ceremony dedicating the University’s new $1.7 million space research building and rode in a motorcade through downtown Ann Arbor. NASA’s official representative at the festivities was Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of the nasa Langley Research Center, also a Michigan alumnus. (LaRC Release; ap, Balt. Sun. 6/16/65)
Italy’s Order of Merit was awarded former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (Col., usmc, Ret.), during his visit to Rome. He and his wife were also received by Prime Minister Aldo Moro. (Reuters, NYT, 10/16/65, 54)
At the Honors Convocation of the aiaa meeting in San Francisco the following presentations were made: Rodney C. Wingrove, Research Scientist at nasa Ames Research Center, received the Lawrence Sperry Award for his contribution to controlled reentry and precise landings of U.S. manned spacecraft; Dinsmore Alter, Director Emeritus of Griffith Observatory, received the G. Edward Pendray Award for an “outstanding contribution to aeronautical and astronautical literature”; Lloyd L. Kelly, President, Link Group, General Precision, Inc., received the DeFlorez Training Award for “an outstanding improvement in aerospace training”; and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, received the premier Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award “for significant contributions indicative of American enterprise and ingenuity in the art and science of space flight.” This award included a $5,000 honorarium, (arc Release 65-15; msfc Release 65-151; aiaa Honors Convocation Program)
William M. Allen, president at the Boeing Co., addressed National Defense Transportation Association in Washington, D.C.: “Our first Boeing study of a supersonic transport was made in 1952. Preliminary design effort was started more seriously in 1956 and 1957. Then in 1958 the SST became a major engineering project and it has continued in that status ever since, involving many of our top engineers. “From the start of our effort to the present, design determinations have come in an orderly and unhurried progression, as a result of the integration of mountains of test data, much of it worked out in close conjunction with NASA laboratories which, incidentally, deserve the sincere thanks of the American people for their pioneering work in this field. “In the process we explored 290 configurations, and completed wind tunnel testing on 56 different high-speed wings. . . .” (CR, 1/28/65, 1454-56)
Gemini spacecraft, scheduled for a four-day manned flight this summer, was delivered to Cape Kennedy. It was flown by cargo plane from McDonnell Aircraft Corp., prime contractor for manufacture of the craft, where it had undergone simulated flights. Astronauts James A. McDivitt and Edward H. White II, who would pilot the Gemini 4, also had made simulated flights at McDonnell, (ap, Wash. Post, 4/5/65)
Commenting on budgetary considerations as they might affect the Titan iii-C, William Hines said in the Washington Evening Star: “If the economy ax falls on the Titan 3C program in the wake of an unsuccessful launching Tuesday, it will be sad indeed. The program is one of the few major space efforts in recent memory to have gone along so far on schedule, close to budget limits, and with a reasonably high degree of success.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/24/65, A3)
Lunar Landing Research Vehicle flight by Joseph 'Walker at Edwards. by Rep. Joseph E. Karth’s (D-Minn.) Space Science and Applications Subcommittee. Karth committee summarized the most serious reasons for Surveyor’s delay: 1) the failure to do adequate preliminary work; 2) a series of major modifications; 3) inadequate staffing by jPL in the first three years; 4) too rapid expansion of personnel at a later date; 5) poor management on the part of Hughes; 6) a resistance on the part of Hughes to making management changes; 7) an improperly conducted testing program by Hughes; 8) management weaknesses in NASA; and 9) a lack of vigorous centralized control by NASA. To describe the magnitude of the Surveyor problems, the Congressional investigators highlighted a NASA press release of January 1961, which outlined Project Surveyor as costing about $50 million, consisting of seven spacecraft, each weighing 2,500 lbs., capable of placing over 200 lbs. of scientific payload on the lunar surface, with launches scheduled during the 1963-66 time period. The Subcommittee then noted that the first launch had been delayed about two and a half years, payload capability had been reduced to only a TV camera on the first four spacecraft and only 114 lbs. on the next three operational models, with total costs so far of nearly $350 million for the spacecraft R&D alone. The investigation concluded that the responsibility for the Surveyor situation could be found in the inadequate preparation for the project, the performance of JPL, the performance of Hughes Aircraft, and the performance of NASA Headquarters. “A serious mistake” was made at the very beginning of the Surveyor project when insufficient preliminary work was done to identify serious technical problems, judge feasibility, consider alternatives, and more accurately estimate costs. The investigation concluded further that this was “the inevitable result of a poorly defined project.” (House Rpt.)
U.S. experts believed that Russia might attempt to launch a multimanned spacecraft on a 15-day mission as her next manned space effort, reported William J. Normyle in Aviation Week and Space Technology. Based on recent conversation with Soviet scientists, U.S. specialists felt that there was complete confidence in the Voskhod environmental-control system which had been qualified for 30-day missions, Normyle explained. They also believed that the Soviets were prepared to attempt a rendezvous mission more ambitious than Gemini 6. (Normyle, Av. Wk., 11/1/65)
The Sofar (Sound Fixing and Ranging Device), used to locate ICBm’s through a small explosive charge set off as the missile sank, would be transformed into a rescue device for aircraft and ships in the Pacific, Capt. John M. Waters, Jr. (uscg), told a U.S. Coast Guard-sponsored North Atlantic Search and Rescue Seminar in New York. A pressure switch mechanism would fire the explosive at 2,500 ft. below the surface—depth at which sound waves encountered least resistance; sound of the explosion would be picked up by four hydrophone listening stations and the exact disaster site plotted. Capt. Waters said the device was “practically foolproof” and had been endorsed by the Naval Aviation Center. Each Sofar locator would cost about $75. (Bamberger, NYT, 5/14/65, 65)
Contrasting the “image” of U.S. and U.S.S.R. at Sept. 13-18 iaf Congress, William Hines said: “Whether through the Russians’ skill at brainwashing or our own ineptitude, we emerged ... as the rocket rattlers and they as the peace lovers. . . .” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/23/65)
In a Missiles and Rockets editorial, William J. Coughlin questioned NASA’s wisdom in drawing up mission requirements for lunar exploration. The article said:	“Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA associate administrator, told Congress last year:	‘Ranger will play an important role in the support of Project Apollo.’ . . . “Not a single change has been made in any part of the Apollo system or in the program’s operational plan as a result of the Ranger findings. None is contemplated. The reason for this is simple. The Block in Rangers were incapable of producing any such data. . . . “The case for Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter as supports for the Apollo program ... is not a very strong one. . . . “Dr. Newell sees them as part of what he calls the ‘total program for exploring the Moon.’ . . . [He said] in the following statement to Congress:	‘You will have a lunar landing. That lunar landing will involve a few hours of stay on the Moon, a look that the astronauts can make, a few collections of samples, maybe some simple tests, and maybe the implacement by the astronauts of monitors to be left on the lunar surface.’ “After their departure, Dr. Newell sees the instruments carrying on. Lunar Orbiter wheels overhead. Surveyor explores areas on the moon which Man would have difficulty in reaching. . . . “We suggest that if anyone proposed exploring the Antarctic in such a manner, he would he clapped in the pokey as a nut. Man is going to the Moon and he is going to explore it. Expenditure of billions of dollars on instruments remotely controlled from Earth to do the same job is folly.” (M&R, 4/12/65, 46)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., former NASA astronaut and first American to orbit the earth, retired from the Marine Corps after 22 yrs. in the service. Glenn said he would spend much of his time as a consultant to nasa. He would also be a director of Royal Crown Cola Co. ( dod Release 912-64; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/4/65; Wash. Post, 1/5/65; Balt. Sun, 1/5/65; Chic. Trib., 1/5/65)
“If Major Edward H. White leaves his space capsule during next Thursday’s Gemini 4 flight, it will only be a ‘space spectacular’ stunt,” said Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) during a news conference in San Francisco. Rep. Miller, chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, had made the same comment at the time of a similar feat by the Soviet Union. (NYT, 5/28/65)
In what he termed “Coming of Age in Houston,” William Hines wrote in the Washington Evening Star of “a new, mature outlook on the part of NASA.” He said: “There was a conscious effort to deglamorize (but not depersonalize) the [Gemini 4] astronauts, and to' focus attention on the mission rather than on celebrities who would subsequently tell their stories in Life. The decision not to give the spacecraft a name and to use the radio call sign ‘Gemini 4’ was a step in this direction. “The determination of NASA to rid itself of what has been called the ‘Hollywood syndrome’ and handle space flights as transcendental news events instead of tawdry theatrical productions did not come easily, or without prodding from the outside. But once the decision had been made not to try any longer to fool all the people all the time, a new era in public understanding of space dawned.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/17/65)
Dr. Donald Young and Dr. Ralph Pelligra of nasa Ames Research Center had been studying “the use of high caloric diets for prolonged space flights on the theory that it may be possible for astronauts to use their own fatty deposits as a source of energy.” It might be possible that future astronauts would prepare for spaceflight by eating “certain types of fats that would build up in their bodies,” thus providing them with “storage depots of their own fat” that could serve “as a backup if food supplies were limited.” (upi, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 9/26/65)
Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, retiring Air Force Chief of Staff, received a fourth Distinguished Service Medal from President Johnson at the White House. Later, during formal retirement ceremonies at Andrews AFB, a letter from the President was read: “All the world can be grateful to you for your courage, tenacity and exacting standards of professionalism.” Gen. LeMay was succeeded by Gen. John Paul McConnell. (Loftus, NYT, 2/2 ^5, 13; NYT, 2/2/65, 13)
Discussions at last week’s Eurospace meeting in Philadelphia indicated that “Europeans are eagerly seeking means to acquire U.S. technical know-how and systems management capability without buying hardware,” wrote William J. Coughlin in a Missiles and Rockets editorial. He continued: “This was recognized in a blunt statement by Lockheed vice president Elmer P. Wheaton:
Water could have been present on Mars during the first 3.5 billion years of the planet’s history and then disappeared before its craters were created by meteorites, said researchers Edward Anders of the Univ. of Chicago and James R. Arnold of the Univ. of California at San Diego in a report in Science. The scientists said they believed the Martian craters were only 300 to 800 million years old, compared with up to 4.5	billion years for those on the moon. They added: “. . . The crater density of Mars no longer precludes the possibility that liquid water and a denser atmosphere were present on Mars during the first 3.5	billion years of its history.” (Science, 9/24/65)
Highlights of report by Civil Service Commission Chairman John W. Macy, Jr., to President Johnson on Government savings during FY 1965 resulting from employee suggestions showed that one of the top suggestion awards went to NASA personnel. The $1,400 award to msfc aerospace technologists Emmett L. Martz, John L. Burch, and William L. Kimmons was for their design which reduced by $133,438 the cost of certain bearings in Saturn launch vehicle’s guidance system. NASA was among the five nondefense Government agencies that exceeded the million-dollar mark in savings from adopted suggestions. (Pres. Doc., 10/4/65, 335)
King Constantine of Greece invited Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), their wives, and other U.S. officials in Athens for the 16th International Astronautical Congress, to a royal palace banquet, nasa Marshall Space Flight Center Director Dr. Wernher von Braun and JPL Director Dr. William H.	Pickering were among the guests, (ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 9/17/65)
An equipment modification to permit opening of the hatch on Gemini 4 had been successfully tested, William Normyle reported in Aviation Week & Space Technology. Hoses connecting the spacesuits to the spacecraft’s environmental control system were lengthened to permit the astronaut to stand and partially emerge through the hatch. NASA had not yet approved a spacecraft-depressurization and hatchopening exercise for the two-man spaceflight. (Normyle, Av. Wk., 4/5/65, 27)
Dr. William R. Lucas, chief of the Materials Div. of the Propulsion and Vehicle Engineering Laboratory, msfc, received the Hermann Oberth Award from the Alabama Section of the aiaa for his “outstanding individual scientific achievements in the field of astronautics and for the promotion and advancement of the aeronautical sciences.” (msfc Release 65—279)
France was exploring with the U.S. the possibility of establishing an international space launching center in French Guiana, John Finney reported in the New York Times. Center’s location near the equator would make it possible to launch satellites directly into either equatorial or polar orbits valuable for both scientific and communications satellites. Preliminary surveys were under way. (Finney, NYT, 12/20/65, 8)
X-15 No. 2 flown by pilot John McKay (nasa) to 155,900 ft. altitude at maximum speed of 3,938 mph (mach 5.64) to obtain data on star tracking cameras, landing gear modification checkout, stability and control and advanced X-15 landing dynamics. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; X—15 Flight Log)
Need for creation of a “Buck Rogers rescue squad” with trained men and equipment to give aid on short notice to spacemen stranded or stricken in orbit was discussed by William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. Hines said a persuasive case had been made by Michael Stoiko of the Martin Co.: “Stoiko estimated that in the next 20 years there will be about 280 manned space flights involving about 800 men. Half of each—men and flights—will be American, half Russian. Total flight time will be about 2.4 million man hours, compared with the world-wide total of about 1,200 man hours to date.” Stoiko projected “a 62 percent probability of at least seven emergency situations involving 22 men in the next 20 years; a 58 percent probability of two or three emergencies in the coming decade.” Hines said that now “astronauts stranded in orbit would have no hope of rescue and only a melancholy choice between two fatal alternatives: to sweat it out until the oxygen finally was gone, or to make a quick end of it by explosively decompressing both spacecraft and suit.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/2/65)
Soviet aircraft designer Oleg K. Antonov provided technical and performance specifications of the large An-22 aircraft during an interview conducted by J. Marmain for Wehr und Wirtschaft (W. Germany) : first flight was made in February 1965; aircraft shown at International Air Show, Paris, was transport model; considerable rebuilding, including 15-m. extension of the tail, would be required for the craft to accommodate 720 passengers. Antonov said his design office was not concerned with development of a passenger version of the An-22, a new version of the An-24 for 64 passengers, and a smaller special purpose aircraft. (Marmain, Wehr und Wirtschaft, 7/65, 390-91) During July: Paul Tillich, Protestant theologian, commenting upon the “Pacem in Terris” of Pope John xxm, wrote: “A . . . genuine hope for peace is the technical union of mankind by the conquest of space. Of course, nearness can intensify hostility; and the fact that the first manifestations of the technical oneness of the world were two world wars proves this possibility. But nearness can also have the opposite effect. It can change the image of the other as strange and dangerous; it can reduce self-affirmation and effect openness for other possibilities of human existence and—particularly as in the encounter of religions— of other possibilities of genuine faith.” (Tillich, “The Limits of Peace,” Chicago Today, Summary 1965, 2-5)
x-15 No. 3 was flown by Capt. William J. Knight (usaf) 3,136 mph (mach 4.62) to 94,400-ft. altitude for pilot checkout, (nasa x-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
usaf’s Titan m-c rocket could match the Soviet Union’s most powerful booster pound for pound in launching heavy-weight satellites into orbit, according to William G. Purdy, General Manager, Launch Vehicles, Martin Co. “Engineering analysis of Titan III—c’s performance on its maiden flight of June [18] shows that a payload of nearly 27.000	pounds could have been orbited. In the past, Titan in—c’s maximum payload has been computed at 25,000 lbs.” Mr. Purdy said that the Soviet Union’s best was the 26,840-lb. proton i satellite launched July 16 by powerful new rocket. (Martin Co. Release) NASA Science Advisory Committee was considering a proposal by radio astronomers to create a lO-mi.-dia. antenna array to permit a “look” into the past with radio energy, disclosed Bernard M. Oliver, Vice President of a Palo Alto electronics firm. He estimated that 1.000	antennas, each perhaps 10-ft.-dia., spread out over the area of a 10-mi. circle, would provide the resolution of signal intake necessary for the kind of radio observation he was suggesting. Intake of all the antennas would be focused at a single laboratory. There the radio energy would be converted to sound energy and then into light to provide photographic images equivalent to optical images now taken of the moon. Oliver said: “We quite strongly believe that such an exploration tool can provide the maximum amount of information relating to the origins of the universe, to the life cycle, and to the destiny of the universe, and, in a sense, to the destiny of the human race as a whole.” (Chic. Trib., 7/28/65) Missions to Jupiter could be conducted by 1969, suggested Eugene Lally, Space-General Corp. engineer, in a paper presented to the AIAA outlining a program of six missions to the planet Jupiter, beginning with a fly-by in 1969 and culminating with a Jovian orbit in the mid-1980’s. A Jupiter mission would take about two years. Lally postulated that payload weights ranging from a 650-lb. payload to a 12,400-lb. orbiter payload could be easily handled by boosters ranging from Atlas-Centaur with an added kick stage, through the Saturn V which would be used to place a man on the moon. Lally speculated that an instrumented probe would be able to obtain information on the constitution of the core and surface layers, the atmosphere, nature of the largest of the planet’s spots, topography, constitution of meteoroids in its vicinity and the presence of small satellites not yet discovered with telescopes. Lally’s probe would contain experiments to measure the atmosphere, magnetic fields, and gravitational fields; to conduct infrared and microwave examinations of the surface; and to provide pictures similar to those taken of Mars by mariner iv. (Space-General Corp. Release) An Electro-Optical Systems (eos) bombardment ion engine had successfully operated for more than 2,610 hrs. in vacuum chamber conditions and, as a result of that extended run, “lifetimes in excess of 10.000	hours can now be calculated for the tiny engine under conditions of space flight,” Gordon Sohl, Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., told the aiaa meeting in San Francisco. Fueled with cesium, the EOS engine was less than two feet long and weighed 10 lbs. fully loaded with a five-pound fuel supply. It provided a power-to-thrust ratio of 182 kw. per pound. Financed by NASA Lewis Research Center, the EOS research program recently received a follow-on funding from LRC to determine “if the ion engine with 100 pounds of cesium fuel is equivalent in thrust to a conventional chemical rocket carrying a ton of propellant.” (eos Release) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, presented the third annual Theodore von Karman lecture. Dr. Bisplinghoff discussed advances in air transport, such as V/Stol aircraft and the hypersonic transport. He pointed out that within 20 yrs. an estimated 130 million persons (about 50% of the U.S. population) would be living in three main metropolitan areas and that there would be an increasing demand for “air buses.” Dr. Bisplinghoff suggested that the hydrogen-fueled hypersonic transport could be used as a cheap transport, or as an earth-to-orbit aircraft. He said that the hypersonic transport would carry passengers halfway around the earth nonstop at speeds up to 8,000 mph, but there was one problem area: . . . “Where the airplane threatens to overpower the pilot with characteristics which make the airplane unflyable by human systems.” Dr. Bisplinghoff called for increased research for operational experience with the scram jet (supersonic combustion ramjet) engine as a prelude to developing the hypersonic transports. In a press conference preceding his lecture, Dr. Bisplinghoff predicted “another revolution” for personal aircraft in the form of highly simplified controls similar to those in automobiles. He also urged quick Government action to begin the acquisition of a follow-on hypersonic research aircraft to succeed the X-15 and run the flight profile out to mach 10 to 12. (nasa Release 65-247; Text, M/S Daily, 7/28/65; eph) nasa Electronics Research Center Director Dr. Winston E. Kock discussed erc in address. During fy 1965, he said, erc “awarded 33 contracts totaling almost $2 million. The organizations to whom these contracts were awarded are spread widely throughout the country. . . . “The average value of the 33 contracts was $59,000, the largest being $285,000. These contracts were almost all in fairly basic research fields, ranging from integrated circuits and thin film space-charge limited triodes, through research in millimeter and submillimeter waves, optical wave-guides and optical components, to space-borne memory organizations, laser gyros and fluid storage and control devices. . . .” He discussed erc personnel: “We have grown from a group of 65 at our inception last year [Sept. 1] to a total of 244. As we are still in the formative stages, our scientific and engineering personnel now total only 92 out of the 244, but when we have reached our full strength of 2100, we expect that our staff will be about equally divided between scientific and engineering, technical support and administrative. . . .” (Text) Thomas Bilhorn, Manager, Mechanics Section, Scientific Balloon Facility at the National Center for Atmospheric Research (ncar), revealed that facilities for launching balloons capable of carrying 16,000-lb. payloads were expected to be completed by next summer at NCAR’s Scientific Balloon Flight Facility in Texas. The device under construction, called an inflation shelter, would have a ceiling height of 140 ft. and interior diameter of 120 ft. It would reduce handling problems during inflation and would give the capability of periods of hold, recall, and post-inflation inspection and repair. (Text) “There is nothing hostile or aggressive in the military space program we foresee. It is entirely within the context of a national program expressly devoted to peaceful purposes,” said Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director (Space) of Defense Research and Engineering. He continued: “It is likely that military interest will remain focused primarily on near-earth missions, out to synchronous orbit, certainly through 1975. We expect to continue our very large and vigorous unmanned military space program which is performing very important functions. The need for these programs will not diminish since they are by far the most efficient and cheapest way of performing specified tasks. With a steadily increasing experience and know-how in manned space flight, we may expect that spacecraft will acquire characteristics permitting rendezvous, station-keeping, docking, and transfer of man and material. We will likely acquire the means of sustaining military men in space for the periods of time we require. Booster capacities are not likely to limit the applications, but the booster and payload costs will continue to do so.” (Text) In aiaa session on the “History of Rocket Research Airplanes,” John Stack, former naca-nasa designer, pointed out how little was known about transonic and supersonic flight in 1943, when X-l was conceived. Walter C. Williams, Dr. Raymond Bisplinghoff, and Walter T. Bonney, among other speakers, also stressed the key role of engineer test pilots in the success of the X-l, d-558, x-2, and X-15 programs. Session was chaired by Robert Perry of rand Corporation, who traced the history of rocket-powered aircraft,	(eph; rand DeMarquis D. Wyatt, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Programing, told the meeting: “Any discussion of the NASA space program for the next 10 years must be given and received with a grain of salt. Reconstruct in your minds the situation 10 years ago and evaluate the validity of any discussion at that time of the NACA program for the period 1955-1965. Such a discussion would not have even mentioned space in any serious fashion. A paper delivered in 1960 that attempted to outline the NASA program for 1960-1970 would have widely missed the mark in the prediction of today’s realities. One can, therefore, conclude that one of the major management problems of the national space program is the lack of an adequate crystal ball for forecasting the future. “In the 6% years of its existence NASA has carried out a vigorous program of space activities designed to yield: “(a) a description and scientific understanding of the space environment; (b) the development of a broadly based national capability and capacity for manned and unmanned operations in space, and (c) the development of practical uses of space. “Decisions will have to be made with an appreciation of, and indeed the shaping of, our whole national attitude toward space in relation to our other national requirements and interests. Far too many future studies within and without the government are predicated on the assumption that the national investment in space research and technology will at least grow at the rate of the Gross National Product. This has not been true for the past several years and does not afford a necessarily sound planning assumption for the future. Our total federal budget has leveled off in spite of the great increase in the national product in recent years. If this trend holds, then marked increases in space expenditures can only come about through decreases in other federal spending. Such an assumption would indeed be a slender reed upon which to prognosticate the future.” (Text) Dr. Vincent P. Rock, Director of George Washington Univ.’s Program of Policy Studies in Science and Technology, said: “People are shaped by their environment. Technology is creating a new environment. In these circumstances power flows to those with access to technology—all technology, not simply military weapons. The exercise of power brings with it responsibility. The ultimate responsibility of those who exercise technological power is the achievement of a hospitable environment for mankind.” “Text)
Secretary of Commerce John T. Connor told a White House Cabinet meeting that Government scientists wanted to undertake a national weather-control program to determine whether fog could be dispelled, hail suppressed, hurricanes diverted, and rain made, reported Howard Simons in the Washington Post. Connor’s report represented a change of view in the scientific community, heretofore reticent about weather modification. (Simons, Wash. Post, 9/14/65, A9)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, remarked in an interview with Missile Space Daily: “I do not doubt that with good fortune, the trip [to the moon] will be made during this decade, which to me means during the 1960’s. Replying to a question about the future use of solid fuel rockets, Dr. Welsh said: “I certainly see no reason to' doubt that the use of solids will continue to increase. Without attempting to predict specific dates or missions, I believe large solid motor technology will be a very valuable element in our growing national space competence. . . .” On post-Apollo missions: “. . . Under present circumstances, it would seem that our program will include extended exploration of the moon after the first trip, provided conditions are found to be favorable to such exploration. Also, we should be expected to develop a growing capability in earth-orbiting space stations and make an increasing effort in planetary exploration. 1 do not rate these major objectives one against the other because I believe the national space program will in time include all three of the broad missions I have mentioned.” Dr. Welsh said that he hoped the U.S. would be able to “maintain space expenditures at a figure above 1 percent of our Gross National Product.” (M/S Daily, 7/26/65)
During May 7 flight of usaf-naa xb-70a No. 1, Michael L. Yaffee reported in Aviation Week and Space Technology, five of the experimental bomber’s six General Electric yj93 engines were damaged when the wing apex, a steel honeycomb structure, tore apart and scattered pieces of steel into both sides of the aircraft’s divided, rectangular air intake beneath the wing. The No. 5 engine was most heavily damaged, a post-flight examination had shown, but it was the only engine on the right side of the aircraft operating during the half-hour flight back to Edwards afb. When the apex broke, the xb-70a was flying at mach 2.56. About 30 min. later, naa test pilot Alvin S. White landed the aircraft with all left-hand engines (1, 2, and 3) operating at full power and engine No. 5 at 90% power. (Yaffee, Av. Wk., 10/18/65, 64-65, 67)
In an editorial in Missiles and Rockets, William J. Coughlin said: “A start on a correct mol public information program should be made immediately by taking samos off the dirty-word list and bringing it back out in the open. To do otherwise is to keep the U.S. in the position of accepting reconnaissance as something offensive, in the most literal sense. It is not. The U.S. conducts reconnaissance over the Soviet Union for its own protection against a closed society. It should not be afraid to acknowledge that fact.” (M&R, 11/22/65, 46)
The six scientist-astronauts selected for the Apollo program were announced in the Nation’s press: Owen K. Garriott, 34, associate professor of physics, Stanford Univ.; Edward G. Gibson, 29, senior research scientist, Applied Research Labs., Aeronutronic Div., Philco Corp.; Duane E. Graveline, 34, flight surgeon, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center; Lt. Cdr. Joseph P. Kerwin (usn), 33, staff flight surgeon, Air Wing, 4, Cecil Field Naval Air Sta., Pa.; Frank Curtis Michel, 31, assistant professor of space sciences, Rice Univ.; Harrison Schmitt, 29, astrogeologist, U.S. Geological Survey. They W'ere chosen from a group of 16 nominees submitted to NASA by the National Academy of Sciences. NAS had screened about 400 applications forwarded by NASA earlier this year. The six new scientist-astronauts were to have been announced officially by NASA June 29 but NASA officials confirmed the six named on June 28, the day after the press stories. (Schefter, Houston Chron., 6/27/65; upi, Wash. Post, 6/27/65)
A Saturn,/Apollo Applications Directorate had been established in the Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA announced. The new directorate would plan and direct programs utilizing technology developed in Project Apollo. M/Gen. David M. Jones (usaf) would be Acting Director of Saturn/ Apollo Applications in addition to his duties as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Programs). Deputy Director would be John H. Disher, formerly Test Director in the Apollo Program Office. Melvyn Savage, who had served under Disher as Chief of Test Planning, would become Apollo Test Director, (nasa Release 65-265)
Construction of esro’s first launch site, located 100 mi. north of the Arctic Circle at Kiruna, Sweden, was nearing completion, reported John Herbert in Missile Space Daily. A $10 million investment, the range was scheduled to open in May 1966 with the launch of a French-made Centaure sounding rocket to probe the ionosphere. At least 50 launchings of high-altitude probes were programed annually for the next seven years with English Skylarks slated for use after the Centaure series. The rocket experiments would aid European researchers in their studies of magnetic storms, the Northern lights, temperatures, air currents, and communications—disturbing phenomena in an area ranging between 20 and 150 mi. above the earth. (Herbert, M/S Daily,
Groundbreaking ceremony for Univ. of Maryland’s $1.5-million Space Science Building was held at the College Park, Md., campus. Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, and Edward F. Holter, Vice Chairman of the Univ. of Maryland Regents, shoveled the first spadefuls of dirt. (Wash. Post, 4/27/65, A12)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said in a telephone interview with the New York Times that the proposal to fly the Gemini 6 and Gemini 7 spacecraft on a dual flight originally had been made by Walter F. Burke and John F. Yardley of McDonnell Aircraft Corp., the spacecraft’s manufacturer. This might permit rendezvous, but no docking, earlier than if NASA waited for the Agena malfunction to be found and corrected. If the launching pad, the Titan booster, and Gemini 6 could not be made ready in time to catch the Gemini 7 in orbit, “we would not have lost anything but the trying,” Dr. Gilruth said. As for the risk of having two manned spacecraft flying a few feet apart, “That’s no more dangerous than two fighters up there flying with each other,” he added. (Clark, NYT, 10/29/65, 13)
x-15 No. 1 was flown by Capt. William J. Knight (usaf) to an altitude of 76,000 ft., at a speed of 2,761 mph (mach 4.06). (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.; X-15 Flight Log)
