Problems of construction industry were discussed by William Rieke, nasa Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, at Construction Industry Joint Conference in Washington, D.C. Rieke praised accomplishments such as ksc’s Vertical Assembly Building but urged management to increase its effectiveness, labor to expand apprentice programs and control rate escalation, and Government to examine labor policies and maintain knowledgeable labor relations staffs. (Text)
XB-70 No. 1 experimental research aircraft, piloted by North American Aviation, Inc., test pilot Van Shepard and NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton, reached mach 2.55 and 60,300-ft. altitude in national sonic boom program flight, (nasa Proj. Off.)
Boeing Co., Lockheed Aircraft Co., General Electric Co., and Pratt & Whitney Div., United Aircraft Corp., submitted final designs for 1,800-mph Sst to faa. Evaluation team of Government and airline experts was expected to submit engine and airframe choices to faa Administrator William F. McKee by Nov. 1. Final selection would be announced by President Johnson in late 1966. (AP, Wash. Post, 9/1/66, D7; Clark, NYT, 9/7/66, 26)	...
nasa released its 1,000th Tech Brief, one which described development of improved titanium alloy of possible value in field of medicine. Potential industrial uses of inorganic fibers developed as reinforcements in materials for spacecraft were discussed in Non-Glassy Inorganic Fibers and Composites, issued by NASA Office of Technology Utilization. Techniques used to monitor astronauts’ blood pressure could be adapted to prolong the lives of persons with certain types of heart disease, concluded Westinghouse Research Laboratories engineers William J. Jones and Wyatt C. Simpson in monograph entitled NASA Contributions to Cardiovascular Monitoring. Study was conducted for nasa’s Office of Technology Utilization, (nasa Releases 66-238, 66-246, 66-250) During September: usaf had begun evaluation studies of Adam (Air Deflection and Modulation) II—a revolutionary type of aircraft with engines located inside the wings—at Wright-Patterson afb. A full-span, powered model of the propulsive-wing V/Stol aircraft would be designed, built, and tested by ltv Aerospace Corp. under a 15-mo., $439,000 contract jointly funded by usaf and usa. Wind-tunnel tests would be made at LaHC. Aircraft could be used in both military tactical and commercial passenger versions, (afsc Release 154.66)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was appointed chairman of the board of Royal Crown Cola International, Ltd. (AP, Wash. Post, 10/25/66, C8)
Gemini iv Astronaut Edward H. White II, first American to walk in space, told AP that the most important word of advice he had given Astronaut David Scott, scheduled for extravehicular activity during the March 15 Gemini VIII mission, was: "Don’t get in a hurry. "Take things slow and try not to hurry and rush, because you can’t do things in a real rapid manner up tliere. It’s better to go on the slow, deliberate approach.” (AP, Chic.Trib., 3/11/66)
Dr. Donald P. Burcham, jpl Voyager program manager, told Aviation Week in an interview that heavy funding for the Voyager Mars program was anticipated with FY 1968 funds if the Vietnam war did not create new funding problems. (Av. Wk., 5/30/66, 40)
M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by L/C Donald Sorlie (usaf), was air-launched from B-52 aircraft at 45,000-ft. altitude in 10th glide flight at Edwards afb; purpose was to explore lateral and longitudinal stability and control characteristics with dampers on and off. (nasa Proj. Off.)
gemini xii pilot Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., told msc news conference that with proper equipment, like the waist straps and foot restraints he used during Eva, a man could work outside with no fear of fatigue—if he were well trained. Following press conference, Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Aldrin together with a group of msc, ksc, nasa Hq., and industry Gemini program participants flew to lbj Ranch for visit with President Johnson, who said: "The splendid performance of man and machine in Gemini has been a product of the American system at its best. "The months ahead will not be easy as we reach toward the moon.... But with Gemini as the forerunner, I am confident that we will overcome the difficulties and achieve another success.” Group returned to MSC for formal awards ceremony. Receiving NASA Exceptional Service Medal were Gemini xii crewmen James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.; Col. John G. Albert (usaf), etr; Osro H. Covington, gsfc; and John D. Hodge, MSC. NASA Distinguished Service Medal: Dr. George E. Mueller, omsf; and Charles W. Mathews, MSC. Outstanding Leadership Medal: Robert F. Thompson, msc; John J. Williams, ksc; and M/G Vincent G. Houston (usaf), etr. NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Award: James A. Chamberlin, MSC. NASA Public Service Award: John F. Yardley, McDonnell Aircraft Corp.; Bastian Hello, Martin Co.; Bernhard A. Hohmann, Aerospace Corp.; Walter D. Smith, Martin Co.; Walter F. Burke, McDonnell; Louis D. Wilson, Aerojet-General; Lawrence A. Smith, Lockheed; William B. Bergen, Martin Co.; George M. Bunker, Martin Marietta; B/G Paul T. Cooper, afsc Space Systems Div.; Daniel J. Haughton, Lockheed; Roger Lewis, General Dynamics; James S. McDonnell, McDonnell Aircraft; R. I. McKenzie, Aerojet-General; L. Eugene Root, Lockheed; David S. Lewis, McDonnell; and Jack A. Bowers, Martin Marietta. NASA Superior Achievement Award: Arthur W. Vogeley, Richard J. Allen, LeRoy E. Day, John A. Edwards, Eldon W. Hall, Vearl N. Huff, and William A. Summerfelt, NASA Hq.; and Anthony L. Liccardi. NASA Group Achievement Award: Gemini Astronaut Team, Manned Spaceflight Network Team, Gemini Spacecraft Launch Team, Gemini Program Office at MSC, Gemini Program Office at NASA Hq., and Gemini Support Team at msc. (msc Roundup, 11/25/66, 1, 8; Sheehan, NYT, 11/24/66, 36; Pres. Doc., 11/28/66, 1718-9)
zvaa’s Rocketdyne Div. at Edwards afb was struck by afl-cio United Auto Workers in a wage dispute. An estimated half of the 227 workers in UAW bargaining unit stayed off their jobs. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 2/1/66, A9)	_ During January: Series of tests was being completed by NASA msc’s Landing and Recovery Div. to check out direction and finding equipment for homing an Apollo spacecraft for post-landing location and recovery. Tests were performed off Galveston Island in Gulf of Mexico using Apollo boilerplate spacecraft with the Apollo Recovery Beacon and Apollo Survival Radio transmitting signals. Homing runs were made from altitudes of 28,000 ft. to 500 ft. to determine range of direction finder receiver onboard a usaf HC-130H air rescue aircraft with the Apollo Recovery Beacon and Survival Radio on the spacecraft in the Gulf. Equipment had performed as expected with line-of-sight acquisition of boilerplate Apollo on all homing runs by the aircraft, (msc Roundup, 1/21/66,3) During January: Eulogies for the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, and the late Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II, nasa Director of Space Medicine, appeared in Air Force and Space Digest: Walter T. Bonney said of Dr. Dryden: "Hugh Dryden was a deeply religious man. He held that man’s life at its fullest is a trinity of activity, physical, mental, and spiritual. Throughout his life he preached the compatibility of religion and science, and he lived what he preached. No less, he was a realist; and so, as in 1954, he would often remind his listeners that: 'I am not one of those few who believe that we can abolish the use of force in the world. As a nation we find it necessary to build great military power. I am confident that such strength is a greater contribution to the peace of the world ... than military weakness.’ "In 1947, he was called to direct the work of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. His tasks were enormously difficult—radically new and expensive research facilities had to be provided, but even more important, learning the nature of the intricate problems of flight in the new speed ranges and methods for their solution demanded new concepts of team activity and functional coordination. His leadership, disarmingly light and unobtrusive, was amazingly perceptive and effective. Facilities were obtained and changes were made; the period 1947-58 became what might be truly called naca’s golden age. "With establishment of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (of which naca was the nucleus), he undertook the role of scientific leader, reporting to the Administrator, and made of it a position of paramount influence. He rejoiced in the US policy that activities in space should be devoted to peaceful purposes and worked to promote international space cooperation; but no less, he saw in US exploration of space an activity essential to the strength and security of the nation. As perhaps never before, his great wisdom and his unexcelled mastery of the art of the possible were in those later years valued and used to their fullest.” Editor John Loosbrock said of Dr. Lovelace: "In widening circles, the full import of Randy’s untimely death becomes apparent. The Air Force Association and the Aerospace Education Foundation have lost a distinguished leader. The medical profession is poorer for the passing of a brilliant surgeon, an imaginative ^researcher. The United States Air Force will miss his sound advice and pioneering efforts in the special kind of medical knowledge that is required for those who fly—in air and in space. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration must find new leadership for its space medical effort. The entire nation and the world itself will find that Randy Lovelace’s death leaves a large and well-nigh unfillable niche.” (AF/SD, 1/66) During January: Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Special Assistant to NASA Administrator, paid tribute to the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, in Applied Mechanics Reviews on Dr. Dryden’s scientific and engineering accomplishments. Dr. Bisplinghoff noted that the naca, under Dr. Dryden’s leadership, "produced a vast body of new knowledge which made possible routine supersonic flight and laid much of the ground for space flight that was to come. We discern here, perhaps as much as any other place, the impact of Dryden’s leadership on the nation’s destiny. The development of high-speed wind-tunnel facilities and a companion competence for theoretical research within the naca contributed, in the opinion of the author, more than any other single factor to the leadership of the United States in supersonic flight. . . .” (AMR, 1/66, 1-5)
nasa announced appointment of Robert E. King, formerly director of labor relations for General Dynamics/Convair, as NASA Director of Labor Relations. King would provide overall direction for NASA’s external labor relations program; personally coordinate major policy issues and decisions affecting labor relations with dod, aec, and Dept, of Labor; and administer a positive labor relations program to prevent or resolve labor disputes between NASA contractors and their labor unions. He would report to William Rieke, Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, (nasa Ann.)
Scientific and technological knowledge must be directed to the "making and keeping of peace,” Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of Office of Science and Technology and science adviser to the President, told General Electric Forum. "Science will not be the sole contributor toward this end. ... Its role must be to relieve those pressures that have traditionally been the causes of political, social, and economic instability—pressures which have always led to an upheaval of social order. By helping to alleviate poverty, ignorance and disease, and by improving food supplies and living conditions, science can help to remove the causes of war. . . .” (GE Forum, 7-9/66, 8)
William R. Berry reached 19,000-ft, altitude before landing his hotair balloon "City of San Francisco” near Antioch, Calif., after 65-min., 30-mi. flight from Livermore, Calif. If endorsed by National Aeronautic Assn., altitude would break 15,600-ft. world record for hot-air balloons set by Don Piccard in 1965. (AP, Wash. Post, 7/11/66, A8)
Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of OfficeAif Science and Technology, said in an interview with Robert Cahn of Christian Science Monitor: "There are two kinds of breakthroughs. There are those which come through completely new insight and understanding, which is what we usually mean by a scientific breakthrough. You might consider as scientific breakthroughs the discovery of a new kind of nuclear force or the discovery of a new fundamental particle. Then there are the more common breakthroughs in technology—the harnessing of principles in new and unusual ways to achieve the ends you want. Sending a man to the moon and back is one of these.” (Cahn, CSM, 1/25/66) Guest panelist Lord C. P. Snow, joint parliamentary secretary of U.K.’s Ministry of Technology, told Committee that U.K. had no intention of becoming totally dependent on U.S. technology: "By and large, our technological position is uncomfortable, and we have got to change it. . . before we get our economy sturdy again. ... It will take ten years to do all that has to be done. But it will be done.” Lord Snow also made these points: (1) if U.K. could not maintain a high competence in certain areas of advanced technology, she would lose her talented young men, "slide into somnolence and be no good” to herself, America, or the world; (2) the computer or cybernetic revolution would be the biggest revolution mankind had known; (3) mathematics would "take on a new relevance in all advanced societies.” Noting danger that allocational decisions for research in pure and applied science may involve "too much concentration of power,” Lord Snow added: "The scientific results— not the technological results—. . . of observational and radioastronomy have been greater by an order of magnitude than the scientific results of space exploration.” In discussion period, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Cal Tech president, commented: ". . . though I think I would agree with you generally, I hope you do not minimize the scientific results that have come from ... recent space exploration flights—the understanding of the earth’s magnetosphere, the nature of the solar wind, our closeup views of Venus, the Moon, and Mars have added a very substantial amount to our understanding ... of these objects and of interplanetary space ...” When Lord Snow replied that "space things are interesting, but not at the moment to the same degree”, as radioastronomy, Dr. DuBridge said: "Give us another 20 years.” Dr. Charles C. Price, Univ. of Pennsylvania chemist, pleaded for support of more basic research in the areas of living systems and suggested that "the more applied agencies such as NASA, nih and aec put increased emphasis on the support of fundamental research and education in chemistry ...” (Proceedings, House Comm, on Science and Astronautics, 1/25-27/66)
Reorganization of nasa Office of Space Science and Applications (ossa) "to involve its operating offices more deeply in planning the use of manned spaceflight capabilities for scientific exploration of space” was announced by Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell. Several individual programs were reassigned: Pioneer interplanetary probe program from Lunar and Planetary Programs to Physics and Astronomy Programs; geodetic satellite program, including Geos and Pageos, from Physics and Astronomy Programs to Space Applications; management of programs leading to acquisition of scientific data through remote sensing from Manned Space Science Programs to Space Applications; Manned Space Science Programs office was renamed Manned Flight Experiments Office/ossA, to supervise all ossa manned flight support. Dr. John R. Clark, who had been Director of ossa (Sciences), was named Deputy Associate Administrator for ssa (Sciences). Robert F. Garbarini, who had been Director of ossa (Engineering), was named Deputy Associate Administrator for ssa (Engineering). All ossa advanced study efforts under Advanced Missions Staff would report to Dr. Clark. Acting director of that staff would be Dr. John E. Naugle. (nasa Release 66-27)
Wilhelm Forster Observatory, West Berlin, reported U.S.S.R. had launched a satellite at 7:20 a.m. edt from space center in Baikonur. Spokesman said it had not been determined whether spacecraft was manned, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh said report appeared to be in error and had apparently stemmed from misinterpretation of Soviet transmissions associated with tracking of previously launched Cosmos spacecraft. He added that if the U.S.S.R. did attempt launching, nothing got into orbit. U.S.S.R. made no comment. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/20/66)
In msc ceremony, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented Gemini x Astronauts John W. Young and Michael Collins nasa Exceptional Service Medals for "outstanding contribution to space flight and engineering,” and the astronauts reviewed their July 18-21 mission for the press. Pilot Collins revealed that maneuvering difficulties during his walk in space had forced him to approach Gatv vm three times before successfully retrieving a micrometeoroid experiment. He felt the "basic problem” in Eva was that "without some sort of handholds or restraining devices, a large percentage of the astronaut’s time is going to be devoted to torquing his body around until it is in the proper position to do some useful work.” Command Pilot Young said mission’s fuel shortage had been caused by large out-of-plane error, not human error as previously believed: "We had to use a brute force method of rendezvous [with gatv x]. That takes quite a lot of fuel.” (Transcript)
Discussing the urgency of nasa’s deciding "what to do in space after the first Apollo astronauts return from the moon about 1970,” William Hines said in the Washington Evening Star: ". . . it is hard to forget a hint, dropped ... by a leading Russian space official several years ago. The Soviet Union, this functionary suggested, might very well celebrate the 50th anniversary of its great revolution by having cosmonauts plant a flag on the lunar surface. That deadline—if it is a deadline—is now less than 20 months away. "But suppose the Soviet Union is not racing us to the moon, or for that matter suppose that she is. In the present state of planning, the U.S. with the moon in its grasp would be very much like a dog chasing an automobile—what does he do with it if he catches it?” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66)
Gemini IX-A was officially cleared for launching June 1 on three-day mission that would include rendezvous, docking, and extravehicular activity. After hearing reports from the astronauts, launching pad crews, and the worldwide tracking network, William C. Schneider, mission director, declared Gemini IX-A "ready to go.” (NYT, 5/29/66, 58; upi, Wash. Post, 5/28/66, Al)
A Soviet victory in the race to achieve first manned lunar landing "would be a worldwide propaganda disgrace because we ourselves chose the target . . . [and] a crushing political blow at home to the President linked with it, which the present White House incumbent has been from the inception,” wrote William J. Coughlin in Missiles and Rockets. He suggested a possible solution: ". .. extend the U.S. national goal prior to a manned lunar landing by either the U.S. or the Soviet Union. Then, if the Russians were the first to arrive on the Moon, we would be in a position to gracefully acknowledge their achievement while pointing out that to us the Moon was but a way-station en route to a more distant objective. If we accomplished the first landing, we would also have the benefits of victory. But we would not be so exposed in the event of a defeat. . . . "Without establishment of a higher goal and a greater challenge, U.S. space capability will dissipate. NASA efforts to prevent this by getting a worthwhile Apollo Applications Program under way have not met with notable success. This provides a second good reason for lifting our national goal. . . .” (Coughlin, M&R, 5/2/66, 46) During week of May 2: msc officials had not pinpointed exact cause, but had isolated probable cause of faulty thruster which prematurely terminated Gemini viii mission March 16, Missiles and Rockets reported. Corrective action would affect all these components on Gemini 9 and later spacecraft. Gemini program manager Charles W. Mathews emphasized that thruster and its associated hardware and electronics were contained in adapter module abandoned by crew in orbit prior to reentry. "If we can believe telemetry data, we can isolate the cause of the problem to either spacecraft wiring or thruster valve solenoids,” Mathews said. Specific trouble spot within wiring or valve solenoids would be difficult to determine without testing actual equipment. (M&R, 5/9/66, 17)
X-15 No. 3 was flown to 3,580 mph (mach 5.11) and 254,200-ft. altitude by NASA pilot William H. Dana for altitude buildup, micrometeoroid collection, measurements of total solar flux and broadband light distribution by JPL spectroradiometer, and radiometer measurements of ultraviolet exhaust plume characteristics. (X-15 Proj. Off.; fbc Release; jpl Release 408)
Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R-Ill.) inserted into the Congressional Record a tribute to the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator: "Dr. Dryden was highly respected by his colleagues both as an administrator and as a scientist-engineer. He will hold an eminent place when the history of man’s accomplishments in space is written. Although the country mourns his passing he wi]l be long remembered for his many contributions to the good of his country.” (CR, 1/10/66, 29)
NASA would ask $1 billion for Apollo Applications programing in FY 1968 to prevent a lapse in manned space flight by offsetting reduction in expenditures and aerospace industry manpower for Project Apollo, William Normyle reported in Aviation Week. He continued: "nasa was permitted by the Administration to request only $41.9 million for Apollo Applications in Fiscal 1967. Some of nasa’s advanced planners argued for $500 million in the Fiscal 1967 budget now under consideration, but the agency went to the Bureau of the Budget with a request for only $270 million, which was reduced to the $41.9 million.” (Normyle, Av. Wk., 4/25/66, 30)
William L. Green, Jr., executive assistant in NASA’s Office of Public Affairs and former usia press officer, was appointed nasa Deputy Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, (nasa Release 66-140; AF)
Sen. John J. Sparkman (D-Ala.), speaking on floor of Senate, pointed out the contributions of small business to Gemini program and surveyor i mission and said they were "irrefutable evidence that there is still a significant place in our economy for the ambitious and talented ... in new and growing business firms.” (CR, 6/8/66, 12053)
NASA established new program offices at MSC and MSfc to "handle the increasing level of activity involving Apollo Applications.” Offices— headed by George M. Low at MSC and Leland Belew at MSFC—would manage "activities concerned with projects using ojpdy hardware for purposes in addition to the manned lunar landing.” To provide "program management and direction” for msfc’s consolidated research and technology program and to coordinate activities with NASA Hq., MSFC established new Experiments Office headed by Dr. William G. Johnson. (nasa Release 66-172: msfc Release 66-151)
Benefits of U.S. space program were emphasized by NASC Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh at aiaa meeting in St. Paul. He cited in particular space program’s contributions to education, saying, "it has added immeasurably to total available knowledge of man, of the earth, and of the solar system. . . . Funds have flowed from NASA ... to our educational institutions in the form of scholarships and fellowships, in the form of new laboratories, and research opportunities. It is estimated that from this one source about 1,000 new Ph.D.’s are added annually to this resource of the Nation ... and ... it has been a catalyst and a stimulus to education throughout the whole country. . . .” (Text)
Cosmonautics Day in U.S.S.R., celebrating fifth anniversary of first manned space flight by Yuri Gagarin, was marked by condemnations of military orientation of U.S. space efforts and predictions of Soviet space successes. Cosmonaut Gagarin, speaking in the Kremlin, said: "American scientists and cosmonauts have carried out a number of interesting experiments. This is to their credit. It is to be deeply regretted, however, that American cosmonautics is increasingly falling under the influence of the Pentagon, which regards outer space as the theater of future military operations.” Gagarin pledged "all his energies and knowledge” to help in the lunar mission and said man must make himself at home on the moon "to establish stations which will serve as points of departure for longer space voyages and also as astronomical observatories and scientific laboratories.” Cosmonaut Gherman Titov, speaking in a taped interview on Moscow television, predicted that "builders and assemblers will one day exit into space and put together various parts of space stations, assemble spaceships and stations on the moon, and build various structures.” In a Pravda article Marshal Konstantin Vershinin, head of Soviet Air Force, predicted a new manned space mission that could take several cosmonauts through the Van Allen radiation belts. He noted that biomedical data from the cosmos cx flight would "doubtlessly . . . be used in preparing new manned space flights.” In an interview published in Prague, Cosmonaut Konstantin Feok-tistov predicted that man would land on Mars and Venus between 1970 and 1980. (Pravda, 4/12/66, 2; Wash. Post, 4/11/66, A8; AP, NYT, 4/11/66, 37; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/11/66, A8; upi, NYT, 4/14/66, 7; Wash. Post, 4/13/66, A14; Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 4/13/66)
msc Director of Medical Research and Operations Dr. Charles A. Berry received aiaa’s IS 66 John Jeffries Award "for outstanding contributions to the advancement of aeronautics through medical research.” Presentation was made at aiaa Military Aircraft Systems Meeting in Dallas. (msc Roundup, 10/28/66, 1)
nasa test pilot John B. McKay flew X-15 No. 1 to 3.,511 mph (mach 5.06) and 251,000-ft. altitude to collect micrometeorites. As secondary mission, pilot performed maneuvers to check horizon scanner, electrical loads, and wing-pod flutter. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb appointed Dr. John F. Clark as Director of gsfc. Dr. Clark, formerly Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Science), had been Acting Director of GSFC since July 1965. (nasa Release 66-105)
NASA’s Eighth Annual Honor Awards Ceremony was held in Washington, D.C. NASA Administrator James E. Webb accepted from Mr. and Mrs. C. Thomas Clagett, Jr., for placement at ksc a replica of the bronze Kennedy bust sculpted by Felix de Weldon for the John F. Kennedy Memorial Library; and from the American Society of Gvil Engineers, the 1966 Outstanding Gvil Engineering Achievement Award for ksc’s Launch Complex 39. Mr. Webb presented nasa’s Distinguished Public Service Medal to Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner, chairman, Graduate Research Center of the Southwest’s Board of Trustees, who emphasized the need for careful and immediate post-Apollo planning in his keynote address: "We now have a powerful machinery for the command of space— trained specialists, mighty rockets, a technological dexterity that is unsurpassed. But to keep this capability, we must have new strategic objectives. And that there are many worthwhile and compelling objectives there can be no doubt. . . . "I would assert that it is now imperative that more advanced space strategies be adopted—and quickly—if our space program is to remain efficient and effective. And I would suggest that whatever this further strategy, it employ and advance our full capability in science, men, mechanisms, and skill. ...” Recipients of Distinguished Service Medal: Dr. Hugh L. Dry den, former Deputy Administrator (posthumously); Dr. T. Keith Glennan, first NASA Administrator; and Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.), former AFSC Commander. Recipients of Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal: Richard F. Arenstorf, msfc; Helmut J. Horn, msfc; Norman F. Ness, Gsfc; and George F. Pezdirtz, LaRC. Outstanding Leadership Medal: John F. Clark, gsfc; Edgar M. Cortright, Hq,; Robert L. Krieger, Wallops; George J. Vecchietti, Hq.; Harold B. Finger, Hq.; Harry H. Gorman, msfc; Edmund F. O’Connor, msfc; Eberhard F. M. Rees, msfc; and Herman K. Weidner, msfc. Exceptional Service Medal: M. Helen Davies, arc; Herbert A. Wilson, LaRC; Robert A. Rush worth, usaf; Roll D. Ginter, Hq.; David S. Gabriel, lrc; Edmund R. Jonash, lrc; J. Cary Nettles, lrc; Wilfred E. Scull, gsfc; Harry Press, gsfc; Leland F. Belew, msfc; Lee B. James, msfc; William G. Johnson, msfc; and Peter A. Minderman, ksc. Group Achievement Award: jpl; lrc; LaRC (2); and Hq. Space Nuclear Propulsion Office. Public Service Award: Grant L. Hansen, General Dynamics Corp. (Program; Text AF/SD, 1/67/54-5)
President Johnson issued statement after gemini vm carrying Neil Armstrong and David Scott had splashed down safely following difficulties encountered in flight: "They are disappointed that their mission could not continue, but Gemini 8 accomplished the first docking in space—a major step on the course we have set. The information they have acquired will help us to perfect the spacecrafts that will carry us even further. "From their skill and strength we all take heart, knowing that the personal qualities of the astronauts and their colleagues will ultimately prevail in the conquest of space. We are very proud of them.” (Pres. Doc., 3/21/66, 400)
Possible explanation of astronaut’s inability to see stars on earth’s daylight side was presented by physics professors Edward P. Ney and W. F. Hugh in Science: a "spacecraft corona”—cloud of particles formed by waste materials shed from spacecraft—might produce glow that would hide stars dimmer than fourth magnitude. Corona had been discovered by former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., who reported during his Feb. 20, 1962, orbital mission in friendship 7 that he was being accompanied by a cloud of "fireflies.” (Science, 1/15/66, 297-9)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) flew X-15 No. 2 to 4,250 mph (mach 6.33) and 98,900-ft. altitude during 9-min. flight, successfully using full external propellant tanks for first time and setting new speed record for X-15 aircraft. Previous 4,104-mph (mach 6.059) record had been set by the late Joseph A. Walker (nasa), June 27, 1962. (X-15 Proj. Off.; dpi, NYT, 11/19/66, 24)
Technology and automation derived from U.S. space effort could not raise social, educational, moral, or religious values, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of nasc, told Churchman’s Club in Baltimore, but "science and technology do increase the opportunity to make improvements. Where there is more leisure, more accumulated knowledge, and greater understanding, there is also increased opportunity to improve character and raise human values. Certainly, the opportunity which such progress gives toward the elimination of war is an impressive justification for the entire space program.” (Text)
X-15 No. 1 was flown to 3,652 mph (mach 5.34) and 130,000-ft. altitude by Maj, William J. Knight (usaf) to check out electrical loads, nonglare glass, stick kicker, and shade window. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
Thirtieth anniversary of Jet Propulsion Laboratory of Cal Tech. In March 1936 Dr. Theodore von Karman approved initiation of rocket propulsion studies by Frank J. Malina with the assistance of John W. Parsons and Edward S. Forman at the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory, (nasa Historian)
Astronaut David R. Scott would attempt—during about 90 min. outside earth-orbiting Gemini 8 spacecraft—to crawl about using hand holds, move through space using a maneuvering gun with nine times the capability of that used by Astronaut Edward H. White II, and unscrew bolts at small mechanic’s station on the spacecraft, NASA announced at msc news conference. Gemini VIII mission, designed to test man’s ability to maneuver in space and the first rendezvous and docking mission, would take place before the end of the first quarter of 1966. Charles W. Mathews, Gemini program manager, said "the main significance of the mechanical work is that he [Scott] will be evaluating a tool that is specifically designed for space.” The special tool contained a motor to eliminate need for twisting motion by the astronaut that would swing his body around when he was weightless. Target for the rendezvous and docking—Gatv or Augmented Target Docking Adapter (Atda)—had not been chosen. (AP, NYT, 1/17/66, 12) Dr. Joseph F. Shea, manager of msc’s Apollo Spacecraft Office, said in an interview in Houston that the U.S. would achieve its goal of landing men on the moon and returning them safely to earth before the end of this decade: "No new inventions are needed. No breakthrough is needed. This certainly doesn’t mean that it is going to be easy. It is not going to be, but the technology needed to do the job is known now.” He stressed that the pace that had been set would have to be maintained until the goal was achieved. (Maloney, Houston Post, 1/16/66)
New evidence supporting theory that Venus’ environment could sustain life was published by Johns Hopkins Univ. astrophysicists William Plummer and John Strong in Astropkydcal Journal. Past measurements of microwave emissions from Venus had indicated very high surface temperatures. Plummer and Strong concluded, on the basis of recent detailed measurements from high-altitude balloon observations by Cal Tech radioastronomers, that possibly "30 percent of the observed microwaves in the past had no bearing on surface temperatures but rather emanated from electrical discharges within the cloudy atmosphere of Venus.” They estimated Venus’ temperature ranges from 580°F ai equator to 9°F at poles and said there are extensive regions—greater than earth’s land area—"where man would find the temperature comfortable.” (NYT, 4/18/66, 4; Wash. Post, 4/18/66, A7)
John A. Edwards, Director of Gemini Flight Operations, became Deputy Director, Gemini Program, in nasa Office of Manned Space Flight. He replaced LeRoy E. Day, who became Director of Apollo Test, (nasa Release 66-176)
Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., and Astronaut Donald K. Slayton (msc Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations) received gold medallions from Gov. Warren P. Knowles in Madison, Wis., after two-day homecoming celebration. Lovell, who had attended high school in Milwaukee, in turn presented state with Wisconsin flag he had carried for 14 days in space during Gemini vii flight Dec. 4-18, 1965. Slayton was born in Sparta, Wis. (AP, Chic. Trib., 2/25/66)
Dr. Eugene M. Shoemaker, chief adviser on geology for Interior Dept.’s Geological Survey, proposed 10-yr. lunar exploration program following first Apollo astronaut landings late in this decade that "would have nothing to do with exploiting natural resources of the moon.” He explained: "We are using our mineral resources at a fantastic rate. What we really need to sustain our economic needs in the years ahead is a . . . theory about how the earth was formed. A good way to develop this theory would be by comparison with another celestial body—and the moon is just such a body.” Cost would be some $1.5 billion a year. Proposal was made during interview with William Hines, Washington Evening Star. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9121/66, A9)
Aviation/Space Writers’ Assn, named William Hines of the Washington Evening Star recipient of the Robert S. Ball Memorial Award for excellent writing. Cited for his continuing coverage of NASA’s mariner iv Mars probe, Hines would receive a trophy and $300 at the Association’s annual meeting in New York May 24-26. (AP, NYT, 5/5/66, 6; AP, Wash. Post, 5/5/66, B2)
NASA announced sponsorship during 1967 of seven specialized summer programs of research and study for about 245 college and university faculty members in engineering and science. Developed by nasa and American Society for Engineering Education, programs would combine space research at NASA centers and parallel seminar-type studies at adjacent universities. Fellowships would be available for about 225 faculty members. Participating were: (1) Univ. of Alabama, Auburn Univ., and MSFC; (2) Case Institute of Technology and LRC; (3) Univ. of Houston, Texas a&m Univ., and MSC; (4) Univ. of Maryland, Catholic Univ., and gsfc; (5) Virginia Associated Research Center (Univ. of Virginia, Virginia Polytechnic Institute, and College of William and Mary) and LaRC. Also, NASA would sponsor five-week summer faculty program in space physics at Yeshiva Univ. in cooperation with Goddard Institute of Space Studies, (nasa Release 66-305)
Military should increase its interest in the Nation’s technological base rather than rely so heavily on the civilian sector for basic and exploratory research, suggested William Coughlin in Technology Week. He noted the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program: ". . . . much of the technology on which this military effort is based was developed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration on programs deliberately tied to the peaceful uses of space. It is a fair question to ask where a military space program would be today vis-a-vis the Soviet Union if the technological base had not been developed under NASA funding. "Other areas of military importance have not been as fortunate because they lack a civilian counterpart. Steps must be taken to see that development of a technical base in these areas is not overlooked. It is not easy to justify expenditure of manpower and funds in this somewhat invisible arena. . . .” (Coughlin, Tech. Wk, 11/14/66, 54) During week of November 14: Increasing application of engineering techniques developed in space program to medical problems was reported by participants at 19th Annual Conference in Medicine and Biology in San Francisco. Among developments reported: application of computer techniques to detection of pathological conditions and to mass diagnosis of heart disease; automation of classical laboratory techniques in hospital, resulting in increased accuracy and speed; use of new engineering devices to obtain information for better diagnoses; application of new engineering to treatment, including refinements on artificial heart and control of photosensitive epilepsy with a real-time computer. (Tech. Wk, 11/21/66, 30)
President Johnson established White House committee headed by Dr. Donald F. Hornig to study ways to help West European nations improve their technology. Serving with Dr. Hornig would be representatives of Depts. of State, Defense, and Commerce; NASA; aec; and Council of Economic Advisers. (AP, NYT, 11/27/66, 41; Wash. Post, 11/27/66, A6)
"When U.S. spacemen go to the moon, they will surely meet Soviet people there,” Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, visiting Sofia for World Federation of Democratic Youth congress, told Bulgarian newspaper Narodna Armiya. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/12/66, A6)
"Love as an emotion will play a very important role in the future in the populating of outer space,” Soviet scientist Igor Zabelin wrote in Moskva. "In the future when mankind will fulfill its mission of populating outer space, men and women will be sent in spacecraft somewhere for many years.” Noting that "when a couple lives together for five to seven years, they may get sick of each other and very often there is a divorce,” Zabelin warned that such coolness could cause grave problems in outer space, (tipr, Wash. Post, 12/4/66, M7) During 1966: In 1966, NASA attempted 36 major launches with 34 successes. Of 29 NASA missions, 22 were successes, dod orbited 70 payloads in 43 launches. U.S.S.R. launched 43 payloads and France, one. Highlighting NASA space achievements were closeup photographs of the moon provided by surveyor I and lunar orbiters i and n, the soft-landing on the moon by surveyor I, and the five two-man Gemini space flights, surveyor I transmitted more than 10,000 photographs of the moon; the two lunar orbiters returned a total of 635 lunar photographs. Engineering data from these spacecraft indicated Apollo Lunar Module (Lm) could land and operate safely on the lunar surface. In Project Gemini, NASA conducted five two-man space flights, successfully concluding the project [see Nov. 15] and bringing U.S. manhours in space to 1,993 hrs. 34 min. (compared to 507 hrs. 16 min. for U.S.S.R.). Major ground and flight tests in Project Apollo accelerated preparatory to 1st three-man Apollo/Saturn spaceflight, planned for early 1967. Three Uprated Saturn I’s were launched; Saturn V stages for the 1st flight model passed their final ground test firings. Atlas-Centaur liquid-hydrogen-fueled booster completed its development testing, demonstrating restart capability in space. Applications satellites launched were nimbus ii meteorological satellite, three essa satellites inaugurating essa’s operational meteorological satellite system, and Intelsat ii-a communications satellite for Com-SatCorp. The first Applications Technology Satellite, ATS I, was launched into synchronous orbit. Scientific achievements included orbiting of OGO hi, pageos I, explorers xxxii and xxxiii satellites, and pioneer vii interplanetary spacecraft. More than 300 meteorological sounding rockets and 100 scientific sounding rockets were launched. A total of 20 flights of the X-15 research aircraft were conducted; X-15 No. 2 piloted by Maj. William J.	Knight set a new record speed of 4,233 mph (mach 6.33). nasa-usaf flight research investigating sonic booms got underway in six flights with XB-70 aircraft; research for the U.S. supersonic transport program continued. M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle made 14 unpowered flights, and HL-10 lifting body made its first flight. Among the highlights in propulsion technology was static test firing of the 260-in.-dia. solid-propellant rocket motor, producing 3.5 million lbs. of thrust. Two test series of Nerva nuclear reactors were conducted. One, in 110 min. of power operation, demonstrated stability and controllability of the hot-bleed cycle nuclear rocket engine. The other involved first successful full-power operation and a restart operation, ending the program with an accumulation of more than 105 min. of reactor operation at full or near-full power. usaf flight tested its powerful Titan III booster and used it to orbit the first seven Idcsp satellites of an eventual worldwide military comsat system. Of the 43 Soviet payloads, 34 were Cosmos satellites and five, Luna spacecraft. Notable among these were cosmos cx, orbiting two dogs for prolonged period; cosmos cxxii, apparently first Soviet weather satellite; luna ix, achieving first soft-landing on the moon; and luna x, achieving first orbit of the moon. Also orbited were two molniya i com-sats and the 12-ton proton hi unmanned spacecraft used for cosmic-ray research; Yantar I ion-engine payload was flown in suborbital spaceflight test. France orbited her first instrumented scientific satellite, diapason i, the second satellite built and launched by France, (nasa Release 66-319; Major NASA Launches; nasc; Tass; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, passim; A&A 1966, passim) During 1966: International space events were highlighted by the U.N.’s agreement on a space treaty to govern "activities of states in the exploration and use of outer space, including the moon and other celestial bodies.” The draft treaty—suggested by President Johnson May 7—was negotiatedby the Legal Subcommittee of theU.N. Committee onthePeace-ful Uses of Outer Space. On December 19 the U.N. General Assembly adopted a resolution endorsing the treaty, subject to ratification by five nations including U.S., U.S.S.R., and U.K. By the end of 1966, 72 countries had cooperated with the U.S. in space research activities. Six countries joined the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (Intelsat), bringing the total membership to 54. France and U.S.S.R. entered into agreement on cooperative space research, including experiments in astronomy and communications. (U.S. Aeron, & Space Act., 1966, passim; A&A 1966, passim)
Program to seek basic principles of sonic booms—including flights over U.S. communities—was being prepared by a top-level, four-man Government committee, Evert Clark reported in the New York Times. Program hoped to obtain at least preliminary answers before Sept. 1 so that limitations on boom making could be written into Sst development contracts. Committee members: Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of Office of Science and Technology (ost) and Presidential science adviser; Dr. Nicholas Golovin, ost; Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara; and Dr. John R. Dunning, dean of Columbia Univ.’s School of Engineering and Applied Science. (Clark, NYT, 2/18/66, 8)
Secretary of Commerce John T. Connor announced appointment of Dr. George S. Benton, Chairman of Dept, of Mechanics at Johns Hopkins Univ., as director of essa’s Institutes for Environmental Research. Dr. Benton, an authority in atmospheric, oceanographic, and hydrological sciences, would assume his new duties in July. (Dept, of Commerce Release 66-60)
NASA named crews for second and third manned Apollo missions, scheduled for 1967. Prime crewmen for AS-205/208 were James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell Schweickart; backup crew was Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan. Prime crewmen for AS-503, first manned flight using Saturn V launch vehicle, were Frank Borman, Michael Collins, and William A. Anders; backup crew was Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, Jr., and C. C. Williams, Jr. (nasa Release 66-326)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb and Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara signed a Memorandum of Understanding establishing Manned Space Flight Policy Committee, joint nasa-dod committee which would meet regularly to determine top-level policy, ensure coordinated planning, and resolve matters concerning mutual participation in and support of manned spaceflight programs which could not be resolved at lower levels. Co-chairmen of the committee would be Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Deputy Administrator, and Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., dod Director of Defense Research and Engineering. Memorandum superseded Jan. 21, 1963, agreement between the two agencies on Gemini program, (nasa Release 66-26)
Negotiations by U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to acquire the 14,981-acre Sudden Ranch properties adjacent to Vandenberg AFB marked beginning of massive expansion operation for Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program, Missiles and Rockets reported. B/G Joseph S. Bleymaier, Deputy Commander for Manned Systems, afsc Space Systems Div., predicted that within five years, Vandenberg would have "continuous manned operations” involving 40 or more launches annually. (M&R, 1/10/66, 35)
First seven photos transmitted by surveyor i were donated to Clark Univ. by jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering as the school broke ground for a $5-million library honoring the late rocket pioneer Dr. Robert Hutchings Goddard, (upi, NYT, 6/6/66, 42; Berman, Wash. Post, 6/5/66, A14)
nasa’s decision to launch Mariner E—mariner iv’s backup probe—to Venus rather than Mars was criticized by William Hines in the Washington Evening Star: "As a Venus probe, just about everything conceivable is wrong with Mariner-E. Its solar panels are too big, but without them its center of gravity would be all wrong; its earth-seeking radio antenna— essential for long-distance communication—is oriented the wrong way; it is protected against cold rather than heat; its instruments are designed to explore a small planet with a thin atmosphere rather than an earth-sized object with a dense one. "Another Mariner flight to Mars promises far greater return . . . than a jury-rigged mission to Venus.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/6/66)
nasa and Swedish Space Research Committee (ssrc) signed Memorandum of Understanding to conduct pulsed laser radar experiments to determine relationship of noctilucent clouds to height, distribution, and scattering properties of cosmic dust and aerosol particles, ssrc would provide optical equipment and design and construct light transmitter optical system; nasa would provide laser head, power supply, and other 3' ment. Each agency would bear the cosl of the equipment it would y and the responsibilities it would undertake. Results of experiments would be made available to scientific world, (nasa Release 66-35) • Device to alter wavelength of a laser beam to tune it for specific tasks such as communications, surgery, analysis of materials, or industrial applications was patented by Bell Telephone Labs, physicists Drs. Joseph A. Giordmaine and David A. Kleinman. In patented method, laser beam would be passed at a calculated angle through a special crystal so that frequency of the emerging light would be a multiple of original beam’s. (Jones, NYT, 2/12/66,33)
U.S.S.R. released luna ix’s photographs of the moon for first time and criticized distortion of photos publicized by Jodrell Bank Experimental Station. Photos, shown on an eight-minute television program, were analyzed by scientists Vladimir Yurovsky, Yuri Mbelou-son, and Ivan Koval. Moon’s surface appeared very uneven with many small depressions and mounds. Surface near the station had not sunk into the soil to any substantial degree. No visible traces of dust were evident. At bottom of first picture, part of spacecraft, including antenna and two-faced mirror which reflected the lunar surface, could be seen. A small stone believed about 6XA ft. from the craft could have been a meteorite or could have fallen from a hill, in which case "we could presume there are some processes of movement on the moon’s surface,” scientists concluded. Tass announced details of luna ix’s structure and flight: 3,482.6-lb. spacecraft was an airtight package carrying radio system, program-timer, thermal-regulation system, power-supply sources, and television system ensuring 360° view of the landscape. Antennas mounted on outside of craft were set to open automatically after it had settled on lunar surface. Complete with shock-absorbing system and metal screens shaped like petals to protect it during touchdown, 220-lb. instrumented payload detached itself from engine immediately before landing, and two units landed at some distance from each other. Anatoli A. Blagonravov, chairman of the Soviet Commission for Exploration and Use of Outer Space, was critical of Jodrell Bank’s publication of luna ix photos and said that Jodrell Bank lacked the correct vertical and horizontal scales: "The horizontal scale of the British photographs had been shrunk by approximately 2.5 times.” Photos released by Moscow, vivid in detail and contrast, showed a landscape less pinnacled and strange than that in British versions. (Sullivan, NYT, 2/6/66, 76; Grose, NYT, 2/6/66, 1, 76; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/6/66, A14)
Summing up the effect of May 17 loss of Gemini IX mission’s Agena Target Vehicle, William Hines said in the Washington Evening Star: ". . . it is obvious that at the very least the American space effort has lost three weeks of precious time and possibly $25 million in money— the cost of the lost Hardware plus overhead. . . . "One thing should be clear from the experience of Gemini 9. "There was nothing of omission or commission that can be charged against NASA in the failure of the Agena’s Atlas launching rocket. If the hackneyed phrase 'random failure’ ever was properly used, it was in describing yesterday’s trouble. "The Atlas, as a standard space launching vehicle, has had 49 successes in 52 attempts over the last three years—a better success record than the over-all American space program has enjoyed in any year since its inception in 1957.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/18/66, A8)
Revolution in military communications "to which we are now fully committed and which we are actively pursuing,” was discussed by William Beecher in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "At this writing, the Pentagon plans a May launch of the first eight of a series of 14 to 22 repeater satellites in its Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project (Idcsp). The first eight, riding piggyback on a Titan III-C test booster, will be deposited into random orbits about 21,000 mi. up. Within 60 days thereafter, another six repeater satellites together with two gravity-gradient experimental satellites will be similarly orbited. If all 14 of the communications satellites function perfectly, sufficient coverage will be provided to obviate the need for a third shot of eight, Pentagon experts say. "Although meant primarily to perfect the technology of space communications, after a relatively short test-only period, this Idcsp would be made available for high-priority worldwide military traffic—for instance, important communications between Washington and Saigon. . . . "Then, in 1969 or 1970, the Defense Department hopes to put up a fully operational system, called the Advanced Defense Communications Satellite Project (Adcsp). As John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, described it in recent Congressional testimony, 'This system will take advantage of advances in both booster and communications technology which will permit the establishment of an economical, highly reliable system capable of providing many secure, jam-resistant, long-range communications circuits to support vital security operations wherever they occur.’ ” (Beecher, A&A, 5/66, 10)
nasa’s Procurement Office reorganized into two main divisions: Policy and Review, and Contract Management. George J. Vecchietti, Director of Procurement, named Paul A. Barron, formerly gsa Assistant General Counsel for Regulations and General Law,' Assistant Director of Procurement for Policy and Review. William P. Risso, formerly Special Assistant to Director of Procurement, was named Assistant Director of Procurement for Contract Management. Vecchietti also announced establishment of Procurement Surveys Div., with Harvey M. Kennedy, Jr., Director, and Staff Operations Div., with Harold E. Pryor, Director. (nasa Release 66-81)
Joint Chiefs of Staff believed U.S.S.R. was accomplishing much more in advanced weaponry than Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara was giving them credit for, reported Aviation Week. Gen. John P. McConnell, usaf Chief of Staff, was said to be especially concerned about Soviet developments in antimissile missiles and their radars, maneuverable warheads for icbms, military space systems, and advanced aircraft. During hearings on the FY 1966 budget, General McConnell had said the decision on whether to proceed with full-scale development of the advanced manned strategic aircraft (Amsa) should be made in FY 1967. Aviation Week pointed out McNamara did not make that decision in the the FY 1967 budget and dropped Amsa one category—from engineering development to advanced development. Also, in a posture statement before the Senate Armed Services Committee’s Defense Appropriations Subcommittee, McNamara appeared to contradict Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown’s view that the FB-111 was only a stop-gap bomber until Amsa was approved. Comparison of Boeing B-52C through F models, McNamara reportedly said, showed "the FB-111 is not an interim aircraft but is, indeed, a truly effective strategic bomber.” (Wilson, Av. Wk., 2/28/66, 16)
London bookmaker William Hill, who had offered 1,000-to-l odds against a manned lunar landing by the end of 1968, cut the odds to 10 to 1 after luna x entered a lunar orbit, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 4/6/66)
President Johnson’s waning interest in space was postponing NASA’s decision on a post-Apollo program, William Hines suggested in the Washington Evening Star, "nasa ... is more to be pitied than censured for this silence. The agency has been led down the primrose path by . . . [President Johnson] who suddenly lost interest in the now shopworn ingenue. "nasa has no plans because . . . [he] has permitted it to make none; aspirations yes, but plans no. ...” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/15/66, A23) *	nasa would negotiate $ 15-million fixed-price incentive contract with Douglas Aircraft Co. for 14 improved 2nd stages for Delta launch vehicle. GSFC would manage contract, (nasa Release 66-321) *	afsc announced awards to four aerospace companies: Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., $2-million initial increment to a $14-million fixed-price contract for production of Agena launch vehicles; Douglas Aircraft Co., $2.5-million initial increment to a $17.5-million fixed-price letter contract for production of Thor launch vehicles; and Aerojet-General Corp., $2.9-million initial increment to a $54.5-million contract, and TRW Inc., $2.9-million initial increment to a $50-million contract, both for r&d in an unmanned space technology program, (dod Release 1048-66; WSJ, 12/16/66, 4) *	News briefing on Project Apollo was held at msc. Dr. Joseph Shea, manager of NASA Apollo Spacecraft Office at msc, said nasa hoped to launch three manned Apollo missions in 1967 involving "essentially every test that needs to get done in order to insure that the lunar operation is proper.” He outlined the flights: (1) AS-204—three-man, earth-orbital mission of up to 14 days to check out crew, spacecraft, and ground equipment; (2) AS-205/208—10- to 12-day flight in which Uprated Saturn I boosters would launch an Apollo spacecraft with three-man crew and an unmanned Lunar Module (Lm) on successive days for rendezvous mission; and (3) AS-503—full-duration lunar mission rehearsal in earth orbit in which single Saturn V would launch manned Apollo spacecraft and Lm. Shea warned against undue optimism about a manned lunar landing in 1968. "It is literally true that there is no planned date at the present time for the lunar operation . . . and I don’t see how there can be until we have had hardware in orbit to understand what vestigial problems still remain.” Donald Slayton, msc Director of Flight Crew Operations, said that third, nonflying crew had been added to each Apollo mission for additional ground support. He also revealed that training for astronauts selected for Apollo lunar missions would be 40 weeks—14 weeks longer than Gemini training course. Comparing Mercury and Apollo training programs, AS-204 Command Pilot Virgil I. Grissom said: "When we started training for Mercury, we didn’t know what to train for. So we did everything. .. . Training for Apollo has been pretty straight forward. We know what we need to know and we know that we have to learn about the spacecraft, how to operate it and get our flight plan and our mission rules squared away. Back early in Mercury ... we were worried about whether a man could live and survive ... so we did a lot of things like spinning around in 3 axis machines that we don’t feel you really need anymore. . . .” Grissom confirmed that AS-204 mission would carry camera for live television coverage. (Text; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/7/66, A3)
Performance of Apollo Command Module (Cm), launched Feb. 26 from etr on AS-201 flight, was successful enough to obviate any delay in schedule for a 1969 manned lunar expedition, Dr. Joseph Shea, manager of msc Apollo Spacecraft Office, told Gladwin Hill of the New York Times. The Cm, on display at North American Aviation, Inc., in Downey, Calif., remained structurally intact, and the few minor technical problems that had developed during flight were not serious enough to cause any engineering problems in the assembly-line production vehicles for subsequent phases of the testing program, Dr. Shea said. "This was the first major confirmation of design processes and it went quite well.” (Hill, NYT, 3/12/66, 8)
Prominent details of the moon’s far side photographed by zond ill in July 1965 had been named by Soviet astronomers for great scientists, Tass reported. Among them were the Korolev thalassoid and the craters of Confucius, Spinoza, Mendel, Zhukovskiy, and Galois. Information relayed by zond ill would be included in second part of Atlas of the Other Side of the Moon, currently under preparation. First part was published in October 1960. Prof. Yuri Lipski, in charge of preparing the atlas, said one of the photos taken by lunar orbiter i that had been "kindly supplied by American researchers,” had revealed approximate ^ overlap of details in photo taken by zond hi while remainder of photo coincided in part with photos taken by Luna hi. (Tass, 9/27/66)
In Reader’s Digest article, William Hines, science editor of the Washington Evening Star, charged and documented what he described as a banding "together in a unique alliance, [of] NASA and the Urban Renewal Administration” to build NASA Electronics Research Center in Cambridge, Mass., at the cost of several citizens’ rights. He said: "It was a splendid arrangement. The glamor of a Federal space center would grease the way for urban renewal which, realistically, didn’t otherwise stand a chance of tearing up this thriving industrial area. NASA had captured a prize piece of real estate at a bargain-basement price— roughly $4 million—thanks to the fact that urban renewal would pay most of the 'real’ cost of the land and would take on the expense and dirty work of removing the occupants. And the Cambridge-Boston area was going to have all that money spent there. "There was only one catch: nobody had bothered to ask the opinion of the 94 businessmen and their 3,500 employees who were on the Kendall Square chopping block. Most didn’t realize what had happened until they read the newspaper headlines on August 21: $60-Million NASA Plant To Be Built in Kendall Square.’ ” (Reader’s Digest, 1/66, 99-104)
Changes in organizational structure of NASA Hq. were effective this date. Most important change was establishment of an organizational unit called the Office of the Administrator, which included the Deputy Administrator and his staff, the Associate Administrator and his staff, and the Executive Secretariat, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., newly appointed Deputy Administrator, was continuing to serve as Associate Administrator. Willis H. Shapley, Associate Deputy Administrator, serving as the principal assistant to Administrator James E. Webb and to Dr. Seamans, was responsible for policy planning and for general supervision of the agency’s work processes. The Executive Secretariat, headed by Col. Lawrence W. Vogel (usa), was responsible for channeling and scheduling work within the Office of the Administrator. Earl D. Hilburn continued as Deputy Associate Administrator. Director of the Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, Edmond C. Buckley, became Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition. (Other Associate Administrators were Dr. George E. Mueller, Manned Space Flight; Dr. Homer E. Newell, Space Science and Applications; and Dr. Mac C. Adams, Advanced Research and Technology.) Four Deputy Associate Administrators became Assistant Administrators: William B. Rieke, Industry Affairs; D. D. Wyatt, Programming; Adm. W. Fred Boone, Defense Affairs; and John D. Young, Administration. These were in addition to the four existing Assistant Administrators: Richard L. Callaghan, Legislative Affairs; Arnold W. Frutkin, International Affairs; Julian W. Scheer, Public Affairs; and Breene M. Kerr, Technology Utilization. Kerr also was serving as Assistant Administrator for Policy Analysis (formerly Policy Planning), (nasa Release 66-3; Organ. Chart, 1/2/66; NN 1132)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) flew X-15 No. 2 to 3,614 mph (mach 5.12) and 192,300-ft. altitude for pilot altitude buildup, star tracker experiments, and base drag studies. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
In summary of nasa-usaf X-15 flight operations, frc revealed that the three rocket-powered aircraft had completed 253 flight operations since first glide flight June 8, 1959: 156 were actual flights, eight were planned captive flights, and 89 were canceled because of weather or mechanical problems. The three aircraft had flown over 24 hrs. of free flight; 6 hrs. 29 min. faster than mach 3; 4 hrs. 13 min. above mach 4; 56 min. above mach 5; and 11 sec. above mach 6. On nine separate occasions, five different pilots had flown over the 50-mi. astronaut qualifying altitude: L/Col. Robert M. White, L/Col. Robert A. Rushworth, and Capt. Joseph H. Engle, all usaf; and Joseph A. Walker and John B. McKay, both nasa civilians. Four flights terminated in emergency landings, two of which seriously damaged the aircraft, but all three aircraft were still being flown. One flight had been made with modified X-15 No. 2 using external propellant tanks. Six current X-15 pilots included: L/Col. Robert A. Rushworth, Maj. William J. Knight, and Capt. Joseph H. Engle, all usaf; and William H. Dana, John B. McKay, and Milton 0. Thompson, all NASA civilians, (frc Release 2-66)
Employment in aerospace industry would increase to 1,266,000 by June 1966—a gain of 94,000 or eight per cent from September 1965, reported Karl G. Harr, Jr., president of Aerospace Industries Assn. Aircraft employment was expected to show greatest increase, with missile and space employment remaining relatively stable. (Aerospace News, 3/15/66) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., nasa Deputy Administrator, delivering the first Annual Dr. Robert H. Goddard Lecture, stressed the importance of the contributions of men such as Dr. Robert H. Goddard and Dr. Hugh L. Dryden to the dramatic development of the space program: "The history of nasa reflects much of Dr. Dryden’s understanding of how progress can be made and what the conditions are that produce effective responses to the challenges being faced. A pivotal concept that has guided NASA administration has been that of the relation of the research and development project to many rapidly growing disciplines of science and technology. A project serves a larger purpose than its own defined immediate ends. A project is a disciplined and organized effort directed to a specific objective; one of its principal characteristics is that it has a schedule. As such a project provides a creative and driving force in the total achievement of science, engineering, and technology _____” (Text) Wesley A. Kuhrt, United Aircraft Research Laboratories, predicted interplanetary and translunar tourist travel for FY 2001: "A six-day round trip to the moon via 35-passenger, nuclear-powered 'clipper’ ships would cost each adventurer $10,000. For an 18-month trip to Venus, the passenger would pay $32,000. Steerage class to Mars, a two-year undertaking, would cost $35,000. But for $70,000 a passenger could ride the Mars Express to and from the red planet in 11 months. . . .” All fares assumed the Government would underwrite the cost of developing the spacecraft, Kuhrt said. Other predictions made at the symposium included teams of superhuman astronauts bred over several generations as a result of present studies in genetics and molecular basis of life; communications between ordinary persons in their homes and anyone, anywhere; versatile robots to perform human tasks; cosmic cargo transported at $10 per pound; network of satellites to link everyone in the world so they could speak in their native languages via rapid automatic translating computers; and man-shaped robots sending back threedimensional pictures to human masters hundreds of miles away. Harvard astronomer Carl Sagan speculated that the trip from other galaxies had already been made and that earth had already been visited from space at least once. (Text) Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) told a luncheon audience that "we must lay out basic objectives far enough ahead that they will serve as relatively fixed goals—or in non-technical terms, as dreams. Such an early dream of man was to fly like a bird; later, we gradually translated this dream into making it easy for everyone to fly in an aircraft. We have these dreams and they affect our progress strongly. ...” To meet these ends, Karth recommended forming a "Hoover-type” Commission to review planning and decision-making system in the area of science and technology. In addition he cited the need for "frequent, systematic, large-scale surveys and analysis of science and technology from the near-term to the distant frontiers of knowledge. . . .” (Text) In a prediction of what the "Space Age Society” would be like in 2001, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh told the symposium: "The major development over the coming years will be the speed of change. We already have great difficulty maintaining our perspective regarding the change which has taken place during the last 8 or lO years. Well, that rate of change is like the tortoise pace compared with what; is coming in the future. ... "Some with fertile imaginations foresee the time when there will be large scale emigration from earth to growing settlements on the moon and the planets. While I see the great growth in the ability to travel to such distant spots safely and speedily, I see little likelihood of any sizable movement of population even though nuclear reactors would furnish much of the competence to make conditions in such places both livable and productive. My reason for not predicting such movement is due to the simple belief that living conditions are going to be so improved here on earth that few would want to leave. .. . "As for space travel, we can certainly let our imaginations soar, as we are now only in the infancy of growth. The space child has barely learned to walk. The future with its space travel being almost as common as airplane travel is today is yet to come . . . but it will come. Interplanetary trips, at speeds many times what we now attain, will take place in craft as reusable as the jet plane is today, with at least as many passengers aboard. . . . "One more thing I can predict with great confidence. The debate on the worthwhileness of space technology and space exploration—still continuing on the part of those of little vision—will have disappeared completely within a decade or so. The benefits will have become so obvious and the potential so exciting that even the most near-sighted will be aware of the rich space harvest. . . (Text; Weil, Wash. Post, 3/16/66, A10; Hoffmann, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/16/66) Importance of materials science and space vehicle technology was discussed by Milton B. Ames, Jr., Director of Space Vehicle Research and Technology, nasa Hq. oart. "The structural designer of future launch vehicles will face many new and challenging problems. Launch vehicles ... [will be] larger, complex, and more costly. If we are to reuse these launch vehicles without having to spend large sums of money either to bring them back or to refurbish them after recovery, major advances will be required in structural and materials technology.” Development of new materials and methods, such as "superinsulations” to prevent heat leakage; stronger shielding materials to protect spacecraft from meteoroids and intense radiation; advanced lifting-body designs for greater reentry precision; and folding spacecraft parts which could be reassembled in space, would play a major role in U.S. space program before the year 2000, he said. (Text) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, nasc staff member, discussed overall economic outlook for space age up to FY 2001. Sheldon noted that U.S. space program took about one per cent of gross national product and estimated that "Soviet Union is putting about two per cent of their Gnp into space efforts . . . .The close tie with military rocketry has speeded space development in these recent years, but it has also saddled space technology with an expendable ammunition philosophy rather than aiming at the lower operating costs of a recoverable transport philosophy. . . . "Today we probably are headed toward an age of conservation, and one of deliberate recycling .. . the task of the remainder of this century may include the development of closed ecological systems for long-duration space flight, and on a different scale, heroic measures to recycle waste water and to reprocess industrial and consumer wastes into reusable products. . . . "If our urbanized society requires closed ecological systems even here on Earth, we can, in effect, air condition whole cities.” Discussing weather modification and climate control, he said: ". . . whether we bend nature itself, or create new sealed urban units, each almost self-sufficient in its ability to control its temperature, clean and recycle its air and water, and put all other wastes to productive use, some such heroic measures will be needed as this century runs out.” (Text)
usaf XB-70 No. 2 flew 20 min. at mach 3—longest to date—and reached 70,000-ft. maximum altitude in 1-hr. 49-min. flight from Edwards afb. Pilots were North American Aviation, Inc.’s chief test pilot Alvin S. White and Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf). (Flight log; afftc pio)
nasa announced selection of 19 pilots, to join 31-member nasa astronaut team in early May: Vance D. Brand, civilian; Lt. John S. Bull (usn); Maj. Gerald P. Carr (usmc); Capt. Charles M. Duke, Jr. (usaf); Capt. Joe H. Engle (usaf); LCdr. Ronald E. Evans (usn); Maj. Edward G. Givens, Jr. (usaf); Fred W. Haise, Jr., civilian; Maj. James B. Irwin (usaf); Dr. Don L. Lind, civilian; Capt. Jack R. Lousma (usmc); Lt. Thomas K. Mattingly (usn); Lt. Bruce McCandless II (usn); LCdr. Edgar D. Mitchell (usn) ; Maj. William R. Pogue (usaf) ; Capt. Stuart A. Roosa (usaf); John L. Swigert, Jr., civilian; LCdr. Paul J. Weitz (usn); and Capt. Alfred M. Worden (usaf). During recruitment, which began Sept. 10, 1965, nasa received 351 applications of which 159 met basic requirements, (nasa Release 66-67)
Col. Donald Boyer Phillips (usa, Ret.), military aviation pioneer, died of pneumonia at age 74 in Alexandria, Va. Colonel Phillips, native of Washington, D.C., had designed, built, and flown his first glider in 1905. When he retired in 1947, he had flown in nearly 90 types of planes. (Wash. Post, 4/4/66, B2) During March: Study of Vertically Incident Cosmic-Ray Trajectories Using Sixth Degree Simulations of the Geomagnetic Field—consisting largely of computer-generated tables of cosmic-ray trajectories at more than 130 locations around the world—was issued by afcrl. Since cosmic ray trajectories are directly influenced by the configuration of the magnetic field, which varies diurnally, seasonally, and with solar-cycle variations, it was possible to derive information on the changing magnetic field by observing cosmic-ray events. Also, because calculations of cosmic-ray rigidities are equally valid for solar protons, calculation techniques developed under this study could be used to evaluate the trajectories of these solar particles as well, (oar Res. Rev., 3/66)
FAA had submitted to aircraft manufacturers a new supersonic transport (Sst) financing plan, reported William Chapman in the Washington Post. Manufacturers, who claimed they could not afford to pay 25% of expected $l-billion cost of next building stage, would be able to contribute a lighter share of development costs than they had been paying under the 75-25% cost-sharing plan arranged by President Kennedy. (Chapman, Wash. Post, 3/31/66, H8) Australia’s Minister of Supply Denham Henty announced that U.S., U.K., and Australia would cooperate in experiments with U.S. Redstone rockets at Woomera Range to study effects of rocket reentry into the atmosphere. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 4/1/66, A20; Reuters, NYT, 4/1/66, 24) ■> Japanese Transportation Ministry announced a seven-year program to establish system of navigation satellites to be launched in 1972. A new ministry, the Satellite Navigation Research Office, would begin to develop electronic equipment, ground stations, and control systems as soon as the government’s budget for FY 1966 was approved by the current session of the Diet. R&D program would he carried out entirely by Japanese scientists. (NYT, 4/1/66, 59M)
International cooperation on patents procedures and mechanized information retrieval was urged at Washington, D. C., meeting of National Association of Manufacturers’ Patents Committee. U.S. Commissioner of Patents Edward J. Brenner said that "most of the search or examining work in anywhere from 15% to 80% of the applications . . . could be eliminated” if patent offices exchanged information. (Beller, Tech. Wk., 11/7/66, 20)
Funeral of Soviet space designer Sergey Korolev was held in Red Square. After eulogies by Leonid Smirnov, deputy chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers; Mstislav Keldysh, President of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences; Nikolay Yegorychev, Moscow Gorkom Secretary; and Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, the funeral procession moved to the Kremlin wall where the urn containing Korolev’s ashes was placed in a niche. Commentary in the New York Times: "Death has finally declassified the role and identity of Academician Sergei P. Korolev, the man who provided the scientific and technical leadership of the vast Soviet rocket program. The extraordinary pomp of his state funeral in Red Square contrasted sharply with the almost complete anonymity imposed on him while he was alive. In the most fruitful years of his career, the man who led the Soviet Union’s march into the cosmos from the first sputnik to Leonov’s 'walk in space’ was normally referred to in the Soviet press only as the mysterious 'chief designer.’ Korolev’s rockets were powerful enough to send men into orbit and to put cameras into position to photograph the back side of the moon. But they were too weak to break the chains of secrecy that denied him, while he lived, the world applause he deserved.” (Tass, 1/18/66; NYT, 1/20/66, 31)
Referring to President Kennedy’s challenge five years ago "to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth,” William Hines commented in the Washington Evening Star on the progress made:"Of course, Kennedy did not 'invent’ space. Nor did he, in a single 1,100-word exhortation to Congress, create all the conditions needed to make a lunar program possible. The United States had quite a respectable space effort going for several years before Kennedy spoke, and indeed the first American astronaut had flown a brief suborbital mission three weeks earlier. "The foundations on which Kennedy could build a moon program were there. What he did—with advice and urging from many advisers including the then Vice President Johnson and the late 'grand old man of space,’ Hugh L. Dryden—was set a goal. . . . "The call to leadership in space came at a particularly troublous time in the new Kennedy administration’s development. In the month just past, April 1961, the United States had suffered two tremendous setbacks in what had been called 'the battle for men’s minds.’ On April 12 Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin orbited the earth—a full 10 months, as it turned out, before Astronaut John Glenn would match his feat. And on April 19 the bottom fell out of the ill-conceived Bay of Pigs adventure to overthrow Fidel Castro in Cuba.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/25/66, Al, A5)
Dr. W. C. J. Garrard, George K. Williams, and William W. Williams, Lockheed-Georgia Co. engineers, had been named recipients of Wright Brothers Medal by Society of Automotive Engineers for group report on development of soft-field and rough-field landing gear. (Av. Wk., 9/19/66, 25) jpl engineers, uncertain of cause of malfunction, speculated it might be result of stuck valve or insufficient power to operate engine’s triggering mechanism. They said unless it was corrected, surveyor ii could not softland since all three vernier engines were needed to stabilize spacecraft during decelerating descent to lunar surface. On Sept. 22, when it became apparent the mission could not be completed, engineering experiments were performed to obtain as much data as possible on spacecraft performance. All communication with spacecraft was lost 30 sec. after main retro ignition at 5:34 a.m. edt. Probable cause was mechanical failure within telecommunications subsystem due to centrifugal forces generated by high tumbling rate. surveyor ii impacted in area of moon southeast of crater Copernicus about 11:18 p.m. edt. Spacecraft was second in series of seven flights to prove out design, develop technology of lunar soft-landing, and provide basic scientific and engineering data in support of Project Apollo; it contained survey television system and instrumentation to measure lunar surface bearing strength, temperatures, and radar reflectivity, surveyor i, identically equipped, was launched May 30, successfully softlanded on moon June 2 in region of Oceanus Procellarum, and transmitted 10,338 pictures to earth. Surveyor program was under direction of ossa’s Lunar and Planetary Div.; project management was assigned to jpl; Atlas-Centaur booster was managed by lrc; prime contractor for spacecraft development and design was Hughes Aircraft Co. (nasa Release 66-248; NASA Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 9/21/66, Al; Wilford, NYT, 9/22/66, 2; NYT, 9/23/66, 25)
Astronauts David Scott and Neil Armstrong awaiting recovery in the Pacific Ocean after their gemini vm space Bight.
National Aviation Hall of Fame announced six additions: Glenn L. Martin and William F. Boeing,, both aircraft designers; Adm. John H. Towers, commander of first attempt at trans-Atlantic flight; B/G William Mitchell, pioneer advocate of aerial bombing; Robert Hutchings Goddard, U.S. rocket pioneer; and Lincoln Beachey, early designer of dirigibles. All were deceased. (AP, NYT, 12/29/66, 14)
X-15 No. 3 was flown by Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) to 3,204.5 mph (mach 4.65) and 92,100-ft. altitude in pilot familiarization flight. As secondary mission, pilot performed maneuvers to evaluate aircraft’s controllability and natural stability. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
XB-70 research aircraft, flown by Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf) and naa pilot Van H. Shepard, reached mach 2.53 and 60,800-ft. altitude in flight to generate sonic booms over instrumented sites and test structures at Edwards afb. (nasa Proj. Off".; upi, NYT, 12/22/66, 20)
Maj. Donald E. Keyhoe (usmc, Ret.), director of the National Investigations Committee on Aerial Phenomena, demanded at a press conference in Washington, D.C., that Congressional inquiry be made into Ufo’s and usaf’s handling of investigations of reported sightings, nicap had long charged usaf with suppression of evidence and censorship. (Carmach, Wash. Daily News, 3/29/66; Young, N.Y.J/Amer., 3/29/66,1)
William Hines charged in Washington Evening Star that publicity given to proposed U.S. supersonic transport (Sst) was . . part of a propaganda barrage aimed at the American taxpayer, who in the years ahead will be called upon to underwrite deficits clearly predictable in building and operating a costly fleet of airplanes capable of spanning the Atlantic in two hours. "The sst program has been publicized since the program’s inception in 1963 with the same combination of gobbledygook and public-relations hokum used so successfully in merchandising the moon program. Technological challenge, the asserted psychological-spiritual imperative, and the added spur of an international 'race’—all are cited as reasons compelling development of a 2,000-mile-an-hour super-airliner. "Actually the sst, when built and placed in operation, will be no more a free-enterprise product than the Saturn-5 moon rocket is. It will be built to government specifications, by contractors selected by the government, with development costs largely if not entirely underwritten by the government.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/19/66)
NASA msc announced that Astronaut John Young would be command pilot of Gemini 10; pilot would be Astronaut Michael Collins. No date had been set for the Gemini X mission, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 1/25/66)
Gen. William Hugh Blanchard, usaf Vice Chief of Staff, died at 50 after suffering heart attack at Pentagon meeting. General Blanchard was credited with landing first B-29 in China in March 1944. {NYT, 6/1/66, 43)	... During May: Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown said in an article written for NATO's Fifteen Nations that one of his principal tasks had been to find the most effective way of integrating technical and nontechnical advice. Of contributions scientists had made to the process of defense policy-making, he said: "First, the scientist, operating at the frontiers of knowledge, may have anticipated many political and military problems posed by scientific advance. Second, military necessity made the scientist a leader in applying sophisticated rational and mathematical analysis to the solution of some problems—especially resource allocation —which have been generated by scientific advance. "At the same time it must be acknowledged that advice from scientists had been far from infallible, especially where the advice touches upon aspects of a larger problem on which the specialist is less expert, and in some cases, may not even be fully informed.” (NATO's Fifteen Nations, 4-5/66, 18)
John F. Stearns, former chief of National Referral Center at Library of Congress, became Director of nasa’s Science and Technology Information Div., Office of Technology Utilization. He succeeded Melvin S. Day, who had been appointed Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization June 5. (nasa Ann.)
Twelve astronauts were selected for future NASA missions and two others assigned earlier were shifted to a different mission. Prime crewmen for the Apollo earth-orbital mission scheduled in the first quarter of 1967 were Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee; backup crew was James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart, NASA civilian employee. Prime crewmen for the Gemini XI mission scheduled in the last quarter of 1966 were command pilot Charles Conrad, Jr., and pilot Richard F. Gordon, Jr.; backup crew was Neil A. Armstrong, command pilot, and William A. Anders, pilot. James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., backup crew for the Gemini XI mission, were reassigned as backup crew for Gemini IX, Original Gemini IX backups Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan became prime crewmen for that mission after the Feb. 28 deaths of Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr., and Charles A. Bassett II. (nasa Release 66-67)
All participants in the Gemini X mission rehearsed their parts in preparation for July 18 flight. Astronauts John Young and Michael Collins went over flight plan from liftoff to splashdown and conducted review of all spacecraft systems. (Wilford, NYT, 7/15/66, 11)
gemini vm’s GATV had developed a "pretty serious problem,” msc Agena systems engineer Melvin Brooks revealed. The trouble, apparently in a yaw hydraulics system, had developed when mission controllers decided to fire the rocket system by remote control to shift the orbit from 186-mi. (299.5-km.) apogee and 184-mi. (296.3-km.) perigee to circular orbit at 253-mi. (407.33-km.) altitude—leaving it as a rendezvous target for the flight of future Gemini spacecraft. Rocket reached 330-mi. (531-km.) and then 442-mi. (701.6-km.) altitudes. Brooks called these "pretty serious offheadings, serious misalignments.” Eventually, the desired orbit of 253 mi. (407.33 km.) was obtained, gatv was expected to drop gradually to orbit of about 184 mi. (296.3 km.). Gemini vm flight director John D. Hodge said short circuit that had locked a yaw thruster on the Gemini instrument module into wide-open position, forcing emergency landing of the spacecraft March 16, had not been found, (dpi, NYT, 3/25/66; WSJ, 3/25/66, 1)
William A. Hyman, internationally known air and space lawyer and author, died in New York City. (AP, Wash. Post, 7/11/66)
Prof. Philip Handler of Duke Univ., member of the President’s Science Advisory Committee, said at the Asia-Pacific Seminar that the U.S. was the only nation in the scientific revolution and that the U.S.S JL, U.K., and West Germany had not yet entered it. He described the scientific revolution as dependent upon man’s brains and not upon water, coal, or iron, as was the industrial revolution. The computer, he said, was the chief symbol of the scientific revolution. (AP, NYT, 1/27/66, 3) January 24-26: At aiaa Third Aerospace Sciences Meeting in New York City, Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff was elected 1966 aiaa president. Dr. C. Stark Draper, chairman of mit’s Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, gave 29th annual Wright Brothers Lecture on the role of "informetics” in modern flight systems. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell chaired a special "Space Sciences Report” plenary session which considered priorities in planetary exploration and the interaction of solar wind with the planets. Donald L. Hunter of Kitt Peak National Observatory said Venus exploration was likely to be as interesting as exploration of Mars; high Venusian surface temperature did not rule out possibility of rudimentary life forms, and Venus’ environment might be less hostile than that of Mars. Manned round trips to Mars could be shortened to 450-560 days by a Venus "swingby,” according to Rollin W. Gillespie and Stanley Ross of NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; direct flights would take 800 to 900 days. Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator, was principal speaker at the Honors Convocation. He said: "Yesterday, President Johnson presented his budget for the coming fiscal year to the Congress. . . . This year, the process of sorting out priorities and allocating resources has been especially difficult. Abroad, there is the growing commitment to Vietnamese freedom. At home, there is the growing commitment to freedom from poverty, ignorance, ugliness, and unemployment. In addition to these and other commitments, the President’s budget once again reiterates the commitment made in 1958 and repeated year after year: to undertake the exploration of space for the benefit of mankind. Even in a year of extraordinary budget pressures, slightly more than $5 billion for NASA’s part in this enterprise have been requested. . .. "It is within this framework that the nasa program has been hammered out—not representing the sum of our program demands. However, as we indicated in our budget briefing for the Press this past weekend, we believe we have a balanced program of aeronautics and space research, of science and technology, of large scale manned exploration and unmanned probes and satellites. "We recognize there is an enormous responsibility attached to the planning, justification, and direction of a sum so large during a period so rich in other needs. . . . "We have reached a point where the exploration of space is no longer a promise but a hard fact, where scientific data and tested capabilities are in hand instead of in the future. ". . . The program that we have laid out for nasa for the coming year will meet the highest priorities of scientific and technological needs. It will permit flexible evaluation of the next major steps open to us in space. It will maintain the forward momentum that has been built up with energy and care over the past years. It will permit strong competition for those who wish to outstrip us and meaningful cooperation for those who can find communities of interest with us. It will provide an honest and practical balance between the many elements of scientific investigation, technological application and operational experience. It provides a challenge that will require hard work, hard judgment, and careful appraisal at every step of translation from plan into execution. It does not close to future exploitation the many options that have been built for the nation in the past. Most importantly, it recognizes that true national security is best measured by the useful knowledge in men’s minds and that the great arena of space remains a battleground between the intellect of man and the unknown.” Tribute to late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden was made at the Honors Convocation by L/G James Doolittle (usafr) : "On the second of December 1965 the world became poorer; our country lost one of its foresighted leaders; aeronautics lost a man who had devoted a major part of his life to its advancement; astronautics lost its great ambassador at home and at large and those fortunate of us—who had been privileged to know and work with him—lost a beloved, revered and respected friend and associate. "Dr. Hugh Latimer Dryden dedicated his whole life to the service of his fellow man. He was a doer, but a gentle person—a man who strove prodigiously, but instinctively did the kindly thing. He was eager and courageous. He had been critically ill for several years, but he worked hard and effectively up to a few days before his death. . . . "Hugh Latimer Dryden: engineer, scientist, administrator, public servant, patriot, theologian, realist. With his immediate family and all the nation we, his close friends and associates, mourn his passing. We will long remember him with affection, admiration, respect, and gratitude, for excellence endures.” Goddard Award, aiaa’s highest, was presented jointly to Hans J. P. von Ohain, Chief Scientist, Aerospace Research Lab., Wright-Patterson afb, for "his contributions to the achievement in 1939 of the first successful application of turbojet propulsion to aircraft”; and to A. W. Blackman, Chief of Propulsion, United Aircraft Corp., and George D. Lewis, Project Engineer, uac Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Div., for "their contributions to the understanding of the phenomenon of combustion instability and for their recognition of acoustical liners as a method of suppressing such instabilities in turbojet afterburners and rocket engines.” Sylvanus Albert Reed Award went to Clarence L. Johnson, vice president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., and designer of the U-2 reconnaissance aircraft and the YF-12A interceptor, for his "production of two triple-sonic military aircraft, for continuing personal design innovation, imaginative engineering, and practical manufacturing techniques that over the years have aided immeasurably in maintaining U.S. ascendency in defensive aerial weaponry.” 1966 Research Award was given to Prof. Shao-Chi Lin, Univ. of California (San Diego), for "basic research in the electric and electromagnetic properties of ionized gases, and for significant contributions to reentry physics.” (Texts; aiaa Release; aiaa Bulletin, 12/65, 693, 709, 710)
msfc engineers Michael J. Vaccaro and Haydon Y. Grubbs, Jr., ended 18day stay inside lunar vehicle simulator to test interior chamber design and investigate human factors of an enclosed cabin environment. During experiment they performed assigned tasks inside chamber, went outside in spacesuits to simulate going onto lunar surface to gather rock samples, and performed emergency tasks when the compartment walls were "punctured by meteoroids.” Results of experiment, conducted by Honeywell, Inc., might be used in developing hardware needed in future exploration of moon, (msfc Release 66-56)
Scientists were considering "capturing an asteroid” and, through nuclear propulsion, placing it in earth orbit where it could be analyzed, reported John Wilford in the New York Times. He said "experts” believed "capture of an asteroid will be possible as soon as it is possible to send manned expeditions to the surface of Mars or Jupiter.” Astronauts would take with them a separate rocket engine which they would anchor to asteroid’s surface. Rocket would have to "produce long-duration burn but because of asteroid’s low gravity would not have to be very powerful to push the asteroid toward a new orbit.” (Wilford, NYT, 2/27/66, E7)
In his first X-15 flight test, Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) flew X-15 No. 1 to 2,045 mph (mach 3.0) and 75,400-ft. altitude before making successful emergency landing at Cuddeback Dry Lake, Calif., when fuel tank unported 90 sec. after launch. There was no aircraft damage or pilot injury. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
President Johnson appointed bob Director Charles L. Schultze chairman of committee to oversee final review of recommendations made by Nov. 28-Dec. 1, 1965, White House Conference on International Cooperation. Schultze would be assisted by Conference’s executive director, Raymond D. Nasher, and White House special assistants Walt W. Rostow and Joseph A. Califano, Jr. (Pres. Doc., 8/8/66, 1025)
NASA’s "new policy of calling a spade a spade—and a failure a failure—in discussing the results of its manned operations in space” was noted by William Hines in the Washington Evening Star: "nasa has been subjected to harsh criticism—some of ij bordering on ridicule—for the past disinclination of its officials to admit . . . that things occasionally had gone wrong. . . . Seamans’ outspoken evaluation [June 17] of the Gemini 9A flight was regarded here as a signal to other nasa officials to lay the facts on the line when things do not go exactly according to plan.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/20/66, A10)
Crew for second manned Apollo mission, scheduled for 1967 as open-ended earth orbital flight up to 14 days, was announced by nasa: Walter M. Schirra, Jr., command pilot; Donn F. Eisele, senior pilot; and Walter Cunningham, pilot. Backup crew: Frank Borman, command pilot; Thomas P. Stafford, senior pilot; and Michael Collins, pilot. It would be first space mission for Eisele and Cunningham, (nasa Release 66-260)
X-15 No. 1 was flown by NASA test pilot John B. McKay to 3,682 mph (mach 5.19) and 241,800-ft. altitude. Mission objectives included micrometeoroid collection and evaluation of pace transducer, horizon scanner, nonglare glass, and stick kicker. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
A surface-based deep-sea search and retrieval system was described by its inventor, Willard N. Bascom, president of Ocean Science and Engineering, Inc., in an interview with William Hines of Washington Evening Star. Bascom, holder of a patent on "search”, said his system could be ready in a year and that "total cost of a 'search’ vessel ready for operation anywhere in the world would not exceed %y million.” He cited "presently unrecoverable losses of spacecraft and experimental weapons as an urgent justification for developing a deep-sea retrieval system,” and said that he had offered "search” to the Navy. "Similar proposals have been submitted to the Air Force and NASA,” Bascom said. His system, an outgrowth of the Mohole deep-sea drilling project, would use scanning devices and grappling tools suspended from a converted cargo ship. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/66, A7)
An explanation of white dwarf stars—based on study of spectra of four stars in constellation Orion gathered during October 1965 NASA Aerobee sounding rocket flight—appeared in report released by Dr. Donald C. Morton, head of Princeton Univ. rocket program. Results indicated that the four stars are hurling matter toward the earth at about 4 million mph. This loss of mass, extended over a long period of time, would eventually remove up to 95 per cent of the stars’ mass, according to Dr. Morton. They would then be white dwarfs. (NYT, 1/11/66, 6)
Immediate need for an emergency space rescue squad was underlined by the curtailed March 16 Gemini viii mission and by electrical malfunction aboard oao i successfully orbited April 8, William Hines asserted in the Washington Evening Star. "Without such capability,” Hines suggested, "large sums of money and vast amounts of scientific-technological effort are being dissipated, and it is only a matter of time before lives will be placed in jeopardy. . . . Where manned missions are concerned, a rescue capability is not merely desirable but imperative. ... In the next five years somewhere between 25 and 30 missions involving about 75 astronauts will he flown. Durations will range from three to 45 days, and mission objectives will reach as far as the moon’s surface. At the most conservative estimate there are probably a dozen chances for something to go seriously wrong on a typical mission. To put it another way, there are somewhere between 300 and 500 accidents waiting to happen in the next five years-—any one of them potentially tragic.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/21/66, A14)
American Astronautical Society (aas) held symposium on the moon in Washington, D.C., as part of American Association for the Advancement of Science’s (aaas) annual meeting. Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, U.S. Geological Survey, said NASA’s lunar orbiter I photos had revealed "mass wasting” on the moon—a process similar to "downhill creep” which produced slopes of fragmented dirt and rock debris on earth. Accelerated by small local earthquakes caused by impacting meteorites, wasting process was rapidly covering all of moon’s small craters, Shoemaker said. He believed majority of lunar craters were caused by high-velocity explosive impacts of meteorites. Dr. Donald H. Menzel, Harvard Univ., told the press that man would make profound changes on the moon in 15-20 yrs.—particularly if lunar rock were found to contain water of crystallization. "There is a real possibility for man ... to establish self-support expeditions on the moon. Using solar or atomic energy for melting rocks, man could get water and then use the debris for building blocks. Lunar gardens . could be established and animals could be raised there.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/29/66, Al, A6; Clark, NYT, 12/30/66, 8)
Five-man nasa board and House Science and Astronautics Committee’s nasa Oversight Subcommittee had begun separate inquiries into failures of ogo I, ii, in, OAO i, and nimbus i. Questions under investigation included: (1) Is the expenditure on observatory satellites wise? (2) Are the projects being carried out on an efficient basis? and (3) Is the taxpayer’s interest being protected? GSFC Director Dr. John F. Clark told AP he believed there had been "technical goofs but no management problems” associated with the failures. "Scientifically, we have not had a failure in ogo. Something less than 100 percent but more than 75 percent of ogo’s experiment return has been outstandingly successful. OGO 1 and ogo 2—although classified as spacecraft failures—gave us more data than all other satellites combined up to that time.” (NYT, 8/14/66, 1, 70; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/14/66, A23)
XB-70 No. 1 experimental supersonic bomber, piloted by L/Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf) and nasa test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton, reached mach 2.52 and 60,000-ft. altitude in flight from Edwards afb for the national sonic boom program. (XB-70 Flight log)
Launch of U.S.S.R/s luna x spacecraft indicated Soviet goals and techniques for reaching moon were similar to those of U.S., according to William Hines in Washington Evening Star, and raised question whether U.S.S.R. would attempt manned lunar landing in November 1967 to mark 50th anniversary of Bolshevik revolution. Lack of evidence that Russians had developed a large booster comparable to U.S.’s Saturn V suggested they would use earth orbit rendezvous method to reach moon, Hines said. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/1/66, Al)
Research pilots of the X-15, in front of X-15 No. 2 at Edwards, Calif.; Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf), Mai. Robert A. Rush-worth (usaf), John B. McKay (nasa), Capt. William J. Knight (usaf), Milton 0. Thompson (nasa), and William H. Dana (nasa).
NASA Astronaut Michael Collins presented U.S. flag carried on July 18-21 gemini x mission to St. Albans School in Washington, D.C., as "a token of my appreciation for getting me started on this road.” Collins and three other alumni were honored by St. Albans at a banquet and reception. (Adams, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/66, Bl)
U.S. Army parachutists made first manned flight tests of NASA-developed parawing at Army’s John F. Kennedy Center for Special Warfare, Fort Bragg. Concept of maneuverable, parachute-like, flexible wing had been originated by LaRC scientist Francis M. Rogallo and Gertrude S. Rogallo in 1948, and on July 18,1963, NASA had awarded $35,000 to the inventors in recognition of their contribution to aeronautics. Parawing’s gliding and maneuvering capability results from aerodynamic lift developed in flight; conventional parachutes are drag devices and do not develop lift. Roughly triangular and about 400 sq. ft. in area, parawings used in tests had been built to LaRC specifications and could be folded, packed, and deployed like parachutes. Army Aviation Materiel Laboratories (avlabs) had recommended evaluation of parawings for personnel use, and NASA engineers and observers assisted Army with technical consultation. (nasa Release 66-106)
ComSatCorp president Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, speaking at National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., disclosed plans for a $7- to $9-million laboratory to be built by ComSatCorp near Washington, D.C. Facility would employ about 200 people and would be completed by mid-1968. (Clark, NYT, 6/22/66, 12)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), chairman of House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Space Sciences Subcommittee, recommended in Astronautics & Aeronautics that manned and unmanned earth-orbital missions be given major emphasis in the next few years. He suggested lower priority be assigned manned planetary exploration and establishment of manned lunar bases, but that unmanned Voyager Mars and Venus missions be given more extensive support. (A&A, 9/66, 12-14)
U.S.S.R. was showing increasing signs of having conceded manned lunar landing race to U.S. as part of vastly revamped space program, Donald C. Winston postulated in Aviation Week. Significance of new program was that it reflected emphasis Premier Alexey Kosygin had fomented in Soviet planning. Brezhnev and Kosygin, who came to power while three-man voskhod i was still in orbit in October 1964, ordered the spacecraft to earth prematurely as one of their first moves even before the overthrow of Nikita Khrushchev was made public. It was not long before Kosygin grounded the rest of the Voskhod series, which was to have continued with at least five launches through 1965. Only voskhod ii was permitted off the ground after Kosygin took power. The March 1965 mission was conducted because planning had reached an advanced stage by the time Khrushchev was ousted and because Cosmonaut A.A. Leonov’s Eva—first in history—had high propaganda value. Winston theorized that the new space philosophy could produce a much less complex manned circumlunar mission without landing within the next year. (Av. Wk, 11/28/66, 22)
usaf had established and would implement in FY 1967 procedures for the management of DOD’s secondary payload space activities, Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., dod’s Director of Defense Research and Engineering, told closed hearing of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Program would provide for operation of a central business office which would accept requests for dod launch support of space experiments from nasa, other armed services, and other dod nonservice R&d activities. Arrangements for secondary payloads on usaf vehicles had previously been handled on an informal basis. (M&S Daily, 3/9/66)
House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Space Science and Applications Subcommittee recommended cancellation of NASA’s proposed 1967 Venus mission and proposed that $42 million of otherwise programed money be used in the Voyager program to speed exploration of Mars—crashlanding a probe on that planet in 1969. Subcommittee action would go to full Science and Astronautics Committee in form of report on FY 1967 budget authorization for nasa’s ossa. Such reprograming action was new in space effort. Subcommittee Chairman Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) said: "Congress is for the first time asserting its prerogatives, using its judgement, setting priorities of its own.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/23/66, 6)
Mrs. James A. McDivitt gave birth in Houston to a daughter—first child conceived by an American astronaut’s wife after her husband had returned from space. Astronaut McDivitt was command pilot on the June fane 16: usaf Titan III-C launch vehicle in preparation for multiple-satellite payload mission from Eastern Test Range. 4-7, 1965, Gemini rv mission during which Astronaut Edward H. White II made his 21-min. Eva. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/17/66, A2)
Joseph C. Satterthwaite, former State Dept, foreign service officer, was sworn in as a consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb for international affairs "in the general area of Western Europe.” (nasa Release 66-39)
NASA test pilot John B. McKay made successful emergency landing of X-15 No. 1 at Smith’s Ranch, Nev., after malfunction developed in aircraft’s fuel system. There was no damage to aircraft and no injury to pilot. Primary purpose of flight was photometer measurements of sharpness of earth’s horizon for use in Apollo program. (X-15 Proj. Off.; upi, Wash. Post, 9/9/66, BIO)
William J. McWilliams, president of Republic Supply Co., was sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb and NASA Secretariat, (nasa Release 66-46)
Eighth Uprated Saturn I booster was static-fired successfully at msfc for 145 sec. First stage performed as expected, developing 1.6 million lbs. thrust, (msfc Release 66-288) November 29-December 2: aiaa’s Third Annual Meeting and Technical Display was held in Boston. In keynote address, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh described the manned spaceflight program as the most successful technological feat ever undertaken by the Nation. Panel discussion followed on future of U.S. space program. Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Institute for Defense Analyses, predicted that man would be needed in space primarily as a "repairman” for scientific instruments. "The science . . . will be carried out on the ground where enormous facilities for computing, analysis, and discussion are available.” Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.) said emphasis on space activities should not be only on peaceful purposes but also on preservation of peace; this would inevitably require sending military men into space. With advances in technology, U.S. must convert from "throwaway” hardware concept to use of maneuverable reentry vehicles and recoverable boosters, he added. This idea was echoed by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, who said: ". . . all of the hardware developed for future projects would reflect our concern over . . . greater cost effectiveness, through the development of reusable launch vehicles and reusable spacecraft.” Mueller said there would be manned space stations that could stay in orbit a year or longer but said there was no need for crews to stay aloft for such periods. A ferry vehicle would be used for resupply of both equipment and crew. He listed potential benefits of space technology in the next decade, describing air traffic control towers in space, direct-to-home international TV broadcasting systems, and possibilities for predicting and controlling the weather. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) said one of the problems of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics—of which he was chairman—was educating the people of the Nation to the benefits of the space program. It was a difficult task, he said, to justify space expenditures against the costs of Vietnam, foreign aid, and Great Society projects. But, he insisted, "it is the translation of space technologies into useful benefits that is the overall value of the space program.” (Texts; aiaa Daily, 11/30/66, 1, 3; Wash. Eve. Star, 11/30/66, A7) Results from NASA’s EXPLOBER xxxm had shown for first time that tail of earth’s magnetosphere "extends more than 75,000 miles beyond the orbit of the moon,” reported gsfc scientist Dr. Norman F. Ness. Findings were contrary to those of Soviet scientist Dolginov and colleagues who had reported they were unable to detect magnetospheric tail at lunar distances on basis of data obtained from luna x between April 3 and May 4, 1966. Ness suggested as reason for this that luna x data were probably obtained when spacecraft was near or within neutral sheet region of magnetosphere where very low magnetic fields would be expected, (gsfc Release 20-66) In session on Future Large Subsonic Transports, John Borger of paa said problems in air transport industry "are being created by the phenomenal growth rate of our business.” Since the growth rate showed no signs of slackening’in the coming years, continued development and extensive use of large subsonic jet aircraft were not only desirable but essential. Borger pointed out that the engine for the Boeing 747— which would carry times more passengers than present intercontinental transports—was being developed with only commercial airlines as potential customers. This was the first time in air history that a new aircraft powerplant had been undertaken on this basis. Borger noted that a major requirement for the "jumbo jets” was that they be available at least 5 to 6 yrs. ahead of the proposed Sst so that initial development and operation costs could be recovered. H.	F. Klump, general manager of cargo traffic and sales for Deutsche Lufthansa Airlines, sounded a warning about the subsonic jet aircraft’s cargo capacity: unless airports expanded their freight handling facilities enormously, they would not be able to handle volume of material "dumped on them.” W. D. Perreault, program director for Lockheed 500—a giant commercial cargo aircraft for the 1970s—discussed evolution of the 500 from C-5A transport under development for usaf. After reviewing three proposed commercial versions of the aircraft, he said one of them "will provide for the first time a cargo plane with direct operating costs of less than 2/ per ton statute mile.” (aiaa Daily, 11/30/66, 1, 31; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/29/66, A10) Commenting on the report of the aiaa Launch Vehicle and Missile Technical Committee, "The Next Generation of Launch Vehicles—• Evolution or Bold Step?” N. E. Golovin of the Office of Science and Technology said: ". . . if a family of reusable boosters is to be developed for reasons of economy then development cost per booster must be so low that economical amortization must be possible over a relatively small number of flights for each type; or, if only a single reusable booster is to be developed its use must indeed be so cheap that it would pay to employ it for payloads which are but a small fraction of its orbiting capacity. This reasoning . . . casts considerable doubt on the Committee’s suggestion that a 'bold step’ leading to the development of reusable boosters is justified at this time.” (Text) NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, participating in a panel discussion on "Do We Need New Propulsion Systems for Lunar and Planetary Flight?”, concluded that unmanned missions during the next ten years would probably "not require either new propulsion systems or new launch vehicle stages. They probably will require adding a modified Centaur as an upper stage on the Saturn IB or the Titan IIIC. They may require and certainly could use a 260 inch solid first stage under the S-IV-B Centaur. . . .” Cortright recommended that current launch capability be put "to effective use in exploring space and in developing practical applications of space flight.” (Text) During panel on -Space and Public Policy, "poor communications” between scientists and the general public was suggested reason for death of Project Mohole—killed by Congress because it would have cost at least three times the original estimate, nas president Frederick Seitz said such escalations in cost were "not unusual” for such scientific ventures and revealed the project would soon be renewed under a different name such as "deep ocean drilling.” "The goals of space exploration are primarily those of science, not technology,” asserted panelist Hunter Dupree, science historian and history professor at Univ. of California, Berkeley. Chairman of the President’s Science Advisory Committee’s Panel on Space Science Louis Branscomb replied that no one wanted to see the space program purely as a "spectator sport,” and that space programs should be conceived to "maximize their scientific returns.” Commenting on the same subject, NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said: "We must grapple with the problem of what we will do with the moon. This is not an esoteric problem.” Concerned about the lack of aiaa advice to Congress on questions of scientific policy, Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said the loudest critics of the space program were scientists in other disciplines eying the space money. "I call on aiaa to come to Congress with a sharpened viewpoint. You can speak with the consensus of Avco Corp. vice president Arthur Kantrowitz feared that "aiaa is not equipped” to do the suggested job because unanimity within the society could not be achieved on policy questions. And unless it could, the assignment "would induce strains within aiaa and change its complexion.” (aiaa Daily, 12/2/66, 1, 29) Four major aiaa awards were made at Honors Convocation: Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II (posthumously), the Louis W. Hill Award "to honor his many outstanding contributions to the biomedical sciences in their applications to space and in particular his pioneering development of protective devices enabling the human body to function and operate safely in the aerospace environment”; Joe H. Engle of NASA frc, the Lawrence Sperry Award for "outstanding contribution to aeronautics as the youngest pilot to fly the X-15 in various spaceprobing research programs since June 1963”; Warren J. North of msc, the De Florez Training Award for "contribution to astronaut training and operational crew procedures development in support of the manned space flight program”; and Dr. A. K. Oppenheim, the G. Edward Pendray Award for "outstanding contributions to the field of aeronautical and astronautical literature in the area of gaseous detonation and gas wave dynamics.” (aiaa Daily, 11/29/66, 30; Av. Wk., 11/28/66, 19) November 30: NASA launched two-stage, 30-ft.-long Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Wallops Station in cosmic ray and ionospheric experiment for Univ. of New Hampshire. 120-lb. payload reached altitude of 223 mi. (359 km.) and impacted 142 mi. downrange in Atlantic Ocean. Measurements obtained were radioed back during flight and recorded at ground receiving stations. (Wallops Release 66-56; NASA Rpt. srl)
The study of future national space objectives by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight was termed a "timely and thoughtful” document in Technology Week editorial by William J. Coughlin. Noting that its major contribution "is to focus attention on the urgent need for a major decision concerning the nation’s space program,” Coughlin added: "Not only does Congress have a role to play in such decisions, but the Teague subcommittee is moving to fill a vacuum in the decision-making process. The Administration has shown itself reluctant to bring forth decisions in this area. NASA itself has backed away from defining the next space objective. The subcommittee is performing a valuable national service in attempting to bring the matter to a head.” (Tech. Wk., 8/22/66, 50)
M2-F2 lifting body vehicle, piloted by L/C Donald Sorlie (usaf), was air-launched from B-52 aircraft at 45,000-ft. altitude in seventh glide flight at Edwards afb; purpose of flight was checkout of new pilot. (nasa Proj. Off.)
Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) said in a speech before the American Society of Tool & Manufacturing Engineers in Westbury, N.Y.: "Two years ago I asked Administrator Webb for nasa’s future space plans and was told that none existed. I pointed out then that such plans were essential. Last year, we received assurance that the presentations of the fiscal year 1967 budget would reveal such plans. But none has been issued. Instead, nasa Administrator Webb has told us 'the future of the nasa program lies largely in the decision for fiscal year 1968.’ . . . "Our space program began in an atmosphere of perplexity and fear. Our adversaries in Russia had chosen a new arena for the struggle of international power and prestige. They threatened to achieve impressive capabilities which we would be unable to match. But, characteristically, the United States rose to the occasion in one of the biggest sustained technological efforts ever seen. Today, the U.S.S.R. is denied many of the options for surprising space spectaculars which they once had. From month to month, one country or the other may seem to be leading the so-called space race, but our proven capability shows that we are not to be placed at any military or strategic disadvantage. "Therefore it is time again for public opinion to assert itself. What do we want to do with this hard won space capability?” (Text)
usaf awarded Univ. of Colorado a 15-mo., $300,000 research contract to "conduct independent investigations into unidentified flying object (Ufo) reports.” Study would be headed by Dr. Edward U. Condon, a professor of physics at the university, (dod Release 847-66)
Close tie between President Johnson and Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of the Office of Science and Technology (ost) and science adviser to the President, was discussed in Science. During the first six or so months of Hornig’s term "the President and the White House inner circle had an unclear notion of how they might employ ost” with the result that "some of the science staff members complained that they were bored, and that OST was underemployed or involved with trivia.” But a transition had taken place, and as Hornig began his third year of service, "ost and its surrounding bodies—the President’s Science Advisory Committee and the Federal Council for Science and Technology—are heavily involved in policy formulation, coordination of the technical aspects of the Great Society programs, and troubleshooting in a variety of areas.” (Science, 1/28/66, 431)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara was considering usaf proposal for an advanced manned strategic aircraft (Amsa) which would cost $1.5-$2 billion to develop, William Beecher reported in the New York Times. Bomber would reportedly be able to carry internally 25 nuclear-tipped short range attack missiles (Sram), plus nuclear bombs; have unrefueled range of 7,000 to 10,000 mi.; and be capable of traveling 1,625 mph—about 2Vi times the speed of B-52 aircraft, the mainstay of current bomber force. (Beecher, NYT, 11/8/66, 1)
Martin Co. had been awarded a three-month, $75,000 contract to design and develop a flight-qualified, lightweight, hand-held lunar core driller for use on Apollo missions, msc announced. Similar contract, also for $75,000, had been awarded Northrop Space Laboratories. {Chic. Trib., 8/18/66) Ford Foundation president McGeorge Bundy said that although the use of profits from a commercial business to finance a noncommercial undertaking might be novel to television, creation of a special carrier service in the public interest was not without precedent. He cited the Government’s granting of special mailing privileges to newspapers and magazines. Bundy disclosed the Ford Foundation was planning to arrange "a series of meetings in various parts of the country with potential users of a noncommercial satellite system.” Fred W. Friendly, TV consultant to Bundy, described what he said was the underlying irony of modem TV: commercial networks had the money to do qualitative public service but lacked sufficient time on the air, while educational TV had the time but lacked the money. ComSatCorp chairman James McCormack said the heart of the Ford proposal called for the 'Tunneling of savings” that might be enjoyed by commercial communications carriers into support of a cultural undertaking. While acknowledging the value of educational TV, McCormack said he felt only Congress could rule whether one segment of a diversified society could be compelled to support another segment without benefit of specific legislation to that end. AT&T vice president Richard Hough, itt executive Bertram B. Tower, and Western Union Telegraph Co. vice president Earl D. Hilburn challenged the proposal saying that any such communications system should adhere to the common carrier principle of serving all users rather than any particular group such as broadcasters. While these witnesses supported the objective, they questioned the feasibility of the plan on economic and technical grounds. Tower suggested that consideration be given to permitting special rates for educational TV services through existing common carriers. Hilburn said that rate adjustments in favor of educational broadcasters might be authorized if some form of subsidy were determined to be in the national interest. Sen. John O. Pastore (D-R.I.), who had called the hearings, said they were a "prelude” to action by fcc and noted that Congress almost certainly would want to explore the implications of the Ford proposal as it related to a private corporation. Hearings were completed Aug. 23. (ComSatCorp Releases; Gould, NYT, 8/18/66, 59; Wash. Post, 8/18/66, A12; AP, Wash. Post, 8/19/66, A2)
U.S. space officials did not feel that luna ix’s successful soft-landing on the moon indicated U.S. was behind U.S.S.R. in the "moon race,” reported John Wilford in the New York Times. Vice President Humphrey, nasc Chairman, told Wilford in an interview that "so many systems and programs are involved that it is very difficult to say who’s ahead and who’s behind.” Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Deputy Administrator, admired the Soviets’ "solid, aggressive and expanding” space program and conceded that although U.S. program was broader-based "the Russians are awfully good at picking goals and going after them.” Wilford said U.S. space officials were unwilling to speculate on who would make first manned lunar landing, but foresaw no significant changes in U.S. program because of luna ix’s success. Dr. Seamans said Surveyor project would not be curtailed and could not be speeded up: "We’ve got to gather our own data because we can’t count on the Russians to release their own data. Besides, we want to land in other places on the moon. Hopefully, we can exchange data with the Russians.” (Wilford, NYT, 2/5/66, 11)
gemini iv Astronaut Edward H. White II and Gemini vii Astronaut Frank Borman received National Aviation Club’s Award for Achievement in Washington, D.C. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/3/66)
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever was presented the American Legion’s General William E. Mitchell Memorial Award—highest honor bestowed by the Legion’s Aviator’s Post—at a luncheon ceremony in New York’s Wings Club. Schriever was cited for his "outstanding contributions to the aerospace science and military posture of the United States.” (afsc Release 76.66)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), emphasizing the need for expanded efforts in the field of oceanography, said before the National Space Club in Washington, D. C., that oceanography was becoming increasingly related to space. He noted the recent NASA-Naval Oceanographic Office agreement whereby noo would coordinate all investigations about possible applications of manned earth orbital operations in the field of oceanography. He suggested that this program "be expanded formally to include unmanned operations as well.” He urged a national program with national goals, "coordinated by one agency like . . . [nasa]” and given adequate funds—"an all-wet nasa.” Karth said he did not think that post-Apollo programs, such as manned expeditions to Mars or to the moons of Jupiter would gain "general acceptance” until "we have solved the continually worsening home planet problems of hunger and poverty.” (Text)
Reporting on a January Thiokol Chemical Corp.-sponsored Trendex poll on public opinion of the U.S. space program, William Coughlin wrote in Missiles and Rockets: "Some 77% of those interviewed now favor the program as against only 20% opposed to it. This is a dramatic gain from 1963, when only 59% were in favor of the lunar landing and 39% were opposed. . .. "In the four cities in which the latest poll was conducted—Cincinnati, Syracuse, Pasadena and Des Moines—the public appears to be far ahead of the Administration in its assessment of the importance of military space. The response was: defense and security, 38%; scientific and non-military benefit, 35%; and opportunities for economic growth and employment, 18%.” (Coughlin, M&R, 3/21/66, 46)
Gemini VIII rendezvous and docking mission—world’s first space docking—began at etr with launch of 7,000-lb. Agena Target Vehicle (Gatv) by Adas booster at 10:00 a.m. est, followed 100 min. later by launch of Gemini viii by two-stage Titan II booster with Astronauts Neil A.	Armstrong, command pilot, and David R. Scott, pilot. Primary objectives of the mission—sixth manned flight in the Gemini series—were rendezvous and docking of gemini viii spacecraft with gatv and performance of extravehicular activity (Eva) for one orbit. gatv was injected into near-circular orbit with 186-mi. (299.5-km.) apogee and 184-mi. (296.3-km.) perigee; gemini viii entered initial orbit with 128.8-mi. (206.4-km.) apogee and 74.9-mi. (119.5-km.) perigee. Near third apogee, Armstrong fired aft thrusters, circularizing spacecraft’s orbit at 168-mi. (270-km.) altitude. Trailing gatv by 139 mi., Armstrong received intermittent lock-on between gemini viii radar and gatv’s companion transponder. After sighting gatv at 66-mi. range at 04:12 get, Armstrong fired thrusters and Scott read out computer data until 05:15 get, when they switched from catch-up to rendezvous mode. At 150 ft. from gatv, Armstrong reported he had matched velocity for brief station-keeping exercise. Conditions at that point were so favorable that Armstrong passed under gatv and came up 80 ft. in front of it, where he was able to read some data on gatv’s status display. Successful docking was confirmed at 6:33 get. Plan had been to remain docked with gatv through 7M-hr. sleep period until beginning Eva, but at approximately 7:00 get spacecraft-GATV combination began to roll and yaw violently. Unable to stabilize joined spacecraft, Armstrong fired gemini vm’s thrusters to undock and maneuvered away from the gatv. Once freed, however, gemini viii began to roll even more rapidly; roll, pitch, and yaw rates increased, approaching one revolution per min. For three minutes, the astronauts fought to control gemini viii; finally, with oams turned off, Armstrong fired his Reentry Control System (Res) rockets in final attempt to counteract violent roll. This maneuver was successful and eight minutes later, at 7:25:30 get, the spacecraft was stabilized. Within a matter of minutes, the problem was isolated to the spacecraft’s No. 8 thruster, which had fired intermittently while gemini viii was docked with gatv and stuck open until Armstrong managed to turn off oams. It was later determined that a short circuit was probable cause of thruster’s malfunction. Premature use of reentry rockets forced Gemini flight director John D. Hodge to order an emergency landing, with recovery planned in the western Pacific during seventh revolution. (Safety rules of the Gemini program required immediate landing of any spacecraft once its Res squibs were blown; if the flight were allowed to continue, danger of Res fuel depletion would jeopardize firing of Res rockets, vital to safe return of spacecraft and crew.) Spacecraft landed 500 mi. west of Okinawa in regular emergency recovery area at approximately 10:23 p.m. est—10 hrs. 42 min. after launch. Landing was only three miles from intended impact point. Within minutes usaf frogmen parachuted from usaf C-54 rescue aircraft and placed flotation collar around capsule. At 1:30 a.m. est capsule and astronauts were hoisted aboard recovery ship U.S.S. Leonard Despite early termination, gemini viii mission accomplished one of two primary objectives—rendezvous and docking. Original flight plan had specified four gemini viii-gatv dockings and two hrs. 15 min. of extravehicular activity by Astronaut Scott. Five scientific, four technological, and one medical experiment were to have been conducted. Flight had been scheduled to last 44 revolutions—approximately 73 hrs. (NASAProj. Off,; nasa Release 66-52 ;Wilford, NYT, 3/17/66,1;Waldron, NYT, 3/17/66, 20; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66, 1; Simons, Wash. Post, 3/17/66, 1; Av. Wk., 3/31/66, 30-32)
President Johnson announced he would send Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., and Frank Borman, command pilots of the Dec. 4-18 GEMINI vii/vi mission, on a three-week, eight-country tour of the Far East to demonstrate scientific, technological, and educational values of U.S. space program and to visit Far Eastern countries which had cooperated with U.S. in space programs. Astronauts would leave Feb. 21, and visit Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines, Australia, and New Zealand. The President had sent Gemini iv Astronauts James A. McDivitt and Edward H. White II, to the Paris Air Show in June 1965; gemini v Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Charles Conrad, Jr., on an African tour in September 1965; and John Glenn, first American to achieve orbit, on a European tour in October 1965. (Pres. Doc., 2/21/66, 221; NYT, 2/16/66, 54)
Data from onboard cameras and other recovered instruments had confirmed success of NASA’s first high-altitude experiment to investigate parachute designs and techniques that might be used to land instrumented capsules on Mars. Launched aboard a balloon Aug. 30 from Walker afb, experiment had "provided a solid data base with which we can compare and correlate the results of later flight tests involving parachutes and flight units of different sizes and shapes,” Project Manager John C. McFall reported, (nasa Release 66-241)
usaf Aerospace Medical Div. chief scientist Dr. Hubertus Strughold stated in telephone interview with Washington Sunday Star’s William Hines that NASA had not given adequate attention to keeping astronaut’s vision unimpaired during Eva. He said that in normal earth gravity, man could orient himself by means of sight sense (eyes); balance sense (otoliths of inner ear); and pressure sense (Meissner corpuscles concentrated primarily in palms of hands and soles of feet). In space there was no gravity, so otoliths and Meissner corpuscles could not function. When vision was also lost or impaired, orientation was impossible. Strughold pointed out that vision impairment had been a factor in curtailment of three of four Eva missions to date. He said advances in training and in spacesuit design were urgently needed, usaf had been "working on the problem” but had not been asked by NASA for advice or assistance. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/18/66, A7)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), chairman of the Space Sciences Subcommittee of the House Science and Astronautics Committee, said at a luncheon of the Aviation/Space Writers’ Assn, in Washington, D.C., that the war in Vietnam and the needs of "the Great Society in general” would keep the space budget from expanding soon. He said the budget of "more than $6 billion” that NASA planned to ask Congress for in January 1967 "is financially not in the cards for the near future.” (Text)
U.S. monitors had received photographs transmitted from the moon by luna ix, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, told the press: "We have obtained some information regarding those Luna 9 pictures from our own sources. Such data are currently under study ana evaluation. I believe it is important for the public to know that we do not rely solely on Soviet releases or Jodrell Bank pronouncements for our information.” (nasc)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, attended dinner in Rangoon, Burma, given in his honor by Burma’s Foreign Minister U Thi Han. In Burma on a good-will tour, Glenn earlier had given an illustrated lecture on U.S. space program. (AP, NYT, 2/22/66, 4)
France exploded an atomic bomb, air-dropped over her test site at Mururoa Atoll in the Pacific, almost directly under flight path of Gemini x one hour before the spacecraft passed, nasa, advised of the impending test, had warned Astronauts John W. Young and Michael Collins to "keep your heads down” and "not to look at the earth while flying over the atoll.” (WSJ, 7/22/66, 1; Sullivan, NYT, 7/20/66, 22)
A Space Sciences Division in the Engineering and Development Directorate, a consolidated medical directorate, and title changes for key management positions became effective at msc. Medical Research and Operations Directorate would be headed by Dr. Charles A. Berry, formerly Chief of Center Medical Programs. Medical directorate would include Biomedical Research Office, Medical Operations Office, and Occupational and Environmental Medicine Office. Addition of medical directorate brought the number of Center directorates to five. The four Assistant Directors would be known as Directors: Director of Administration, Wesley L. Hjornevik; Director of Flight Crew Operations, Donald K. Slayton; Director of Engineering and Development, Dr. Maxime A. Faget; and Director of Flight Operations, Christopher C. Kraft, Jr. (msci 1130.1; msc Roundup, 5/27/66, 1,2)
U.S.S.R. Antaeus cargo aircraft lifted 88 tons, 103 kg., in flight from Podmoskovnoye airport (Moscow) piloted by I. Y. Davidov, Krasnaya Zvezda announced. Previous cargo record had been 53 metric tons, 479 kg., lifted Dec. 16, 1958, by U.S. mats C-133 Cargomaster piloted by Col. John M. Thompson (usaf). (Tass, 10/30/66)
nasa’s first manned Apollo flight might be made in 1966 instead of 1967, as originally scheduled, predicted Dr. Joseph F. Shea, manager of NASA Apollo Spacecraft Office at msc, in a speech at naa’s plant in Downey, Calif., to press group touring manufacturing and test sites for Apollo spacecraft and Saturn boosters. "The Apollo program is about on schedule in time, cost and performance. We have found the performance of the hardware some better than we had expected, on the basis of tests. All testing for the first manned flight probably will be completed by the end of June. "I hope we can make the first manned flight this year, although it is not scheduled until next year. I think that the first lunar excursion module will be sent up next year. "I am sure personally that our first lunar landing will be done comfortably before the end of the decade.” C. R. Able, group vice president of Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems Div., outlined to the group plan for converting empty hydrogen tank from Saturn V’s 3rd stage into manned space capsule. For conversion, series of metal balloons containing liquid oxygen would be added to original orbited payload, to serve later for breathing and for combination with hydrogen to operate fuel cells for producing electricity. An Apollo or Gemini spacecraft would dock with empty 3rd stage, and astronauts would emerge to remove end cover plate in end of the tank, after purging it of any hydrogen remaining from launch. An airlock, carried aloft as part of original payload or launched later, would be attached to opening left by removal of cover plate and tank would be repressurized with oxygen from metal balloons to provide astronauts with "shirtsleeve environment.” Tank walls would have about 100 shallow threaded holes for mounting work benches, furniture, or other convenient items, presumably launched separately. Able emphasized that purpose of stage conversion—to offer astronauts relief from cramped quarters and extended weightlessness—did not duplicate function of USAf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol). Douglas Aircraft Co., McDonnell Aircraft Corp., and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. each had $50,000 NASA contracts to study use of booster cases. (Wallin, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 5/5/66; upi, Miami Her., 5/6/66)
Howard H. Haglund, formerly Deputy Project Manager and Spacecraft System Manager for Surveyor at jpl, had been named Manager of jpl’s Surveyor Project Office. He succeeded Robert J. Parks, who returned to his former position of jpl Assistant Director for Lunar and Planetary Projects, (jpl Release 426) o Efficient management in both industry and Government was the key to a continuing successful space effort, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, told the Management Club at Patrick afb. "The space challenge is unique. To face up to its imperatives calls for new ways of doing things. The pacing item is as much managerial competence as it is technology or money. . . . "Under the stress and pressure of getting the job done, there is imposed a harsh necessity which breeds innovation. So long as purposeful men accept such challenges, this nation will flourish and its economic and political systems will continue to lead the way. On the other hand, should we slip into the path of the familiar and decline to accept the challenge of the new, this nation will suffer a grievous loss and so will the peoples throughout the world. . . .” (Text)
nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh, speaking before Metropolitan Washington Board of Trade’s Science Industry Committee, replied to criticism that the national space program is highly expensive and wasteful: "The national space program is the largest concerted effort undertaken by any nation to advance the frontiers of human knowledge. As such, it is a seedbed of invention, a spur to our productivity, a source of insurance for our national security, a stimulus to learning, and a world-wide ambassador for peace. Because of it, our chances of improving medical research and finding a cure for cancer or heart disease are greater, not less. Because of it, our chances of improving our educational system and solving a vast range of social problems are greater, not less. "The issue is really not that of substituting space progress for progress in some other worthy field, because the space program contrihutes importantly to advances in practically all other lines of endeavor, and it stimulates the national economy at the same time. . . .” (Text)
gemini viii Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and his family were honored with a gala parade on their arrival in Armstrong’s hometown of Wapa-koneta, Ohio. Ohio’s Governor James A. Rhodes announced plans for the construction of a $200,000 airport near Wapakoneta to be named for Armstrong. Sen. Frank J. Lausche (D-Ohio) and Rep. William M. McCulloch (R-Ohio) announced a congressional resolution of tribute to Armstrong and his fellow gemini viii Astronaut David R. Scott. (AP, Balt. Sun, 4/14/66; Wash. Post, 4/14/66, D16)
X-15 No. 3 was flown by nasa test pilot William H. Dana to 3,218 mph (mach 4.71) and 96,100-ft. altitude to check out MH inertial system, cockpit display, horizontal tail loads, and stick kicker. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
M/G John D. Stevenson (usaf, Ret.), former commander of Joint Task Force Eight of the Defense Atomic Support Agency, was appointed Special Assistant to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller to assist with general management of manned space flight activities, (nasa Ann.)
faa Administrator William F. McKee told the Economic Club of Detroit that by bringing closer together the industrialized and developing nations, supersonic aircraft would make possible "a better way of life for all. . . . The social meaning of this greater ability to communicate is difficult to imagine.” Calling air travel one of the Nation’s fastest-growing businesses, General McKee said that rate of increase had averaged 14 per cent over recent years and had jumped to 25 per cent for the first half of 1966. (NYT, 9/20/66, 76)
Recent Soviet space accomplishments indicated that a manned space spectacular was imminent, suggested William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. He noted luna ix’s soft-landing on the moon Feb. 3, luna x’s launch into lunar orbit March 31, and the 22-day flight of two dogs in cosmos cx Feb. 22-March 16. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/14/66, A12)
Tests showed that as little as one or more inches of continuous snow cover could be reliably identified from satellite photos, essa’s Office of Hydrology reported. Associate Director of the Weather Bureau William E. Hiatt commented: "An increased capability of assessing snow accumulations, especially in remote sections where observation stations are limited, could result in faster appraisal of river conditions and contribute to more timely release of river forecasts and flooding warnings.” (essa Release 66-71)
M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by L/C Donald Sorlie (usaf), was air-launched from B-52 aircraft at 45,000-ft. altitude in ninth glide flight at Edwards afb. Purposes of flight were to complete pilot checkout and to extend the M2-F2’s flight envelope, (nasa Proj. Off.)
Adm. William F. Boone (usn, Ret.), Assistant NASA Administrator for Defense Affairs, told Missiles and Rockets that under new agreement between dod and NASA—expected to be signed in about two months— lrc would modify a liquid hydrogen J-85 jet engine with 200,000500,000	lbs. thrust for use in air-breathing technology development. As its contribution to the joint program, usaf would provide F-106 aircraft for flight tests of engine. (M&R, 5/30/66, 31)
U.K. would build $84-million prototype nuclear-power reactor of the breeder type—designed to produce large amounts of new fissionable atoms—at Dounreay in northeast Scotland, Technology Minister Frank Cousins told the House of Commons. Sir William Penney, head of British Atomic Energy Authority, told news conference he hoped to have commercial models of the breeder power station in operation by 1980. (NYT, 2/10/66; Wash. Eve. Star, 2/11/66, Al)
Lockheed-Georgia Co. engineers Dr. W. C. J. Garrard, George K. Williams, and William W. Williams received Society of Automotive Engineers’ (sae) Wright Brothers Medal for their group report on development of soft-field and rough-field landing gear. Presentation was made at sae’s National Aeronautic and Space Engineering Meeting in Los Angeles. (Lockheed Southern Star, 9/15/66, 1)
Establishment of National Natural Disaster Warning System to provide warnings of hurricanes, tornadoes, tidal waves, floods, and other natural hazards was announced by the White House in response to proposal by Secretary of Commerce John T. Connor. Warning System would "make effective use of present technology and existing facilities for the distribution of all warnings over a single authentic channel between the warning agency and the public”; it would eventually provide around-the-clock weather intelligence reaching hundreds of communities which had not previously had adequate warning service. (Pres. Doc., 3/7/66, 303)
Solar electric propulsion of unmanned spacecraft to Mars appeared entirely possible by the mid-1970’s, reported jpl researchers John Stearns and Donald W. Ritchie at AIAA meeting in San Diego. Four 55-ft.-long folding rectangular solar-cell panels would furnish power that could be harnessed to a set of small ion-chamber engines to propel spacecraft with approximate 7,000-lb. payload toward Mars. Trip would take about 300 days and culminate in orbit around Mars. Report also envisioned 850-day mission by solar-electric-propelled spacecraft to and beyond Jupiter in late 1970’s, (jpl Release; NASA Release 66-53)
Press briefing was held at LaRC on results of nasa’s lunar orbiter i mission, launched Aug. 10 from etr to orbit the moon and photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts. The more than 200 photos transmitted by the spacecraft revealed a rugged lunar landscape covered with thousands of craters. Ridges and hills were more gently sloped near moon’s center and became progressively smoother in the west. Presence of large rocks, or "blocks,” proved that surface was firm enough to support manned spacecraft. Of the nine sites photographed, the Ocean of Storms where surveyor i was resting appeared safest for manned landing. Classified as a dark mare— flat, waterless plain with relatively few craters—it had 20 per cent fewer craters than any of the other sites. U.S. Geological Survey scientists Dr. Harold Masursky and Dr. Lawrence Rowan suggested that the photos showed evidence of volcanic activity. Citing a small cone-shaped hill on line of a geologic rift near surveyor i ana a large crater on the back of the moon, apparently filled with congealed lava, Dr. Masursky said: "The moon is not a cold, dead, lifeless planet. It looks close to being as dynamic as the earth.” Dr. Rowan noted that major faults on the lunar surface seemed to run in two general directions—northeast-southwest and southeast-northwest —and concluded that much of the volcanic activity probably occurred along these lines. LaRC scientist William Michael said nonphotographic data on the satellite’s orbit indicated moon might turn flat side toward earth, not bulgy side as generally believed. He said displacement of moon’s center of mass toward earth could explain both a flat face and moon’s slight wobble, which had been accounted for previously by the "bulge” theory. Micrometeoroid detection experiment had not recorded any "hits” during satellite’s eight weeks in lunar orbit in contrast to earth-orbiting satellites which often registered a hit every two weeks. Project Manager Clifford H. Nelson announced that Lunar Orbiter B—second of five satellites in series—would be launched between Nov. 6 and 11 to photograph area slightly north of that scanned by lunar orbiter i. (Clark, NYT, 10/7/66, 5; Wash. Eve. Star, 10/7/66, A3; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 10/7/66, Al)
faa Administrator William F. McKee announced that Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff would serve as a consultant on faa research and development efforts—particularly in supersonic transport (Sst) program— while continuing to serve as Special Assistant to NASA Administrator. (faa Release 66-30)
A new nuclear particle—the most massive and most stable yet found— had been discovered by physicists at Argonne National Laboratory (anl). Three and a half times as heavy as the proton, the particle wa9 "a 'nucleon resonance’ known simply as N*3245.” The number "3245” stood for 3,245 million electron volts, the amount of its energy. According to Dr. Alan D. Krisch of Univ. of Michigan, nucleon resonances "may be 'excited’ or highly energetic states of protons and neutrons . . . and can be produced only in accelerators. They are not observed in nature.” Krisch, along with John R. O’Fallon, Keith Ruddick, and Steven W. Kormanyos of Univ. of Michigan, and Lazarus G.	Ratner of anl, made the discovery using Argonne’s 13.5-billion electron volt (Bev) zero gradient synchrotron. They said this "abnormally stable” particle has a lifetime of one ten-thousandth of a millionth of a millionth of a millionth of a second, which is "longer than that of any of its family of nuclear particles.” Krisch suggested N*3245 may have "an unusually high spin which prevents it from decaying easily.” Discovery was reported in Physical Review Letters. (Phys. Rev. Letters, 4/18/66, 709; Amer. Inst, of Physics Release, 4/18/66)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana flew X-15 No. 3 to 3,545 mph (mach 5.20) and 178,000-ft. altitude in flight test for altitude buildup. As secondary mission, pilot performed maneuvers to check out boundary-layer noise, horizontal tail loads, and heat transfer panels. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
X-15 No. 3 was flown by NASA test pilot William H. Dana to 3,750 mph (mach 5.34) and 306,900-ft. altitude in flight test to collect micrometeoroids. As secondary mission, pilot performed maneuvers to check dual channel radiometer, tip-pod accelerometer, and precision attitude. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
Quasars, once believed rare, might account for 28 per cent of the radio sources in space, Dr. John D. Wyndham, research fellow at Cal Tech, reported on the basis of 10-mo. research project. Dr. Wyndham had located all 328 sources listed in Third Cambridge Catalog of Radio Objects, then identified many of them with visible light sources, increasing the number of identifications to more than 150. Identification of radio noise source with a visible light source was first step in determining its distance and confirming that it was a quasar, he explained. (AP, NYT, 7/6/66, 35)
John A. Edwards, nasa Deputy Director, Gemini Program, had been designated Director of Operations for Saturn/Apollo Applications in omsf. (nasa Ann., 12/30/66)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey designated Col. Donald W. Paffell (usaf) his Assistant for Aeronautics and Space Matters, (usaf Hq. Bull., 2/14/66,2)	_
NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced appointment of William B. Rieke, nasa Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs and former president of Lockheed Aircraft International, Inc., as Acting Assistant Administrator for Administration. Mr. Rieke would assume new duties beginning May 30, replacing John C. Young who resigned to become an assistant to bob Director, (nasa Release 66-131,• nasa Ann.)
Accomplishments between June 1 and 7—surveyor i, Gemini ix-a, OGO in, and Wasp missions—had given nasa "the most rewarding week in its short but action-packed history,” wrote William J. Coughlin in Technology Week. "Big shots and small, it all added up to an active and highly promising seven-day period for nasa. As someone commented, this was indeed the week that was.” (Coughlin, Tech. Wk., 6/13/66, 54)
msfc engineers Michael J. Vaccaro and Haydon Y. Grubbs, Jr., entered lunar vehicle simulator to begin 14- to 21-day final laboratory validation tests on interior chamber design and investigation of human factors of an enclosed cabin environment. Cabin, 10-ft. cylinder with 7-ft. diameter and 5-ft. ceiling, had stations for performing various tasks—eating, sleeping, taking sample measurements, and completing geophysical assignments. Study, conducted by Honeywell, Inc., under NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology (oart) sponsorship, would determine: (1) functional relationships between physiological responses and behavior and the time required to perform assigned tasks; (2) how to design lunar roving vehicles to provide crew mobility and utilize cabin space; and (3) how to increase proficiency in performing required tasks during extended lunar exploration. Engineers would be isolated as if on moon, wear long-johns or spacesuits, and eat dehydrated food, but would have radio communications for receiving instructions and equipment to record physical condition continuously during test. (msfc Release 66-44)
NASA research pilot John B. McKay made successful emergency landing on Delamar Dry Lake, Nev., when engine of X-15 No. 1 aircraft shut down prematurely—probably because ammonia fuel pump ruptured—32 sec. after aircraft had been dropped from B-52 bomber at 45,000-ft. altitude. McKay escaped injury, and X-15 suffered only minor damage. (Edwards afb Memorandum; X-15 Proj. Off.)
nasa Director of Program Review William A. Fleming reiterated NASA hopes of landing a man on the moon by mid-1968 at ieee conference in Milwaukee. Fleming said plans for post-Apollo space activity had not been completed but might include further exploration of moon, possibly with a roving vehicle; drilling to sample the subsurface of the lurain; or establishing manned space stations. Manned space flight to Mars was still at least 20 yrs. away, he said. (Milwaukee /., 10/25/66)
Measurement of angular size of x-ray source Sco X-l [see March 8, May 23, June 17-18] was reported by Herbert Gursky, Riccardo Giacconi, Paul Gorenstein, and John R. Waters of American Science and Engineering, Inc. (ase) and mit’s Minoru Oda, Hale Bradt, Gordon Garmire, and B.	V. Sreekantan in Astrophysical Journal. Accompanying article by ase’s Oscar P. Manley suggested source was a protostar; Giacconi group said source, if observable, would appear in visible light as starlike object. (Astrophys. /., 6/66, 1249, 1253)
British Research Council had offered to pay one half the $ 11.2-million cost of constructing a 150-in. telescope in Australia, largest in Southern Hemisphere. Similar offer from Univ. of California was pending before Australian Government. (NYT, 10/26/66, 1) nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said that "through the creative use of the capabilities that we are building up, space may ... be used as one of many approaches to alleviate” problems of "famine, disease, over-population, and the need for more and better education” facing developing nations. Dreams of eventual space travel were "pure fantasy,” according to Cal Tech astronautics professor Dr. Jesse L. Greenstein. He urged, however, that a greater portion of national expenditures be devoted to achieving interstellar communications—a task that "may ultimately become the greatest scientific adventure.” Dr. Robert P. Sharp, professor of geology at Cal Tech, noted that although "earth scientists” were playing important role in national space program, it was also important that they "look downward into our own planet. . . . Our understanding of these distant bodies will depend to a good degree upon how well we understand our own plain earth.” Likelihood that revolutionary improvement in communication on earth would transform society was suggested by John R. Pierce, research director of Bell Telephone Labs. Communications Sciences Div. Satellites would greatly expand potential of backward countries and would help build a sense of national identity in underdeveloped areas. "Technology is moving faster than our ability to assimilate it,” scientist and industrialist Dr. Simon Ramo postulated. Dr. Ramo urged development of new class of men called "socio-technologists” who could "effectively link scientific developments with social betterment.” Dr. Murray Gell-Mann, professor of theoretical physics at Cal Tech, said society must give new direction to technology, diverting it from applications that yield higher productive efficiency into areas that yielded greater human satisfaction. A symbol of this sort of change would occur when man no longer wanted to channel resources into "building bigger, noisier aircraft” or when society decided to divert a new highway around a virgin forest rather than build through it. (Texts; Bart, NYT, 10/26/66, 23; Duscha, Wash. Post, 10/26/66, A9; NYT, 10/30/66, 52)
$500-million XB-70 No. 2 experimental bomber and its F-104 chase plane collided and burned near Barstow, Calif., destroying both aircraft and killing F-104 pilot Joseph A. Walker and XB-70 co-pilot Maj. Carl S. Cross (usaf). Walker, NASA test pilot, held world’s records for his 4,104-mph and 354,200-ft.-altitude flights in X-15 rocket research aircraft. XB-70 pilot A1 White ejected in seat capsule and parachuted to ground, suffering arm.and back injuries. On basis of preliminary usaf reports that F-104 apparently hit two vertical stabilizers on XB-70 at 25,000-ft. altitude during "routine” flight, President Johnson praised pilots who gave "their lives to advancing science and technology” and added "immeasurably to the progress this nation is making in the effort” to advance supersonic flight, usaf later revealed that aircraft were flying in formation as close as 10 ft. with T-38, F-4B, and F-5 aircraft "to allow photographic coverage of aircraft powered by General Electric engines” for publicity purposes. Disclosure prompted AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard Schriever to establish two usaf accident boards and Congress to designate House Appropriations Committee to investigate the disaster. (Edwards afb Release; Pres. Doc., 6/13/66, 748; Wash. Post, 6/14/66, A3)
U.S. Astronaut Alan Shepard and Soviet Cosmonaut Boris Yegorov had same positive response to Parade editor Jess Gorkin’s suggestion that an American and a Russian fly together in the same spacecraft. Shepard, contacted at Msc, said it would be of "enormous value.” Yegorov indicated that U.S.S.R. might already be preparing for joint space exploration, saying: "If the Americans are really keen on the idea of joint flights, they had better start learning Russian. All of us are studying English already.” (Anderson, Parade, 7/24/66, 4-5)
U.S. had current "edge” over U.S.S.R. in overall space capability but this status had been "recently acquired and is not sufficient to form even the slightest basis for complacency,” Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, told Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Assn. Industrial Luncheon in Washington, D.C. Dr.Welsh analyzed the areas of relative accomplishment: "(1) Number of spacecraft. The United States has placed almost 400 spacecraft into earth orbit and on escape missions, while the USSR has put slightly less than 200 on such missions. . . . However . . . Soviets have placed each year a greater total weight of payloads. ... (2) Lunar and Interplanetary. The United States has been far less active but considerably more successful in its interplanetary activities. . . . We have photographed Mars and had a productive fly-by of Venus while the USSR’s active interplanetary program has been primarily plagued by failure. In addition, we have taken some 17,000 photographs of the moon and are taking hundreds more by the magnificent Surveyor spacecraft. ... (3) Manned Flight . . . U.S. . . . has a distinct lead over the USSR with about 1500 man flight hours in orbit compared with about 500 . . . with the longest individual flight as well as the longest extra-vehicular activity. Also, the U.S. has had two controlled rendezvous maneuvers, one docking experiment, and considerable manned spacecraft maneuvering experience. So far, the USSR has achieved none of these latter goals. (4) Space Applications. The United States has navigation, weather, and communications satellite systems in regular operation, while the USSR is still in the developmental stage in such activities. (5) Scientific Data . . . the larger number and greater variety of U.S. scientific payloads, as well as the wider and freer dissemination of the information obtained, may well have added more to the world’s store of knowledge. (6) Propulsion . . . the USSR has surpassed the United States in the field of propulsion so far as the amount of thrust is concerned [but] this thrust advantage is much less true today as both countries have in operation and under development larger and more advanced propulsion systems.. . (Text)
Sst design proposal evaluations were submitted to faa by 235-member Government team and 30 domestic and foreign airlines; faa Administrator William F. McKee would study evaluations and make recommendation; President Johnson would mfie final decision by Jan. 1, 1967. {Wash. Post, 11/1/66, B7)
"The First Soft Step,” program discussing Project Surveyor and showing flight operations facilities, was broadcast on six Alabama Educational Television Network stations. Program, hosted by mit science reporter John Fitch, was first in 13-week "Science Reporter” series which had been taped on location at four NASA centers and nine contractor plants. Second program, to be telecast June 6, would be titled "Landing on the Moon” and would concern nasa’s Lunar Excursion Module, (msfc Release 66-117)
Successful mock launching of Gemini 8 spacecraft at etr in preparation for March 15 three-day rendezvous and docking mission. Astronauts Neil Armstrong and David Scott spent two and one-half hours in Gemini capsule during simulated spaceflight, (dpi, NYT, 3/10/66, 10)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey, accompanied by NASA Administrator James E. Webb and nasc Executive Secretary Edward C. Welsh, flew by helicopter to gsfc for three-hour tour, during which they watched GSFC technicians receive first photos from essa ii meteorological satellite. Successful operation of essa ii officially created world’s first fully operational weather-forecasting satellite network. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/66; AP, Balt. Sun, 3/3/66)
NASA announced appointment of Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf), pilot in USAF’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program, to X-15 research program, replacing Capt. Joe H. Engle (usaf), who had transferred to MSC April 4 to become an astronaut. Following extensive training program, Major Adams would become 12th man to fly the rocket-powered aircraft, (frc Release 15-66)
Possible space developments in 1970’s were listed by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, in a letter to Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight: (1) improved propulsion, including nuclear; (2) merging of aeronautics and astronautics in development of lifting bodies and winged spacecraft with maneuverable reentry capability; (3) lunar surface exploration and possible establishment of lunar bases; (4) manned earth-orbiting space stations; (5) unmanned probes within solar system and manned expeditions to planets "whenever that becomes promising and practicable”; (6) voice and TV direct communications from satellites to home receivers "throughout large sections of the world,” and advances in operations and research on other applied satellites. (Text)
Gemini X Astronauts John W. Young and Michael Collins flew from recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal to ksc to begin 10 days of debriefing on July 18-21 mission. (Strothman, Wash. Post, 7/23/66, A3)
gemini rv Astronaut Edward H. White II and gemini v Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., were among the ten outstanding young men of 1965 announced by U.S. Junior Chamber of Commerce in Tulsa, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/9/66)
Reps. William Green (D-Pa.) and Earle Cabeil (D-Tex.) were appointed to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, replacing Reps. Bob Casey (D-Tex.) and Brock Adams (D-Wash.), who resigned, (nasa lar V/41)
ComSatCorp suggested separate meetings during week of April 18 with at&t and Western Union to explore use of multipurpose domestic communications satellites and discuss ownership of ground stations. Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp president, stated: "We believe that there are no inhibitions on Comsat’s ability to provide domestic satellite service, and ... we view earth stations as an integral and critical part of a satellite communication system which must be planned and operated in concern with the space segment. Accordingly, we feel that this responsibility must be reflected in ownership.” (ComSatCorp Release)
nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh spoke at the dedication of Boeing Co.’s Industrial Research Center in Huntsville, Ala. "I believe that the next decade will find us marrying more closely the major features of aeronautics and astronautics so that manned spacecraft will take off and return to spaceports with reusable propulsion systems and reusable spacecraft. The near future will find us engaged in the exploration of the lunar surface, the development of manned earth orbiting permanent space stations, unmanned and then possibly manned travel to the planets, as well as in the progressive utilization of space technology in such fields as communications, navigation, meteorology, and observation. "In addition, I believe the next decade holds great promise for the utilization of space systems technology in the solution of many of the economic and social problems of this complex civilization. . . .” (Text)
Fifth anniversary of President John P. Kennedy’s call before a joint session of Congress to undertake a manned lunar landing in this decade.
One of the world’s largest and most sensitive automatic space tracking and telemetry antennas was officially dedicated at Goldstone, Calif. Newest facility in nasa’s Deep Space Network (dsn), 210-ft. dish antenna was U.S.’s largest fully steerable antenna and world’s largest built for research by spacecraft. Operated by jpl, $14-million antenna would be used to track future Mariners and other spacecraft to Mars, Venus, and even Pluto on the outer reaches of the solar system. Dedication ceremonies, hosted by jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering, included addresses by Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), chairman of Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of Science and Astronautics Committee. NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Edmond C. Buckley, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, also participated, (nasa Release 66-88; msc Roundup, 4/29/66)
In Houston Post Edward W. O’Brien cited need for definition of future national space effort, pointing out that "the mighty industry-government team that has been mobilized for manned flight is tapering off.” Employment, at the peak, had been 400,000; by the end of 1967, total would be 200,000; by 1968, only 100,000. What the U.S. must soon determine is "whether this unique assembly of brainpower and mechanical skill should be held together, or whether it should be applied elsewhere to better public advantage.” (Houston Post, 8/16/66)
First manned Apollo spacecraft (AS-204) would be orbited in first quarter of 1967, NASA announced. Mission would verify spacecraft systems performance and crew operations. NASA had hoped for December launching, but modification of environmental control system (Ecs) would necessitate further ground testing of spacecraft. Prime crew would be Virgil I. Grissom, command pilot; Edward H. White II, senior pilot; and Roger Chaffee, pilot. Backup crew would be James McDivitt, command pilot; David Scott, senior pilot; and Russell Schweikart, pilot. (nasa Release 66-284)
Senate began consideration of FY 1967 Independent Offices Appropriation bill (H.R. 14921), which included $4,991,600,000 NASA appropriation. Two amendments proposed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) to reduce NASA’s appropriation—one by $998,320,000, the other by $150,000,000—were defeated, (nasa lar V/128)
First direct measurement of minimum amount of energy required to initiate simple chemical reaction was announced by Cal Tech, where graduate student John Michael White had shown that one third of an electron volt of energy was necessary to split a hydrogen molecule and link a deuterium atom with one of the hydrogens. AEC-supported study had been suggested to White by Dr. Aron Kuppermann, prof, of chemical physics, who said measurement would make it possible to learn "whether bimolecular chemical reactions can be described by the laws of classical mechanics or whether it is necessary to use quantum mechanics.” (Cal Tech Release, 4/4/66)
Referring to nasa-dod decision of 1964 to exchange experts in each other’s programs, Aviation Week reported the score to date: 184 usaf, 78 Army, 25 Navy, and six usmc officers assigned to NASA; transferred to dod was one NASA official, Dr. Michael Yarymovich, now technical director of usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program. (Av. Wk., 4/25/66, 25)
Sen. Harry F. Byrd, Jr. (D-Va.), replaced Sen. Joseph D. Tydings (D-Md.) on the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. House Science and Astronautics Committee membership remained the same. (NASA LAH V/l)
Teat pilots saved one of two U.S. $500 million XB-70 research aircraft during test flight from Edwards AFB by short circuiting two terminals with a paper clamp. When a jammed door prevented hydraulic extension of nose landing gear, Col. Joseph Cotton {usaf), co-pdot with North American Aviation, Inc.’s chief test pilot, Alvin S. White, removed paper clamp from his brief case and touched it to two pin terminals in a small relay unit, following instructions radioed by NAA ground engineers. Gear extended, and although main gear burst into flame as 185-ft., delta-winged aircraft landed, naa reported damage was light. (Wash. Post, 5/3/66, Al; NYT, 5/4/66, 23)
Commenting on success of Project Gemini in developing techniques and experience vital for manned lunar landing, William J. Coughlin said in Technology Week: "Gemini technology will ... be applied to the manned scientific space stations still to come. This fanning out of technology from the direct-line effort to effect a manned lunar landing is a dramatic demonstration of the rapid maturing of the national space program.” (Coughlin, Tech. Wk., 11/21/66, 50)
X-15 No. 2 was flown by Maj. William Knight (usaf) to 3,473 mph (mach 4.90) and 231,000-ft. altitude to conduct startracker experiment and base drag study and test alternate pitot static system. (X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, NYT, 8/14/66, 8)
Dr. Edmund P. Learned, Harvard Univ. professor of business policy, became adviser to faa Administrator William F. McKee on "economic and financial aspects of the supersonic transport (sst) development program.” (faa; faa Release 66-38)
Comprehensive report on June 8 collision of XB-70 and F-104 aircraft near Barstow, Calif., compiled by two investigative boards—one to determine causes, the other to examine command responsibility—was transmitted to Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara by Secretary of the Air Force Harold Brown. Inadvertent movement by F-104 into position "from which recovery was virtually impossible” was cited as "most probable cause” of collision; failure of Maj. Carl Cross (usaf) to eject from XB-70 before crashing was attributed to an escape system malfunction. Among report’s recommendations were: improvement of afftc’s operational procedures; modification of XB-70’s escape system; and establishment of standards for formation flights. In accompanying memorandum, Secretary Brown said that Col. Joseph F. Cotton (usaf) , XB-70 test director; Col. James G. Scott (usaf), Edwards afb information officer; and John S. McCollom, Director of Research Vehicles for Aeronautical Systems Div., had been reprimanded and Col. Albert M. Cate (usaf) relieved of duties as Deputy for Systems Tests at afftc. (CR, 8/15/66, 18505-10; upi, NYT, 8/16/66, 15; Maffre, Wash. Post, 8/16/66, 6)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., headed six-man panel of investigators that began attempt to reconstruct St. Louis crash of T-38 jet plane in which Astronauts Elliot M. See, Jr., and Charles A. Bassett II died Feb. 28. msc Public Affairs Officer Paul Haney told upi that full report would not be completed for "at least six weeks.” The tragedy prompted Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R-Wash.) to urge the House Committee on Science and Astronautics to investigate flight training of astronauts, particularly the number of hours of flying time required and the justification for such requirements, (upi, NYT, 3/2/66, 22; nasa lar V/36)
XB-70 No. 1 supersonic aircraft, piloted by North American Aviation, Inc., test pilot Van H. Shepard and L/Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf), reached mach 2.51 and 60,000-ft. altitude in flight from Edwards afb for the national sonic boom program. (XB-70 Flight Log)
International scientific community commented on luna ix’s soft-landing on the moon. Dr. William Pickering, Director of jpl, offered congratulations and said: "The difficulty of the task is attested to by the number of previous attempts to accomplish a soft landing on the moon. The success of this mission has already added to our knowledge of the lunar surface. We now await with interest the scientific data which will be received in the next few days.” Heinz Kaminski, chief of Bochum Observatory, West Germany: "American space flight technology is on a high level of perfection which the Russians just can’t match.” Dr. L. R. Shepherd, president of British Interplanetary Society: "[Soft-landing on the moon is] much more difficult than the orbit rendezvous achieved by the Americans.” Dr. Shotaro Miyamoto, chief of Kyoto Univ. astronomical observatory, Japan: "Soviet landing means men and materials will now be sent to the moon and its development accelerated.” (NYT, 2/5/66, 11; 2/6/66, Ell)
Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of Office of Science and Technology and science adviser to the President, in memorandum to President Johnson said: "In October 1965 I convened an ad hoc Jet Aircraft Noise Panel... I am pleased to be able to present to you the report of this Panel entitled 'Alleviation of Jet Aircraft Noise Near Airports.’ ” Principal recommendations were: (1) initiation of Federally-supported studies of expected scope of noise problem through 1975 and of public and private programs needed to combat the problem; (2) creation of a Federal task force to analyze the problem; (3) development of valid, broadly applicable standards of noise measurement; (4) pursuit of definitive technical study to reduce noise levels; (5) establishment of task force to investigate methods for Federal participation in program for compatible land utilization near airports; (6) initiation of program to modify operating procedures and techniques that would reduce engine noise without compromising safety. {Pres. Doc., 3/21/66, 404)
X-15 No. 2 was flown to 3,614 mph (mach 5) and 102,200-ft. altitude by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) to conduct heat tests. Pilot conducted base-drag studies and checked out stability and control, ablative materials, and wing tip accelerometer. It was 170th flight of the X-15 and 7th during August, (frc Release 16-66; X-15 Proj. Off.)
Certificate promoting the late Dr. William Randolph Lovelace II, to rank of major general in U.S. Air Force Reserve was presented to his eldest daughter, Mrs. John Sellman, at usaf Satellite Test Annex, Sunnyvale, Calif., by M/G Ben I. Funk, afsc’s Space Systems Div. Cmdr. Dr. Lovelace, former NASA Director of Space Medicine, died with his wife and their pilot in an aircraft accident near Aspen, Colo., December 1965. (afsc Release 43.66)
Astronaut Donald K. Slayton received an honorary Doctor of Engineering degree from Michigan Technological Univ. in ceremony at msc. Degree was conferred "in recognition of high attainments in engineering.” As msc Assistant Director for Flight Crew Operations, Slayton directed the Astronaut Office, Aircraft Operations Office, and the Flight Crew Support Div. (msc Roundup, 1/21/66, 2)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, visited msfc to review technological and scientific progress on work being conducted by msfc for ossa projects, including Apollo Telescope Mount, x-ray astronomy experiment, and several other astronomy experiments. Accompanying Dr. Newell were his deputies, Edgar M. Cortright and Dr. John E. Naugle, and directors of ossa program offices, (msfc Release 66-256)
Theoretical possibility of self-supporting tapered cable extending 22,000 mi. into space from earth and from extraterrestrial rotating or revolving bodies was examined in Science report by John Isaacs, Hugh Bradner, and George E. Bachus, Scripps Institute of Oceanography, and Allyn C. Vine, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. Cable, referred to as a "skyhook,” would be extended downward from a satellite in synchronous orbit, become an extension of the satellite, and be held in place by the balance between centrifugal and gravitational forces that keeps any satellite in orbit. Authors of the report conceded in a telephone interview with Harold Schmeck of the New York Times that "present-day engineering is not yet up to the task of making a cable strong enough and light enough for the sky hook project from earth.” (Science, 2/11/66, 682-3; Schmeck, NYT, 2/12/66, 12)
XB-70 No. 1 experimental research aircraft, piloted by NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton and North American Aviation, Inc., pilot Van Shepard reached mach 2.52 and 60,000-ft. altitude during national sonic boom program flight, (nasa Proj. Off.)
Major decisions on the future of space exploration facing the Administration received comment by William J. Coughlin in Missiles and Rockets: "History teaches us . .. that such exploration is more likely to come in waves, one overlapping the other, than in single units, each with a distinct beginning and a distinct end. "Man strives for the most distant objective within reach of his technology. And as the first explorers try and try again on that far reach, others—at first other explorers and scientists, then those scouts of commerce, miners and trappers, then businessmen, settlers and shopkeepers—follow in their wake to prove and develop what courage has proven attainable.” (Coughlin, M&R, 1/24/66, 46)
Clark Univ.’s Robert Hutchings Goddard Library announced plans to bury a time capsule containing 100 "early Space Age” artifacts, including tape recording of former Astronaut John Glenn’s communications with ground control during his Feb. 20, 1962, MA-6 flight in friendship 7. Capsule would be set to be opened in 500 yrs. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/66, A4)
Ten-month survey was reported by Cal Tech radioastronomy research fellow Dr. John D. Wyndham. He found that at least a fourth of the radio sources reported beyond this galaxy belonged in the quasar category. If a fourth of the thousands of radio sources beyond the Milky Way are quasars, the latter must be very abundant, the report said. (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/29/66, A26)
Meteorite crater 1,476 ft. in diameter and with an average depth of 100 ft. ■—third largest crater on record—was discovered in the western foothills of the Chilean Andes by geological team led by Dr. William A. Cassidy, Columbia Univ. Lamont Geological Observatory, and Joaquin Sanchez, Instituto de Investigaciones de Geologicas de Chile, nsf announced. Crater, which lies in an area 1,000 ft. above sea level accessible only by foot, was discovered while team was investigating a depression shown in an aerial photograph. Crater’s age had not been determined. (Chic. Trib., 3/13/66)
Gemini x Astronauts John W. Young and Michael Collins flew from ksc to msc for reunion with families and continued debriefing. News conference had been set for Aug. 1. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/25/66, A12)
House passed H.R. 15963, bill to establish Cabinet-level Dept, of Transportation. Amendments proposed by Reps. Benjamin J. Rosenthal (D-N.Y.) and John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) that would have established an Office of Aircraft Noise Control and Abatement in the Department were defeated. (CR, 8/30/66, 20342-84)
A nasa Contract Administration Services Representative’s office—headed by Donald R. Mulholland, Deputy Director of nasa’s Western Operations Office—had been established at headquarters of afsc’s Air Force Contract Management Div. (afcmd), Los Angeles, Calif. New office, which completed network of representatives’ offices in major dod centers, would "provide liaison between afcmd and nasa elements on contract administration services support. . . .” (nasa Hq. Bull., 5/23/66, 6)
X-15 No. 3 was flown by NASA test pilot William H. Dana to 3,682 mph (mach 5.34) and 132,700-ft. altitude in his third flight. Primary purpose was pilot checkout. (X-15 Proj. Off; upi, Chic. Trib., 8/5/66)
Question whether "superrockets” for the Apollo manned space program should have liquid or solid stages was no longer debatable, said William Hines in the Washington Evening Star; the solids had been "forced through studied neglect to default.” He continued: "This is not to suggest, however, that the whole liquid-solid debate is moot. "Between Saturn I-B’s 35,000-pound orbital capability and Saturn V’s 250,000 pounds is a huge gap; between Atlas-Centaur’s 2,300-pound escape capability and Saturn Y’s 95,000 pounds is a gap that is even greater, proportionately. "A wide variety of scientific and manned payloads can be envisioned as fitting within these gaps. A flexible booster system based on large solid rockets of varying lengths and flight characteristics could fill the gaps quickly and at reasonable cost; liquid systems could not.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/17/66, A6)
House appointed to House-Senate Conference Committee on NASA FY 1967 authorization Reps. William E. Miller (R-N.Y.), Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.), Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), Joseph W. Martin (R-Mass.), James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), and Charles A. Mosher (R-Ohio). (nasa lar V/95-96)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb appointed B. L. Dorman, vice president of Aerojet-General Corp., Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, effective Jan. 16, 1967, and Gen. Jacob E. Smart (usaf, Ret.) Acting Administrator for Administration, effective Jan. 1, 1967. Both positions were formerly held by William B. Rieke, who resigned to return to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. (nasa Release 66-327)
Senate unanimously passed by voice vote the NASA FY 1967 authorization bill of $5,008,000,000—-$121,135,850 more than the sum voted by the House but $4 million less than President Johnson had requested. In speech on Senate floor during passage of bill, Sen. Spessard L. Holland (D-Fla.) said that if the U.S. failed to continue development of solid propellants, it would fail in the one thing it "should be doing to catch up with the Soviet Union in the field of space effort.” Senate bill included only the $3.5 million requested by the Administration for one additional firing of a half-length 260-in. solid rocket motor. In other debate, Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D-Pa.) said he felt that national priorities were "substantially out of order when the Senate, in the course of 5 or 10 minutes, passes a $5 billion authorization bill to send a man to the moon,” and that he hoped the space effort could be put on an international cooperation and not a competitive basis. Clark was joined in his remarks against the bill by Sen. J. William Fulbright (D-Ark.), who said such action was "typical, today, of any bill relating either to outer space or the military ... in my view, it is an outrageous distortion of priorities.” (CR, 5/24/66, 10715-20)
U.S.S.R. charged at 17-nation disarmament conference in Geneva that the crash of an American nuclear bomber in Spain in January was "flagrant violation of international law and of the 1963 Moscow Treaty” which banned all but underground tests. U.S.S.R. claimed flight violated the treaty because "it is common knowledge that the most important purpose of this treaty was to prevent radioactive contamination of the atmosphere, outer space, and water.... The southern coast of Spain and adjacent sea areas have been radioactively contaminated by American nuclear weapons.” U.S. chief delegate William C. Foster rejected the allegations as "false” and countercharged that U.S.S.R. was guilty of a "propaganda” maneuver. (Wash. Post, 2/18/66, A16)
Apparent inactivity in Soviet manned space program might reflect "growing dismay over the tremendously high cost of astronautics where men are involved,” wrote William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. "The Russians may feel they have better things to do with their money, just as the United States would have if the Kennedy 'moon message’ of 1961 had not been hung like an albatross around the national neck as a commitment involving American prestige before the world.” Cost of Project Gemini was about $700,000 per man hour. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/3/66, A12)
X-15 No. 2 was flown to 3,443 mph (mach 4.85) and 249,000-ft. altitude by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) on star-tracking mission. (X-15 Proj. Off.)
Saturn V crawler completed first successful load-carrying run at ksc since track support roller bearings had been crushed during 7.9-million-lb.-load test July 25, 1965. Crawler lifted 447-ft., 10.6-million-lb. launcher umbilical tower No. 1 (Lut) and moved it 24 mi. in about nine hrs. ksc Procurement Director Michael Haworth revealed costs for two crawlers ordered would total $14.2 million, $5.1 million more than original $9.1-million cost-plus-incentive-fee contract with Marion Power Shovel Co. (M&R, 2/7/66, 34)
