NASA test pilot William H. Dana made successful emergency landing of X—15 No. 3 at Edwards afb after low pressure developed in fuel pump. (AP,B Sun, 4/27/67)
To astronauts, Maj. Edwin E. (Buzz) Aldrin, Jr. (usaf), and Capt. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn), had won the 1967 Harmon International Aviation Trophy, the Clifford B. Harmon Trust announced in New York. Trophies also would go to Miss Sheila Scott of Britain, who had established speed records during a 28,633-mi solo flight around the world in a single-engine plane, and to Alvin S. White. White, now manager of supersonic flight research and development for Trans World Airlines, was named the outstanding airplane pilot for test flights of the XB-70 at mach 3 as chief test pilot for North American Aviation Company. The awards are made annually for exceptional feats of individual piloting skill. (NYT, 9/10/67)
Nuclear physicist Dr. Edward Teller, speaking at a Washington, D.C., press conference, recommended that U.S. proceed with a ballistic missile defense system. Qualifying his opinion as “inexpert,” Dr. Teller noted there were other factors to be considered in any decision for the deployment of a missile defense system. Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara opposed the antimissile system on the grounds that it would not withstand a sophisticated assault. (B Sun, 4/28/67, 7)
XB-70 No. 1 research aircraft was piloted by NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton and Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf) to mach 1.35 and 37,000-ft altitude to conduct stability and control maneuvers, (nasa Proj Off)
Most probable cause of Jan. 27 flash fire in which Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee died was a sparking short circuit in worn, defective, or poorly insulated wire, Apollo 204 Review Board concluded in its final report. Copies of report were distributed simultaneously to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, congressional committees, and the press. Board was unable to pinpoint exact ignition source, but identified conditions which led to the disaster: (1) a sealed cabin, pressurized with an oxygen atmosphere; (2) an extensive distribution of combustible materials in the cabin; (3) vulnerable wiring carrying spacecraft power; (4) inadequate provisions for the crew to escape; and (5) inadequate provisions for rescue or medical assistance. Having identified these conditions, the Board addressed itself to the question of “how these conditions came to exist. Careful consideration of this question . . . leads ... to the conclusion that in its devotion to the many difficult problems of space travel, the Apollo team failed to give adequate attention to certain mundane but equally vital questions of crew safety. “The board’s investigation revealed many deficiencies in design and engineering, manufacture and quality control. When these deficiencies are corrected the over-all reliability of the Apollo program will be increased greatly.” Board offered a total of 21 recommendations, including: (1) an “indepth” review of the entire Apollo life-support system; (2) an investigation of effective ways to control and extinguish spacecraft fires; (3) severe restriction and control of amount and location of combustible materials inside spacecraft; (4) reduction of time required for crew to egress and simplification of escape operations; (5) continuous monitoring of safety of all test operations to assure adequacy of emergency protections; (6) improved ground communications system; (7) continued studies of two-gas cabin atmosphere; and (8) full-scale mockup tests to establish fire safety of reconfigured command module. Board emphasized that its report was not intended as a criticism of NASA’s entire manned program: “The board is very concerned that its description of the defects in the Apollo program . . .will be interpreted as an indictment of the entire manned space flight program and a castigation of the many people associated with the program. Nothing is further from the board’s mind.” (Text; NYT, 4/10/67, 1, 28-9; W Star, 4/ 10/67, Al, A6-7; W Post, 4/10/67, Al, A8) .
Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Director of ost and science advisor to the President, addressing science writers’ seminar in St. Louis, doubted value of scientists’ becoming part-time politicians to promote greater public support of scientific activity. He said a scientist who used his skill in explaining complex subjects to laymen was “a much better politician than anyone trying to be an amateur on serious political matters.” Noting that rate of growth of Federal support of science activities had slowed in recent years, Hornig said $17 billion was still being spent annually on science activities, including $1.8 billion on academic science in universities. (AP, NYT, 11/19/67, 2; Federal Support for Academic Sciences and Other Educational Activities in Univ. and Col., July 67)
In February and March testimony released by Senate Foreign Relations Committee’s Subcommittee on Disarmament, Director of Defense Research and Engineering Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., indicated that U.S. was developing a new type of nuclear warhead designed to destroy enemy missiles with high-intensity x-rays. X-ray method, which would be used with three-stage Spartan missile, could destroy enemy missile by (1) disrupting avionic circuits used for guidance and detonation; (2) heating warhead to such high temperatures that it would ablate prematurely and burn up during reentry; or (3) triggering the warhead and causing premature detonation. (Committee Off; Av Wk, 5/15/67, 22; upi, P Inq, 5/11/67, 3; Finney, NYT, 5/10/67, 1)
Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D-Pa.), member of Senate Foreign Relations Committee, on Senate floor called proposed Nike-X ABM system “a very expensive flying ‘erector set’ ” and said that Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara was following an unwise course, “militarily, economically, and diplomatically. . . . Even if we were to spend forty billion dollars or more on a so-called massive system, the resulting increase in our security would be zero. . . . The result would he a waste of a great deal of money . . at a critical time. He cited three flaws in arguments supporting abm system: (1) justification based on approaching threat of Communist Chinese nuclear tipped missiles (“We have the capacity to devastate China many times over . . . and the Chinese know that,” he said); (2) assumption that a thin abm system would be effective against Communist China for any appreciable period; and (3) assumption that during so-called safe period in Chinese nuclear development, U.S., behind an abm defense, would be genuinely safe from nuclear attack. “The inevitable conclusion,” Senator Clark noted, “is that the proposed . . . system simply will not do the job which its proponents say it will do.” (Text; CR, 10/9/67, S14413-27)
William H. Woodward was promoted from Deputy Director to Director of oart’s Space Power and Electric Propulsion Div.—formerly Nuclear Systems and Space Power Div.—succeeding Harold B. Finger, who became NASA Associate Administrator for Organization and Management March 15. Woodward would be responsible for planning, managing, and coordinating advanced research and technology programs in the area of space power, including solar, chemical, nuclear, and electric propulsion, (nasa Release 67-78)
President Johnson’s FY 1968 budget recommendations marked “a turning point in the Nation’s space program,” nasa Administrator James E. Webb testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Webb said President Johnson had “placed before the Congress a program which says that this Nation must go forward in space and not call it quits at the end of this decade.” He summarized recommendations for (1) completion of Apollo program; (2) development of capabilities for long-duration manned space flight in Apollo Applications (aa) program; (3) development of “practical applications of our space know-how” using capabilities of AA program and “advanced unmanned systems like the ats-4”; (4) planetary exploration through Voyager program; (5) development of Nerva II nuclear rocket engine; and (6)	increase in aeronautical research efforts to deal with “emerging problems of civil as well as military aviation” [see Jan. 25]. Webb announced that NASA had established Voyager program management responsibilities “designed to make the best possible utilization of the proved capabilities” of JPL “and of our field centers and laboratories.” Voyager program, since 1964 under NASA Hq. Division of Lunar and Planetary Programs, would become a separate division in OSSA with Oran W. Nicks as Director and Donald P. Hearth, Deputy Director. JPL would be responsible for surface laboratory, tracking, and mission operations systems; msfc, for orbiting spacecraft and Saturn V launch vehicle systems; and LaRC, for landing capsule bus system. Discussing the NASA program, Webb said: “I should be very clear on the subject of risks. In moving ahead to utilize the resources made available to us, we have had to take technical risks in the development of our equipment and in establishing our schedules. These have included risks that a particular design or line of development would not succeed in meeting the specifications; risks that schedules might not be met; and that we could not recover from a serious setback because we did not have parallel or back-up developments. But we have not knowingly accepted a higher level of risks in order to meet our manned flight schedules. In our specifications, trade-off studies, test criteria, or mission plans, we have taken no risks to the lives or safety of the astronauts that we could find a way to avoid.” Webb urged that decisions on Voyager and aa programs and on Nerva II be made this year to avoid acceleration of the “dispersal of the know-how that we have built up in government, industry, and universities that has already begun___” Questioned by Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) on whether U.S. or U.S.S.R. led in space technology, Webb replied that U.S.S.R. would be ahead in large spacecraft until “we get the nerva as a third stage for the Saturn V which will roughly double the capability of the Saturn V for Earth-escape missions.” While U.S.S.R. may lead in planetary exploration, he said, U.S. was superior in “the very sophisticated use of microminiaturization and many new techniques of handling data.” (Testimony; Transcript, 14-15, 28-9, 34; NASA Release 67-40; NYT, 3/1/67, 29)
Col. Joseph F. Cotton (usaf) and NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton made successful emergency landing of XB-70 No. 1 at Edwards afb after crew entry door opened on takeoff and main landing gear malfunctioned. (XB-70 Proj Off)
Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, discussing Soviet space plans in Ogonyek, hinted that U.S.S.R. was preparing to launch a large manned space station in the near future. It had been speculated that U.S.S.R.—which had not launched a manned spacecraft since March 18, 1965—would conduct major manned launch in 1967 to commemorate 50th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution. Gagarin said there was little value in repeating feats already accomplished: “. . . it is not sensible in the future to put expensive spacecraft into orbit for several days. ... It is apparent that they will have to stay in orbit a long time. It will be necessary to supply them and change crews with the use of simplified types of space vehicles. . . . The time is not far off when longer and more distant space flights will be made.” In later Novosti press agency report Soviet Academy of Sciences Chairman Anatoly A. Blagonravov supported Gagarin’s predictions and said: “Mankind is entering the 7th year of the age of man’s space flight, and we do not doubt that in the not very distant future we will witness new space victories which will exert a growing influence on the life of people.” (Anderson, NYT, 4/9/67; upi, W Star, 4/9/67, A13; C Trib, 4/10/67)
afsc’s Ballistic Systems Div. (bsd) and Space Systems Div. (ssd) were combined to form new Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) with headquarters in Los Angeles. New organization would be commanded by m/g John W. O’Neill, former Commander of Electronic Systems Div. m/g John L. McCoy, former BSD Commander, was named Deputy Commander for Missiles; m/g Paul T. Cooper, former SSD Commander, was appointed Deputy Commander for Space, (afsc Release 101.67; ssd Release 67-207)
Development of a military base in space or on the moon would be the least expensive way to protect U.S. cities, Rep. William Jennings Bryan Dorn (D-S.C.) suggested in speech on the House floor. He said that the refinement of U.S. capabilities to destroy, on a moment’s notice, any potential enemy anywhere in the world would be far superior to development of an antimissile missile system for the. protection of selected cities only. In addition, stations in space that could control the weather and current of the sea might well “deter a madman dictator” and a spacecraft capable of raining atomic warheads could ensure peace. (CR, 3/9/67, H2422-3)
European leaders had realized in recent months that only they could close the “technology gap” between their countries and the U.S., Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, told New York Times reporter Evert Clark. Dr. Hornig reached this conclusion after a 16-day tour of six European capitals. The belief that U.S. had created the gap and should therefore assume the burden of closing it “has entirely disappeared,” he said. “What we found [on the tour] was a realistic approach, a realization that most of these things are basic problems, ones they have to tackle themselves.” This realization was “a most important advance” that represented an “enormous closing of the understanding gap” and meant that discussion of the many problems making up the larger technological gap “has now come down to earth.” (Clark, AFT, 7/21/67,15) 324-801 0—89
Entire universe might be immersed in a sea of tiny particles known as neutrinos whose presence had thus far eluded observation, Dr. William A. Fowler of Cal Tech told American Physical Society meeting in New York. His theory sought to explain absence of helium in the spectra of certain older stars within the framework of the “big bang” theory of the universe. If -the exploding fireball from which the universe was formed had been packed with neutrinos, these particles would have interacted with neutrons to produce a cloud of protons and electrons, Dr. Fowler said. Latter would then have combined to form hydrogen atoms which would have stringently limited amount of helium formed. “Neutrino astronomy is just getting started,” he said, “but it might ultimately verify or deny presence of the hypothetical neutrino sea.” (Sullivan, NYT, 2/2/67,25)
U.S.S.R. and Great Britain planned to sign a joint technological agreement shortly as result of British government and industry team visit to Moscow during September, reported Aviation Week. Agreement would cover automatic landing, aircraft engine technology and reliability, engine noise, and sonic boom research, Minister of State John Stone-house, team leader, stated. Britain had substantial lead over U.S.S.R. in these fields, but Stonehouse contended sharing of information would lead to new export markets for British hardware in Soviet and Soviet-bloc countries. (Av Wk, 10/2/67,16)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell became NASA Associate Administrator. His appointment had been announced Aug. 25. Dr. Newell would be replaced as Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Sciences) by Dr. John E. Naugle. (nasa Release 67-228; NASA Ann, 10/20/67; Hines, W Star, 10/3/67, A4)
Method for obtaining a three-dimensional view of clouds photographed two-dimensionally by weather satellites was reported by AFCRL’s John H. Conover and Itek Corp.’s Ronald J. Ondrejka. Photos used were from Nimbus II mission. The two photos used in this stereo-pair arrangement had to be taken from different points, in this method long used in photo reconnaissance studies. With three-dimensional satellite-photograph presentation, absolute cloud heights could be measured to within a theoretical accuracy of about one km. (OAR Res Rev, 11/67, 11—2)
XB-70 No. 1 research aircraft was piloted by Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf) and NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton to mach 2.54 and 60,200-ft altitude in flight at Edwards afb for national sonic boom program. (nasa Pro j Off)
Charges that nasa’s Apollo program had serious deficiencies were reviewed by William Hines in series of articles in Washington Evening Star. A 55-page report submitted to nasa three days before Jan. 27 flash fire by Thomas R. Baron, former North American Aviation, Inc., inspector at ksc Apollo warehouse, charged that improper parts had been installed in Apollo I spacecraft. Careless and unorthodox warehousing practices had caused many parts and materials intended for spacecraft use to lose their identity, Baron told Hines in an interview. “As a result there was probably a bundle of stuff [in Apollo] that they don’t have any idea what ... it is at all.” Baron also charged that on at least one occasion, naa had installed a substandard part with deliberate subterfuge, without the knowledge of nasa. Truth about the part could easily be concealed because nasa had no quality-control men of its own in receiving warehouse, Baron said. He was particularly critical of deviation from test procedures: “When you deviate on your small components, and you deviate on all of them, and you put these in one system and you run a systems test and you deviate again, you’ve ended up with a system that really isn’t worthwhile.” James Parker, former nasa quality control inspector at ksc, told Hines that nasa quality control supervision on Apollo contractors’ work was “spotty” and said he had periodically cited instances of waste and improper expenditures in reports to his ksc superiors. (Hines, W Star, 3/15/67, Al, A6; 3/19/67, A7; 3/23/67,1, A6; 3/26/67, A3)
Lewis Research Center’s Quiet Engine Program should produce a significant reduction in jet-engine noise and reverse the rising noise levels which had created serious problems at major airports, Michael L. Yaffee reported in Aviation Week. Expected to cost $50 million, program was seeking to develop a new turbofan demonstrator engine that would show a reduction of 15 PNdb (perceived noise in decibels) on takeoff and 20 PNdb on landing, below noise of current transport engines. Definition phase of Quiet Engine Program began under $458,000 contract LeRC awarded United Aircraft Corp.’s Pratt & Whitney Div., July 13. Remaining $750,000 allotted to program for FY 1967 was being used to purchase supporting services and hardware. (Yaffee Av Wk, 8/21/67, 38-9)
USN had selected six companies to compete for six-month study contract to design ship-based antimissile missile system which could support Nike-X, William Beecher reported in New York Times. Companies were Hughes Aircraft Co., Martin Marietta Corp., Boeing Co., Aerojet-General Corp., McDonnell Douglas Co., and Raytheon Co. Code-named Seaborne AntiBallistic Missile Intercept System (sabmis), it would be deployed on submarines and warships stationed in international waters off Communist China and U.S.S.R. to intercept long-range missiles launched from those countries. A USA Nike-X official commented: “The Navy system is both feasible and attractive. It could intercept enemy ICBm’s before they can deploy most of their penetration aids; it would reduce the number of missiles Nike-X would have to contend with; and it would tremendously increase the enemy’s technology problems by forcing him to become very sophisticated indeed if he wants to stand any chance of getting his icbm’s past both the mid-course and terminal phase defenses.” (Beecher, NYT, 7/4/67,1, 2)
NASA appointed Edward M. Shafer, Assistant General Counsel, to become Associate General Counsel. Shafer’s principal responsibilities had been in the areas of international programs and communications satellites. He had served as Chairman of NASA Board of Contract Appeals since Jan. 1, 1965. (nasa Ann, 11/8/67)
Citizens League Against the Sonic Boom, an organization with 230 members in 18 states, had started a campaign to stop the construction of a U.S. sst, New York Times reported. Harvard Univ. physicist Dr. William A. Shurcliff, director of the campaign, said in a Cambridge, Mass., interview that the League would attack the sst program in Congress. “The amount of money provided thus far by Congress is less than one-quarter of what is needed to get a prototype in the air. The government must put about $1.1 billion together, and to date Congress has only supplied $200-million or $299-million. “I think our chances of stopping the program are good.” {NYT, 6/18/67, 60)
Shortage of U.S.-manufactured high-reliability components because of the demands of the Vietnam war was one of the reasons Canada was postponing the launch of her Isis-A satellite from fall 1967 to 1968, Dr. John H. Chapman, Deputy Superintendent of the Defence Research Telecommunications Establishment, told Toronto Globe & Mail. Isis-A would measure characteristics of the ionosphere. (Toronto Globe & Mail, 3/24/67,29)
Newsweek reported that Soviet diplomats in Washington, D.C., admitted to East European colleagues that Soyuz I mission had been launched one week early in an attempt to offset the impact of Svetlana Alliluyeva’s press conference. Mrs. Alliluyeva, daughter of the late Joseph Stalin, defected to the U.S. in April. U.S.S.R. reportedly denied, however, that rescheduling had any effect on the April 24 crash-landing which resulted in Cosmonaut Komarov’s death. (Newsweek, 5/8/67)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, speaking at National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., criticized the press for uninformed discussion of the Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy: “I deplore comment in the press recently regarding the accident. The press has a responsibility not to comment in areas about which it is not informed.” Speaking on the fifth anniversary of his space flight in Friendship 7, Glenn noted that the deaths of three Apollo astronauts were part of the price man must pay in his quest for knowledge: “Man tries something and sometimes he succeeds and sometimes he fails. It is very regrettable. We hate to lose good friends, but we think they went in a good cause.” (Sehlstedt, Jr., B Sun, 2/21/67,8; AP, WPost, 2/21/67; NYT, 2/22/67,50) During week of Feb. 20: Princeton Univ. announced development of accelerator capable of raising electrically neutral atoms and molecules to energy levels never before obtained in controlled experiments. Utilizing supersonic jets of mixed gases in high-vacuum container, accelerator could generate molecular beams of neutral particles with kinetic energies of 10 or more electron volts. Particles at this energy level were necessary to many common gas-phase chemical reactions. Dr. John B. Fenn, professor who directed NSF-sponsored project, said accelerator would aid studies in meteorology and aerospace technology. (NYT, 2/26/67, 59)
Addressing the House on means for a terminal-phase missile interception Systran, Rep. William R. Anderson (D-Tenn.) called for a sea-based antiballistic missile intercept system (sabmis). Pointing to the popular estimate that Red China would have a ballistic missile delivery capability in the early 1970s, the Congressman stated: “. . . deployment of a sabmis unit would place in the seas close to an adversary’s homeland and across his ‘launch trajectory window,’ a mobile, partly submerged screen of antimissile forces.” (CR, 9/19/67, H12137)
The “Phillips Report”—report by NASA’s Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips which “found insufficient competence in key management and technical positions” at North American Aviation, Inc., 16 mo before Apollo accident—was being suppressed by nasa, Rep. William F.	Ryan (D-N.Y.) charged in an AP interview. Representative Ryan said he would ask Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) to demand NASA’s submission of the full report for examination by the subcommittee. (AP, W Star, 4/19/67, A6)
Col. Joseph Cotton (usaf) and naa test pilot Van Shepard flew XB-70 No. 1 to mach 1.43 and 42,200-ft altitude during two-hour performance evaluation flight at Edwards afb. (XB-70 Proj Off)
Decision to use 100% oxygen atmosphere in U.S. spacecraft had not been made as a shortcut to compensate for U.S.S.R.’s superior booster capability, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh told Interavia Air Letter. “There were other factors involved,” including weight and efficient use of oxygen-consuming fuel cells. Dr. Welsh emphasized there was “. . . no basis at all for a change in [Apollo program] policy” because of Jan. 27 tragedy at ksc and predicted U.S. still had 50-50 chance to land first man on the moon, (upi, W Star, 2/5/67, A8)
European aerospace industry assn., Eurospace, was urging formation -of an optional regional communications satellite system to provide TV and telephone coverage for Europe, Donald E. Fink reported in Aviation Week. An expanded version was also being studied to link the continent with the entire Mediterranean basin, the Middle East, and major portions of Africa. Designated Eurosat, system would consist of one 375-lb comsat launched into stationary orbit by an eldo Europa II booster and at least 18 ground stations in Europe and North Africa. Fabrication of satellite and ground stations would be restricted to European aerospace companies. Initial cost estimate for satellite system was $100 million. (Fink, Av Wk, 8/28/67,29)
New members of House Committee on Science and Astronautics were named: Reps. Jack Brinkley (D-Ga.); Bob Eckhardt (D-Tex.); Larry Winn, Jr. (R-Kan.); Guy Vander Jagt (R—Mich.); Jerry L. Pettis (R-Calif.); Donald E. Lukens (R-Ohio); and John E. Hunt (R-N.J.). (nasa lar VI/8,11; Committee Ofc.)
Senate, approving (71-1) dot’s FY 1968 appropriations bill (H.R. 11456), accepted figures of its Appropriations Committee, where special attention had been given to air and highway safety programs [see Sept. 28]. Despite persistent efforts of Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wisc.), who would have allowed only $1 million for SST development, amount was fixed at $142 million. Senate-approved bill was sent to conference committee. (CR, 10/5/67, S14299-333)
Congressional actions in response to Jan. 27 flash fire at KSC in which three Apollo astronauts died: Sen. Harrison A. Williams, Jr. (D-N.J.), urged Senate to ratify space law treaty [see Dec. 8,1966] as a worthy tribute to the astronauts. (CR, 2/3/67, S1449-50; nasa lar VI/16) Sen. Spessard L. Holland (D-Fla.) and Rep. Edward J. Gumey (R-Fla.) introduced joint resolution (S.J. Res. 30) to establish a Commission “to formulate plans for a memorial to astronauts who lose their lives in the line of duty in the U.S. space program.” Astronauts Memorial commission would be composed of five Presidential appointees—one NASA representative, one dod representative, and three civilians. (CR, 2/7/67, S1657; nasa lar VI/17) Sen. Vance Hartke (D-Ind.) praised efforts of Mitchell, Ind., residents to erect a memorial to Apollo Astronaut Gus Grissom. “The memorial will preserve the memory of that record for future generations who might otherwise lose sight of the spectacular achievements of the few individuals who made the first forays into space.” (CR, 2/16/67, S2071)
Acting Under Secretary of Commerce Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, in testimony before Senate Commerce Committee and Committee on Public Works’ Subcommittee on Air and Water Pollution, recommended against direct Federal support of an electric car “at this time.” He urged instead a program to reward the “best designs of low-pollutant vehicles by basing Government purchase on performance competition. ... If electric vehicles can compete successfully ... a market could be made available on which production facilities and schedules could be based. . . .” (Testimony, 9, 11) Arthur C. Clarke, author and past president of British Interplanetary Society, chided critics of space program expenditures because “ ‘there is so much to do on earth.’ . . . There was plenty to do in Europe when Columbus left—there’s still plenty to do there. But the opening up of the new world did more to revive the stagnant European culture and economy than an internal action could possibly have done. “. . . I welcome the so-called space race, despite the multiplication of cost and human effort that it involves. If we weren’t racing, we wouldn’t be moving quickly enough. . . .” (Text) Mariner spacecraft would be increasingly useful in returning scientific data from the planets, JPL Director Dr. William H. Pickering predicted. He noted launch opportunities during 1970’s in which Mariner-type spacecraft could be flown to more than one planet in series of gravity-assist missions and said 1970-6 period offered several favorable opportunities for closeup study of the comets by Mariner-type spacecraft carrying up to 150 lbs of scientific instruments. (Text) GSFC Director Dr. John F. Clark, discussing possible first mission configuration for a Galactic Jupiter probe, said an initial flight could probably be launched during a 20-day launch window centered on first week of March 1972. Planetary encounter would occur between 17 and 20 mos after launch. (Text) Sterilization of lander and surface laboratory constituted “the most difficult technological task” of NASA’s Voyager program to explore Mars and Venus with automated spacecraft during 1970’s, Edgar M. Cort-right, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, told the meeting. The most difficult scientific task vas developing an effective integrated set of biological experiments. (Text) Exploration of the planets would contribute to, not detract from, man’s ability to meet problems on earth, Dr. Charles Sheldon II, Library of Congress, suggested. “Also one has the right to hope that even if elements of past history repeat in new forms, mankind with a shrinking world and shrinking solar system, and with a greater awareness of his place within the scheme of things will divert his restless energies and struggles to overcoming the space frontiers rather than wasting his talents and his treasures in fratricidal war. . . .” (Text) U.S. had achieved world leadership in the technology of space exploration, but that leadership was relative and by no means conclusive, Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) asserted. “The challenge is no less great now than it was in 1957 when Sputnik I jolted us out of the narcosis of complacency. To our peril, we cannot allow the transient pressures and strains of American life to vitiate our determination to maintain that leadership. At the same time we cannot ignore or overlook any opportunity to reach a rapport and an understanding with Russia that will be of material assistance in making the exploration of space for peaceful purposes truly a monumental achievement of all mankind.” (Text) March 15: NASA and West Germany’s Federal Ministry for Scientific Research (bmwf) signed Memorandum of Understanding for study of electric fields in the upper atmosphere. NASA would furnish five Nike-Apache sounding rockets for launch from esro facilities at Kiruna, Sweden, beginning in April. Rockets would release barium clouds, particularly in the auroras, to be observed from the ground, bmwf would provide chemical payloads and ground observation equipment and would conduct launchings in cooperation with esro and Swedish Space Research Committee (ssrc) . Both NASA and bmwf would bear cost of their respective responsibilities. Results would be made available to world scientific community, (nasa Release 67-57)
Most Soviet reporting of Jan. 27 flash fire in which three Apollo astronauts died was factual. A few members of Soviet and Italian press, however, charged that “haste” had contributed to the accident. Radio Moscow: “We in the Soviet Union are deeply grieved at the news of the tragedy at Cape Kennedy. “The courage of Virgil Grissom, Edward White, and Roger Chaffee had won our esteem and we join in paying homage to their memories. . . .” Trud (Moscow): “The astronauts became the victims of the space race created by the leaders of the United States space program. Recently, the hurry, the haste in space Sights has continued to grow. There were a number of Saws in the ApoHo system.” La Stampa (Turin, Italy): “Technical revisions must be brought about so that the tragedy will not repeat itself . . . perhaps the rigorous time schedule . . . ought to give way to slower and more secure rhythm.” II Popolo (Rome) : The accident offered “questions for reSection, above all an invitation to weigh in proper measure the margin of risk that accompanies all the conquest of man. ... It is ironic that this happened, just when any danger seemed to be less proximate, during a normal exercise on earth.” (AP, NYT, 1/30/67, 2, 3; AP, B Sun, 1/30/67; Trud, 1/29/67, 3, uss-t Trans.)
Michael E. Gluhareff, Russian-born engineer and associate of helicopter pioneer Igor I. Sikorsky, died in Bridgeport, Conn., at 74. Gluhareff was engineering manager of Sikorsky Aircraft, a division of United Aircraft. His many patents had included a dart-shaped plane, sailplane (glider), tail-less airplane with rear-mounted propeller, and device to use exhaust gases of engines to increase the speed and load of the plane (co-inventor) . (AP, W Post, 9/6/67, B8)
FAA met with 11 U.S. airlines and one leasing company to discuss financing of sst. Following conference, faa Administrator William F. McKee announced that airline representatives had “indicated general agreement with the concept of assisting with financing of the prototype development phase.” (faa Release 67-11)
Joseph J. Tymczyszyn, a senior faa test pilot and chief of faa’s West Coast Supersonic Transport Development Field Office, had emerged as the test pilot most likely to certify the sst, Mitchell Gordon disclosed in the Wall Street Journal. Tymczyszyn, certifier of both the Boeing 707 and the Douglas DC-8 jetliners for U.S. service, had already spent four years familiarizing himself with sst operation, and had logged more than 1,000 hrs in sst simulators. (Gordon, WSJ, 1/3/67,1)
House voted 312-92 in favor of $4.6-billion NASA FY 1968 appropriation bill (H.R. 12474)—NASA’s lowest in five years. This was the sum recommended by the House Appropriations Committee [see Aug. 18]. Two amendments by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.)-—one to reduce R&D funds by $100 million, one to reduce administrative operations’ funds by $37 million—were defeated by voice vote, (nasa LAR VI/93; CR, 8/22/67, H10909-30)
William Littlewood, a former vice president of American Airlines and developer of the DC-3 aircraft, died at age 69. Recipient of numerous awards—including Wright Brothers Medal, Flight Safety Foundation Medal, and Guggenheim Medal—Littlewood had been a member of naca, Flight Safety Foundation, Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory board of directors, U.K. Royal Aeronautical Society, and Canadian Aeronautics and Space Institute. (NYT, 12/5/67, 45; W Star, 12/5/67, B4)
Under reduced gravity conditions on moon, most natural and comfortable gait for an astronaut would be “a lope at about ten feet per second,” advised Amos A. Spady, Jr., LaRC scientist. He and fellow scientist, Donald Hewes, had tested subjects on specially constructed device— simulating effects of astronauts moving in moon’s lower gravity. Simulated lunar gravity had not guaranteed that all motion would be higher, faster, or farther. Scientists had discovered that, at most speeds, lunar stride would be longer—sometimes twice as long—but number of steps per minute would be reduced by as much as half. (Weil, W Post, 10/2/67, B4)
John Cobb Cooper, former president of International Institute of Space Law and founder of McGill Univ.’s Institute of International Air Law, died in Princeton, N.J. Cooper devised a legal code for outer space in 1961 when he was legal adviser to the International Air Transport Assn. Code included recommendations that: (1) the lower boundary of outer space be fixed at the point above the earth’s surface where it is possible to launch a satellite into orbit at least once around the earth; (2) outer space have the same status as the high seas, and that no one be permitted to assert sovereignty over outer space or any celestial body in it; (3) satellites and other spacecraft have the nationality of the country that launched them unless otherwise agreed; and (4) a nation have the right to take action in outer space for its self-protection and self-defense. {NYT, 7/24/67, 27)	_	_
Two MSFC scientists had received awards from Alabama Section of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. Physicist William C. Snoddy was presented Hermann Oberth award for contributions to Explorer, Pegasus, and Apollo/Saturn programs. Deputy Director, Technical, Eberhard F. M. Rees was given General Holger N. Toftoy award for outstanding technical management during 1947-67. (Space Propulsion, 11/30/67,147)
NATO was considering establishing a $45-million comsat system which would permit simultaneous consultation of its leaders during crisis, William Beecher reported in New York Times. U.S. would supply and launch two satellites; costs would be shared by NATO members. Proposal was expected to be formally approved during May. (Beecher, NYT, 4/21/67, 11)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana flew X-15 No. 1 to 3,205 mph (mach 4.84) and 71,000-ft altitude in flight at Edwards afb. Purposes of test: (1) pcm system checkout; (2) measurement of coldwall heat transfer; (3) measurement of step panel heat transfer; (4) boost guidance checkout; (5)	energy management checkout; (6) check of tip-pod accelerometer; (7)	sonic boom study; and (8) study of horizontal tail loads. (X—15 Proj Off)
Flash fire swept through oxygen-filled pressure chamber at Brooks APB, Tex., killing Airman 2/C William F. Bartley, Jr., and Airman 3/C Richard G. Harmon in accident similar to the one Jan. 27 which killed three Apollo astronauts at ksc. Fire struck at 9:45 a.m. Est, about 12 min. after airmen had entered the chamber to take blood samples from rabbits under observation to determine effects of pure oxygen on the blood. Cabin pressure was brought down to ground level within 13 sec after fire had ignited, but both men died from burns within several hours. Col. James B. Nuttall, commander of USAF School of Aerospace Medicine, said there were no plans to change research methods because of accident. “As you have seen, it is not safe,” but he said one-gas systems were less complicated and more reliable than two-gas systems. (AP, W Star, 2/1/67, A3; O’Toole, W Post, 2/1/67, 1)
NASA personnel changes: (1) Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, resigned effective Aug. 1 to become a vice president of Polaroid Corp.; (2) b/g Carroll H. Bolender (usaf), omsf, was named manager for the Lunar Module (lm) at msc’s Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, replacing Dr. William A. Lee, who resigned for personal reasons. Bolender would be responsible for management of the lm program including design, development, and fabrication of the vehicle by Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., lm prime contractor; (3) Col. Maynard E. White (usaf, Ret.), former Deputy Chief of Staff for Personnel, usaf Hq. in Europe, became Director of Program Control, omsf, replacing William E. Lilly, who was appointed Assistant Administrator for Administration March 8. White would be responsible for the total financial, administrative, and business management support services for omsf and the administration and direction of approved facility projects in support of the manned flight program, (nasa Releases 67-196, 67-198; O’Toole, W Post, 7/26/67, A10; AP, W Star, 7/26/67)
dod announced appointment of Dr. Eberhardt Rechtin, jpl Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Acquisition, to new position of Director, Advanced Research Projects Agency. Rechtin would be responsible for planning, initiating, and directing research and development programs assigned by Director of Defense Research and Engineering Dr. John S. Foster, Jr. (dod Release 1107-67)
Separate memorial services were held in Houston for Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Edward H. White II. Among those attending were Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of msfc; Dr. Robert Gilruth, Director of msc; Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Astronaut Alan Shepard; and former Astronaut John Glenn. (Hines, W Star, 1/30/67, 1)
A satellite capable of broadcasting directly to the home, bypassing local stations and national networks, might be technically feasible within five years, ComSatCorp President Dr. Joseph V. Charyk testified before Fee. Economic feasibility, however, might require more than five years, he said. Dr. Charyk appeared as a witness for the Justice Dept., which was challenging the proposed acquisition of abc by ITT. (Mintz, W Post, 4/18/67, A2)
Sen. Edward W. Brooke (R-Mass.) and Sen. Charles H. Percy (R-Ill.) were assigned to vacancies on the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences created by the resignations of Harry F. Byrd, Jr. (D-Va.), and Sen. George D. Aiken (R-Vt.). (Senate Comm.)
In response to fcc inquiry on future communications in Atlantic area— currently served by two comsats and four cables—ComSatCorp President Joseph V. Charyk and at&t Vice President Richard R. Hough presented their proposals in separate letters to fcc Chairman Rosel H. Hyde. Hough, advocating a fifth underwater cable, said that although AT&T supported the idea of a global comsat system, all of the international carriers believed the cable project was “the right way to add to our capabilities at this time.” The best service, he said, could be provided by “a balanced, integrated network of both cables and satellites.” Charyk charged that the cable would not be economically feasible: “. . . when a new cable is laid to carry traffic that could otherwise be carried at no extra cost by satellite facilities which must be established in any case, the ultimate customer must bear the cable cost as an addition to the already committed costs of service.” As traffic was diverted from comsats to a cable, a greater share of satellite revenue requirement would have to be carried by routes not served by the cable, primarily less developed countries with smaller traffic streams. U.S., he said, was committed to develop the Intelsat system. To ensure that U.S. met this commitment, “the advanced [comsat] system must be in operation in the time frame we have proposed for INTELSAT iv. It is essential that a vigorous advanced satellite development progam be under way during 1968.” (Texts; Smith, NYT, 12/29/67, 43) December 27: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CXCVIII into orbit with 281-km (175-mi) apogee, 265-km (165-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 65.1° inclination. Equipment and instruments performed satisfactorily, (gsfc SSR, 12/30/67)
New U.S.S.R. commission would scientifically study reported UFOs, reported Newport News Press. DOD’s contractor to investigate UFOs, Dr. Edward U. Condon of Univ. of Colorado, would invite head of new Soviet commission, retired Air Force Gen. Porfiri A. Stolyarov, to be his guest. Condon would offer Stolyarov access to all U.S. information, hoping for full exchange of data and close working relationship. U.S.S.R. had in past dismissed UFOs as “American hoax,” now did not reject possibility that all UFOs could still be explained away, but warned against outright dismissal. (Newport News Press, 11/30/67,4)
Dr. Ludwig Roth, 58, McDonnell Douglas director of Saturn-Apollo extension program died in Redondo Beach, Calif. Bom in Gross-Gerau, Germany, he had been an associate of Dr. Wernher von Braun in pioneering rocket engineering and space sciences, He had served as Assistant Director of Army Ballistic Missile Agency. (AP, NYT, 11/3/67, 43; World Space Directory, Fall 1967, 155) During October: jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering stressed importance of unmanned space exploration in Astronautics and Aeronautics: “During the past decade of space exploration, unmanned spacecraft have demonstrated a remarkable versatility in performing a wide variety of scientific tasks. The success of these robots is due largely to the ingenuity of the designers in building complex but reliable automated devices, capable of withstanding the constraints imposed by the hostile spaceflight environment. “It is clearly evident that many difficult engineering and scientific problems remain to be solved. The experience of the past decade demonstrates, however, that within the next decade unmanned spacecraft can initiate a detailed surface exploration of our neighboring planets. “The unmanned exploration of the solar system is technically and scientifically possible. It presents a unique opportunity to step boldly forward into new areas of both technology and science.” (Pickering, A&A, 10/67,80-4)	.
Report by nrc Space Science Board on the concept of orbiting large reflecting mirrors concluded that there was no overwhelming evidence that scientific damage would result from the deployment of a single reflector system. It recommended, however, that such a satellite not he considered in the future unless the ability to destroy it by ground signals were an inherent part of the design and unless detailed studies of its effects on ecology, biology, and astronomy were previously conducted and made public. It said it could see no scientific merit for such a satellite system commensurate with its cost to the public and its nuisance to science. Report was prepared by Board’s Committee on Potential Contamination and Interference from Satellites as a result of NASA’s 1966 announcement that it had asked five aerospace companies to study feasibility of orbiting large reflecting mirrors that could illuminate land masses at night. Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, confirmed in a letter to nas President Dr. Frederick Seitz that the Government no longer had plans for such a project. (NAS—NRC—NAE News Report, 5/67, 2) 0 National Academy of Sciences Panel on Applied Science and Technological Progress had concluded that the “most important invention in the pursuit of modem . . . applied science is the big mission-oriented industrial or Government laboratory,” and had underlined importance of a symbiosis between mission-oriented institution and university. Panel’s report, forwarded to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, also recognized Government’s special responsibility for integrity and sufficiency of man’s environment and for dealing with national and regional social questions. It urged adaptability of large, interdisciplinary Government laboratories to new national problem areas. (Text)
Edward H. White II, one of the three Apollo astronauts who died in Jan. 27 flash fire at ksc, was named to receive AlAA’s 1967 Haley Astronautics Award. Selection had been made in early January. AIAA cited White for his historic walk in space and other contributions, undertaken “at great personal risk in the advancement of space flight” during June 3—7, 1965, Gemini IV mission. Award would be presented to his widow. (AP, W Post, 2/8/67, A6; upi, NYT, 2/9/67,9)
NASA announced selection of 11 civilian scientist-astronauts: Dr. Joseph P. Allen, 30, a physicist research associate at the Univ. of Washington; Dr. Philip K. Chapman, 32, a naturalized citizen horn in Australia and staff physicist at mit’s Experimental Astronomy Laboratory; Dr. Anthony W. England, 25, a graduate fellow in geophysics at MIT and the youngest man ever to be named an astronaut; Dr. Karl G. Henize, 40, an astronomy professor at Northwestern Univ. and experimenter in the Gemini program; Dr. Donald L. Holmquest, 28, who would report for duty in one year after completing his medical internship at Baylor College of Medicine; Dr. William B. Lenoir, 28, an assistant professor of electrical engineering at mit; Dr. John A. Llewellyn, 34, a naturalized citizen born in Wales and associate professor in chemistry at Florida State Univ.; Dr. Franklin S. Musgrave, 31, a post-doctoral fellow at Univ. of Kentucky with a doctorate in medicine from Columbia Univ., a Ph. D. in physiology from Univ. of Kentucky, and four other college degrees; Dr. Brian T. O’Leary, 27, who held a Ph. D. in astronomy and was in the NASA trainee program at Univ. of California Dept, of Astronomy’s Space Sciences Laboratory; Dr. Robert A. Parker, 30, assistant professor of astronomy at Univ. of Wisconsin; and Dr. William E. Thornton, 38, who recently completed two-year tour of duty with Brooks AFB Aerospace Medical Div. The new astronauts, except Dr. Holmquest, would report for duty at MCS Sept. 18. After two weeks orientation, they would begin “ground school” training, which would include orbital mechanics, astronomy, computers, spacecraft orientation, general mathematics and physics refresher courses, and field trips for contractor facility orientation. In March they would start Air Force flight training to become qualified jet pilots. The new group, which increased number of NASA astronauts to 56, was sixth class to be selected and second to be chosen specifically for scientific education. They were selected from a group of 69 nominees submitted to NASA in March by nas after evaluating 923 applications. (NASA Release 67—211; msc Roundup, 8/18/67,1-3)
usaf would not use pure oxygen atmosphere on its manned space flights, partly because of the fire hazard, announced L/Col. John W. Ord, Director of Crew Test Evaluation at usaf School of Aerospace Medicine. Ord said Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program would use mixture of oxygen and helium because it was lightweight and conducted heat away from the spacecraft. (Lockett, W Post, 2/7/67) Dr. Hubertus Strughold, chief scientist at sam, recommended that astronauts preparing for long-duration interplanetary space flights undergo “prophylactic surgery” to prevent appendicitis or gall bladder attacks and prophylactic dental work to guard against abscessed teeth. Dr. Alfred C. Koestler, head of Holloman afb’s Altered Atmosphere Pressure Laboratory, reported that 18 chimpanzees had survived rapid decompression to the near vacuum of 150,000 ft for 3l/> min without any noticeable residual effects following four-hour recovery period. Tests offered hope that an astronaut outside his spacecraft could be rescued if his spacesuit were to spring a leak. Bends, the painful decompression sickness that cripples deep-sea divers, would imperil astronauts leaving a spacecraft with “mixed-gas” atmosphere to work in space, L/Col. Robert C. Mclver suggested. His conclusion was based on series of experiments in which 74 healthy men 324-801 0—69---4 underwent a total of 388 exposures to decompression; one fourth developed symptoms of bends, (usaf Proj Off; afsc Release 274.66; W Star, 2/8/67, A8; W Post, 2/10/67, A4; WSJ. 2/15/67, 1; upi, NYT, 2/24/67, 53)
In testimony before House Committee on Interstate Commerce’s Transportation and Aeronautics Subcommittee, Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, urged passage of H.R. 3400 to allow Secretary of Transportation to prescribe aircraft noise abatement regulations. Rep. Wydler cited complaints from churches whose religious services had been interrupted; doctors whose patients’ mental and physical health had been impaired; schools whose classes had been disrupted; and individuals whose lives had been inhumanly intruded upon by jet aircraft noise. Passage of the bill was imperative, he said, because aircraft noise had become “something that dominates the lives of those who have to live with it to the point where it actually destroys the way in which they are living.” Secretary of Transportation Alan S. Boyd told Subcommittee that dot was trying to find a solution to the problem, but he admitted his disbelief that “there will ever be such a thing as a quiet airplane. Despite our far longer experience with the problems of truck noise and railroad noise, we have not been able to produce quiet vehicles in those modes of transportation.” However, he believed that “we will be able, by technological and regulatory means, to reduce the impact of aircraft noise exposure for the majority of Americans who are . . . subject to excessive noise exposure.” He said bill was “the mechanism by which we can assure future aircraft are substantially quieter than our present generation [of aircraft].” (Transcript)
Soviet space program would be seriously delayed because of the April 24 accident which killed Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov, Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin disclosed in Komsomolshaya Pravda. “Flights of spaceships of the type of Soyuz I will be possible only after a complete determination of the causes of the accident, their elimination and then test flights. This, of course, will take time.” Gagarin confirmed that Soyuz I mission had been first of a series of flights planned for summer 1967. Concerning rumors that Komarov had survived the crash landing of Soyuz I, he said: “How we all wish that Volodya Komarov was alive. . . . But one must look facts in the face.” (NYT, 5/18/67, 31; AP, W Post, 5/18/67, A26)
Astronauts Donald K. Slayton, Alan B. Shepard, Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Frank Borman, and James A. McDivitt, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, expressed confidence in NASA’s management of U.S. space program. They noted that there had been only one mishap in the program, compared with 16 successful manned flights under the same management. Since fire had been foreseen as a significant danger in orbit but not on the launch pad before fueling of the launch vehicle, everyone had been “lulled into a sense of false security . . . [and] grossly underestimated the fire potential of the spacecraft,” they said. Schirra explained confidence astronauts felt prior to the fire Jan. 27: “The back-up crew [of which Schirra was commander] had left the Cape with the feeling that we had a good spacecraft behind us. ... I was not at all prepared for the news I received when I arrived at Houston.” (Hines, W Star, 4/18/67, 1)
NASA test pilots Fitzhugh Fulton and Donald Mallick flew XB-70 No. 1 to mach 2.27 and 58,000-ft altitude in flight at Edwards afb to check out: (1) three pacer airspeed calibration points; (2) photos of the tufted right upper canard; (3) boundary layer noise data; (4) stability, control, and handling qualities; (5) bypass close unstart of left inlet; (6) nose ramp flutter data; and (7) radar airspeed calibration, (nasa Proj
Ashes of Soviet Cosmonaut Col. Vladimir M. Komarov were buried in the Kremlin wall in a military funeral attended by Premier Aleksey N. Kosygin, President Nikolay V. Podgorny, and other high Government leaders and scientists. Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin, in a brief speech, pledged that Soviet cosmonauts would “continue the cause” for which Komarov gave his life. A nasa spokesman said plans to send U.S. Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper and Frank Borman to funeral had been abandoned because U.S.S.R. denied permission, saying it was an internal Soviet affair. (AP, W Star, 4/26/67, A24; NYT, 4/27/67, 3; upi, W Pos*, 4/27/67, A4)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) set new winged aircraft speed record when be flew X—15 No. 2 to 4,534 mph (mach 6.72) and 99,000-ft altitude in flight at Edwards afb to: (1) test Martin ablative coating and ramjet
afcrl Space Physics Laboratory scientists Drs. Graham R. Hunt and John W. Salisbury said, “Major ‘hot spot’ on the moon is not volcanic,” a conclusion based on measurements made by afcrl imaging device to produce thermal photographs of infrared emissions of lunar surface during dark of moon. Images had been obtained by using infrared imager in association with afcrl Strawberry Hill Observatory’s optical telescope at Concord, Mass. The hot spot, associated with crater Tycho, had heat distribution pattern very similar to solar illumination pattern just before lunar sunset. Because of clear relationship between heat release and solar illumination, Salisbury and Hunt had concluded that crater was emitting stored solar heat rather than volcanic heat. (OAR Res Rev, 7/67, 12-3)
Dr. Donald H. Menzel of the Harvard College Observatory said in a letter to Time that he planned to propose naming features of moon’s far side for the three American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut who lost their lives in accidents connected with space research. Features were to be named at 1970 meeting of International Astronomical Union. (Time, 9/29/67,11)
Letter to President Johnson from Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, assessed U.S. space program after Apollo/Saturn flight of Nov. 9: U.S. had captured lead in space race with the U.S.S.R. Rep. Ryan urged the President to renounce the space race, and “to make a serious request for the beginning of far-ranging international cooperation to reduce the costs and increase the benefits of space exploration—to remove the wasteful duplication of two great nations.” (Text)
Average U.S. taxpayer would not help finance any space program beyond manned lunar landing unless he could understand it and identify with its purpose, m/g John B. Medaris (usa, Ret.) told aas Symposium in Huntsville. “Putting a man on the moon was a good objective. People can see the moon. They can understand communication and weather information and possible defense benefits from a moon landing. “But after the astronaut puts an American flag on the moon’s surface and satisfies the public, what will happen to our program then? We have to have a steady commitment of great resources to keep this program going. We have got to convince the public that there is a link between them and our next objectives . . . [and] give them some sort of objective they can identify with their own welfare.” Noting that “people recoil in fear from the concept of the endlessness of interstellar space,” General Medaris suggested that public would approve of an objective such as establishment of a lunar colony. “We better forget the spectacular and use a public relations approach like the soap companies do and figure out what the public will pay for.” (Houtz, B News, 6/14/67)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), releasing testimony earlier submitted to Senate Appropriations Committee’s Independent Offices Subcommittee, urged that $427 million be cut from NASA’s FY 1968 authorization bill (S. 1296). “We have to establish our priorities, and when it comes to parceling out money the space program stands far below defense, education and many other vital programs.” Specifically, Proxmire recommended: (1) temporarily delaying initiation of programs that would commit U.S. to a manned Mars mission and other deep-space probes; (2) cutting aa funds; and (3) cutting advanced missions funds. (Text)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., appointed Apollo 204 Review Board to investigate Jan. 27 accident at ksc which killed Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee: Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of LaRC, Chairman; Astronaut Frank Borman, msc; Maxime Faget, msc; E. Barton Geer, LaRC; George Jeffs, North American Aviation, Inc.; Dr. Frank A. Long, Cornell Univ.; Col. Charles F. Strang, Norton afb, Calif.; George C. White, Jr., nasa Hq.; and John Williams, ksc. Three advisory members were added later: Charles W. Mathews, Director of Saturn/Apollo Applications, nasa Hq. omsf; John Yardley, McDonnell Co. executive; and L/Col. William D. Baxter (usaf) . LaRC Chief Counsel George Mallay would serve as counsel to the board, (nasa Release 67—16; Wilford, NYT, 1/30/67, 2)
Seven members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight continued hearings on Jan. 27 Apollo accident at ksc by touring AS-204 launch pad and questioning eyewitnesses. Donald Nichols, assistant test manager at ksc, told the Subcommittee that the decision to keep the hatch closed during Jan. 27 Apollo rehearsal might have cost die lives of the crew. On Oct. 31, 1966, he said, decision was made to change plans that would have kept the hatch open until the crew had been better trained on emergency procedures. Officials decided that hatch could be locked and emergency escape practice conducted after the test, he said. If test procedures had not been changed, the hatch would have been open or the astronauts not present in the spacecraft. Thomas R. Baron, former North American Aviation, Inc., quality control inspector, said that Apollo 1 astronauts smelled smoke in their spacecraft 12 min before they died and tried for five minutes to escape. This information, he said, had been supplied by naa electrical technician Mervin Holmberg. Holmberg later made a surprise appearance before the Subcommittee and denied Baron’s allegation: “I listened to his [Baron’s] speculation, but I didn’t make any comment” on what caused the fire. “I wasn’t even near the accident when it happened.” Baron, who had submitted a report to NASA [see During March] prior to Jan. 27 accident charging laxity, poor morale, and bad management on the part of naa, was sharply criticized by subcommittee members, and his statement was disclaimed. (Abramson, W Post, 4/22/67, A4)
Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) flew X—15 No. 1 to 167,000-ft altitude and 3,682 mph (mach 5.32) to provide pilot experience at high altitude and check out horizon scanner, horizontal stabilizer alpha, 3rd landing skid, and electrical loads. (X-15 Proj Off)
Funeral services were held for Apollo astronauts who died in Jan. 27 flash fire at ksc. All three men were buried with full military honors: Virgil I. Grissom (L/Col., usaf) and Roger Chaffee (LCdr., usn) at Arlington National Cemetery, and Edward H. White II (L/Col., usaf) at West Point. President Johnson and hundreds of dignitaries attended services at Arlington; Mrs. Johnson and Vice President Humphrey were among the attendees at West Point. (Hines, W Star, 1/31/67 Al, A6; Secrest, W Post, 2/1/67, Bl; Casey, W Post, 2/1/67, Al, A4)
J. V. Reistrup, in the Washington Post, reported that the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences had prepared a draft report on Apollo accident hearings which would be published in early 1968. The report, revealed as a result of Rep. William Ryan’s (D-N.Y.) Dec. 18 criticisms on Congress’ failure to produce such a report, was said to be critical of NASA but to have reaffirmed Apollo lunar-landing goal. (Reistrup, W Post, 12/22/67, Al)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) flew X-15 No. 2 to 3,409 mph (mach 5.10) and 90,000-ft altitude in first flight with a new ablative coating and seeder designed to permit eiircraft to fly at mach 7.4 without basic airframe modification. Flight also tested: (1) stability and control with dummy ramjet and ablative; (2) Hycom phase-II camera (KA-51A); (3) ramjet local flow; (4) ramjet separation characteristics; and (5) wing tip accelerometer, (nasa Proj Off; Av Wk, 8/28/67, 33)
DOD officials were concerned about serious mechanical problems that had “undermined the readiness” of the Minuteman II icbm, William Beecher reported in the New York Times. “As recently as this spring, reliable sources say, nearly 100 missiles—about 40 per cent of all the advanced Minuteman 2 missiles and 10 per cent of the entire 1,000-missile Minute-man force—were out of action because of trouble with the weapon’s guidance and control system.” Although DOD’s “more or less official view” was that the problem was “worrisome hut well in hand,” many officials “while observing that mechanical problems will always group up in any complex electronics system and can be corrected, cite the Minuteman 2 trouble in questioning the wisdom of the near total reliance that Mr. McNamara places on intercontinental ballistic missiles in the strategic field.” [See July 28.] (Beecher, NYT, 7/28/67, 1, 2)
Paul E. Cotton, Director of Management Operations, in NASA’s omsf, was appointed director of oart’s Programs and Resources Div. Cotton would replace William E. Hanna, Jr., who had been named Director of the Bureau of Data Processing and Accounts in the Social Security Administration. (NASA Release 67-304)
Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R-Ill.) introduced in the House H.R. 8145, a bill to establish Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel to “provide the [nasa] Administrator with independent advice and assistance in safety matters, regardless of operational ‘commitments’ or budgetary considerations. Regardless of the outcome of the current [Apollo accident] investigation . . . the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s . . . safety practices need strengthening. Based on NASA statements and . . . [FT 1968] testimony . . . the area of greatest weakness appears to be in the lack of a truly independent review of NASA’s facilities, operations, and procedures solely from the viewpoint of safety.” (CR, 4/6/67, H3657; nasa lar VI/39)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) charged that the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences had defaulted on their responsibility to report to the American public about the Congressional hearings which had been held on the Jan. 27 Apollo accident. In a statement inserted in the Congressional Record, Rep. Ryan said that since Congress seemed reluctant “to face some unpleasant truths and to ask some hard ques-. tions that need to be asked,” he had prepared his own report based on the hearings and on the hundreds of letters, documents, and personal commentaries he had received. Much of this correspondence, he said, which cited deficiencies and negligence which were both intentionally ignored and unintentionally overlooked, was made in confidence for fear of reprisals by NASA or NASA-contractor employers. Rep. Ryan concluded that Congress overfunded and underexamined the validity of major technological programs and the success and integrity of their administration. Having an excellent space program, he said, “is essential both to our pride and to our progress . . . [but] it is essential as well that we throw off the shackles of the space race and declare our intention to make rational plans designed to meet the needs of America not distorted by the conceptions and value judgments of another nation. It is essential that we examine our national priorities with the utmost care and make certain that the space program is neither made a handy villain by its critics nor a handy saviour by its spokesmen. We must establish reliability and make a sober and objective appraisal of the space program’s role in our society.” Congress, he asserted, ought to: (1) demand that NASA adopt new standards of candor, present regular status reports, and clarify its budget presentations, and that a panel of independent experts be created to provide objective technical evaluation of NASA management and planning procedures; (2) relinquish romanticism and evaluate each program in terms of specific objectives and social value; (3) revise its attitudes about hearings on the space program, being sure to call both friendly and hostile witnesses; and (4) establish a realistic view so that the space program could be assigned its proper place in national priorities and receive whatever funds necessary. (CR, 12/18/67, A6320-9; Ryan’s Off)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana flew X—15 No. 3 to 250,000-ft altitude and 3,886 mph (mach 5.35) at Edwards afb. Purpose of test flight was to check: ultraviolet exhaust plume; solar spectrum measurement; micrometeoroid collection; air density; x-ray air density; arc boost guidance; and tip-pod camera, (nasa Proj Off)
NASA announced that research at Ames Research Center indicated a probability of meteoroids’ puncturing spacecraft at about six times greater than previous calculations. Tests which simulated meteor entry into atmosphere were conducted in aec’s Hypervelocity Planetary Gas Tunnel. arc Director H. Julian Allen and assisting scientists Charles Shepard, Howard Stine, and Barrett Baldwin used melting or ablating tests on one stony meteorite and on samples of gabbro—common, meteor-like earth rock—at simulated speeds up to 35,000 mph. Tunnel tests showed that heat of entry into earth’s atmosphere melted rock surface, boiled off interior water, and expanded gases occurring in rock. Expansion of exterior rock layer by 10 to 1,000 times converted exterior to foam and acted as a heat shield. Foam was 2 to 20 times less dense than the unheated rock; depending on entry conditions, foam would or would not break off. Past experience and theory had suggested that meteors were sandlike and would be remains of broken up comets; in addition, studies of meteor and comet trajectories had supported current theory that comets would be like “dirty snowballs” made mostly of ice, frozen ammonia, and methane with rock and sand additives. Opposed to these beliefs, arc scientists speculated that many more meteors originated in the rocky asteroid belt and that much more solid rock would be contained in luminous clouds of comets, arc could now prophesy the need for greater protection on long missions where the probability of meteoroid hit would be highest. (NASA Release 67-281)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) warned the Senate that U.S. deficit could reach $30 billion unless drastic cuts were made in Federal spending. He suggested that a $5-billion reduction in proposed FY 1968 spending be made by: (1) postponing public works programs such as highway construction until economic and military demands were lowered; (2) foregoing the “expensive frill” of sst development; (3) curtailing military costs by further reducing U.S. troop strength in Europe; and (4) cutting NASA’s post-Apollo funds by over $1 billion by postponing “such projects as a soft-landing on Mars, which has nothing to do with our present goal of a moon landing. “The situation that we face in fiscal 1968 involves an economy dominated by a heavy Federal budget, no matter how it is measured. If these circumstances materialize, there is no question about the immediate urgency of substantial expenditure reductions. . . . We may need a tax increase too, but first priority by all means should go to the reduction of spending.” (Text)
U.S.S.R.’s next manned space flight would use a Soyuz spacecraft similar to the one which crashed April 24, according to Astronauts Michael Collins and David Scott who had discussed future space plans with Soviet cosmonauts at the Paris International Air and Space Show [see May 26-31]. In upi interview Collins and Scott said they were “amazed by the similarities between the two [U.S. and U.S.S.R. space] programs.” Collins said that Cosmonauts Pavel Belyayev and Konstantin Feoktistov indicated “that there would be several earth orbital flights and then ... a circumlunar flight” (upi, W Post, 6/4/67, A9)
37,000-ft altitude over Canada. His theory conflicted with one set forth in 1966 by Johns Hopkins Univ. astrophysicists Drs. William Plummer and John Strong that surface temperatures of Venus were low enough to support life in certain areas. (Lyons, NYT, 5/28/67, 21) • The frontier of space is limited only by man’s “ability to maintain individual freedom and yet join many minds in concerted action,” NASA Administrator James E. Webb said at the Celebration of The Prelude to Independence in Williamsburg, Va. “It is the essential requirement for each of us to do what we can as individuals and as groups to make our system of representative government work, and then work better. More and more this means that each of us must find a way to reach through complexity and organized prejudice to trusted sources of information and organized facts. We must not do less than to make sure we understand the fundamentals in the many important disciplines of human activity. Without this understanding of at least the fundamentals . . . today’s citizen cannot play the role only he can play in representative society, cannot bridge the gap from the old to the new, from one discipline to another. Without this capability, a citizen today cannot be a fully effective participant in a free society. Indeed, without this basic understanding on a large scale at all levels our nation is likely to forfeit the capability of collectively responsible action, and with it, the basis for an effective free society. . . .” (Text)
Orbiting satellites could survive Van Allen radiation belts 10 to 100 times longer than originally estimated if their outer shells were shaped like spheres, Dr. Charles Mack, mit Lincoln Lab, suggested .at aiaa’s Aerospace Sciences Meeting in New York. Basing his prediction on results from new MIT-developed technique to simulate Van Allen belts', Dr. Mack said that radiation would always strike the surface of a sphere at wide angles, improving the chances of scattering and thereby decreasing the amount of absorption. Ideal spacecraft would be 10-ft-dia sphere with instrumentation in the core, Dr. Mack said. Most current satellites were smaller and carried instruments near surface. New York Times writer John Wilford reported that gsfc planned to have MIT-type simulator in operation by 1969. (Wilford, NYT, 1/26/67, 10)
William S. Aiken, Jr., former Chief of Operations Research Branch, OART, was appointed Deputy Director, Aeronautical Vehicles Div., oart. (NASA Ann, 8/15/67)
nasa personnel changes: (1) George H. Hage, former Engineering Manager for Boeing Co.’s Lunar Orbiter Program, had been appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Engineering), replacing Robert F. Garbarini, who resigned effective April 27. Hage would be responsible for maintaining the highest possible standards of engineering excellence and discipline, systems performance and project management on the spacecraft and launch vehicles in the OSSA program. (2) Bernard Moritz, former nasa Deputy Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, had been appointed Assistant Administrator for Special Contracts Negotiation and Review. Moritz would be responsible for negotiation and review of certain assigned contracts involving new policy or administrative arrangements requiring consideration or decision by the Administrator or Deputy Administrator. (3) m/g John
Five NASA officials were among 45 young business and Government executives from U.S. and abroad selected to receive mit’s 1967-68 Alfred P. Sloan Fellowships for one year of study at mit’s Sloan School of Management “to accelerate their development into positions of major executive responsibilities. . . .” NASA recipients: R. Bryan Erb, Assistant Chief, Structures and Mechanics Div., msc; Robert H. Kirby, Jr., Flight Mechanics and Technology Div., Lane; Calvin K. Perrine, Jr., Assistant Chief, Mission Operations Div., Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, msc ; Robert J. Schwinghamer, Technical Assistant to Director of Manufacturing and Engineering Laboratory, MSFC; and William E. Scott, Deputy Chief, Research Div., Office of University Affairs, NASA Hq. (nasa Release 67—104)
Donald L. Mallick, a pilot and engineer at frc, and L/Col. Emil Sturmthal (usaf), chief of afftc’s bomber section, were selected as pilots in joint nasa—usaf XB-70 research program, (frc Release 17-67)
Growing confidence that U.S. would accomplish a manned lunar landing by 1970 had plunged space planners into an urgent debate over post-Apollo plans, John Wilford wrote in the New York Times. Should the U.S. concentrate on unmanned and manned exploration of Mars or Venus? An expanded lunar-oriented program? Giant manned laboratories in earth orbit for research and surveillance? Networks of communications and meteorological satellites? Or a series of instrument probes to comets, asteroids, and outer planets? Such questions had opened a searching reexamination into the value of space exploration, and some critics were urging a less ambitious and costly program, with more emphasis “on the problems that confront us here on earth.” While the debate continued, nasa was said to favor concentrating on manned orbiting laboratories that would exploit present technology. Although a broad range of space goals was considered attainable in the next two decades, NASA officials said failure to define post-Apollo objectives soon could cause U.S. to find itself unprepared to achieve any major space goal before the mid-1970s. (Wilford, NYT, 1/22/67, 1)
nasa’s Eighth Annual Honor Awards Ceremony was held in Washington, Dr. Roger W. Heyns, Chancellor of Univ. of California, discussed impact of space program on university curricula and research efforts in his keynote address. “Through the stimulation of nasa programs, new fields of study have been created ... and NASA ... [has become] one of the world’s most ambitious attempts to pool the talents and learning of thousands. ... “. . . nasa has been doing pioneering work of immense significance to modern society that has nothing to do with the exploration of space per se. Objectives have been defined, scientific and technical knowledge and talent have been collected, trained and aimed at research objectives and results produced. That is a massive accomplishment of human engineering . . . [and] an inspiration to all of us. . . . Just how much ... is transferable to other situations remains to be seen, but ... it certainly is not inconceivable that what we have learned, and what we will learn, about public administration from NASA may, in the long pull, mean every bit as much as the scientific and technological developments from the exploration of space itself.” Recipients of Distinguished Service Medal: nAsa Associate Administrator Dr. Homer E. Newell; Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Edgar M. Cortright; LaRC Director Dr. Floyd L. Thompson; and former Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff. NASA’s second Distinguished Public Service Medal was presented to Dr. Charles S. Draper, director of mit’s Instrumentation Laboratory. Special Group Achievement Award was presented to Canadian government for outstanding success of Alouette I satellite (launched Sept. 28, 1962). Exceptional Service Medal: Astronaut Roger B. Chaffee (posthumously); Charles F. Hall, arc ; Donald R. Bellman and Robert D, Reed, frc ; William J. Boyer, Laurence K. Loftin, Jr., James S. Martin, Jr., and Clifford H. Nelson, LaRC; James S. Kramer and H. Warren Plohr, LeRC; Robert H. Gray, ksc; Howard H. Haglund and Robert J. Parks, jpl; Paul G. Marcotte, gsfc; William Cohen, George C. Deutsch, Arthur F. Hood, Joseph B. Mahon, Benjamin Milwitzky, Lee R. Scherer, and William M. Shea, nasa Hq. Recipients of Exceptional Scientific Achievement Award: Michel Bader, Donald E. Gault, and Maurice D. White, arc ; Walter B. Horne, William H. Phillips, and Israel Taback, LaRC; Samuel S. Manson, LeRc; and Eugene M. Shoemaker, USGS. Group Achievement Award: Apollo 204 Review Board; nasa sst Evaluation Team; Lunar Orbiter Spacecraft and Operations Team; and 260-in Solid Motor Project Team. Public Service Award: William Feldman, Eastman Kodak Co.; Robert J.	Heiberg, Boeing Co.; Mark Sasso, RCA; Robert L. Roderick, Hughes Aircraft Co.; and Richard Cottrell and Paul B. Datner, Aerojet-General Corp. Exceptional Bravery Medal was presented for “courageous and heroic action” in attempting to rescue the Apollo 204 crew to Donald 0. Babbitt, Stephen B. Clemmons, James D. Gleaves, Jerry W. Hawkins, and L. D. Reece, naa; and Henry H. Rogers, ksc. (Text; nasa Release 67—272; Program)
NASA’s selection of two foreign-born astronauts [see Aug. 4] was praised by Erwin D. Canham in the Christian Science Monitor: “The Australian, Dr. Philip K. Chapman . . . and the Welshman, Dr. John A. Llewellyn, . . . are both naturalized Americans. They are, one may assume, part of the brain drain which has brought so many able persons to the United States in the last quarter of a century. Nothing like this flow of talent has been seen on such a scale in history before. “The outreach of science also has become profoundly international. It is a deeper bond than we have yet recognized it to be. Someday, perhaps, it will transcend politics. That is the challenge: to bring political institutions into line with the basic unities which are evidenced in men’s constantly changing relationship to the physical universe. . . (Canham, CSM, 8/5/67) Harold Masursky, U.S. Geological Survey, told news conference at jpl that several of the pictures indicated there might be frozen liquid on the floor of perpetually shaded craters near the lunar poles. The nature of the “fluidal materials” was open to speculation, he said, but “meandering rills appeared to have been caused by some form of material flowing from a vdlcanic eruption—similar to terrestrial streams found in desert areas on earth.” (nasa Proj Off; AP, W Post, 8/9/67, A3; upi, C Trib, 8/15/67; NYT, 8/15/67, 1)
President Johnson appointed Paul R. Ignatius, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Installations and Logistics), as Secretary of the Navy, succeeding Paul H. Nitze, who became Deputy Secretary of Defense July 1. John T. McNaughton, who had been nominated and confirmed as Nitze’s successor in June, was killed in an aircraft crash July 19. The President approved reassignment of Thomas D. Morris, Assistant Secretary of Defense (Manpower), to replace Ignatius. {PD, 8/7/67, 1100)
Distance between earth and moon had been calculated at 250,000 mi with 20,500-mi variation by jpl scientists Dr. J. Derral Mulholland and William L. Sjogren. New lunar values, which had an accuracy of less than 50 ft compared to previous discrepancy of one mile, were calculated from theoretical work by astronomer Dr. W. J. Eckert from spaceflight data; verified by ranging measurements of Lunar Orhiter I and II spacecraft; and used to revise a 50-yr table of lunar motion required for plotting spacecraft trajectories, determining launch times, and scientific research. ( jpl Release 436)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, described correction of “serious procedural deficiencies in the flow of timely information” from NASA to the Committee, J. V. Reistrup reported. A letter from Rep. Miller to Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) had explained the corrective measures, worked out with NASA Administrator James E. Webb. NASA would notify the Committee staff immediately of any accident involving death or serious property damage; NASA Oversight Committee would be briefed every three months on Committee-defined “critical problem areas”; NASA would report significant program changes and problems as soon as they occurred; and nasa would furnish budget data in October, updating the data monthly. (Reistrup,. W Post, 9/23/67)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) made successful emergency landing of X—15 No. 1 at Edwards afb 59 sec after takeoff because of an electrical power failure. (X—15 Proj Off)
jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering appointed William H. Bayley, General Manager of Deep Space Network (dsn), as Assistant Laboratory Director for Tracking and Data Acquisition. In new post, Bayley would direct worldwide dsn which jpl had operated for nasa. Bayley succeeded Dr. Eberhardt Rechtin, who had taken leave of absence from jpl to accept post of Director of DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency. (jpl Release 461/11-67)
Laser applications in industry and space were rapidly increasing, William Smith noted in the New York Times. A solar-powered laser was being developed for communication across the 50 million mi between earth and Mars, and Dr. Henry Lewis, director of rca’s David Sarnoff Research Center, predicted the laser would also play a very important role in tracking space vehicles. Said Dr. Lewis: “The laser fits the bill with greater accuracy than radar is capable of obtaining.” (Smith, NYT, 1/15/67, FI)	.	.	„
Technology Week marked beginning of its second decade of publishing by asking some of the Nation’s leading educators, scientists, and engineers to project their goals for technology, aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Sea-borg emphasized the need for man to first choose goals for technology: . . we must give more thought to guiding the direction of our technological future. “. . . if there are any ultimate goals for technology we will know what they are only when we all agree on the goals of man.” MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun proposed an earth resources management system employing space technology—principally, resourcesensing satellites—to meet the needs of the world’s rapidly growing population. Said Dr. von Braunam firmly convinced that one of the great future contributions of our space program will be in helping to manage more effectively the utilization of our world resources.” In discussing long-delayed peaceful application of nuclear explosions—Project Plowshare—Dr. Edward Teller, Associate Director of Lawrence Radiation Lab., suggested that questions of safety, fear of the unknown, limited nuclear test ban, and international politics were chief obstacles to program. Until these obstacles were removed, Plowshare would continue to lie dormant. Prof. Isaac Asimov, Boston Univ. School of Medicine, foresaw that mankind, now faced with the practical need for working under low-gravity conditions, would have to develop “low-gravity engineering.” Low-gravity engineering might also prove useful in future exploration beneath the sea. Dr. Joshua Lederberg, Professor of Genetics at Stanford Univ. School of Medicine, proposed that man’s central technological goal was the harmonization of his technical goals, a process Dr. Lederberg called “eutechnics.” He went on to declare: “In the eutechnical society, the penultimate crime may become to introduce any technological innovation as a subsystem benefit without analyzing its impact on the whole future of man. The ultimate one would be to deny man his humanity by denying him the chance to think, to know himself.” Dr. Charles S. Draper, head of mit’s Aeronautics and Astronautics Dept., emphasized the need to establish an adequate balance between “directly beneficial” and “remedial” technologies. As air and water pollution, land damage from mining, soil erosion, and other problems become acute, man must give more thought to remedial actions for disturbances inflicted on the environment. Dr. Draper suggested space vehicle technology as “. . . an excellent model for the technology of overall environmental control for the earth.” Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.), former afsc Commander, believed that the big challenge of the next 25 yrs would be the effective management of technology for the public good. Schriever suggested that: “the systems management concept [developed in Nation’s military and space programs] will be required to bring these technologies to bear on these problems. ; . .” Clarence L. Johnson, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Vice President, listed 10 aerospace projects which, he felt, should receive major attention during next 20 yrs. Among these projects were use of nuclear power plants in aerial transports to reduce fuel-to-cargo ratios, solution of sonic boom problems, and development of high-density fuels. Dr. Athelstan F. Spilhaus, dean of Univ. of Minnesota’s Institute of Technology, explored the objectives and benefits of geotechnology— use of geophysical and geochemical knowledge “to intervene in the natural processes of our environment on a massive—and even global— scale.” Dr. Spilhaus said he believed the public would “. . . welcome ... an imaginative experiment in city living designed to remove the chores, dirt, delays, and human wastage, and emphasize the opportunities for social, cultural, economic and recreational advantages that high-density living provides.” In final article, TRW Vice Chairman Simon Ramo wrote: “We are in the science era of mankind; we are not yet in the social era of mankind. ... A quick look at our society shows that science’s greatest challenge now and for the next few decades is for the application of science to human needs.” (Tech Wk, 1/23/67, 32-79)
Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) flew X—15 No. 3 to 82,000-ft altitude and 3,136 mph (mach 4.71) at Edwards afb. Purposes of test flight were to check: (1) phase II tail loads; (2) boost guidance checkout; (3) traversing probe; (4) tip pod accelerometer; and (5) boundary layer noise. (NASA Proj Off)
Soviet Union reportedly had been giving top priority to efforts to develop multiple warheads for its big missiles, William Beecher wrote in New York Times. If the report was correct and if the Soviet effort succeeded, Moscow could increase several-fold its ability to hit a number of targets in the U.S. simultaneously. In Britain, Air Commodore Neil Cameron described the new weapon in Royal Air Force Quarterly. “It is widely believed that the Russians have developed the multiple individually guided reentry vehicle, known as mirv, which could revolutionize nuclear strategy. ... It would mean that each Soviet missile dispatched could carry ten or more individually guided warheads in the megaton class, which could neutralize the Americans’ numerical lead in this field and make a counter-force strategy as far as the Soviets are concerned a realistic possibility.” (Beecher, NYT, 9/10/67; AP, B Sun, 9/15/67; Cameron, RAF Quart, Autumn 67, 175-83)
Vice President and Mrs. Humphrey, accompanied by nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh, would visit msfc and U.S. Army Missile Command (amc) at Redstone Arsenal March 22-23, msfc and AMC announced. Trip was later postponed because Mr. Humphrey felt he should remain in Washington, D.C., to greet President Johnson on his return from a Pacific trip, (mfsc Release; Marshall Star, 3/22/67,1)
William Markowitz, physics professor at Marquette Univ., summarized his study of the reported flight dynamics of UFOs (unidentified flying objects) in Science. Study was made because of letter in Oct. 21, 1966, Science by Dr. J. Allen fiynek, consultant to usaf’s Project Blue Book, urging investigation of residue of puzzling UFO cases by physical and social scientists. Markowitz’s findings: (1) the control of reported ufos by extraterrestrial beings is contrary to the known laws of physics and (2) the data published do not justify the holding of investigations. He added that he would not believe that earth had ever been visited by any extraterrestrial until he was shown such a visitor. (Markowitz, Science, 9/15/67,1274^-79)
msc Apollo Program Manager Dr. Joseph F. Shea briefed major Apollo contractors and subcontractors at msc about Jan. 27 flash fire, John Wil-ford reported in New York Times, msc made no announcement of the meeting. (Wilford, NYT, 2/4/67, 15)
John R. Biggs, former director of NASA Office—Downey at North American Aviation’s Downey, Calif., plant, became Deputy Executive Secretary in the Office of the Administrator, nasa Hq. (nasa Ann, 2/6/67)
A national information system for assuring the availability of every significant scientific or technical document, regardless of its origin, was “inevitable,” Edward J. Brunenkant, director of AEc’s Division of Technical Information, predicted at New York meeting of the Special Libraries Assn. Noting that over 1 million scientific articles were being printed annually in 35,000 journals, Brunenkant conceded that the establishment of a national system would be “extraordinarily complex,” but said the need for it was “urgent.” (NYT, 6/1/67, 33)
Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee had died of “asphyxiation due to smoke inhalation” but cause of Jan. 27 flash fire was still unknown, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., reported in memorandum to nasa Administrator James E. Webb. Dr. Seamans had met Feb. 2 with Apollo 204 Review Board at Ksc. “. . . clear identification of the source of ignition or of its possible source will depend upon detailed step-by-step examination of the entire spacecraft and its relative test support equipment.” Dr. Seamans said duplicate Apollo spacecraft had been flown to ksc from North American Aviation, Inc.’s Downey, Calif., plant to permit a “parallel step-by-step disassembly process.” In addition, Board was “defining a series of investigative tasks . . . and assigning these to teams for execution. . . .” Report confirmed that spacecraft had been operating on external power when fire occurred, but there was no evidence “up to this time that the source of power whether simulated internal or external was related to the accident.” Dr. Seamans emphasized that his statement was preliminary. nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E.	Mueller announced that nasa would proceed with launching of three unmanned Apollo flights scheduled for 1967: AS-206, AS-501, and AS-502. Manned Apollo missions were postponed indefinitely pending the outcome of Apollo 204 Review Board’s investigation, (nasa Releases 67-21,67-22)
Sen. Joseph S. Clark (D-Pa.), speaking on the Senate floor, urged President Johnson to appoint a commission to study the need for construction and deployment of an antiballistic missile (abm) system. “. . . the ABM question is of such a magnitude that it is essential to have a careful and objective evaluation of the course the United States should follow. I do not believe . . . that the military-industrial complex is objective enough to advise the United States Congress or the President on how we should proceed. This being the case, I strongly suggest that a temporary blue ribbon commission drawn from all sectors of national life is the best way to bring a thorough- inquiry into the issues. “Our very national survival may be at issue in the ABM controversy. It is time we put the best minds in the country to work.” (CR, 7/27/67, S10364-6)
Dr. Edward U. Condon, Director, University of Colorado’s study of Unidentified Flying Objects (ufos) , said that “such studies ought to be discontinued unless someone comes up with a new idea on how to approach the problem.” Condon said “it’s been extremely difficult to gather information on this subject” and asked anyone with any “hard information to speak now—or forever hold your peace.” He stated: “We have approached the problem in an unprejudiced way, seeking to find whatever there is to find by objective scientific means with no scientific results so far. Some of the difficulties associated with belief in visitors from outer space are well set forth in an article by Prof. William Markowitz in Science for Sept. 15 and should be studied by all who wish to be informed on the subject,” he added. (Harkins, Boulder Camera, 9/27/67; AP, LA Times, 9/28/67) September 27-October 2: nasa launched for ComSatCorp the fourth of Intelsat ii series of commercial communications satellites (Intelsat II—D)-— designated Pacific II—and second of them in the Pacific. Launch was from etr by Thrust-Augmented Delta (DSV-3E) launch vehicle. Satellite went into transfer orbit over Pacific at approximately 176° east with 29,056-mi (37,105-km) apogee, 186-mi (299-km) perigee, 658.8-min period, and 26.4° inclination. Satellite would supplement services of and replace current Pacific satellite, Intelsat II-B (174°E), in event of its failure, nasa support nominally would terminate after about three days, subsequent to providing backup transfer orbit data and calculations. Final orbit and spin axis orientation would be made by ComSatCorp with onboard hydrogen peroxide system. Approximately 15 days after launch, satellite would be available for commercial use. Satellites could handle TV data transmissions, or up to 240 voice channels (480 circuits) between “first class” ground stations such as Andover. Part of satellite capacity would support ncs/nascom for Apollo program. It would serve as backup against interruption of satellite communications service and would add communications capability across the Pacific. On Sept. 30, apogee motor was ignited at 7:45 pm edt, on command from ComSatCorp-operated earth station at Paumalu, Hawaii, and kicked new satellite from its elliptical transfer orbit into a planned, near-synchronous orbit over Pacific. Reorientation and velocity correction maneuvers were carried out Oct. 1 and 2 to place spin axis in orbit plane and to improve circularity with predicted orbit (resulting from these maneuvers) of apogee, 22,531 mi (36,260 km), perigee, 21,805 mi (35,091 km), period, 1,430.5 min. drift rate, 1° east per day. As Intelsat II—D approached Intelsat II—B, launched Jan. 11, now located between 174° and 175°, drift rate would be reduced and intersatellite interference tests would be conducted to determine minimum angular separation which could be employed without mutual interference (nasa cooperating with ComSatCorp in planning tests). The Intelsat satellite system, in addition to this new Pacific II satellite, included the Pacific I satellite and two satellites serving the Atlantic area, Early Bird I, launched Apr. 6, 1965, and Atlantic II, launched Mar. 22, 1967. (nasa Proj Off; ComSatCorp Releases 67-45 and 67-48)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), speaking on the House floor, suggested that SST program was progressing too rapidly. “. . . it is not clear why the United States is so anxious to rush into a costly program of SST development involving many unsolved problems and great economic risk on the strength of a nebulous national prestige. It may well be that our prestige will lose a great deal more if we show ourselves to be a nation whose commitments and investments are based largely on a hysteria about our ‘image’—largely and simply because the British and French are building the Concorde—unable to wait and learn from their experience—and unable to take the advice of a multitude of technical and economic experts within our own country as to the inadvisability of this effort. . . .” {CR, 7/20/67, H9128)
Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin received first honorary membership awarded by International Assn, of Machinists and Aerospace Workers at iam Aerospace Conference in Houston. Aldrin, considered by the Union to be the first space mechanic, was cited for his work with tools outside Gemini XII spacecraft Nov. 13, 1966. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., received an Award of Merit for being first American in space. (Houston Chron, 6/2/67)
XB-70 No. 1 research aircraft was flown by NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton and North American Aviation, Inc., test pilot Van Shepard to mach 1.41 and 35,000-ft altitude to obtain data on stability and control maneuvers. (nasa Proj Off)
Rep. Charles E. Goodell (R-N.Y.) introduced legislation to House authorizing the President to “designate a day in January of each year as a day of remembrance” for Apollo Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee, who died in Jan. 27 fire at ksc. (CR, 3/9/67, H2460)
Decrease in worldwide air temperature since the 1940’s might be due to emission of man-made pollutants into the atmosphere, National Center for Air Pollution scientists Robert A. McCormick and John H. Ludwig suggested in Science. Increasing amount of solid material made atmosphere more turbid and thus reduced amount of solar radiation reaching earth. Although excessive amount of carbon dioxide in atmosphere as a result of prolonged coal and oil burning should have made earth warmer, the authors noted, its effect had been offset by the turbidity caused by the pollutants. (McCormick, Ludwig, Science, 6/9/67, 1358-9)
Memorial services in Houston for Astronaut Edward G. Givens, Jr., were attended by many of his fellow astronauts and their families. Givens would be buried June 9 in Quanah, Tex. (msc Roundup, 6/9/67,1; AP, W Post, 6/9/67, B8)
A completely fireproof version of the spacecraft fabric Velcro had been perfected and would be used on NASA’s first manned Apollo mission in 1968, William Hines reported in the Washington Evening Star. In tests conducted at msc early in August, the all-metallic fabric did not ignite, even in pure oxygen atmosphere at 16.5 psia. Velcro Corp. vice president Jack Mates told Hines in an interview that NASA had not yet placed an order for the improved Velcro, but that his company was beginning production of a substantial quantity. In the Jan. 27 Apollo fire, flames in the spacecraft had quickly spread along the surface of ordinary nylon Velcro adhesive pads which were used to hold frequently used equipment. (Hines, W Star, 8/18/67)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) flew X-15 No. 3 to 3,818 mph (mach 5.18) and 277,000-ft altitude, becoming fourth usaf X-15 pilot to meet 264,000-ft-minimum-altitude requirement for usaf astronaut rating. Purposes of flight: (1) arc boost guidance system evaluation; (2) solar spectrum measurement; (3) micrometeoroid collection; and (4) ultravoilet plume and tip-pod camera evaluation. (X-15 Proj Off; frc X-Press, 10/20/67,1)
Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) flew X-15 No. 1 to 3,570 mph (mach 5) and 227,000-ft altitude in test to build up pilot altitude and check out horizon scanner and horizontal stabilizer. (X-15 Proj Off)
Surveyor VI briefing was held at NASA Hq. Dr. Leonard D. Jaffe, JPL Surveyor Project Scientist, said Surveyor VI had discovered or confirmed that: (1) lunar maria were covered primarily with very fine, 0.001-in-dia particles but also with “some coarse particles and rocks up to a yard across”; (2) particles stuck together weakly and were not suspended above lunar surface; (3) radar return was from surface and not from subsurface layer; (4) strength of lunar maria was three to eight pounds psi at one- to two-inch depth; (5) composition of rock was basic and basaltic with very little meteoritic iron on the surface; (6) surface was extremely uniform; and (7) particles were cohesive and adhesive, but there was “no need for concern” about manned spacecraft’s sinking or being covered by sticky soil in maria sites investigated. Simultaneous operation of Surveyors V. and VI would permit measurement of moon’s “wobble” or physical libration by obtaining spacecraft’s range and range rate, Dr. John A. O’Keefe, Assistant Chief of gsfc’s Laboratory for Theoretical Studies, explained. “The moon has a sort of a nose [Sinus Medii, landing site of Surveyor L7] that sticks out in front. The earth’s gravity takes hold of that nose and wiggles it . . . back and forth as the earth slightly moves either way.” Although scientists had a fairly good idea of the size of the “nose” and how firmly earth could grab it, they did not know how the moon responded to the pull, he said. Response depended on whether lunar mass was concentrated toward the center, in which case it would yield easily, or toward the outside, in which case moon’s inertia would be much stronger. Dr. O’Keefe also showed Surveyor VI photos of lunar surface lit by sunshine. In one, corona was traceable out to a distance of 30 solar radii from the sun—furthest ever traced. Another revealed persistence of a line of light after the instant of true sunset. Line, which had appeared less clearly in previous Surveyor photos, he said, could be explained either as a layer of 0.001-inthick particles or as lunar material floating a short distance frcm surface because of electrostatic charges. Surveyor VI mission represented “the completion of two major milestones of lunar surface exploration—the investigation and certification of four prime candidates for future manned landings and the scientific evaluation of four . .. widely separated regions in the moon’s equatorial belts,” Surveyor Program Manager Benjamin Milwitzky asserted. To maximize the scientific value of the last Surveyor mission in the series, NASA had established a group of scientists to study and recommend possible landing sites for Surveyor G. As a result of group’s recommendations, NASA had selected Tycho crater, south of the equator, as primary target, and Fra Mauro, north of the equator, as an alternate. Highland Tycho area was “risky as a landing site,” he said, because it was covered by ridges, grooves, and rocks, but it would provide scientific data for comparison with data from previous lowland maria landing sites. Surveyor G, scheduled for launch Jan. 7, 1968, would be equipped with surface sampler, TV cameras, alpha-scattering instrument, and minor payload items such as magnets on footpads and surface sampler scoop and special mirrors. (Transcript; Reistrup, W Post, 12/15/67, A20; W Star, 12/15/67, A7)	_
Adm. David L. McDonald, Chief of Naval Operations, and Gen. John P. McConnell, Chief of Staff of the Air Force, presented Distinguished Flying Crosses to the military astronauts who had made space flights in special Pentagon ceremony. Included were posthumous awards to L/Col. Virgil I. Grissom (usaf) and L/CoL Edward H. White II (usaf), who died in Jan. 27 Apollo fire. Capt. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., speaking on behalf of his fellow astronauts, said they were “proud members of the military, but also . . . representatives of a great and significant national effort,” who had grown “to enjoy the [space program’s] successes and live with its failures.” (dod Release 642-67; AP, B Sun, 7/14/67, 6; SBD, 7/17/67,_ 68)
Michael Getler, in Aerospace Technology editorial, cited U.K.’s lack of “willingness to invest at home in the pursuit of new technology needed to compete and to grow,” as a maj or reason for devaluation of the British pound [see Nov. 18]. Comparing French and U.K. economies Getler noted that France had invested heavily in her own industry to support a large-scale military buildup and an expensive national space program. “In contrast to French willingness to pay for the cost of [r&d], the British have tended to treat their big companies solely as manufacturers. . . . “While the British have purchased [U.S.] Polaris missiles ... the French have built their own. The British . . . now are buying U.S.-built F-4s and F-llls, while the French continue to design and build newer versions of their own Mirage family, and are now exporting them. . . . “The British national space program is virtually non-existent despite a growing realization . . . [by] Parliament that investment in a properly scaled effort can be of great importance in developing [British] technology. . . . There is no suggestion that the British take on a multibillion dollar effort, but there certainly are grounds to support investment in a $100 million program . . . that would be directed at developing satellites with some obvious commercial applications.” Although U.K.’s purchases of U.S. goods were “good business for American industry,” Getler noted, “the long range risk to this country is that an old and comparably faithful ally will be weakened in the process. Eventually, the British will tire of buying U.S. weapons . . . [but will have] no R&D base ... to fall back. . . .” (Getler, Aero Tech, 12/4/67,58)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller testified on Apollo project reprogramming before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. First “man-rated” Apollo Block II spacecraft would be delivered to ksc in late 1967 and launched three months later with Walter M. Schirra, Walter Cunningham, and Donn F. Eisele as prime crew, Webb said. Back-up crew would be Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Ceman. Spacecraft would still have 100%-oxygen atmosphere, but use of noncombustible and fire-resistant materials would minimize fire hazard, he asserted. “We are confident that the results of the first Block II Apollo flights will justify moving rapidly to follow-on flights, thus overcoming some of the effects of the present delay ... [so that] we can carry out this plan within the funds now available for fiscal year 1967 and in NASA’s budget for fiscal year 1968.” In order to “assure maximum progress” and reduce pressures on North American Aviation, Inc. (naa), prime Apollo spacecraft contractor, nasa was realigning its contracting arrangements, Webb said. Contracting changes included: negotiation of a new strong-incentive contract with naa for manufacture, test, and delivery of standard Block II spacecraft; extension of Boeing Co.’s present contract responsibility to include integration of command and service module and lunar module with the Saturn booster system; selection of a third contractor to make necessary modifications to standard Apollo spacecraft produced by NAA; and consideration of offers by other aerospace companies to provide contractor assistance in Apollo systems management and check-out and test procedures. Dr. Seamans described impact of Jan. 27 fire on Apollo schedule and budget. Lunar landing before 1970 “remains possible,” he said. “The impact . . . has been to reduce that probability, not eliminate it. . . . After the first manned Block II flight on the uprated Saturn I in 1968, we plan three to four manned Saturn V missions . . . [and] in 1969 ... up to six Saturn V missions.” Resulting $75 million of additional costs through FY 1968—for materials and equipment changes, flammability testing, launch facility modifications, and spacecraft delivery rescheduling—would be absorbed within the total budget plan currently before Congress. NASA’s responses to recommendations by Apollo 204 Review Board were outlined by Dr. Mueller: (1) bulk combustibles and other flammable materials had been replaced with flame-resistant materials, and necessary flammables stored in fireproof containers; (2) emergency procedures would be reviewed and exercised prior to each hazardous operation, and a quick-opening hatch installed for simplified egress from capsule; (3) new NASA Office of Flight Safety would be established under omsf to review and evaluate safety provisions and monitor test operations; (4) all emergency equipment had been reviewed and additions or substitutions—including installation of water fire extinguishers—made where necessary; (5) detailed design review of spacecraft communications system had been conducted and minor changes made to assure reliable operation; (6) full-scale mockup tests had been conducted to assess fire hazard and problems of gas detection and control; and (7) management and organizational changes had been instituted to clarify responsibilities and improve coordination between NASA centers and contractors. In response to questions by Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.) regarding rating of companies in the 1961 Apollo spacecraft contract competition, Webb said that Martin Co. had been rated first, on the basis of its technical proposal, by the source evaluation board. However he, Dr. Dryden, and Dr. Seamans—considering other factors such as lower cost estimate, outstanding company performance record, overall capability offered, and experience with X—15 experimental aircraft— chose NAA as prime candidate. Senator Smith expressed concern that the Committee was not kept informed of serious problems revealed in the Phillips Report and asked whether NASA followed any guidelines to determine when situations should be brought to the attention of the Committee. Webb replied that no such guidelines existed and indicated that he thought it unnecessary to detail the problems to the Committee since he thought that NASA could control them. Several other committee members also expressed their desire to be informed of any problems approaching the magnitude of those surrounding the Phillips Report. When Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) continued to criticize NASA’s reluctance to make the report public, Webb offered to discuss it, in complete context, in executive session, and repeated his objection to releasing such evaluations of contractor performance out of context. (Testimony; SBD, 5/10/67, 57-66; O’Toole, W Post, 5/10/67, Al)
U.S., France, and U.K. had had excellent displays at Paris International Air and Space Show [see May 23-31], but visitors had seemed most impressed by U.S.S.R. exhibit, Time magazine noted. “The greatest Soviet surprise was the launch vehicle that in 1961 sent Pioneer Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin into orbit in Vostok 1. . . . Visitors at the show flocked to a huge mock-up of the 13.6-ton Proton satellite, [to] ... a model of their advanced Molniya communications satellite, [and to] . . . the variety of new Russian jet liners. “. . . the U.S. went all out . . . [and] Britain and France also put their best fleet forward. . . . But it was the Russians who stole the show, simply by taking the wraps off space hardware—some of it a decade old—that they had never before displayed in the West. . . .” (Time, 6/9/61)
William C. Schneider, formerly Mission Director for NASA’s Apollo Applications (aa) program, was named Apollo Mission Director and Apollo Program Deputy Director for Missions, omsf. Schneider would be responsible for management, direction, and coordination of mission and flight plans, schedules, and associated activities, (nasa Release 67-206) During July: Editorial comment on proposed NASA FY 1968 authorization bills [see June 28]: Science: “The political atmosphere surrounding the U.S. space program is today murkier and less hospitable than at any time since 1961 when President Kennedy'decided to send men to the moon. This does not necessarily mean that nasa is in any danger of falling off its $5-billion-a-year budgetary plateau . . . [but] it is clear that, where Congress is concerned, the agency has lost much of its innocence and therefore its plans are to be reviewed with caution and skepticism. “Some members of Congress are remarkably frank in indicating that their principal interest in the space program lies in the economic benefits it brings their districts. . . . Indeed, one might be justified in predicting that the major budgetary struggles of the future will be less concerned with how much money nasa gets than with how NASA spends the money it does get.” (Carter, Science, 7/14/67, 170-3) Washington Evening Star: “If continuity and momentum are to be maintained in the space program . . . the [congressional] conferees must act with special wisdom this year. “Two . . . items in the House bill should be embodied in one final version. . . . One would establish an independent safety panel in nasa, and the other would require . . . [nasa] to keep Congress ‘fully and currently informed’ of problem areas in the space effort. “Both proposals were strongly opposed by administration spokesmen on grounds that seem shallow and legalistic. It would be well to embody both in the final 1968 authorization bill, if only to put NASA on firm notice that it is time to shape up.” (W Star, 7/7/67, A16) New York Times: “To read the record of the Congressional debate on NASA’s budget is a melancholy experience. . . . Behind the rhetoric it was easy to see the pressure of the many corporations and communities now sharing in nasa’s largeness and fearful of the impact of any maj or cut in this flow of golden manna. . . . “A rational 1968 space budget would have been substantially lower than either the House or Senate version, and would have cut particularly severely at the Apollo project. ... It would have changed the present emphasis ... to lay greater stress on the exploration of the cosmos with relatively cheap, unmanned rockets. Instead, the enormously expensive manned lunar landing effort is left virtually intact, while the highly promising program for sending unmanned Voyagers to Mars and other planets could be entirely eliminated. “The lobbyists can rejoice, but the nation’s real interests have been dealt a severe setback.” (NYT, 7/3/67,10)
nasa’s Apollo program was “back on the track” six months after the Jan. 27 fire at ICSC, Washington Evening Star columnist William Hines concluded after a tour of NASA centers. “Half a year after that unforgettable night of Jan. 27 the process of trauma, shock, and recuperation has run its course. Much remains to be done, of course—and it will be another nine or 10 months before astronauts fly again—but things are moving once more. “At Downey . . . where Apollo spacecraft are built, at Houston, where flights will be controlled, and at Cape Kennedy, where they will begin, there is a noticeable air of confidence (but not over-confidence) mingled with caution (but not over-caution). “A sadder but wiser Apollo team has emerged from the disaster at pad 34 with the realization that ‘pretty good’ simply is not good enough. . . .” (Hines, W Star, 7/27/67, Al)
Widow of NASA X-15 test pilot Joseph A. Walker filed $l-million damage suit for the June 8,1966, death of her husband when his F-104 fighter aircraft collided with an XB-70 experimental bomber near Barstow, Calif. Aircraft had been flying in tight formation “to allow photographic coverage of aircraft powered by General Electric engines” for publicity purposes. Mrs. Walker’s suit, filed in Federal Court in Los Angeles, charged negligence on the part of General Electric Co. and its chief test pilot John M. Fritz, and North American Aviation, Inc., manufacturer of the XB-70. (upi, W Post, 6/9/67, A2)
nasa test pilots Fitzhugh Fulton and Donald L. Maffick flew XB-70 No. 1 to 58,000-ft altitude and 1,581 mph (mach 2.43) in flight at Edwards afb. Purpose of test was to check lateral-directional stability, control, and handling qualities at mach 2.35 and 55,000 ft; inlet unstart at mach 2.4 and 57,500 ft; variable nose ramp functional test at mach 1.6 and 38,000 ft, and at mach 1.4 and 32,000 ft. Flight was successful. (XB-70 Proj Off)
Frank J. Magliato, Special Assistant to the nasa Administrator, was appointed NASA Executive Secretary, replacing John R. Biggs, who became Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, (nasa Ann, 12/1/67)
U.K.’s Royal Artillery Institution donated two 19th-century rockets to the astronautics collection of Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. One rocket was made by Sir William Congreve in 1815 and used on the Woolwich Ranges; the other, William Hale’s 24-lb rotary rocket, was constructed in 1863. Congreve rockets were used in the U.S. in 1814 while Hale rockets were used in the Mexican War in 1846 and the Civil War. (Smithsonian Release)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.) introduced to the House H.R. 10674, a bill to rename the Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore in honor of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom who died in Jan. 27 Apollo accident, (nasa lar VI/65)
First nonstop helicopter crossing of the Atlantic was successfully completed when two usaf HH-3E helicopters landed at Le Bourget Airport, opposite the U.S. pavilion at the Paris International Air and Space Show, following 30-hr 48-min flight from New York [see May 26-31]. Helicopters, which followed the route taken by Charles Lindbergh in 1927 when he became first man to fly the Atlantic nonstop alone, traveled 4,160 mi and made nine refuelings in flight. First flight crew was commanded by Maj. Herbert B. Zehnder (usaf) ; second by Maj. Donald B. Maurras (usaf). Both crews were submitting claims to Federation Aeronautique Internationale for new speed records from New York to London and New York to Paris, (upi, P EB, 6/1/67, 1; NYT, 6/2/67,17)
William M. Magruder, Lockheed Aircraft Corp,, had been selected to receive Flight Safety Foundation’s 1967 Richard Hansford Burroughs Test Pilot Award, Aviation Week reported. (Av Wk, \/9/61, 13)
Lunar Receiving Laboratory, under construction at msc, would provide scientists with an unparalleled opportunity to examine extraterrestrial materials under controlled conditions, msc staff members James C. McLane, Jr., Elbert A. King, Jr., Donald A. Flory, Keith A. Richardson, James P. Dawson, Walter W. Kemmerer, and Bennie C. Wooley declared in Science. The laboratory would have four major functions: “(i) distribution of lunar samples to the scientific community for detailed investigations after a period of biologic quarantine; (ii) performance of scientific investigations of samples that are time-critical and must be accomplished within the quarantine period; (iii) permanent storage Under vacuum of a portion of each sample; and (iv) quarantining and testing of the lunar samples, spacecraft, and astronauts for unlikely, but potentially harmful, back-contamination (contamination of extraterrestrial origin).” (Science, 2/3/67, 525-9)
nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh stressed at aiaa meeting in Baltimore the importance of space exploration as a contributor to peace: “. . . space activities can be a substitute for aggression, a bridge to understanding between the nations, and a major tool of arms control and disarmament. Once man accepts the challenge of exploring the great universe around us, he can more readily rise above the terrifying grip of parochial hatreds and fears. Space exploration helps satisfy man’s unquenchable thirst for knowledge—a basic characteristic which sets him apart from other creatures. Compared to the business of coercing and killing his own kind, the challenge posed by the prospect of crossing the established frontiers of the normal physical world is not only infinitely to be preferred, but its potential is limitless.” (Text)
William E. Zisch, Vice Chairman of the Board of Aerojet General Corp., was sworn in as a part-time consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb on technology development and utilization of NASA-developed technology by nonaerospace industries. (NASA Release, 67-8)
Karl Harr, president of Aerospace Industries Assn., spoke before Metropolitan Baltimore Chamber of Commerce on impact of U.S. space effort and risk that it would be weighed and evaluated in “oversimplified terms.” A huge and complex effort should not be judged by superficial aspects alone, forgetting that concentration of “our best industrial, economic, scientific and intellectual resources, organized to an unprecedented degree . . ., has an impact on every aspect of our national life.” Harr noted the strangeness of the unknown medium of space, “for which our ultimate capabilities are yet to be determined.” “Today we find ourselves both in midstream in our national space effort and at a crossroads as to future efforts. ... It is essential that we delay no longer in sorting out that which is valid and enduring, in terms of your total interest and mine, from that which is superficial or transitory.” (Text) Cause of X-15 No. 3 crash was unknown. The pilot, Maj. Michael J. Adams, had difficulty with control booster system; X—15 failed to recover from a dive from extremely high altitude, the pilot losing control above 200,000	ft and regaining it briefly at about 80,000 ft. Setting unofficial world speed and altitude records, the three X-15s had flown 191 times; No. 3 having had 65 flights. The aircraft were built by North American Rockwell (formerly naa) under a cooperative program by usaf, usn, and NASA. (NASA Proj Off)
Predicting future trends in aeronautics and space, nasa’s Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology John L. Sloop told American Society for Metals in Rochester, Pa.: “Current events make it clear that many national needs are increasing the pressure on resources and this is being felt over a wide range of activities. . . . It is times like these, however, that give the opportunity for advanced research and technology to open up the range of possible new missions that can be considered in future national decisions [and] we must visualize future mission possibilities and develop the various technologies needed at an optimum pace. Essential to the soundness of this approach is emphasis on technology that has multiple applications.” Sloop praised “the potential of applications satellites,” and said it was “perhaps best gaged by the number of users, domestic and foreign, that are willing to invest their own money. In communications, there are over a dozen proposals for systems that involve an estimated investment of over a billion dollars.” (Text)
House and Senate both passed NASA FY 1968 authorization bills which were less than the $5.1 billion originally requested by NASA. Senate bill (S. 1296) authorized $4,851 billion: $4,136 billion for r&d; $648 million for administrative operations; and $67 million for construction of facilities. House bill (H.R. 10340) authorized $4,791 billion: $4,076 billion for r&d; $648 million for administrative operations; and $67 million for construction of facilities. Senate defeated two amendments by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) to reduce nasa authorization—-one by $317 million; one by $98 million. An amendment by Sen. Charles Percy (R-Ill.) which would require NASA to keep Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences “fully and currently informed” was also defeated. Committee Chairinan Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.) said the proposal had been considered by the Committee and rejected as unnecessary: “It’s not needed. What is needed is enforcement and compliance with existing legislation.” House bill authorized $200.7 million less than Committee on Science and Astronautics had recommended [see May 16]. An amendment by Rep. Richard L. Roudebush (R-Ind.) to an amendment by Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) cut $65 million from $455 million proposed by Committee for aa program. Fulton’s original amendment had recommended cutting the program by $250 million. Remaining reductions, totaling $135.7 million, were contained in surprise recommittal motion offered by Representative Fulton at the end of the day. They included: (1) $6.2 million from advanced missions (funding eliminated); (2) $21.5 million from Voyager; (3) $20 million from nuclear rockets; (4) $78 million from launch vehicle procurement; and (5) $10 million from sustaining university program. Amendment also contained provision to establish an independent safety review board within NASA. Establishment of the board had been urged by Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R-Ill.) as one means of avoiding another accident like the Jan. 27 Apollo fire. Differences between Senate and House authorization bills would be resolved by joint House/Senate Conference Committee. (CR, 6/28/67, S9078-94, H8150-200; upi, NYT, 6/29/67, 11; Reistrup, W Post, 6/29/67, A6)
Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, discussed importance of defense R&D and problem of choosing among new technological developments available. Speaking before the Dallas Chapter of the Assn, of the U.S. Army and the Dallas Council on World Affairs, he noted that over 80% of all the scientists and engineers who had ever lived were alive today; scientific and technical manpower had increased 400%, compared to 50% for labor force; and % of aU U.S. R&D supported national defense. Current defense R&D funding was $8 billion. Discussing selection of proposed projects, he described a new tool and procedure called the Development Concept Paper, “a short, single document . . . [which] requires that . . . parties agree to a common document that states the issues, the assumptions, the alternative courses of action available, the pros and cons for each.” With this type of presentation, he said, the Secretary of Defense could more easily and more objectively decide whether to approve or reject a project, and if approved, the paper could be transmitted to project’s implementers as a guide. This new tool, he indicated, would be used in future to avoid repetition of past inappropriate decisions in which precious resources were wasted, such as air-launched Skybolt missile and B-70 aircraft which proved too vulnerable after $2 billion had been spent on their development; and C5-A subsonic transport aircraft, currently being produced for operation in 1969, whose production had been delayed since late 1950’s pending development of a system to utilize it. From such cases, Dr. Foster noted, “we have repeatedly learned that money is not enough. That enthusiasm is not enough. That technical innovation is not enough. We need critical analysis of purposes, missions, threats, and requirements. We also need realistic tested advanced alternatives produced by our investment in research. And to gain wise management decisions, we must join these together in constructive confrontation.” (Text)
“We will never evacuate the frontiers of space to any other nation,” President Johnson pledges during tour of Michoud Assembly Facility. On the platform in front row from left are Astronaut Walter Cunningham, Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr., the President, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, Mrs. Webb, Gov. John J. McKeithen, and NASA Associate Administrator for Administration Harold B. Finger. In the back row, behind and to the right of Webb, are Gen. Edmund F. O’Connor, Director of Industrial Operations, msfc; Dr. George N. Constan, manager of Michoud; H. D. Lowrey, president of Chrysler Corp. Space Division; and J. K. Swearingen, project manager for Ling-Temco-Vougbt Range Systems Division. “In the 9 years since I first introduced in the . . , Senate the Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, we have seen the power of our rocket engines increase 50 times—from 150,000 to 7,500,000 pounds of thrust in the engines that you build here. “Not long ago-we had to stand by and watch other countries accomplish what we could not accomplish. I will never forget the days of Sputnik 1 and Sputnik 2, and the real concern. . . . “We were the most scientifically advanced nation on the face of the earth but we did not launch man’s first earth satellite. “We were backward because we did not choose to adventure. We did not choose to have vision. We did not choose to look forward. Now let us remember that our future achievements—or our future failures— will depend on how far ahead we choose to look and how far ahead we choose to think. “If we think second, and if we look third, then we are going to wind up not being first. . . we will advance in space to the extent that our people and their representatives are prepared for us to advance and are prepared to pay the cost of that advance. We may not always proceed at the pace we desire. I regret . . . that there have been reductions and there will be more. There have been interruptions, and I hope that we have had all we can take. But I do have faith and confidence in the American people. “We will not surrender our station. We will not abandon our dream. We will never evacuate the frontiers of space to any other nation.” (SBD, 12/13/67,218; PD, 12/18/67,1696-7)
U.K., France, and West Germany would develop a short-to-medium-distance aircraft designed to reduce cost of air travel by the early 1970s, John Stonehouse of the British Ministry of Technology told a London news conference. Known as the European Airbus Project, plan called for a 300-passenger twin-engine aircraft with a 1,931-km (1,200-mi) to 2,253km (1,400-mi) range to begin commercial service by 1973. Expected to cost $532 million, Airbus would be designed jointly by Sud-Aviation of France, Hawker Siddeley of U.K., and Arbeitsgemeinschaft Airbus of West Germany. (NYT, 7/26/67, 61M)
Prime crew for first maimed Apollo mission—shown here preparing for mission simulator tests at North American Aviation plant—are, left to right, Donn F. Eisele, senior pilot; Walter M. Schirra, Jr., command pilot; and Walter Cunningham, pilot. feel and show this same confidence if the work and the sacrifice of the past are to have meaning and the objectives of manned space exploration are to be achieved.” Several subcommittee members, however, condemned NASA for withholding facts about cost and management problems with North American Aviation, Inc. ( NAa) , and indicated that they would be more critical of nasa in the future. In response to charges by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) that Webb had “an obsession with secrecy,” Webb asserted that NASA had been exceptionally cooperative: “No program of this magnitude has ever been operated with greater public scrutiny. No agency has ever given its committees more information on what it is trying to do.” He offered to elaborate on the Phillips Report [see April 18] in closed session but declined to discuss it publicly, insisting that further public discussion would destroy close relationship between NASA and its prime Apollo spacecraft contractor. (Testimony; Wilford, NYT, 5/11/67,26; O’Toole, W Post, 5/11/67. A9)
Senate Appropriations Committee activities were listed by Wall Street Journal: voted $142 million for this year’s development of the sst; doubled the House-approved $20 million for highway safety grants; added $50 million to FAA’s budget for improved air safety (versus the $7 million requested by the Administration) ; and, in all, voted nearly $1.7 billion for the Department of Transportation’s FY 1968 budget. Sponsor for the improved air safety figure of $50 million had been Sen. John Stennis (D-Miss.), chairman of the Appropriations Subcommittee that handled faa’s budget, who proposed $20 million for operation of air control towers and overtime payment for their crews, plus another $30 million for such new safety equipment as airport ground lighting and improved radar. Sen. Stennis had stated his hope that someday air safety projects could be financed partly with special user charges. (WSJ, 9/28/67,3)
Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R-Ill.) inserted in the Congressional Record his statement expressing concern over Apollo 204 Review Board’s failure to determine whether Apollo accident was result of a single oversight or “indicative of a basic weakness in the organization of NASA and/or the contractors---I am deeply disturbed by the report of the Apollo 204 Review Board. My concern is not that the Board was unable to discover the precise cause of the accident during the course of its rigorous technical investigation, but, rather, that the Board failed to examine, or at least report on, the fundamental conditions which permitted the accident to occur and which, moreover, resulted in the tragic deaths of three fine young men. The report’s, and apparently the investigation’s, shortcomings in this regard leave open the possibility of similar catastrophes in the future.” {CR, 4/10/67, H3786-7)
William Tier, Deputy Manager of Operations in mfsc’s Saturn I/IB Program Office, was named Manager to replace Lee B. James. Tier’s former position would be filled by William F. LaHatte. (msfc Release 67-62)
Rep. John J. Rhodes (R-Ariz.), speaking in the House on behalf of .the Republican Policy Committee, urged that House/Senate Conference Committee on NASA FY 1968 authorization bill accept key Republican amendments adopted by the House. Amendments would reduce nasa’s FY 1968 budget request by $201.4 million, establish an independent safety panel in nasa, and require nasa to keep Congress fully and currently informed of problems. (CR, 7/19/67, H9045)
Washington Post editorial criticized suggestion by nuclear physicist Dr. Edward Teller that nuclear explosions be used to provide data about moon’s interior: “Speaking for a multitude of laymen, we want our moon left intact. If not many farmers are left who do their planting by the times of the moon, at least all of us like to remember moonlit nights when we were not thinking of nuclear fission. ... If Dr. Teller wants to dig another Isthmian Canal with ‘a small nuclear explosive,’ we might consider that within the range of our needs. But let our moon alone. We look forward once again to sitting in the moonlight on a summer’s night and smelling honeysuckle without the thought that a chunk of moon might blast off suddenly into another orbit.” (W Post, 5/2/67)
Rep. Donald Rumsfeld (R-Ill.), speaking on the floor of the House, urged House to support Rep. Charles Mathias’ (R-Md.) bill (H.R. 69) to establish a commission to review organization of Executive Branch: “Congressional review has often been piecemeal and after the fact. For example, the recent congressional hearing concerning the tragic Apollo spacecraft fire unearthed a shocking amount of information about NASA’s operations which should have been reported to Congress long ago. . . . Legislation has been proposed to correct this, and hopefully, the provisions in the House version of the NASA authorization bill , . . will be accepted and thereby require NASA to keep Congress ‘fully and currently informed’. ... I am convinced such language is needed with respect to NASA. I am equally convinced that, if the operations of the executive branch are studied and reviewed for organizational deficiencies and economy of operation, there would be far less need to wage battles on the floor on a piecemeal, hit-or-miss basis.” (nasa lar VI/75)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) flew X—15 No. 2 to 96,000-ft altitude and 3,239 mph (mach 4.8) in flight at Edwards afb to check stabilization and control with dummy ramjet and check out thermalcouple system. Flight was successful except for break of dummy ramjet chute cable during landing sequence. (X-15 Proj Off)
XB—70 No. 1 research aircraft piloted by NASA test pilot Fitzhugh Fulton and North American Aviation, Inc., pilot Van Shepard reached mach 2.53 and 60,400-ft altitude during flight at Edwards afb for national sonic boom program, (nasa Proj Off)
jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering announced appointment of Fred H. Felberg, Assistant Laboratory Director for Technical Divisions, to the new position of Assistant Laboratory Director for Plans and Programs. He would be succeeded by Jack N. James, Deputy Assistant Director for Flight Projects. In his new position Felberg would be responsible for “planning jpl’s total program, including . . . effective distribution of manpower and resources.” (jpl Release 460)
usaf named four usaf pilots to train for DOD’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program: Maj. James A. Abrahamson; L/Col. Robert T. Herres; Maj. Donald H. Peterson; and Maj. Robert H. Lawrence, Jr., the first Negro selected for a mission in the Nation’s space program. All were completing training course at Edwards AFB Aerospace Research Pilot School. They would join 12 previously selected pilots in September to begin project training, (usaf pio; NYT, 7/1/67, 1, 8)
Senate, in approving (60-5) NASA FY 1968 appropriations bill (H.R. 12474) of $4.7 billion, accepted figures of Senate Committee on Appropriations. Measure would go to conference to reconcile differences between House and Senate versions. NASA FY 1968 funding in three categories tallied: r&d Senate appropriation of $3,955 billion was increase of $96.0 million over House appropriation, decrease of $152.1 million from authorization, and decrease of $356.5 million from budget. Construction of Facilities Senate appropriation of $55.4 million was increase of $19.5 million over House appropriation, decrease of $14.6 million from authorization, and decrease of $21.3 million from budget. Administrative Operations Senate appropriation of $628.0 million was decrease of $20.0 million from House appropriation, decrease of $20.2 million from authorization, and decrease of $43.3 million from budget. Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.), Chairman, Senate Committee on 324-801 O—69 Armed Services’ Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee, said: “Ten years ago we did not have the knowledge or the equipment to meet the Russian challenge. ... But today ... we are at the crossroads of decision as to what our space program is going to be in 1970 and beyond. . . .’’ Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.), ranking minority member, Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, stated that President’s signing of FY 1968 authorization bill “clearly signaled a new policy of relegating the space program to a secondary position.” (Testimony; CR, 10/6/67, S14367-82)
NASA X—15 (No. 3) crashed in Mojave Desert when the aircraft “exceeded its structural limitations during the final portions of the reentry maneuver,” X—15 Accident Investigating Board suspected. X— 15’s pilot, Maj. Michael J. Adams, did not use ejection system and was killed, the first fatality in the 191 flights since the three X—15s started their flight operations, June 8, 1959. Usual flight plan called for aircraft to ascend at a sharp angle after being dropped by B—52 aircraft. After engine burnout, plan called for coasting up into high thin air, then dropping back in pancake style into thicker air for reentry. According to a NASA spokesman, the aircraft had risen to about 260,000 ft and encountered trouble on the way down. “There apparently was some sort of control malfunction as the pilot attempted to pull out of his descent,” spokesman said. Radar and telemetry data received during flight were excellent, data being received down to an altitude of 60,000 ft. Speed and altitude records for winged aircraft—4,534 mph, by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf), and 354,200 ft, by nasa’s Joseph A. Walker (who had since died in crash of XB-70 No. 2 and F—104 aircraft) — had been set by X—15s. Two crash landings of X—15 aircraft had occurred; pilots had survived and aircraft had been restored to flight status. X-15 No. 3 pilot, Maj. Adams, 37, had finished usaf training in 1952, flown in combat in Korea, and graduated with honors from Aerospace Research Pilots School. Although assigned to mol program, he had requested transfer to X-15 operations. Board was continuing attempt to determine the probable cause. (fRC Release 26-67; AP, AIT, 11/16/67,15)
Development of a laser system for detecting small variations in moon’s motion, and for measuring earth-moon distances to within two meters was reported by afcrl. A laser beam would be directed at a reflector placed on lunar surface; reflected light would be detected. (OAR Res Rev, 12/67, 5) During 1967: In 1967, U.S. orbited 87 spacecraft; U.S.S.R., 67; France, 2; Italy, 1; Australia, 1; and U.S.-U.K., 1. U.S. total included 30 launches with 61 payloads for dod and 20 successful nasa missions in 22 attempts—highest percentage of successes in one year to date. NASA had one satellite as a secondary payload. Highlighting NASA space achievements were closeup photographs of the moon provided by Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter spacecraft; soft-landing on the moon by Surveyor III, V, and VI; successful Venus flyby by Mariner V; and preparation of a uv chart of sun’s surface temperature from Oso IV photos of the sun. Surveyor III, V, and VI radioed more than 50,000 closeup photos of the moon and conducted on-site chemical analyses of the lunar soil, confirming its being similar to basaltic rock on earth. First launch from lunar surface was accomplished when Surveyor Vi’s retrorockets were fired, lifting spacecraft and translating it to another site eight feet away. NASA launched Lunar Orbiter III, IV, and V, successfully completing the five-mission program and obtaining detailed photos of entire lunar surface—with 100 times the detail possible with earth-based telescopes—including eight prospective Apollo manned landing sites. Mariner V passed within 2,600 mi of Venus and radioed data on Venusian atmosphere and effects of solar wind. Ground tests in Project Apollo were continued in preparation for three-man Apollo/Satum space flight planned for 1969. Following flash fire in which three astronauts died Jan. 27 during ground test at ksc, intensive studies were Conducted to devise new safety measures. Nearly all combustible materials were removed from the spacecraft, and the hatch was redesigned for fast escape. Apollo program climaxed Nov. 9 with successful maiden flight of Saturn V which orbited unmanned Apollo 4 spacecraft. Applications satellites launched included three Intelsat comsats for ComSatCorp and three essa meteorological satellites for essa. Ats II provided first continuous high-quality photos of earth from geostationary orbit, and Biosatellite II provided new knowledge on effects of radiation and weightlessness on life forms. Scientific achievements included orbiting of Oso III and IV, Ogo IV, Explorer XXXIV and XXXV satellites, and Pioneer VIII interplanetary spacecraft. Some 180 meteorological sounding rockets and 105 scientific sounding rockets were launched, and RAM C—1 spacecraft was launched on suborhital mission to measure effectiveness of water-injection concept in maintaining communications during reentry. Some 12 flights of X—15 rocket research aircraft were conducted, including record-setting 4,534 mph (mach 6.72) flight by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf). Following crash Nov. 15 in which first fatality in 191 X-15 tests occurred, flights were suspended pending a review of the accident. NASA—USAF flight research continued with 14 flights of XB-70 supersonic aircraft. President Johnson authorized faa to proceed with SST prototype construction, contracts were signed with Boeing Co. and General Electric Co., and construction was begun. Research programs were initiated for wing-structure designs for hypersonic aircraft which could make sustained flights at 5,300 mph (mach 8), and studies were undertaken to reduce aircraft noise. M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle crashed May 10, during its second flight of the year. dod program included orbiting of two Vela nuclear-detection satellites and 11 idcsp comsats; static test-firing of Titan HIM 1st stage; and beginning of construction of MOL launch complex at Yandenberg AFB. Among the highlights in propulsion technology was the third and final test firing of the 260-in-dia solid-propellant rocket motor, producing 5.8 million lbs of thrust. One test of NERVA nuclear reactor was conducted in which NRX—A6 was operated at full design power for 60 .min, achieving major goal of one-hour-duration operation. Phoebus IB was operated at 1,500 mw for 30 min, and Phoebus 2C-F underwent series of systems tests with conventional fuel. Tracking, communications, and data acquisition reached greatest volume in 1967 with a large number of unmanned satellites and space probes, msfn stations conducted tracking operations with Lunar Orbiter spacecraft as targets after completion of missions’ photo-acquisition phases, and new Apollo Manned Space Flight Network was completely checked out using Tts I, launched as secondary payload with Pioneer VIII. At end of 1967, NASA’s Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition was simultaneously supporting 50 flight programs for NASA; six in cooperative international programs; and 12 for dod. U.S.S.R. launched 67 payloads, including 61 Cosmos satellites, one Venus probe, one Soyuz spacecraft, and three Molniya I comsats. Venus IV landed on the Venusian surface and transmitted atmospheric data; Soyuz I, after 25-hr manned flight, crashed on landing, killing the pilot; and Cosmos CLXXXVI and Cosmos CLXXXVIII unmanned spacecraft achieved world’s first automatic docking in space. (NASA Release 67—301 ; Space Flight Record 1958—1967; NASA Proj Off)
Robert Walker, writing in the New York Times, reviewed new applications for industrial use of gold. In telephone industry, gold was used for coating electromechanical switchgear and for transmitter domes; in computers, for coating metal tapes and electroplating printed circuits; and in automotive industry, for connecting alternator-regulator systems. To aerospace industry, one of gold’s most important characteristics was that it reflected heat and light. Gold was used to coat the “umbilical cord” which connected Astronaut Edward H. White II to Gemini IV spacecraft (June 3, 1965); to cover shrouds that contracted very hot jet aircraft engine parts; and to coat satellites so that they reflected more than 90% of sun’s heat. By adding oxides to gold coatings space scientists used the gold to absorb infrared energy which could be converted to electrical energy. (Walker, Ayr, 12/24/67, IF)
Testimony by NASA and naa officials at congressional hearings on Apollo accident was loaded with technical information to avoid discussion of mismanagement and responsibility, William Hines charged in the Washington Evening Star: “In execution, it was a masterful operation. Experts avalanched data on the committees until . . . [they had] far more technical information than they could possibly handle. . . .” Hines cited statement by Sen. Walter Mondale (D-Minn.) which “got to the very core” of the problem: “ ‘I am not interested in knowing enough about building spacecraft so that I can build one in my backyard, but I do think I have a responsibility to know enough about questions of management, contractor performance and quality control so I can pass judgment on the question of whether these are fundamental issues that we need to deal with.’ ” “If members of the House committee had all kept their eyes on this central issue and refused to be confused by the irrelevant and the trivial, the hearings on that side of the Capitol would have been far more fruitful to date.” (Hines, W Star, 4/20/67, A6)
Reorganization of the Bureau of the Budget had created the Economic, Science and Technology Division, headed by John D. Young, reported Jerry Kluttz, in Washington Post. Young, at one time NASA’s Assistant Administrator for Administration, had headed the task force that recommended the shakeup. Reporting to his new division would be the Departments of Commerce and Transportation, aec, nasa, nsf, Small Business Administration, and the regulatory agencies. Both nasa and aec were transferred from the Military Division. (Kluttz, W Post, 9/7/67)
A 59-lb, $350,000 computer used on Gemini V mission had been reconditioned and was being used by USN in tests of new airborne weapons system designed to locate and destroy enemy radar, AP reported. USN declined to name the aircraft or reveal where the tests were being conducted. (AP, Denver Post, 5/14/67) Dr. Mac C. Adams, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, discussed NASA’s attempts to solve the increasing problem of aircraft noise. Efforts included: (1) active participation in the interagency task force established by President Johnson to study aircraft noise [see Feb. 1], (2) study of methods to reduce noise of conventional aircraft engines, (3) investigation of the use of steeper descent angles during approach to landing and steeper climb on takeoff to reduce noise by moving the source farther from the ground, and (4) research on a new turbine engine with low noise as a basic requirement. (Text; NNews, 5/16/67) Former afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.) charged that the Johnson Administration was not “pushing technology” and suggested that $400-700 million more should have been spent annually on exploratory and advanced development during the past four or five years. He was particularly critical of the “arbitrary separation of space activities into peaceful and military. ... It simply serves to emphasize, by comparison, the straightforwardness of the Soviet program. Their single-purpose program seeks only to attain a versatile technological superiority which, once attained, will serve the political purpose they choose regardless of what kind of a space program we have or how we categorize it. . . .” (Text) Anglo-French Concorde supersonic aircraft, scheduled to enter commercial service in 1971, would pioneer three markets, monopolizing the first two until “pushed away” by U.S. SST, scheduled to enter passenger service in 1974-5, W. J. Jakimiuk, president of Sud-Aviation, predicted. Concorde would dominate the North Atlantic market where SSTs would first be used; however, “as soon as the U.S. sst penetration of the North Atlantic pushes away the Concordes, they will be introduced on the major other markets, where a position of monopoly again will be found,” Jakimiuk said. When U.S. SST “pushes” Concorde away from these routes, it would then move to a new series of routes where traffic density would be so low that “there will be no sst competition.” (NYT, 5/21/67, 88) Director of FAA sst Development b/'g J. C. Maxwell, referring to report by Institute for Defense Analyses (ida) which suggested that sst program could seriously weaken the Nation’s balance of payments [see May 16], said that “our balance of payments will continue to benefit if American and foreign airlines continue to buy and operate American aircraft in the upcoming supersonic area.” General Maxwell said faa estimated that 1990 market for SSTs, if operations were limited by sonic boom considerations, would be 500 aircraft, improving balance of payments position by $17 billion. If sonic boom did not limit operations, 1,200	aircraft would be sold, improving balance of payments position by $32billion. (Text; Lardner, W Post, 5/Y1/61, Cl) Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, responded to criticism that U.S. was losing its strategic superiority. “For many years, the Soviet Union apparently had been following our lead in every important strategic system technical development. . .. This is still the case. We are following their activities with great care. We see no evidence that our planned strategic capabilities will be endangered by recent Soviet technological actions. . . .” Dr. Foster announced that first MOL would be launched by USAF in 1970, confirming rumors that program was two years behind schedule. (Av Wk, 5/22/67,11) Awards presented included: (1) Monsanto Aviation Safety Award for the “most significant and lasting contribution to air safety” in 1966 to faa Deputy Administrator David D. Thomas, who was recognized as “the principal architect of the U.S. air traffic control system”; and (2)	1967 Robert S. Ball Memorial Award for distinguished and meritorious aerospace writing to Howard Benedict, AP senior aerospace writer, for series of articles from Aue. 8-Sept. 19, 1966, on Gemini XI mission. (Editor & Publisher, 5/13/67; faa Release 67-7)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced his approval for production and deployment of a “thin” Nike-X antiballistic missile (abm ) system at a meeting of upi editors and publishers in San Francisco. He explained: “Were we to deploy a heavy abm system throughout the United States, the Soviets would clearly be strongly motivated to so increase their offensive capability as to cancel out our defensive advantage.” He opposed a more advanced, heavy, anti-Soviet system and approved the “thin” abm system because “the system would be relatively inexpensive—preliminary estimates place the cost at about $5 billion—and we would have a much higher degree of reliability against a Chinese attack than the much more massive and complicated system that some have recommended against a possible Soviet attack.” McNamara stated: “An abm deployment designed against a possible Chinese attack . . . would provide an additional indication to Asians that we intend to deter China from nuclear blackmail, and thus would contribute toward our goal of discouraging nuclear weapon proliferation among the present nonnuclear countries.” The Secretary of Defense said the defensive move was being made with China in mind, not the Soviet Union. He warned the Soviet Union, however, that if it decided to expand its limited antimissile system, the U.S. would respond by increasing its offensive forces to maintain its overwhelming retaliatory capacity. The decision was generally applauded by congressional leaders but also unleashed an offensive—expected to be focused in the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy—for building a “heavy” defense system against Soviet missiles, reported John W. Finney in New York Times. The proposed “thin” abm system would provide each region of the U.S. with at least one battery of warhead interceptors, reported AP. The exact locations of the batteries, each with several missiles, remained a secret, (dod Release 868-67; Av Wk, 9/25/67, 11; Beecher, NYT, 9/19/67, 1; Finney, NYT, 9/19/67, 1; AP, SF Exam, 9/19/67, 5)
Dr. Donald E. Guss, project scientist for gsfc’s Solar Particle Intensity and Composition Experiment, died in Cleveland after a heart attack. (W Post, 2/8/67)
The time had to come to end the “belabored post-mortems of the Apollo fire” and to restore confidence in the Apollo program, William Coughlin suggested in Technology Week, “nasa certainly has its faults, particularly in the quality control area. But we believe that the overall record of the Apollo 204 probe offers some inspiration for confidence in NASA management. It takes a great deal of integrity to give an accident review board full freedom and support when the outcome can only be critical of those setting up the board—and NASA provided that freedom and support. It then takes courage to stand up and disagree with some of the findings of the board—and NASA did that The Phillips report, damaging as it was, also was testimony that NASA had been on top of the problems at North American and was making progress in solving them. . . . ‘^Confidence in Apollo must be restored and the program allowed to move ahead, without undue restriction, on its new lunar schedule. “Anything less will diminish the sacrifice made by three brave men.” (Coughlin, Tech Wk, 5/22/67,58)
nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh was interviewed by Christian Science Monitor’s Neal Sanford. Comparing American and Soviet space budgets, he expressed belief that U.S.S.R. was spending more than twice the U.S. percentage of gross national product on space. “Their [gnp] is less than half of ours. While they are spending about the same amount of money that we are on space it is about twice the percentage of gnp. They are putting a greater priority on space than we are.” Soviet space program for 1967 had been “the most active in . . . [their] history, so far as launches go,” he said. “I don’t know if they are cutting [their budget] back. They are going along at a good rate . . . [and] from the progress they are making, we assume they are going along at about the same funding.” (Sanford, CSM, 10/4/67, 5)
Nasa personnel changes: (1) John S. Brown, Division Director in the Office of Legislative Affairs, NASA Hq., became Deputy Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs; (2) John P. Jewett, Assistant Chief for Administration, Nevada Extension of aec/nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo—n), became Chief of snpo-n. (nasa Ann, 7/2/67, 7/25/67)
Noise problems arising from commercial jet aircraft operations, and the Government’s attack on these problems were described by ost Director Dr. Donald F. Hornig in appearance before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee [see Feb. 1]. He stated: “At the request of the Chairman of the President’s Advisory Committee on Supersonic Transport, Secretary McNamara, I assumed responsibility for defining and directing an interagency sonic boom program. Its goal is to determine the potential sources of difficulty or additional costs associated with commercial operation of supersonic transports.” ost, said Hornig, had framed “action program” with faa, NASA, and Depts. of Commerce and of Housing and Urban Development—responding to President Johnson’s Transportation Message of Mar. 2, 1966. He added: “. . . NASA’s aeronautics research program in the sonic boom problem areas is both broadly conceived and well defined to provide technical support to the FAA and to the aerospace industry in the national sst Development Program.” (Text)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., had signed contract to appear in at least eight Wolper Productions’ TV documentaries on great explorations in history, the New York Times reported. Series, beginning in January 1968, would include Henry M. Stanley’s African search for David Livingstone, Captain James Cook’s exploration of the South Pacific, and Roald Amundsen’s expedition to the South Pole. (Gent, NYT, 4/14/67, 67)
Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) flew X—15 No. 1 to 3,818 mph (mach 5.68) and 135,000-ft altitude during nine-min flight at Edwards afb to: (1) provide pilot experience at high altitudes; (2) record stabilizer flow angle of attack; (3) test electrical loads; (4) check out 3rd landing skid; (4) check out pressure attitude indicator; (5) record data from X-15 sonic boom; and (6) check out ablative coatings on stabilizer. (nasa X—15 Proj Off)
NASA had discarded crew assignments for three manned Apollo missions originally scheduled for 1967 but postponed shortly after Jan. 27 fire, msc Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton told the press at msc. “We don’t have any crews assigned officially to any missions at the present time. There’s not much point in worrying about crew assignments until we know what we’re going to do.” Backup crew for AS-204 mission had been Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham; prime crew for AS—205/208 mission had been James A. McDivitt, David Scott, and Russell Schweick-art; for AS-503, Frank Borman, Michael Collins, and William Anders. (upi, W Star, 3/24/67, A2; AP, W Post, 3/24/67, A6; Wilford, NYT, 3/24/67,1,15)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana flew X-15 No. 3 to 82,000-ft altitude and 3,682 mph (mach 5.52) in flight at Edwards afb. Purposes of test: (1)	cold-wall heat transfer; (2) step-panel heat transfer; (3) boost guidance checkout; (4) sonic boom study; and (5) pcm checkout. (nasa Proj Off)
First live global telecast linking North America, Europe, Asia, Australia, and Africa would be carried on National Educational Television (net) June 25, net Vice President William Kobin announced. Designed as a live documentary to enable man to see earth as a single entity in space and time, two-hour telecast would examine such major problems as hunger and overpopulation. It would be transmitted to more than 30 nations via four comsats: ComSatCorp’s Early Bird, I and Intelsat II—B and two of U.S.S.R.’s Molniya I comsats. (Gent, NYT, 2/8/67, 63)
The time had come to “fix” the responsibility for the total results of U.S. technology, Michael Getler suggested in Aerospace Technology. There was no single group or agency to “link the broad spectrum of American technological development with social development. There is no single group with the expertise available to probe all forms of technology and its effects, to pump funds into a truly important new applied science not able to capture headlines, to speed the transfer of defense and space technology into other areas, and to put the special interest groups on the line for blockage of improvements within the state-of-the-art. There is no group directly responsible to the citizenry to develop and carry through legislation to try and save us from tomorrow’s smog and urban clutter; for we have not, by a long shot, run out of self-inflicted ills. . . .” Getler urged that the overall responsibility be given to Congress. “It is the Legislative branch of Government, properly augmented with a permanent staff of specialists, that is best equipped to serve as a responsive arbiter between the good life of our people, the promise of technology, and the pressure of die marketplace.” (Getler, Aero Tech, 8/14/67,62)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) made public the full text of the Phillips Report which had been withheld by NASA. Full report contained no significant information that had not been included in the summary presented by nasa Administrator James E. Webb to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space. Sciences April 18. (upi, NYT, 4/30/67, 38)
Washington Evening Star writer William Hines criticized Apollo 204 Review Board’s failure to consult Walter C. Williams, operating head of Project Mercury from 1958-63, in investigation of Jan. 27 flash fire. “NASA has no ready answer ... to questions about why Williams’ name was omitted from the consultant panel. His standing in the space business is such that it could hardly have been due to chance oversight.” Hines said Williams had left NASA in April 1964, reportedly after “disagreement with superiors over management policies. His relations with headquarters officials had been strained for six months prior to his departure, ever since a final report on Project Mercury was issued . . . [in which] Williams castigated industrial contractors, saying they had given poor attention to quality control on hardware for manned missions. . . .” (Hines, W Star, 3/8/67, A5)
Col. V. John Lyle (usaf, Ret.), former Assistant to the Comptroller of the Air Force, was made special assistant to nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Plight Dr. George E. Mueller, (nasa Ann)
XB-70 research aircraft, flown at ftc by usaf pilots Col. Joseph Cotton and L/c Emil Strumthal, reached mach 2.52 and 63,500-ft altitude in flight to test stability control and handling qualities. Other test objectives included: handling qualities at mach 1.2 and 40,000-ft altitude; unstarts; radar air speed calibration at mach 1.9 down to 1.2 and 45,000-ft altitude; nose ramp flutter function at mach 1.2 'and 32,000-ft altitude, and at mach 2.55 and 64,000-ft altitude. (NASA Proj Off)
nasa named crews for first two manned Apollo/Saturn V flights. Prime crew for AS-504 (first mission), scheduled for 1968: James A. McDivitt, commander; David R. Scott, CM pilot; and Russell L. Schweickart, lm pilot. Backup crew would be Charles Conrad, Jr., commander; Richard F.	Gordon, cm pilot; and Alan L. Bean, lm pilot. Prime crew for AS-505 (second mission), scheduled for 1969: Frank Borman, commander; Michael Collins, CM pilot; and William A. Anders, lm pilot. Backup crew would be Neil A. Armstrong, commander; James A. Lovell, CM pilot; and Edwin E. Aldrin, lm pilot. A three-astronaut support team was named for each flight crew: for AS-504—Edgar D. Mitchell, Fred W. Haise, Jr., and Alfred M. Worden; and for AS-505—Thomas F. Mattingly II, Gerald P. Carr, and John S. Bull, (msc Release; AP, W Star, 11/21/67, A2)
Col. Joseph F. Cotton (usaf), pilot, and L/Col. Emil Sturmthal (usaf), copilot, flew XB-70 No. 1 to 59,700-ft altitude and 1,510 mph (mach 2.3) in flight at Edwards afb. Purposes of test: longitudinal stability and control and handling qualities checkout; throat unstart checkout; variable nose ramp functional test; radar airspeed calibration; and handling qualities approach sidestep maneuvers. Flight was successful except for lost radar contact. (XB-70 Proj Off)
Carl B. Squier, U.S.’s 13th Federally licensed pilot and one of its earliest air daredevils, died at Burbank, Calif. Born in Decatur, Mich., he had worked since 1929 for Lockheed Aircraft Corp., becoming president in charge of sales and working as consultant beyond his retirement. He was a friend of such notables in U.S. aviation as Wiley Post, Charles A. Lindbergh, and Capt. Edward Rickenbacker. (NYT, 11/7/67, 41)
Apollo Command Mod ole at Launch Complex 34, Kennedy Space Center, is a silent, grim reminder of the dash fire that took the lives of the three-man crew when it swept through the spacecraft during launch rehearsal. 204) died, apparently instantly, when flash fire swept through their Apollo I spacecraft mated to an Uprated Saturn I booster 218 ft above the ground. Crew was Virgil I. Grissom, one of seven original Mercury astronauts; Edward H. White II, first American to walk in space; and Roger B. Chaffee, preparing for his first space flight. Accident, worst in the history of the U.S. space program, occurred at 6:31 p.m. est at ksc’s Launch Complex 34 during first major rehearsal for scheduled Feb. 21 . mission. Immediately after tragedy, msc Director Dr. Robert Gilruth, Chairman of the Board of North American Aviation, Inc., Lee Atwood, and NASA’s Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips flew to Ksc from Washington, D.C. General Phillips described the accident at a press conference Jan. 28: “The facts briefly are: at 6:31 p.m. (est) the observers heard a report which originated from one of the crewmen that there was a fire aboard the spacecraft . . .” At T-10 and holding in the countdown, observers saw a “flash fire” break out inside the spacecraft, penetrate its shell, and surround its exterior with smoke. Rescue workers rushed to the pad area but could not open the hatch for five minutes. Phillips said astronauts’ only hope of escape would have to open hatch manually with a crank tool. He refused to speculate on how long accident would delay the Apollo program or on source of the fire but admitted that “if there is an ignition source ... in pure oxygen this, of course, has flash-fire potential.” His statement that spacecraft was operating on internal power when fire broke out was corrected Feb. 3 by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans: “The fuel cells in the service module were not in use, and the so-called internal power was being supplied by batteries having the same characteristics as the fuel cells but located external to the spacecraft.” NASA immediately appointed a board of inquiry (see Jan. 28) and announced that all data had been impounded pending its formal investigation. Unmanned Apollo flights would proceed on schedule, but manned flights were postponed until board’s inquiry was completed. Apollo I backup crew—Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham—were expected to be named prime crew for rescheduled mission, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 67-16; NYT, 1/28/67, 1, 18; 1/29/67, 1, 48, El; W Post, 1/28/67, Al, A7; 1/29/67, Al, A18; WStar, 1/28/67, A1,A4; 1/29/67, Al, A6)
NASA appointed m/g John D. Stevenson (usaf, Ret.) Director of Mission Operations, omsf, succeeding Everett E. Christensen who returned to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. General Stevenson had been serving as special assistant to Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, (nasa Release 67—23)
Edward R. Mathews, chief of ksc Saturn systems office, was named acting Apollo Program Manager at icsc, replacing m/g John G. Shinkle (usa, Ret.), who resigned May 18. (AP, NYT, 5/30/67, 44)
GAO had begun “detailed examinations into certain specific areas of the Apollo program,” Assistant Comptroller General Frank H. Weitzel wrote in a letter to Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), who had inquired about GAO reviews of NASA-NAA contracts. Examinations were begun “on the basis of information developed during” a preliminary review, started in October 1966, which had covered NASA Hq., “several NASA centers,” and plants of NAA and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. (Hines, W Star, 6/1/67, C16)
37-yr-old Astronaut Edward G. Givens, Jr. (Maj., usaf), was killed near Houston when the car he was driving missed a curve and crashed into an embankment. Two other usaf officers with him were injured, one critically. Givens was the first U.S. astronaut to die while off duty. Six others had died in connection with the space program: three in air crashes and three in the Jan. 27 Apollo fire. He was selected to join the NASA astronaut team April 4, 1966. (msc Roundup, 6/9/67, 1; upi, NYT, 6/7/67, 30; upi, W Post, 6/1/61, A7)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana flew X—15 No. 3 to 84,000-ft altitude and 3,682 mph (mach 5.51) at Edwards afb. Purpose of test flight was to check (1) cold-wall heat transfer, (2) wavy panel heat transfer, (3)	boost guidance, (4) pcm, (5) horizontal tail loads, (6) nose gear loads, and (7) tip-pod accelerometer, (nasa Proj Off)
Blastoff of Saturn V at ETR produced one of the loudest noises in history, natural or man-made, according to Columbia Univ.’s Lamont Geological Observatory at Palisades, N.Y. Observatory physicist Dr. William Donn labeled U.S. and U.S.S.R. nuclear explosions the only louder manmade sounds and 1883 fall of Great Siberian Meteorite as the only louder natural sounds on record. (AP, W Post, 11/10/67, A8)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman, House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee, in interview with Aerospace Management, said: “The Space Program got off the ground ten years ago on a surge of apprehension and sensationalism. This year it became very clear that public acceptance or rejection will be a key factor in shaping the U.S. objectives in space for the years ahead. Having ushered in the second decade of space exploration, both NASA and the aerospace industry should now review their ‘ledgers’ to make the best use of their achievements to date, as well as learn from the mistakes and false-starts of the past.” He predicted: “I have no doubts that before this century is over, man will set foot on the near planets [although] it seems more reasonable to me to first find out more about the other planets by means of automated robots [and] I will be disappointed if ... we don’t couple the great capabilities of the Saturn V vehicle with those of a Voyager spacecraft.” He added: “However, be they the merits of the Voyager concept or the potential benefits of Earth Resources Satellites, the public and Congress must be honestly convinced of their values if space efforts are to be supported.” (Karth, Aerospace Management, Fall/Winter 67, 5—9)
MSFC Director Dr. Wernher von Braun was presented the Smithsonian Institution’s Langley Medal by Dr. Fred L. Whipple, Director of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Dr. von Braun was cited in “recognition of his creative vision of the practical application of rocket power to space flight leading to the first U.S. satellite, and of his technical leadership in development of the Saturn class of large launch vehicles upon which the Apollo moon flight is based.” He was the 13th recipient of the award, which was established in 1908 to commemorate the aeronautical achievements of Samuel Pierpont Langley, third Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution. Other recipients included Orville and Wilbur Wright, Charles A. Lindbergh, Robert H. Goddard (posthumously), Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr. In making the presentation, Dr. Whipple said U.S. could have launched the world’s first satellite if it had endorsed the proposal which he and Dr. von Braun developed in 1954 to launch small spacecraft from the equator using existing rockets. Government decision to fund, instead, usn’s Vanguard project, allowed U.S.S.R. to win “the first space race.” (Text; Smithsonian Release; Marshall Star, 6/7/67, 1; AP, NYT, 6/6/67. 3)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) urged that Congress cut $9 billion from President Johnson’s FY 1968 budget to avoid tax increase. Interviewed on “Youth Wants to Know” television program, Proxmire suggested that $5-7 billion be cut from public works, $1 billion from space, and $1 billion from U.S. forces in Europe. (AP, W Post, 2/12/67)
Busts of Wilbur and Orville Wright were unveiled in the Hall of Fame for Great Americans at New York Univ.’s Bronx campus. They were among 93 people named to the Hall of Fame since its opening in 1900. (NYT, 4/2/67,24) During week of May 7: Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, N.J., announced plans for what was believed to be the Nation’s first academic center for the study of cryogenics—a branch of physics related to the production and effects of very low temperatures. Dr. John G. Daunt was named to direct the new center. Stevens President Dr. Jess H. Davis said center would have two major objectives: “to help meet the pressing need for scientists and engineers who have substantial training and experience in this developing science,” and “to conduct basic research, which seeks to extend man’s knowledge of cryogenics into areas as yet unexplored.” (Bird, NYT, 5/14/67,63)
faa Administrator Gen. William F. McKee received Washington, D.C., Air Line Traffic Assn.’s 1967 “Man of the Year” award. (Av Wk, 6/19/67,13)
m/g Holger Nelson Toftoy (usa, Ret.), a leading Army ordnance expert who recommended that former German V-2 development team under the leadership of Dr. Wemher von Braun be brought to U.S. at end of World War II, died at Walter Reed Army Medical Center after a long illness. General Toftoy became commander of White Sands Proving Grounds immediately following World War II. In 1952 he became Director of the Ordnance Missiles Laboratory at Redstone Arsenal, Huntsville, Ala., and in 1958, when Redstone was reorganized as the Army Ordnance Missile Command, he was named Deputy Commander under m/g John B. Medaris. General Toftoy subsequently became commander of Aberdeen (Md.) Proving Ground until his retirement in 1960. {vpi, NYT, 4/20/67) Landing sequence began when Surveyor III shifted its normal cruising attitude to position main retrorocket. Triggered by radar (later ejected), main retromotor burned and slowed spacecraft to about 250 mph. Vernier engines, which were to have slowed spacecraft to about 3 mph, failed to cut off at 14 ft above lunar surface as planned, and the 620-lb spacecraft made three separate landings—covering distance of 33 ft—before engines shut off 37 sec after initial touchdown. First pictures transmitted were unclear because of sun’s brightness, but later photos were excellent. They revealed that spacecraft was resting in a depression or small crater with 5° slope—which was expected to hinder photography of lunar horizon—and showed impressions made by footpads during multiple landing. Shortly after touchdown a telemetry malfunction falsely indicated major drain on power system, but photos confirmed that spacecraft’s batteries were intact and undamaged. In addition to photographic equipment, including two additional mirrors to expand camera’s field of view, spacecraft also carried a shovel-like surface sampler which would scoop soil, move debris, and strike lunar rock with an expandable arm operated by radio signals from earth. On April 21—22 sampler began bearing strength tests and excavation of trenches up to six inches deep. On April 23-24, cooled by two-hour lunar eclipse, Surveyor III took 118 excellent color photos of Venus, a star duster, and earth as it passed between the moon and the sun. On basis of preliminary digging operations and photos, project scientists concluded that lunar soil had consistency similar to wet sand and a bearing strength of about six pounds per square inch—firm enough to support Apollo spacecraft. Cal Tech professor and advisor to JPL on soil mechanics Dr. Ronald F. Scott explained: “The surface is like ordinary soil... a lot like fine grained sod or damp beach sand, and it behaves in perhaps a disappointingly ordinary way. The area presents no hazardous conditions and looks good for a landing site. An astronaut walking across the surface would not need snowshoes.” On May 3 communications with spacecraft were halted temporarily to conserve battery strength throughout two-week lunar night. Performance of Surveyor III, with equipment identical to Surveyor I	and Surveyor II except for soil sampler and two additional mirrors, was near flawless, and expected lifetime was indefinite. Surveyor I was launched May 30, 1966, successfully softlanded on moon June 2, 1966, in Ocean of Storms, and transmitted 10,338 pictures to earth. Surveyor II	was successfully launched Sept. 20, 1966, but failed to softland because of an ignition failure, (nasa Proj. Off; NASA Release 67-85; upi, W Star, 4/23/67, A10; O’Toole, W Post, 4/22/67, A4; 4/23/67, Al)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, defended the Mariner/Mars 1971 mission in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Responding to criticism by Committee Chairman Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) that information from the mission would arrive too late to contribute to the design of the 1973 Voyager spacecraft, Dr. Newell said: “. . . it is very important to recognize . . . that there are three areas of design involved. One is the hardware design. Two is software design, and three is design of the scientific mission. . . . The Mars 71 probe will be fully in time for us to use in the software design, in other words, setting the profile of the mission to get the spacecraft into the atmosphere and onto the surface, and will be fully involved in continuing design of the scientific experiments and observations. . . .” (Transcript, 433-5)
Effect of sonic boom on sst flight routes and sales prospects was discussed by Secretary of Transportation Alan S. Boyd, FAA Administrator William F.	McKee, and Director of sst Development b/g J. C. Maxwell (usaf, Ret.) in May and June testimony released by House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on the Dept, of Transportation. Conditions under which supersonic flight would be permitted over populated land areas had still not been determined, Gen. Maxwell explained. “The available sonic boom data indicate that the present sst design may possibly be restricted from supersonic operations over populated land areas . . . [and we] have based our sst program decisions on the conservative assumption that this design will be operated primarily on water.” dot did not have to force the American public to tolerate sonic booms to make sst program an economic success, Secretary Boyd assured the Committee. “We are satisfied that we can have a . . . highly successful program, assuming the sonic boom is intolerable over populated areas. ... The only thing that is involved here is whether we sell more aircraft, not whether the program is a success. . . .” Even if sst were limited to subsonic flight over inhabited areas at least 300 aircraft could be sold initially, he said, and market studies indicated “that there is a possibility of going up to 1,200 aircraft by 1990.” (Transcript, 41, 294, 942)
Senate passed $2.6-billion AEC FY 1968 authorization bill (H.R. 10918) which included $7.3 million for a new proton accelerator in Weston, 111. Amendment by Sen. John 0. Pastore (D-R.I.) to delay approval of the Weston site until' the community or the state passed open-housing laws which would enable Negro employees to find suitable housing near the plant was defeated. (CR, 1/13/61, S9484-521) The New York Times later commented: “. . . credit goes to Senators . . . who exposed the real issues at stake, and who won a moral victory when the vote margin in Weston’s favor proved much narrower than had been expected. . . . “But there is an even more basic objection to any commitments or expenditures for this expensive research tool at this time. That objection is simply the irrelevance of a 200 billion electron volt accelerator to any real present national problem. . . . The budget cutters are now in full cry demanding reductions in already inadequate expenditures for human needs. It is a distortion of the national priorities to commit many millions now to this interesting but unnecessary scientific luxury.” (NYT, 7/16/67,12)
nasa test pilots Fitzhugh Fulton and Donald Mallick flew X-70 No. 1 to mach 1.8 and 55,000-ft altitude in test to check out stability and control of handling qualities, by-pass airflow calibration, and nose ramp flutter. (XB-70 Proj Off)
Boeing Co. President William M. Allen received Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce’s 1967 Kitty Hawk Memorial Award for distinguished civilian achievement in aviation. Award for distinguished achievement in military aviation was presented to Air Force Academy Commandant Col. Robin Olds. (Av Wk, 12/25/67,68; Boeing pio)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), speaking on the House floor, urged Congress to reopen its investigation of NASA, with particular emphasis on management policies and procedures. He said the Phillips Report indicated NASA “has had grave difficulty in enforcing standards of workmanship, implementing safety and inspection procedures and in properly supervising contractor costs and time schedules. The results of more recent reviews of North American and reviews of other contractors have again not been made public. “Under such unsatisfactory conditions, accidents and failures can well be expected. Congress should be less concerned with the technical cause of a particular fire and more with the space agency’s lack of control over its own program. It is with this in mind that I have regretted the untimely close of the congressional hearings and requested further substantive investigation into the area of NASA management. . . .” (CR, 6/12/67, H7033)
Three Lewis Research Center engineers received “I-R 100” awards at National Industrial Research Week ceremonies in New York City. The “I—R 100” awards were sponsored by Industrial Research Magazine and presented in observance of National Industrial Research Week. LeRC recipients William D. Klopp, Peter L. Raffo, and Walter R. Witzke were cited for the development of tungsten rhc, the highest strength metal known at temperatures above 3,500° F. The alloy Would have eight times the tensile strength of pure tungsten at the same temperature with no sacrifice in ductility at low temperatures. At temperatures below 250°F, pure tungsten would be very brittle and alloying it to increase strength usually made it more brittle. (LeRC Release 67-60)
ComSatCorp President Joseph V. Charyk, speaking at ComSatCorp’s fourth annual meeting in Washington, D.C., said a shortage of ground stations was delaying development of a complete international comsat network. “A fourth satellite of the Intelsat-II series exists and could be launched this fall. . . . Unfortunately, appropriate earth station facilities do not exist and even after approval of the necessary applications . . . [by Fee], operational availability will still be 14 to 18 months away.” Because of this lag in number of earth stations and because a satellite failure could cause severe service interruption, ComSatCorp was seriously considering “the desirability of placing the fourth satellite of the Intelsat-II series as a spare in orbit this fall and . . . [seeking] a limited solution to the high-traffic demands by interim utilization of this satellite through a transportable earth station in Hawaii.” (Text; Smith, NYT, 5/10/67, 63)
Princeton Univ. astronomers were studying photos of ultraviolet spectra of Venus and Jupiter taken by a rocket-borne telescope launched from WSMR May 5 in an effort to provide additional data on Venusian atmosphere, New York Times reported. Photos, taken at 118-mi altitude, provided “50 times more detail than ever obtained before,” Dr. Donald C. Morton, director of Princeton’s rocket astronomy program, explained. Princeton astronomers would continue analyzing spectrograms to determine composition of planets’ gaseous atmospheres, and would compare findings with data transmitted by U.S.’s Mariner V and U.S.S.R.’s Venus IV spacecraft—both expected to reach Venus by late October. (NYT, 1/2/61, 21)
Rep. Dante B. Fascell (D-Fla.) introduced in the House a bill (H.R. 7798) to strike commemorative medals in honor of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee who died in the Jan. 27 Apollo flash fire. (CR, 3/23/67, H3301)
Pilot Joseph Cotton (Col., usaf) and co-pilot Van Shepard, North American Aviation, Inc., flew XB-70 No. 1 research aircraft to mach 2.57 and 61,000-ft altitude in flight at Edwards AFB for national sonic boom program. (NASA Proj Off)
U.S.S.R. marked Cosmonautics Day—anniversary of first manned space flight by Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, in 1961—by launching Cosmos CLV. Orbital parameters: apogee, 286 km (178 mi); perigee, 203 km (126 mi); period, 89.2 min; and inclination, 51.8°. Satellite reentered April 20. (upi, W Star, 4/12/67, 1; gsfc SSR, 4/30/67)
Sen. John 0. Pastore (D-R.I.), Chairman of Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, speaking at launching of Navy’s latest nuclear submarine, the Narwhal, in Groton, Conn., called for “full speed ahead” on building an abm system. (Av Wk, 9/18/67; jCR, 9/19/67, S13207-9)
Gen. James Ferguson, afsc Commander, presented Distinguished Service Medal for outstanding service to m/g John L. Zoeckler, his Deputy C/S Systems. Ferguson cited Zoeckler’s “strategic use of management techniques to eliminate serious scheduling problems inherent in the F-lll program.” Zoeckler had managed System Program for F-lll aircraft system at asd, Wright-Patterson afb, from Oct. 14, 1963, until Sept. 1, 1967. (afsc Release 209.67)
Alumni Assn, of Western High School, Washington, D.C., would honor alumnus Edward H. White II, one of three Apollo astronauts who died in Jan. 27 accident, with a memorial, which would include furnishings, decorations, and possibly a space exhibit for school’s guidance library and counseling rooms. (W Star, 5/7/67, Bl)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller stressed importance of manned spaceflight program in speech before ieee meeting in Washington, D.C.: This is a particularly appropriate date for us to review our manned space flight programs. It was just five years ago today that John Glenn became the first American to orbit the earth in his Mercury spacecraft, Friendship 7. Since that time, we have made noteworthy strides in the manned exploration of space. ... In the Mercury and the Gemini Programs, we learned much about man’s capabilities in space flight. . . . “We will learn much more from the Apollo missions. By 1970, we will have provided the capability to explore space out to 250,000 miles from earth and to conduct manned operations and experiments on flights of up to two weeks duration. The Saturn I and Saturn V boosters will have injected up to 140 tons of payload per launch into near-earth orbit. The Saturn V will have sent 48 tons to the vicinity of the moon. The Apollo spacecraft will have sustained a three-man crew for two weeks in a two-compartment, maneuverable vehicle and will have landed two men on the moon and returned them with samples of lunar material, to earth. The U.S. manned space flight programs will have logged more than 500 man days in space, during which data and experience will have been acquired from approximately 100 in-flight experiments.” (Text)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb held press conference on management changes: (1) George S. Trimble, Jr., Director of Advanced Manned Missions Program, OMSF, was appointed Deputy Director of msc. (2) NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Edgar M. Cortright was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. He would be replaced by Donald P. Hearth, Voyager Program Manager. (3) MSFC Deputy Director Eberhard F. M. Rees was named to serve as Special Assistant in Manufacturing Problems to msc Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager George M. Low. Discussing space law treaty [effective Oct. 10] after making announcements, Webb said it was a valuable further advance of the rule of law into spaee but noted that laws could be broken. “We have an agreement in the Antarctic . . . not to introduce military operations or equipment and this has worked well. . . . We now have this agreement in space, and . . . the most important enforcer of these that relate to space technology is momentum and continued development of technology. The forward capability is what in essence has produced cooperation when we have had it. . . . [U.S.S.R.] and other nations must recognize that they’re not going to have a monopoly in this field. [Our being] . . . there is the most important way to make sure we get the benefits of the treaty. Without continued development of this kind I am not sure what the treaty means.” (Transcript; NASA Release 67-268)
Recent cuts in NASA’s FY 1968 budget were due in part to lack of Congressional understanding of the U.S. space program, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh told aiaa’s Joint Propulsion Conference in Washington, D.C. “Many members of the Congress understand” certain areas of the space program, but “not enough of our legislators seem to have sufficient comprehension of the vast benefits flowing from space activities. And if many members of Congress and very many of their constituents don’t know about these benefits, then they may well feel j ustified in cutting back on the amount of money to be spent. . . .” To help increase understanding, Dr. Welsh recommended that the space industry avoid “confining their advertising to superlatives” about prod. ucts and communicate the overall benefits of the space program. (Text)
NASA announced establishment of an Astronomy Missions Board, to be chaired by Harvard College Observatory Director Dr. Leo Goldberg. Twelve astronomers and physicists would make up the Board, which would advise NASA through Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. John E. Naugle. Executive Director for the Board would be ossa’s Deputy Director of Physics and Astronomy Dr. Henry Smith. The Board would develop and review scientific objectives and general strategy for space astronomy missions of sounding rockets, balloons, and satellites and would recommend designs for missions, telescopes, and other equipment. Excluded from the Board’s responsibility would be studies of moon and planets from close range and earth orbital observations of the earth, (nasa Release 67-284)
Informed U.S. military sources said U.S.S.R. had now been convinced the aircraft carrier would be vital to international conflicts of today, and was even now building its first aircraft carrier, a “baby flattop,” reported UPI. Adm. Ephraim P. Holmes, Supreme Allied Commander, Atlantic, and his chief of staff, v/A William E. Ellis, said little was known of specifications but he believed it would have long-range capabilities. (Oestreicher, upi, W Post, 10/23/67, A3)
nasa appointed Vincent L. Johnson Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Engineering). Johnson’s former position of Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Programs was filled by Joseph B. Mahon, former Agena Program Manager and Deputy Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Programs, (nasa Release 67-289)
Three Apollo astronauts died in Jan. 27 flash fire at ksc because “some engineer, technician, or inspector had gotten careless,” former Astronaut Donald K. Slayton, MSC Director of Flight Crew Operations, told employees at General Motors AC Electronics Div., Milwaukee, where Apollo guidance and navigation equipment was manufactured. Slayton urged workers: “Take a good sharp look at your job. Are you giving everything you’ve got? Now you know somebody’s life depends on it.” An msc official later reported that Slayton’s speech had not been intended for publication. Slayton emphasized that he was not trying to affix blame for the Apollo accident, but was just trying to make workers ultraconscious of the importance of their jobs, (upi, W Star, 2/10/67; UPI, WIT, 2/11/67)
U.S. officials reported that Cosmos CXLVI, launched March 10, had split into three parts: two were spacecraft and one was final stage of launch vehicle, Evert Clark said in New York Times. Exact date of separation was not known. Some officials speculated that flight might have been in preparation for a manned flight on April 12—sixth anniversary of first manned space flight, 'by Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin. (Clark, NYT, 3/18/67, 11)
Changes in NASA staff alignment: Harold R. Finger, Manager of nasaaec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo) since its formation in 1960, was named to new NASA position of Associate Administrator for Organization and Management. He was succeeded in snpo by his deputy, Milton Klein. Reporting to Associate Administrator Finger would be Assistant Administrator for Administration William E. Lilly; Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs Dr. Rernhardt L. Dorman; Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization Dr. Richard L. Lesher; and former LaRC Assistant Director Francis R. Smith in new post of Assistant Administrator for University Affairs. University Affairs Office would integrate, coordinate, and guide nasa’s relationships with colleges and universities; manage the Sustaining University Program; and assume other duties previously assigned to ossa’s Office of Grants and Research Contracts. Dr. Thomas L. K. Smull, formerly Director of Grants and Research Contracts, was appointed Special Assistant to the Administrator on NASA—NAS and nasa-nae relationships. Other changes: DeMarquis D. Wyatt became Assistant Administrator for Program Plans and Analysis and David Williamson was appointed as his deputy. Rudget and programming functions previously under Wyatt were transferred to the Office of Administration, where they would be integrated into a NASA-wide system for resources management, including programming, budgeting, personnel management, and financial reporting. Rreene M. Kerr, Assistant Administrator for Policy Analysis, resigned to return to private industry but would continue to serve as part-time consultant to NASA; Gen. Jacob M. Smart (usaf, Ret.) succeeded Kerr in addition to continuing to serve as Special Assistant to the Administrator; William E. Lilly, Director of Program Control, omsf, became Assistant Administrator for Administration, replacing General Smart; and John Biggs, Deputy Executive Secretary, became Executive Secretary, replacing Col. L. W. Vogel (usa) , who returned to his previous assignment as Executive Officer, (nasa Releases 67-47, 67-49, 67-50)
