aiaa named Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) winner of Octave Chanute Award for notable contribution to hypersonic and reentry flight. Maj. Knight flew X—15 research aircraft at mach 6.72 (4,534 mph) Oct. 3, 1967. Annual award of $500 and travel stipend of $1,000 would be presented at aiaa Second Flight Test, Simulation and Support Conference in Los Angeles March 26. (afns Release 3—8—68—165; aiaa Release, 3/20/68; afsc Newsreview, 5/68, 9)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, told National Space Club in Washington, D.C., U.S.S.R. in 1968 had been surpassing its 1967 payload successes numerically and, “what is more significant . . . surpassing substantially the number of successful payloads launched this year by the United States. While our activity curve is moving down . . . theirs is headed up.” U.S.S.R. had “orderly, persistent, and well planned space program, including a vigorous project for a manned landing on the lunar surface.” U.S. had operational lead in communications, navigation, and meteorology but U.S.S.R. showed “considerable activity” in those fields. U.S. had been generally more successful in unmanned lunar and planetary performance, but U.S.S.R. was more active. (Text)
Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) criticized general public’s “let it wait” attitude toward science and technology in Dandridge M. Cole Memorial Lecture before aiaa Greater Philadelphia Section: Poll after poll showed “strong inclination to slow down or cut back r&d—particularly the space program- • . . Indeed, sentiment has grown that drastic cuts should be made in r&d to finance a variety of requirements—Vietnam to urban renewal. ... In April Senate turned down “by only two votes” move to .reduce DOD R&D budget half million dollars on top of committee cut of $240 million. In House, space budget was cut to $4-billion level, $1.25 billion less than 16 mo before. Technology seemed major factor in economic and social progress and was essential to maintaining international position, but it needed to be more responsive to urgent social problems. “A strong case can be made to continue supporting vigorous R&D efforts in the U.S., although directions and priorities must change to suit our needs from time to time.” (A&A, 7/68, 4-5)
NASA Lewis Research Center announced organizational changes: Dr. Seymour C. Himmel, Assistant Director for Launch Vehicles, was named Chief of new Special Projects Div. for jet noise and v/stol aircraft study and to new post of Assistant Director for Aeronautics. Newell D. Sanders, Chief of Chemistry and Energy Conversion Div., would assume additional duties as Assistant Chief of Special Projects Div. Milton A. Beheim, Chief of Aerodynamics Branch, Advanced Systems Div., was appointed Chief of new Wind Tunnel and Flight Div. Edmund R. Jonash, Chief of Centaur Project Office, was named Chief of new Launch Vehicles Div., which would include previously separate Centaur, Agena, and Atlas Project Offices. William R. Dunbar would become Project Manager for Centaur. H. Warren Plohr and Edward F. Baehr continued as Agena and Atlas Project Managers. (LeRC Release 68-29)
The seven fat years of the space effort are ended, and the seven lean years have begun,” William Hines wrote in Washington Sunday Star. During FYs 1962—1968 Congress had granted nasa more than $30 billion. In FY 1969 agency would be limited to slightly under $4 billion. Transition from fat to lean was “completely understandable.” NASA had received favored treatment because it had high-priority goal, but with attainment now in sight, NASA was no longer in priority position. “Beginning of the end” came in FY 1967 when funding fell nearly $250 million from 1966 level. Budget for FY 1968 was down $400 million from FY 1967, and cut from FY 1968 to 1969 probably would be close to half billion dollars. With current inflation added, NASA “will be lucky to have $4 billion,” he said. Agency would be operating in 1969 “at an economic level lower than that of six years ago when the moon program—and the fat years—were just getting started.” (W Star, 6/9/68, E7)
Holder of world manned aircraft speed record, X—15 pilot Maj. William J. Knight (usaf), received senior astronaut wings and Distinguished Flying Cross from m/g Hugh B. Manson, Commander of afftc. Maj. Knight set 4,534-mph speed record Oct. 3, 1967, in special ablative-coated X—15; two weeks later he reached 277,000-ft altitude to qualify as an astronaut. On June 29, 1967, after experiencing complete engine and power failure, he had piloted X—15 to safe landing to earn DFC. (afftc Release 68-1-9)
Test pilot Map William j. Knight (USAF} was named winner of Harmon International. Aviator s trophy. In photo, he inspects connection between, external tank and rocket-powered X—15 No. 2, which he flew to record 4£2Q mph Oct. 3, 1967. Two tanks supplied additional engine propellant for increased speed. On Oct. 24, 1968, NASA test pilot William H. Dana took X—15 No. 1 on last flight of research program. Philadelphia, Boeing Co, Vice President John M. Swihart announced abandonment of swing-wing design for SST in favor of fixed-delta-wing aircraft with four independently mounted engines under triangular tail. Final detailed design would be given to FAA by Jan. 15, 1969, deadline. New design differed from delta-winged Anglo-French Concorde and Soviet Tu-144 in wider wing span and horizontal tail which, according to Boeing Vice President in charge of SST H. W. Witbington, made possible superior control at low speeds and compensated for more drag encountered with sweep-back angle of wing. Aircraft cost would be same as swing-wing, $40 million. It would carry same number of passengers, 280 or more, at same maximum speed, 1,800 mph. (Witkin, NYT, 10/22/68, 77; dpi, W Post, 10/22/68, All; AP, W Star, 10/22/68, A3)	...	. Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, received $5,000 AIAA Louis W.	Hill Space Transportation Award “for devising, developing and supervising significant space and satellite programs for military and civilian agencies of the United States Government.” arc Director H. Julian Allen was named Honorary Fellow of AIAA, highest membership award given by Institute. It was presented annually to two Americans and one foreign national. Other 1968 recipients were James S. McDonnell, Chairman of Board, McDonnell Douglas Corp., and England’s Sir Frank Whittle, often called father of jet engine, (aiaa Releases; arc Release 68—15; arc Astrogram)
In Washington Sunday Star William Hines commented on James E. Webb’s resignation as NASA Administrator: “Yes . . . there was a James Webb. He had his faults, God knows, and a peculiar style. Most people would have done the job differently. But, on balance, it is difficult to see how anyone could have done it much better.” (W Star, 10/6/68, C4)
jpl scientists Paul M. Muller and William L. Sjogren, using tracking data from Lunar Orbiter V, had discovered mass concentrations of dense material beneath moon’s surface, centered below all five circular seas on moon’s near face. They had caused acceleration in speed of Lunar Orbiter V spacecraft, while irregular seas had only small effects on satellite’s orbital velocity. Source and nature of concentrations were not known, but their presence under circular seas indicated relationship to these seas. Further analysis was expected to yield more positive information on size and depth of masses, which might aid Apollo navigation and shed light on moon’s origin and evolution. (NASA Release 68—143; JPL Release 486; Sullivan, NYT, 8/16/68, 42; Cohn, W Post, 8/16/68, A3)
Edward J. Schmidt, Special Assistant to General Electric Co.’s Vice President for R&D, was sworn in by NASA Acting Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, as consultant to the Administrator in management operations as affected by scientific and technical information, (nasa Release 68—189)
Tenth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, Explorer /, launched by abma—jpl team with Jupiter C booster. In defiance of original prediction of three-year lifespan, 30.8-lb stovepipe-shaped spacecraft had traveled 1 y2 billion miles and was expected to continue orbiting through 1968, though silent. Explorer /, currently in orbit with 771mi (1,241-km) apogee, 215-mi (346-km) perigee, and 100-min period, had stopped transmitting data May 23, 1958, after supplying data on cosmic rays, micrometeoroids, and temperature and discovering one of earth’s radiation belts later named after Dr. James A. Van Allen, designer of satellite’s radiation-detection experiment. At National Press Club Ceremony in Washington, D.C., commemorating anniversary, Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, reviewed
X—15 No. 1, flown by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 3,545 mph (mach 4.96) and 214,000-ft altitude to measure earth’s horizon at 40-mi altitude. Data obtained would be used to redefine horizon as navigational reference for Apollo spacecraft on return flight from moon. (X-15 Proj Off; nasa Release 68-105; SBD, 6/17/68, 229)
In New York Times John N. Wilford said some NASA Hq. officials were “hesitant to approve a lunar orbit mission out of fear of being criticized for taking undue risks by skipping preliminary test flights. They are worried about the spacecraft’s electrical system, which developed some minor ‘bugs’ during Apollo 7, and the propulsion system, even though the on-board rocket apparently performed well in eight firings during Apollo 7.” If lunar mission was decided on, it would probably be launched Dec. 21 when moon’s position to earth would require minimum midcourse rocket firing maneuvers for landing and light conditions would give good view of potential lunar landing site. First astronauts on moon were expected to stay less than 24 hr, to demonstrate it could be done. In time astronauts would make many return trips and would roam moon’s surface in “moon buggies.” Day might come when people would establish lunar colonies. (NYT, 10/28/68, 12E)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana flew X—15 No. 1 rocket research aircraft to 104,500-ft altitude and 2,898 mph (mach 4.36) from Edwards AFB to check out aircraft’s electrical systems and test newly developed spray foam insulation planned for use on 2nd stages of Saturn V rockets beginning with vehicle eight. Foam was much lighter than insulation previously used to maintain low temperatures required for cryogenic propellants used in Saturn V. (X—15 Proj Off; msfc Release 68-69)
XB—70 research aircraft was flown to 15,500-mi altitude by Col. Joseph F. Cotton (usaf) and NASA test pilot Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr. Primary goals were not achieved because main landing gear valve malfunctioned. Low-speed, gear-down handling qualities, propulsion system, and performance tests were accomplished during 2-hr 30-min flight from Edwards afb. (XB—70 Proj Off)
Dr. Donald F. Hornig, President Johnson’s Special Assistant for Science and Technology, would join Eastman Kodak Co. in “executive capacity” in early January, Science reported. He would also become professor of chemistry at Univ. of Rochester. (Science, 11/22/68, 881)
NASA announced completion of X—15 flight research program [see Jan. 21]. On final flight Oct. 24—199th in series which began June 8, 1969—nasa test pilot William H. Dana flew rocket-powered aircraft to 255,000-ft altitude. Attempt at 200th flight Dec. 20 was canceled because of adverse weather conditions. In nasa—usaf—usn program initiated in 1954, flights by three X—15 aircraft manufactured by North American Rockwell Corp. had included more than 82 min of flight at speeds exceeding mach 5 and total flight time of more than 30 hr. Peak altitude reached was 354,200 ft (67.04 mi) and top speed was 4,520 mph (mach 6.7)-—speeds and altitudes never before attained by any vehicle fully controlled by pilot from launch to landing. It had set two official world altitude records of 246,740 ft and 314,750 ft previously. X—15 flight program provided knowledge applicable to design and development of future spacecraft and commercial supersonic aircraft and data on aerodynamic heating in high-speed flight, which could cause deterioration of aircraft structural integrity. X—15 remained only aircraft capable of studying phenomena at hypersonic speeds, space-equivalent flight, and reentry flight.	“ It also had served as test bed for new components and subsystems, subjecting them to hypersonic flight environment. In 1962 four X—15 pilots received Robert J. Collier Trophy from President Kennedy for “the greatest achievement of aeronautics or astronautics in America, with respect to improving the performance, safety, or efficiency of air and space vehicles.” (nasa Release 68-221; NASA SP-60; nasa EP—9; AP, NYT, 12/21/68, 73; SBD, 12/23/68, 236)
Commenting on James E. Webb’s retirement, Sen. John Stennis (D-Miss.) said on Senate floor, “I have been a member of the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences since about the time Mr. Webb was appointed to head NASA. I am not given unduly to praise a man. I am not impressed by a title. I am impressed by a record. But I am certainly impressed with the fact that Mr. Webb carried out his responsibilities for nasa with an expenditure of $34 billion, in what might be called a crash program; and I have not seen any evidence of any activity of his except that clothed in the highest degree with integrity, honesty, frankness and openness in his dealings with the committee, with Congress, as well as with the public.” (CR, 10/8/68, S12227—8)
nasa test pilot William H. Dana flew X—15 No. 1 to 187,500-ft altitude and 3,546 mph (mach 5.27) to test spray-on foam insulation, much lighter than previously used insulation, for use on Saturn V 2nd stage. Test, from Edwards afb, was satisfactory, with X—15 performing in maximum-heating design trajectory close to that of Saturn V and sustaining temperatures of up to 1,500°F. (X—15 Proj Off; msfc Release 68-69; AP, P Inq, 4/5/68)
Rep. George P, Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman, of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, reads citation on Goddard Trophy which President Johnson (right) presented to Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. (center), former NASA Deputy Administrator. rial Dinner in Washington, D.C. “The public’s knowledge and understanding of space exploration have been broadened by the remarkable achievements of the first decade of the space age, hut a great many people in the space program are deeply concerned about an apparent decline in popular support of space activities.” Space achievements had been well publicized but “the capability that made these feats possible, the underlying science and technology, the inherent value of delving deeper into the mysteries of the atmosphere and space, and the mechanism by which increased scientific knowledge enhances economic and social progress are apparently little understood or appreciated on a wide basis. “Up to now we have had to devote our full energies to working on the means by which we reach into space. Now that the pipelines are filling with space hardware, more and more of our preoccupation is turning toward the question of what can be done to assure that the people who have supported our program . . , receive the full range of benefits which can be derived from space exploitation.” (Text; CRS 3/12/68, E1769) * Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Manned Space Flight Subcommittee, told Sixth Goddard Memorial Symposium in Washington, D.C., he saw “grave danger to our economic and social progress, as well as to our position in the world, if ‘let technology wait’ attitude becomes too prevalent.” He advocated building sound foundation for economic growth by longterm investment in science, technology, and education and by maintaining technological leadership “as a necessary basis for our national security and economic strength.” He called for “a space program better balanced between scientific, exploratory and economic payoff missions.” (Text; Clark, NYT, 3/6/68, C33; SBD, 3/6/68,25)
jpl announced appointment of r/a John E. Clark (usn, Ret.) as jpl Deputy Director, effective Feb. 19. Adm. Clark had retired as Commandant, Twelfth Naval District, in September 1967. (jpl Release)
arc scientists Dr. William L. Quaide and Verne R. Oberbeck had developed method of calculating lunar soil depths using measurements based on Lunar Orbiter photos and Surveyor photos and surface analyses, nasa announced. Studies indicated that many of moon’s smaller craters and much of soil and fragmental material on lunar surface were result of meteoroid impacts. By simulating impacts in laboratory and comparing results with photos of lunar craters scientists identified four crater types: (1) craters with up to 12-ft dia, round bottoms, and depths 25% of their diameter; (2) craters with 12- to 22-ft dia, flat bottoms, and central mound; (3) craters with 22- to 30-ft dia, flat bottoms, and no mound; and (4) craters with diameter greater than 30 ft with second crater gouged in flat bottom. Thick layer of fragmented material, calculated by new method to be up to 20 yd deep, coincided with densely cratered areas to support impact theory, (nasa Release 68—59; SBD, 4/5/68, 202)
John B. Tuke had assembled operable weather-picture receiving station at his home in Stranraer, Scotland, out of spare electronic parts, old antenna, electric motor, and tuning fork for about $480. One of first amateurs to construct homemade receiving set, Tuke was able to receive pictures from essa and Nimbus satellites for 15 min, from lower Spain to Arctic, on each pass. Interest in amateur stations had grown to point that NASA had published booklet of instructions for building ground stations [see April 26] and Electro-Mechanical Research Co. in College Park, Md., had begun selling packaged sets for $5,000. (Wil-ford, NYT, 5/13/68)
XB—70 No. 1, flown by nasa test pilots Donald L. Maffick and Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., reached 9,500-ft altitude and 316.5 mph to obtain inflight data for sst program. Flight ended prematurely after 71 min because of hydraulic system malfunction. (XB—70 Proj Off; NASA Release 68-105; SBD, 6/17/68,229)
NASA announced appointment of William C. Schneider, Apollo Mission Director, as Director of Apollo Applications, succeeding late Harold T. Luskin, who died Nov. 25. George H. Hage, Deputy Director of Apollo Program, would be Acting Apollo Mission Director in addition to his present duties, (nasa Release 68-217)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from portable launcher at wsmr carried GSFC payload to 3.1-mi (5.05-km) altitude. Objectives were to flight-qualify production lot of VAM—20 variboosters, demonstrate Aerobee rail launch feasibility, determine exiting loads on rail launcher, establish procedures for rail launching, and verify boost-phase dispersion calculations. Booster web burning time, booster pressure, acceleration, velocity, and system impact were as predicted. (NASA Rpt srl) X—15 No. 1 was successfully flown by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) to 254,100-ft altitude and 3,716 mph (mach 5.26) in test from Edwards AFB. Primary objectives were to conduct WTR experiment and check out horizon scanner, fixed alpha cone, and fluidic probe. (X—15 Proj Off)
XB—70A experimental supersonic bomber, piloted by NASA test pilots Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., and Donald L. Maffick, reached mach 1.64 and 39,400-ft altitude during 1-hr 58-min flight from Edwards AFB to test exiter vane integrated loads and frequency and handling qualities. All primary objectives were accomplished, although cabin pressure problem necessitated manual operation of system. (XB—70 Proj Off)
In Washington Sunday Star, William Hines reported results of query of eight eminent scientists on most important single decision related to science and technology which faced President-elect Richard M. Nixon early in his administration. Consensus was: shaping of long-term science policy. Also cited were need for reexamination of priorities and goals, with firm decision on extent to which science and higher education should receive Government support; creation of Dept, of Science in cabinet or stronger Science-Government communication lines; reassessment of space funding and other “big science” projects, including proton accelerators; greater emphasis on social goals; vigorous antipollution efforts; and more imaginative use of science and technology as instruments of national policy. None of eight scientists advocated abandonment of space program after culmination of Apollo project. Alvin M. Weinberg, Director of Oak Ridge National Lab., said of space program, “This thing takes so very much money that it’s hard to get excited about any other decision in science until this one has been made. What should be its level in the 1970s? We have become accustomed to something like four or five billion dollars a year, but I doubt very much that this is a level the new President is likely to concur in.” (W Star, 12/29/68, C3)
NASA announced Astronaut John A. Lewellyn had withdrawn from astronaut training program because of inability to progress sufficiently with jet flight training at Reese afb, Tex. After discussions with NASA and usaf officials, he had withdrawn to consider several opportunities within NASA and elsewhere. His departure reduced total number of NASA astronauts to 52. Nine of eleven scientist-astronauts selected in 1967 were in flight training. Dr. Brian T. O’Leary had withdrawn April 23 because he disliked flying, (msc Release 68-63; AP, NYT, 8/24/68, 12) .
Honored at Chicago’s National Conference on Industrial Research as Man of the Year in research by Industrial Research magazine, JPL Director, Dr. William H. Pickering, told press at Illinois Institute of Technology, “The United States has superiority in space exploration but the Congressional cutbacks may enable the Russians to get well ahead of us.” (Kotulak, C Trib, 1/24/68)
Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.), President of Schriever and McKee Associates, had been sworn in as consultant to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, NASA announced. Former faa Administrator and former NASA Assistant Administrator for Management Development, Gen. McKee would advise NASA on management, aeronautics, and coordination with other Government agencies. (NASA Release 68—169)
John A. Manke, NASA research pilot at prc, stands before wingless HL—10 lifting-body vehicle which he flew in first powered flight, after air launch from. B-52 aircraft. Manke reached 610 mph in NASA—usaf program to evaluate possible forerunners of reusable spacecraft. Eventual 1,000-mph speed was expected. Donn F. Eisele, and Edgar D. Mitchell. Flight crew support team wa3 Astronauts Joseph H. Engle, James B. Irwin, and Charles M. Duke, Jr. Mission probabilities ranged from earth orbital operations to lunar orbital flight, with separation and docking of command and service module and lunar module. (NASA Release 68-201; AP, W Star, 11/14/68, A7; W Post, 11/14/68, A12; AP, NYT, 11/14/68, 21; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/14/68, 1)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, had told Apollo project contractors that U.S.S.R. was developing a “large booster, larger by a factor of two, than our Saturn V,” New York Times’ John N. Wilford reported. Wilford said estimate was part of warning to Apollo team that unless they speeded their efforts, U.S.S.R. might beat U.S. to manned lunar landing. With Dr. Mueller in Europe, NASA spokesman had said he did not know basis of information. Previously, there had been no public statement indicating U.S.S.R. might be working on rocket with greater than 10-million-lb thrust. Saturn V had 7.5-million-lb thrust. (NYT, 8/14/68,11)
NASA announced creation of Research and Technology Advisory Council to assist in planning and evaluation of research and technology for aeronautics and space. Council would assess relative importance of ongoing research, suggest additional work, and advise on methods for developing national resources. Headed by Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, Head of mit Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, and supported by committees representing seven major technology areas, Council included: Dr. David Altman, United Technology Center; Dr. Allen V. Astin, Director of National Bureau of Standards; Dr. Loren D. Carlson, Univ. of California School of Medicine; Dr. Howard W. Emmons, Harvard Univ.; Gen. James Ferguson, Commander of AFSC; Dr. Nicholas J. Hoff, Head of Stanford Univ. Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics; Dr. Hans W. Liepmann, Cal Tech; Dr. John G. Linvill, Head of Stanford Univ. Electrical Engineering Dept.; Matthias E. Lukens, Deputy Executive Director of Port of New York Authority; Dr. Ronald Smelt, Vice President and Chief Scientist of Lockheed Aircraft Corp.; Dr. Chauncey V. Starr, Dean of Univ. of California Engineering School; and Edward C. Wells, Vice President, Product and Development, Boeing Co. Dr. Allan E. Puckett of Hughes Aircraft Corp. accepted appointment later. (NASA Release 68-4; NASA oart)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, flown by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully acconfplished eighth flight after being air-launched from B—52 aircraft. During four-minute pilot-checkout flight Manke tested limit cycle characteristics and performed stability and control maneuvers, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 68—105; SBD, 6/17/68, 229)
Special Assistant to President for Science and Technology, Dr. Donald F. Hornig, on receipt of first Mellon Institute Award at Camegie-Mel-lon Univ. for “the application of science to the betterment of mankind,” discussed “A Crisis for Science.” After two decades of progress, “Congress and the public ask whether we can afford it after all. We now find ourselves pulling back from the exploration of space, slowing down on the development of universities, and even holding back on health research.” Scientific community, however, had “done much to alienate itself from the society which supports it.” (Text; Science, 7/19/68,248)	j
Scientists at Univ. of California at Los Angeles, testing to determine if life could exist in hostile environment of Venus, said they had grown algae in atmosphere of 100% carbon dioxide. They said Venus had more than 90%. More complex plants had not survived, reported Dr. Willard F. Libby, Nobel Prize winner in chemistry, Dr. Joseph Seck-bach of Israel, and Dr. Irene Aegerter of Switzerland. (AP, NYT, 12/8/68, 35)
U.S.S.R. published Zond VI photo of 70-mi-wide lunar crater carrying name honoring geneticist Nikolay I. Vavilov, who had been sent to Siberia in 1939 for opposing ideas of Trofim D. Lysenko, and his brother Sergei I. Vavilov, who had later become president of Soviet Academy of Sciences. Nikolay Vavilov died in Siberia in 1943; his brother died in 1951. Soviet name for crater, Brothers Vavilov, had not yet been accredited by International Astronomical Union. (NYT, 12/3/68, 36)
nasa announced award of $4,521,671 contract to Honeywell, Inc., for management and engineering services during 1968 for Centaur launch vehicle guidance system. Atlas-Centaur booster had successfully launched seven Surveyor spacecraft toward the moon and was scheduled to launch oao, ats, and two Mariners. (LeRC Release 68—3) January 12: XB—70 research aircraft, flown by Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., and Donald L. Mallick, reached mach 2.55 and 67,000-ft altitude and accomplished 70% of primary test objectives during 1-hr 54-min flight from Edwards afb. Purpose of flight was to take wing tuft photos and check stability, control, and handling qualities; inlet performance; boundary layer noise; friction; fuselage bending. (XB—70 Proj Off)
Sudden affirmative response by U.S.S.R. to President Johnson’s longstanding offer for discussion of limiting missiles may have substantial meaning, said William S. White in Washington Post. “If this should turn out to be the case it would be ironic, indeed. It would mean that only after renouncing his office had the President been able to convince the Russians . . . that this country was honestly prepared to make accommodations with Moscow, so long as they were realistic and enforceable accommodations to reduce a possibility of nuclear holocaust that still hangs over the world and will so hang whatever may or may not happen in the Vietnams.” ( W Post, 7/1/68, A21)
dod released April 23—24 testimony before Senate Committee on Armed Services’ Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee. Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, had said F— 111A wings had broken off during Jan. 23 ground test—under load greater than expected in flight but less than stipulated 50%-overload safety margin—before introduction into Vietnam combat, where aircraft had operated under protective restrictions. General Dynamics Corp. President Frank W. Davis later termed ground testing which broke wings off usaf F—111A “normal.” Tests, he indicated, were made to determine stress limitations. “We’ve had no failures ... at stress simulation to be expected in combat.” (Transcript; Kelly, W Star, 7/7/68, A3; AP, W Post, 7/7/68, A22; 7/8/68, A15; Corddry, B Sun, 7/7/68, 1)	_
NASA announced it had assigned Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan as prime crew for Apollo 10 mission, scheduled for second quarter of 1969 as second manned flight of lunar module. Backup crew would be Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper,
Ryan XV—5B Vertifan aircraft made first vertical and hovering flights at arc, piloted by Ryan chief test pilot William Anderson in airworthiness tests. These were first vertical flights since extensive modifications converted aircraft from original XV—5A to new version for NASA research [see July 18]. Aircraft made three vertical lift-offs, reaching 20-ft altitude and remaining stationary in air up to one minute, (arc Astro-gram, 8/15/68, 3)
New comet of undetermined size had been discovered by amateur astronomers John Bally-Urban and Pat Clayton, who were attending Southwest Astronomical Conference at New Mexico State Univ. Using 10-in telescope, they made discovery while observing comet Honda. Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had confirmed sighting of comet, which had been given official name of Bally Clayton comet. (AP, W Star, 8/26/68, A2)
usn Aquanauts Fernando Lugo and Don C. Risk, wearing standard neoprene wet suits and Mark VIII breathing apparatus, dived to record 1,025-ft simulated ocean depth and, with three other aquanauts, accumulated record 48 hr each at 825-ft depth during tests at Washington, D.C., Navy Yard. Experiment was in preparation for usn’s 60-day Sealab III experiment in underwater living scheduled to begin in fall 1968. (dod Release 180—68) *	r/a John E. Clark (usn, Ret.), former Commandant of Twelfth Naval District in San Francisco, became JPL Deputy Director. He had been Commander of Naval Air Missile Test Center (1954), arpa Deputy Director (1958—61), and Commander of pmr (1961—65). (JPL LabOratory, 2/68, 3) *	Jodrell Bank Observatory Director, Sir Bernard Lovell, claimed explosion of Soviet spacecraft in orbit during 1962 Cuban missile crisis led U.S. to believe U.S.S.R. was launching massive icbm attack and warned that World War III could be triggered by misidentified space debris falling to earth. (JV News, 2/20/68, 3; SBD, 2/20/68, 281) *	U.S.S.R. was closing its missile gap and could equal U.S. 1,054-icbm force by mid-1969, according to dod sources. Between October 1966 and October 1967 Soviet icbm force had increased from 340 to 720 missiles; currently, U.S.S.R. had more than 720 icbm sites in operation and about 280 under construction. In addition, U.S.S.R was reportedly developing new 16-tube nuclear submarines, missiles that could travel long distances underwater, mach 3 interceptor aircraft, and mobile, solid-fueled icbms. (Beecher, NYT, 2/19/68, 1; 2/20/68, 18; Wilson, W Post, 2/20/68,1) * Preliminary to joint NASA—USAF flight testing, X—24 manned lifting-body vehicle built by Martin Marietta Co. had been sent to arc for full-scale wind-tunnel tests, to begin Feb. 26, FRC announced. Prime purpose was to verify aerodynamic predictions obtained from small-scale model tests, (frc Release, 5—68)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced appointment of Dr. Robert V. Meghreblian, Manager of jpl Space Sciences Div., to newly established post of Deputy Assistant Laboratory Director for Technical Divisions. Dr. Donald P. Burcham, Deputy Manager of Space Sciences Div., would succeed him. ( jpl Release)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, described OSSA programs before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Three-year budget history of Space Applications program was one of very few in OSSA “showing a steady rise” and increase for FY 1969 was primarily due to increase in Earth Resources Survey Program. “Together with user agencies—the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, Interior, and Navy—we are studying the feasibility of applying space technology and techniques to such Earth resources disciplines as agriculture and forestry resources; hydrology and water resources; geography, cartography, and cultural resources; and oceanography and marine resources. Data are now being obtained by flying with electronic and electro-optical sensors over geographical areas ... to permit correlation of remote sensor data with actual conditions. ... To complement the acquisition of sample data in preparing for future systems, we intend to initiate a definition and economic benefit study in Fiscal Year 1969 of an automated spacecraft system called Earth Resources Technology Satellite.” (Testimony)
Bullet fragment in brain of holdup victim Joseph Barrios was successfully repositioned into brain membrane by whirling patient in ARC centrifuge, subjecting him to force of 6 g. Fragment had moved from critical central ventricle to lateral ventricle when doctors at O’Connor Hospital in San Jose, Calif., somersaulted Barrios on rotating chair, but fragment could move again. Force of centrifuge—normally used by NASA for space research—imbedded fragment in membrane of left ventricle, where it was expected to remain safely encapsulated by scar tissue. Dec. 16 x-rays showed fragment had not moved since centrifuge treatment. Barrios was sent home from hospital Dec. 17. (Brody, NYT, 11/21/68, 37; AP, W Post, 11/21/68, A3; arc Astro gram, 12/8/68,1; arc Medical Services Branch)
msc officials announced resignation of Astronaut John S. Bull (L/Cdr., usn), third astronaut to leave space program because of medical problem. Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Chief of Medical Programs, told news conference Astronaut Bull had rare respiratory disease for which there was no known cure and no medical name. It was characterized by chronic sinus difficulties, lung obstruction, and sensitivity to aspirin. (upi, W Post, 7/17/68, All)
Some 25 Mexican and Brazilian scientists began four-month study course at msc to learn how aircraft-borne sensors could enable them to map natural resources. Program, initial step toward development of earth resources satellites which would carry sensors for international exchange of data, included 12-wk technical course taught by Univ. of Michigan instructors under $92,000 contract; 6-wk field trip to Government and university sensor development centers; and additional 2-wk study at msc. After completing program, scientists would initiate test programs for remote sensing techniques in their countries, first with NASA aircraft and then with native-owned aircraft. (H. Chron, 2/15/68; AP, NYT, 2/16/68,1) *	John D. Hodge, msc, and Dr. George F. Pezdirtz, larc, received Arthur S. Flemming Award, presented annually to 10 outstanding young men in the Federal Government. Pezdirtz had developed pyrones, new family of polymer plastics, and Hodge had been flight director of manned flight missions beginning with Project Mercury. (NN; PD, 2/19/68, 289-90) *	INTELSAT comsats had carried heaviest load of traffic across Atlantic in their history during interruption of service on two transatlantic cables, ComSatCorp announced. With cooperation of earth stations overseas, ComSatCorp used 177 additional circuits on Intelsat I and II—C. Satellites and stations functioned precisely. (ComSatCorp Release 68-6) *	Current U.S. aerospace test facilities were becoming outdated, afsc Commander, Gen. James Ferguson, told Los Angeles Chapter of American Ordnance Assn. Warning that U.S. was “stretching present-day facilities to a thin point and reaching a limit in . . . ability to ‘make do’ on a year to year basis,” Gen. Ferguson urged that an “imaginative, comprehensive, long-range plan” be instituted for design, development, and acquisition of new facilities. Major facility needs, he said, included: wind tunnel for testing vtol aircraft over entire performance range, ' 200-ft vacuum chamber capable of simulating space environment, shock interaction facility to simulate aerodynamic flow and strong shock generated over warhead models and true-temperature wind tunnel (tripl-TEe) to duplicate flight conditions at hypersonic speeds and temperatures. (Text) *	Dr. Stephen J. Lukasik, Director of Nuclear Test Detection in DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa) and Acting arpa Deputy Director, was appointed arpa Deputy Director, (dod Release 157—68) *	USAF Space and Missile Systems Organization awarded General Electric Co. $2,600,000 increment to a previously awarded contract for reentry vehicle flight testing, (dod Release 162—68)
NASA Assistant Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee, said Nimbus B would be launched in meteorological flight program in spring 1968. Nimbus D continued on schedule for 1970 launch as major step in charting earth atmosphere with new techniques. Nimbus E and F were planned for 1971 and 1973. First of next-generation meteorological satellites (Tiros M) would be available for launch for essa in 1969, providing in single spacecraft both stored picture data for global use and local readout of cloud photos, day and night. Dr. Naugle foresaw “in more distant future the possibility that several economic applications of satellite technology can be combined on single, multiple purpose satellites, thus achieving economy through the sharing of many basic spacecraft systems.” (Testimony)
Pravda released description of preparations for launching of Maj. Yuri A. Gagarin in history’s first manned space flight April 12, 1961. Songs by 110-member folk music choir—instead of one man’s voice—had been selected for radio tests to avoid arousing rumors that U.S.S.R. had put a man into orbit. Pravda reports were excerpts from The First Four Stages, book recognizing leading role in Soviet manned space flight of Sergei P. Korolev. U.S.S.R. acknowledged malfunction had occurred during first unmanned test of Vostok spacecraft launched May 15, 1960, as Sputnik IV. Because of improper alignment, spacecraft was hurled deeper into space when retrorockets fired instead of braking for reentry. (Anderson, NYT, 1/25/68; A&A, 15-60, 123, 147)
Gen. John P. McConnell, usaf Chief of Staff, was awarded National Geographic Society’s Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1967 for “effective leadership and direction of U.S. Air Force in development and utilization of aerospace vehicles.” Award was presented annually to military or civilian member of usaf who made most outstanding contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace, (ngs Release; AP, NY News, 5/29/68, 22)
Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, and Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Cal Tech President, presided at unveiling of historical marker at JPL commemorating test-firing of rocket engine Oct. 31, 1936, by students of Cal Tech’s Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory under the late Dr. Theodore von Karman. With firing, Cal Tech had become first university actively to sponsor rocket research. Its work had gained Government sponsorship and later had led to establishment of JPL. (jpl Release 492; Diebold, LA Times, 11/1/68)
Recorded aircraft highjackings had totaled 14 in past year, with 13 U.S. airliners over southern U.S. forced to land in Cuba, Andrew Wilson of London Observer reported. (IP Post, 8/14/68, A3) August 14^-27: At U.N. Conference on Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space held in Vienna and attended by 500 delegates from 74 nations, Soviet Premier Alexey N. Kosygin announced U.S.S.R. and “other Socialist countries” would establish comsat network “Intersputnik” to compete with Intelsat. Draft agreement had been submitted in New York to U.N. Secretary-General U Thant by U.S.S.R., Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Mongolia, and Cuba. Vladimir Minashin, head of comsat div. of Soviet Ministry of Communications, said Intersputnik satellite would have same synchronous orbit used by the four U.S.-provided Intelsat satellites. U.S. Dept, spokesman said U.S. had no need to join U.S.S.R.-sponsored system; Intelsat, with 62 member nations, was already operating successfully, handling 95% of total international telecommunications traffic. U.S. was not opposed to Soviet proposal for political reasons, but on grounds there would be economic problems in creation of two worldwide comsat systems. (W Post, 8/14/68, 12; O’Toole, W Post, 8/15/68, A21; Hamilton, NYT, 8/15/68, 18; 8/20/68, 18; WSJ, 8/15/68, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 8/15/68, 1) Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, at Vienna conference discussed three results of U.S. manned space flight program to illustrate contributions to space exploration. Program had proved man could live in space and man could do useful work in space and it had created technology to make these possible. In first category, nasa, nas—nrc Space Science Board, nsf, arpa, dod groups, universities, and others had conquered problems of weightlessness in space, heavy acceleration and deceleration forces, air supply and pressure required for breathing in space, psychological problems presented by isolation, and problem of radiation. Successful termination of Mercury and Gemini programs had proved man capable of existing in space. His capability to do useful work in space had been proved by successful rendezvous and docking of spacecraft, by space photography, and by extravehicular activity. Pervasiveness of space technology had been demonstrated by range and variety of thousands of products, including Saturn V launch vehicle, world’s largest flight vehicle, and integrated circuit, one of world’s smallest manufactured items. Dr. Mueller said: “Our civilization has been built upon our accumulated knowledge of the natural laws of our environment. All of our inventions have been the result of the application of these natural laws. Advances in our civilization have always followed after discovery of some one of the missing links in our chain of knowledge. ... We know that many of the missing links . . . will he supplied ... as we move man with his accumulation of experience and his sophisticated equipment for exploration, into a new laboratory . . . the laboratory of the moon and outward to our solar system. ... If all of us, from all nations, are sufficiently creative, abundantly inventive, and freely adaptive, we have it within our power to improve the lives of every man, woman, and child.” (Text) U.S.S.R. Cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov at Vienna conference proposed Aug. 15 that Ocean of Storms, prominent feature of lunar landscape, be renamed Ocean of Gagarin in honor of Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gargarin, who made first manned earth orbit April 12, 1961. Leonov, who took man’s first walk in space in 1965, read Gagarin paper which emphasized similarity between experience of Soviet astronauts and that of crews of deep-sea exploratory craft. He said all actions taken in Soviet space vehicles were tried first in underwater craft. Large Soviet exhibit at conference showed full-scale model of original Soviet spacecraft and listed Soviet space firsts. U.S. exhibit, small because of cut in nasa funds, depicted benefits space exploration would produce for developing countries. (Hamilton, NYT, 8/16/68) J. L. Blondstein of British National Industrial Space Committee told group meeting at conference Aug. 20 that production of U.S. military satellites capable of direct TV broadcasts to military units was “imminent.” He said U.S. had spent between $80 million and $100 million on development but denied information was being withheld for military security reasons. DOD spokesman in Washington had said he knew of no plans for direct TV broadcasts by military satellites. (Hamilton, NYT, 8/21/68, 3) W. T. Pecora, Director, U.S. Geological Survey, said Aug. 23 that worldwide volcano and earthquake monitoring network might be provided within a few years by space satellites carrying cameras and sensing devices to give up to one hour advance notice of strong earth shocks. (AP, C Trib, 8/23/68)
Lightweight plastic foam invented by ARC scientists Dr. John A. Parker and Salvatore Riccitiello showed promise for industrial fire protection, particularly fuel fires. Extremely light polyurethane with additives formed tough, protective char layer when exposed to flame, while simultaneously releasing fire-extinguishing gases which helped to quench flame. Used to fill airspaces within structures, foam would prevent oxygen from reaching and feeding a fire. Demonstrations had shown it suitable for fire protection in aircraft, spacecraft, homes, and other structures. Other possible uses included automobiles, boats, trains, oil refineries, paint and chemical processing, and laboratories. Foam was resistant to heat flow, making it an excellent insulator, (nasa Release 68-187)
White House announced that Gen. William F. McKee (usaf, Ret.) had submitted his resignation as head of FAA, effective July 31. There was no indication of successor. {W News, 7/2/68, 12; WSJ, 7/2/68)
In joint communique, Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology, and Alexandra Birlandeanu, member of Romanian Politburo touring U.S. scientific institutions, announced agreement to broaden scientific and technological ties, including exchange of scientists and possible collaboration in atomic energy field. Romania had asked U.S. for technical and financial aid toward construction of its first nuclear power plant by 1973. (Grose, NYT, 7/9/68, 1)
Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin—who became first man in space when he orbited earth once in U.S.S.R.’s Vostok I April 12, 1961—and engineer Col. Vladimir S. Seryogin were killed when their MiG—15 jet aircraft crashed northwest of Moscow during training flight. Gagarin, who had been commander of Soviet Corps of Cosmonauts and officer in charge of cosmonaut training, was second cosmonaut to die in an accident. Cosmonaut Vladimir M. Komarov had died when Soyuz I crash-landed after reentry April 24, 1967. Bodies of Cosmonaut Gagarin and Col. Seryogin would be cremated and buried in Kremlin wall, (upi, W Star, 3/28/68, 1; Reston, W Post, 3/29/68, 1)
Sen. John J. Sparkman (D-Ala.) on Senate floor said: “President Johnson is properly called the principal architect of America’s space program. As Senator and Vice President he worked unceasingly to assure this country a role of leadership in the exploration of space. . . . Under President Johnson’s leadership in the Senate the Space Act was passed in 1958, creating the National Aeronautics and Space Administration . . . setting up a charter to win for this country a preeminence in the peaceful exploration of space. NASA pulled together widely scattered efforts in space and built an organization unique in this country’s history. It has contributed to the technological competence so vital to modern industrial society.” (nasa LAR VII/108; CR, 10/10/68, S12423)
Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin, Vance D. Brand, and Joe H. Engle began 177-hr simulated space journey with Apollo 2TV—1 model spacecraft inside giant vacuum chamber at msc, to prove spacecraft structure and inner pressure vessel and verify Apollo’s environmental control system in temperature and vacuum extremes. (West, H Chron, 6/17/68; H Post, 6/18/68, 2; nar Skywriter, 6/21/68,1)
William E. Stoney, Jr., former Chief of msc’s Advanced Spacecraft Technology Div., became NASA Deputy Director (Engineering) of Apollo program, (nasa Release 68—151)
naa Executive Director, m/g B. E. Allen (usaf, Ret.), in Washington, D.C., ceremony presented awards to Allen Bourdon, William Diehl, and Ernest Hall, last three living civilian flight instructors of World War I air service, for “their patriotism, devotion to duty, and capability as pilots [who performed] an outstanding service toward our achievement of victory in World War I.” (naa News)
Donald A. Hall, designer of Lindbergh aircraft, Spirit of St. Louis, died in San Diego, Calif., at age 69. (NYT, 7/3/68, 33)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced personnel changes for new Apollo Lunar Exploration Office [establishment announced Dec. 19, 1967]: Capt. Lee R. Scherer (usn, Ret.), Assistant Director for Lunar Programs and Lunar Orbiter Program Manager, ossa, would transfer to omsf to direct new office; Capt. William T. O’Bryant (usn, Ret.), Program Manager for Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Package, ossa, would head Flight Systems Development Div.; and Dr. Richard J. Allenby, Jr., Deputy Director of Manned Flight Experiments, ossa, would head Lunar Science Div. (nasa Release 68—5)
nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, presented nasa’s bioscience programs to House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee. Biosatellite flights D and F, 30-day earth-orbiting missions to study effects of space environment on living organisms, were scheduled for second and fourth quarters of 1969 and 21-day flights C and E for 1970 and 1971. Flights would test reactions of central nervous system, cardiovascular system, metabolism, performance, and behavior of pigtailed monkey. Gas management system for two-gas atmosphere would be flown for first time in U.S. satellite. (Testimony)
Edward Wenk, Jr., Executive Secretary of Marine Resources Council, told new American Oceanic Organization in Washington, D.C., “We are ready for the next step in Federal management of marine affairs—creation of an independent civilian operating agency.” Chairman of new group, Rep. George E. Shipley (D-Ill.), member of House Appropriations Committee, said, “I think that we will see the time that this country will spend as much in oceanography as we are spending in the space program.” (Corrigan, W Post, 11/17/68, Kl)
Nearly 200,000 mourners filed past biers of Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin and Col. Vladimir Seryogin in Soviet Army House in Moscow. Premier Alexey Kosygin, President Nikolay V. Podgorny, and Communist Party leader Leonid I. Brezhnev briefly joined honor guard of soldiers near biers. (Winters, B Sun, 3/30/68; NYT, 3/31/68, 21)
Analysis of data returned by Pioneer VIII had led arc scientists to speculate that earth’s magnetic tail, extension of its magnetic envelope (magnetosphere) blown out by solar wind to resemble comet’s tail, might be shorter than the 200 million mi suggested by certain theoretical calculations. When Pioneer VII flew through tail region at 3.5-million-mi distance from earth after Aug. 17, 1966, launch, it found long period when solar wind was completely or partially blocked out, suggesting spacecraft had observed end of organized tail region. Conditions encountered in tail area by Pioneer VIII at 1.75 million mi from earth after Dec. 13, 1967, launch, were similar. However, instead of smooth cylindrical structure expected at smaller distance, Pioneer VIII found conditions resembling turbulent wake, leading some scientists to conclude tail was shorter. Others, including Pioneer Project Scientist, Dr. John Wolfe, believed tail might include successively turbulent and smooth areas, (arc Astrogram, 6/20/68; AP, NYT, 6/22/68, 53)
NASA Honor Awards ceremony was held at Washington, D.C., with Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Acting Administrator, making presentations. Alexander H. Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Research and Development) , was main speaker. ' Distinguished Service Medal, nasa’s highest honor, was presented to Secretary Flax; Edmond C. Buckley, former NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition; Paul G. Dembling, NASA General Counsel; and Abe Silverstein, Director of Lewis Research Center. NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal went to LeRC’s G. Mervin Ault, Edmond E. Bisson, and John C. Evvard; Jpl’s Richard M. Goldstein, Alan Rembaum, Lewis D. Kaplan, and Conway W. Snyder; msfc’s Otto A. Hoberg and Hans H. Hosenthien; LaRc’s Mark R. Nichols; and arc’s William A. Page and John A. Parker. Exceptional Service Medal recipients were: Mac C. Adams, Walter Boone, Richard L. Callaghan, Arnold W. Frutkin, Alfred S. Hodgson, Mildred V. Morris, and Boyd C. Myers, NASA Hq.; Robert M. Crane (posthumous), William R. Schindlar, and Michael J. Vaccaro, arc; Robert J. Darcey, Herman E. LaGow, and Robert J. McCaffery, gsfc ; Philip Donely, Paul F. Fuhrmeister, and Harry H. Hamilton, LaRC; Robert C. Duncan, erc; Fred H. Felberg and Alvin R. Luedecke, JPL; Arthur Rudolph, msfc; and Hubert Ray Stanley, Wallops Station. Group Achievement Award went to Apollo 7 Flight Operations Team, Instrumentation Ships Team, Mariner Occultation Experiment Team, ogo Project Team, Sonic Boom Investigating Team, and Surveyor Team. (Program; msfc Release 68—267; Marshall Star, 11/13/68, 1; Pasadena Independent, 11/15/68; arc Astrogram, 11/21/68, 1)
MSC engineers Edwin Samfield and William C. Huber were granted patent No. 3,389,877 for inflatable tether to connect orbiting spacecraft or to connect astronauts and spacecraft. Tether, which became semirigid when inflated to avoid problems of flexible tether, consisted of nylon tube with aluminum end pieces and shock-absorbing struts for attachment to spacecraft. It could be folded and stowed in end piece and expanded with compressed gas when needed. Prototypes were being constructed at msc. (Patent Off pio; Jones, NYT, 6/29/68, 37)
At White House Dinner honoring members of space program, President Johnson presented Presidential Medal of Freedom, Nation’s highest civilian award, to retired NASA Administrator, James E. Webb, “a most distinguished public administrator, ... a farsighted and forceful leader of this Nation in the pioneer exploration of outer space, opening new frontiers of discovery and progress for the American people,” President told 23 Apollo astronauts, NASA officials, Government leaders in space program, and heads of rocket-building firms, “I asked you to come here tonight in the twilight of this administration, so I could pay the respect and the honor and the affection that I felt for the man who has directed your efforts and directed them so well, and so that I could express my personal admiration and respect for you.” In response, Webb said, “The challenge of space is large and so is NASA. In all such human endeavors, organized institutional efforts are essential, and we know, in the words of Emerson, that they are ‘the lengthened shadow of one man.’ We in NASA know, Mr. President, that you are the man of which our civilian space effort, conducted for the benefit of mankind, is the lengthened shadow.” At predinner ceremony, document for White House Treaty Room was signed by Apollo 7 astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., R. Walter Cunningham, and Donn F. Eisele; Apollo 8 Astronauts William A. Anders, Frank Borman, and James A. Lovell, Jr.; and pioneer aviator Charles A. Lindbergh. Also in Treaty Room were commemorations of May 21, 1963, visit to White House by Astronaut L. Gordon Cooper following 22-orbit mission in Faith VII May 15—16 and of June 17, 1965, award of Exceptional Service Medal to late Astronaut Edward H. White II, and Astronaut James A. McDivitt following first U.S. space walk during June 3—7 Gemini IV mission. During exchange of dinner toasts President Johnson said that “in the hundreds of laws on which I have answered the rollcall, the bills that I have sponsored or cosponsored or amended or defeated, there is not a single one that gives more pride than the Space Act.” Responding, Webb cited three generations of spacecraft in 10 yr, “put to use ... in every major field,” and said he had “strongly held view that in the kind of world we live in, our Nation needs this kind of success in this kind of endeavor.” {PD, 12/16/68, 1689—91; McCardle, W Post, 12/10/68, Dl; Shelton, W Star, 12/10/68, B6; NYT, 12/10/68, 86)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Deputy Administrator, announced elimination of lunar module (lm) operations from first manned Apollo/ Saturn V flight, Apollo 8. msf would begin planning and training for alternate, low-earth-orbit, manned command and service module (csm) mission for December launch but no final decision on precise mission plan would be made until after Oct. 11 Apollo 7 flight results were evaluated. LM 3, delayed in checkout, would be flown in 1969 on fourth Saturn V with CSM 104 since preliminary studies had indicated many Apollo objectives scheduled for later flights could be obtained by using Apollo 8 csm mission. Two problems in Saturn Apollo systems—vertical oscillation, or pogo effect, in 1st stage of Saturn V and rupture of small propellant lines in upper stages—had been corrected and solutions verified in extensive ground tests. Plans and changes were discussed in detail at NASA Hq. news conference by Apollo Program Director l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), who blamed checkout problems for six-week delay in Apollo schedule. “It is our view,” he said, “. . . that the probable flight readiness of lm 3 is perhaps in February, but it is in the February-March time period.” He said important advantage of flying Apollo 8 in 1968 was opportunity for earlier experience in operation of Saturn V and CSM than could otherwise be obtained. In response to questions Gen. Phillips said lunar landing next year was “clearly possible.” He also announced reassignment of crews: redefined Apollo 8 mission would have crew of Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders; crew originally assigned to this mission—James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart—would fly on Apollo 9 with lm. New backup crew for Apollo 8 was Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr. (Text; NASA Release 68—148; AP, C Trib, 8/20/68; O’Toole, W Post, 8/20/68, A3; Wilford, NYT, 8/20/68, 19; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 8/20/68,1; msc Roundup, 8/30/68,1)
Deep sea drilling between U.S. and Africa by scientists of Joint Oceanographic Institutions for Deep Earth Sampling (joides) had confirmed that sea floor was spreading and pushing Europe and America farther apart, John Lannan said in Washington Evening Star. Evidence, brought to surface in samples, or cores, extracted from earth’s bottom, showed fluid internal mass of molten rock under ocean was still welling up along mid-Atlantic Ridge. Cores indicated “this newly formed crust must spread slowly aside, like a giant conveyor belt, continuously accumulating sediment . . . throughout millions of years as it moves,” scientists said. (W Star, 12/14/68, Al) An advanced version of cartwheel configuration, 300-lb Essa VIII carried two Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) cameras which would photograph earth’s cloud cover and immediately transmit pictures to local APT stations in 52 nations. During first 22 orbits spacecraft underwent orientation maneuver to place it in wheel mode and spin rate was adjusted by 0.2 rpm. By Dec. 19 all spacecraft systems had been successfully programmed and excellent pictures had been read out. essa financed and managed tos system and would operate spacecraft after NASA completed checkout later in month. GSFC was responsible for procurement, launch, and initial checkout of spacecraft in orbit. Essa VIII was 18th Tiros satellite launched successfully since Tiros I, first weather satellite, April 1, 1960. All from Tiros III on had equaled or exceeded designed operation lifetimes. Most recent essa satellite launched was Essa VII, launched Nov. 10. (NASA Proj Off: essa Release ES 68-67; SBD, 12/17/68, 210)
White House announced from Johnson City, Tex., that President Johnson would present NASA Distinguished Service Medals to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders during “Astronaut Day” ceremonies in Washington, D.C., Jan. 9, 1969. (AP, W Star, 12/31/68, A5; upi, NYT, 1/1/69, 10; W Post, 1/1/69, 2)
Apollo 8 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., William A. Anders, and Frank Borman—scheduled to begin lunar orbital mission Dec. 21—• held preflight press conference at MSC. Borman, comparing mission to “a combat tour in Vietnam,” said: “The risks we take are acceptable ones. . . . We have to accept them if we believe it’s worthwhile. If I ever feel it’s not worthwhile, I’ll quit.” Describing the magnificence of space flight, Borman said, “When you’re finally up at the moon and looking back at the world, the nationalities blend. . . .You get the concept that this really is one world and wonder why ... we can’t live together like decent people.” Anders said crew “might use the opportunity [of being in lunar orbit ChristDeoember 7-10: NASA’s' Oao-II 21-foot-wu!e, 4,400-pound Orbiting Astronomical Observatory carried 11 telescopes into orbit to seek answers to questions on origin, evolution, and future of universe. Photo was made in final flight qualification testing. mas Day] to express to all peoples of the world our purposes and the benefits we can expect from space exploration.” (Lannan, W Star, 12/8/68, A4; AP, KC Star, 12/8/68; AP, M Her, 12/8/68)
Univ. of Wisconsin professor Dr. William Kraushaar, speaking at dedication of new $4.3-million Center foT Space Research at mit, reported discovery by NASA’s Oso III of high intensity of gamma rays flowing from center of Milky Way. Dr. Kraushaar said finding was first observation to support theory that galaxy centers were rich reservoirs of cosmic rays. (Wilford, NYT, 4/27/68, 40)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, defended space activity before St. Louis, Mo., section of aiaa: “There are . . . those who are trapped by the illogical proposition that if the money involved were not spent on space, it would automatically flow into projects in which they are more interested. ... I do not agree. It is not an ‘either/or’ situation. In my judgment, if this country is great—and I know it is—it has the will, the ability, and the responsibility to handle both a vigorous space program and the social and economic problems which confront it. In fact, our competence to solve the issues of the city is greater because of the space program.” {CR, 6/17/69, S7314)
In Washington Post, columnist Joseph Kraft said post-Apollo programs had been sharply cut in Congress and space spending had been compared unfavorably with money for pressing internal needs. “In this situation, it makes sense for this country to disengage while it is ahead. There is no need for the United States to race Russia to every new milestone in space. On the contrary, what the United States wants is a program closely connected to explicit American requirements—a program of exploration for its own sake, not for the sake of beating the Russians. In that way, this country can continue to develop a capability in space, without having to respond in a panic to the ups and downs that are necessary part of the space business.” (W Post, 12/26/68) Outgoing Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Donald F. Hornig, recommended reexamination of concept of Federal Dept, of Science since science “has now assumed such importance to the nation that its position would be stronger if it had a voice in the Cabinet.” He advocated annual report on state of science similar to annual economic report and said Office of Science and Technology “could eventually evolve in an office of planning and analysis, looking broadly at national problems with some scientific or technological component, but extending well beyond the purely technical areas.” Under questioning, Dr. Hornig said he agreed with Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, President of Univ. of Oklahoma and former Assistant Secretary of Commerce, that Federal Dept, of Science, with NSF as its core, might encompass oceanographic agencies, high-energy-physics research currently funded by AEC, ESSA, Bureaus of Census and Labor Statistics, geophysics branches of Geological Survey, and some NIH programs. Dr. Hollomon also suggested NASA be added when it could be included “without having it become the tail that wags the dog.” Dr. Hornig insisted no massive “science agency” should be created to usurp supervision of Nation’s science effort. Bacteria might have caused gastrointestinal upset suffered by astronaut Frank Borman on Apollo 8 mission, Dr. Rudolf H. T. Mattoni, head of Biological Systems Div. of Nuclear Utility Services, Hawthorne, Calif., told meeting. Effects of weightlessness on bacteria on Biosatellite II flight (Sept. 7—9, 1967) suggested that lack of gravity might have allowed common, normally benign, intestinal bacteria to cause illness like Borman’s. Drs. Bouilin Browning of St. Thomas Univ. and Irwin Oster of Bowling Green State Univ. reported first experimental evidence that weightlessness can cause chromosomal damage of genetic significance, based on sperm cells flown 45 hr aboard Biosatellite. Cornell Univ. map expert, Prof. Arthur J. McNair, said sophisticated photographic mapping by satellites at 140-mi altitude would provide faster, cheaper, broader, and more detailed coverage than now possible by airplane mapping. Single map-making satellite photo, he said, would be equivalent to 1,000 photos taken by aircraft. U.S. could be fully mapped in one year from photos from satellite in near-polar orbit for four weeks. Another 11 mo would be needed for data processing. Dr. Robert H. Hardie of Vanderbilt Univ. said planet Pluto had appeared to be dimming for past 10 yr. It was moving in 248-yr orbital period to point where it reflected little sunlight and its surface temperature had dropped two degrees. He speculated that planet froze into mass of stone and solid nitrogen as temperatures reached —250° C when facing away from the sun. When bathed in sunlight, planet warmed to —200° C and formed reflecting puddles which astronomers saw as variations in light intensity. (Text; UPl, W Post, 12/28/68, A9; Lannan, W Star, 12/30/68, A3; AP, W Post, 12/30/68, A6) December 27: At White House press conference President Johnson discussed Apollo 8’s effect on U.S. position in space race: “We are very pleased with the progress we have made. . . . Each side has different examples of its achievements. But in the 10 to 11 years since Sputnik I . . . when we didn’t even have a space committee in the Congress, when we were talking about the basketball up there in the air, when we have weathered the storms that have brewed—everyone who wanted to cut anything, the first thing they wanted to cut was the space program —when we have seen the editorial professors inform us that there was really no value in doing all of this anyway, it gives me great pleasure now to see the thrill that even they are getting out of it.” President described anxiety about complex mission and said he had repeatedly asked himself whether U.S. was ready, whether date selected was best one, whether every possible precaution had been taken, and whether every man had performed his requirements. “About all you can do ... is to pick men that you have confidence in, that you trust, give them the support they need, and then hold on.” Remembering he had “recommended this goal for this decade” to President Kennedy, he said: “There have been many pitfalls every step of the way. I don’t know how many folks have just wanted to abandon it, clip it, cut it, take the money for the cities or the war or just anything else. Space has been a whipping boy. “So when you see the day approaching when visions, and dreams, and what we said to the Congress when we created the Space Administration back in 1958 are becoming reality, you naturally are hopeful.” Later, in telephone message to Apollo 8 astronauts, President congratulated crew and said: “You have made us very proud to be alive at this particular moment in history. You have made us feel akin to those Europeans nearly five centuries ago who heard stories of the New World for the first time. . . . My thoughts this morning went back to more than 10 years ago . . . when we saw Sputnik racing through the skies, and we realized that America had a big job ahead of it. “It gave me so much pleasure to know that you men have done a large part of that job.” {PD, 12/30/68, 1744-50)
Senate adopted S.R. 391, changing assignments of minority Senators to standing committees. Measure excused Senators Edward W. Brooke (R-Mass.) and Charles H. Percy (R-Ill.) from Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and assigned Senators Mark O. Hatfield (R-Ore.) and Charles E. Goodell (R-N.Y.) to Committee. (NASA LAR VII/90)
Chief Test Pilot Joseph S. Algranti successfully ejected from lunar landing training vehicle about four minutes into planned six-minute flight, when large lateral-control oscillation developed as he descended from maximum altitude of 550 ft. He ejected at 200 ft and landed by parachute while $1.8-million vehicle crashed and burned several hundred feet away. Flight was 14th for this Lt,TV. Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, jr., was named chairman of board to investigate accident. (msc Special Releases; W Post, 12/9/68, 1; SBD, 12/10/68, 172)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) flew X—15 No. 1 to 209,600-ft altitude and 3,545 mph (mach 5.05) from Edwards afb. Purposes of test flight were to check Saturn insulation horizon scanner and fixed ball nose. (nasa Proj Off)
Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) had established Yuri Gagarin gold medal honoring cosmonaut who became first man in space April 12, 1961, during Soviet Vostok I mission, Space Business Daily reported. Medal would be awarded annually to pilot contributing best performance of year in peaceful exploration of space. (SBD, 12/11/68, 178)
Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) piloted X—15 No. 1 to 218,500-ft altitude and 3,409 mph (mach 4.74) in flight from Edwards afb. Objective of flight, exposure and satisfactory retraction of wtr experiment, was not accomplished because abnormally low hydraulic pressure and severe vibrations prevented aircraft’s reaching required altitude. (X—15 Proj Off)
LaRC Associate Chief of Flight Mechanics and Technology Div., John P. Campbell, had been selected by American Helicopter Society to receive its Paul E. Haueter Award for 1968, Langley Researcher announced. Award was given annually for significant contributions to development of vertical lift aircraft other than helicopters. Campbell was cited “for his personal contributions to and direction of NASA research programs which have provided a sound technology base for a large number of vtol designs.” {Langley Researcher, 5/17/68,1)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, addressed International Meeting of American Nuclear Society in Washington, D.C. In past decade NASA had developed “impressive capability” in “competent and creative people who make up our government-university-industry team.” It was “prepared to accomplish any goal in space exploration which the new administration may establish.” NASA future included “broad, balanced, Planetary Program” emphasizing Mars but examining other planets like Mercury and Jupiter; major lunar exploration program in 1970’s; astronomy program covering optical astronomy, x-ray and gamma ray fields, and low-frequency radio astronomy; and increased emphasis on space applications programs, with maj or efforts toward surveying earth’s resources from space and continuing developments in meteorology and communications. (Text)
NASA Acting Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, announced at NASA Hq. news briefing that Apollo 8—carrying commander Frank Borman, cm pilot James A. Lovell, Jr., and lm pilot William A. Anders—would be launched from etr Dec. 21 on open-ended lunar orbital mission of at least six days. Spacecraft would circle moon 10 times at 70-mi altitude before returning to earth. Dr. Paine explained: “After a careful and thorough examination of all of the systems and risks involved, we have concluded that we are now ready to fly the most advanced mission for our Apollo 8 launch in December, the orbit around the moon.. . . “We have reached this conclusion after a long series of intensive investigations of the status of our program, the flight hardware, ground support equipment, status of our training.” l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo Program Director, cited two categories of new risks with a lunar orbital mission: “In the one . . . the spacecraft propulsion system must operate properly in order to propel the spacecraft back out of lunar orbit and on its way back to earth. And the other category of risks are those that are inherent in being some three days away from the earth as opposed to . . . between a half an hour and three hours which the crew is away from the earth in a low earth orbital mission.” Although increased reliance would have to be placed on dependability of life support and electric power systems and mission would have to take on additional risks, Gen. Phillips said, “The progression of risk between the Apollo 7 mission which we have flown and the Apollo 8 mission which we have designed is a normal progression of risks in a logically stepped development, flight test program.” (Transcript; NASA Release 68—199; Schmeck, NYT, 11/13/68, 1; O’Toole, W Post, 11/13/68, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/13/68, 1) Engineer Michael O’Hagan, manager of space and military systems in government contracts dept, of U.K.’s Standard Telephone & Cables Co., told Conservative Party seminar in London U.S. was “actually buying land with mineral rights” in other countries after using satellites to discover its location. Hawker Siddeley Group Ltd. scientist K. C. C Pardoe said countries could use satellites to spy on rival nations’ crops and decide best time for marketing. (Reuters, W Post, 11/13/68, A25)
NASA announced Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., had replaced Astronaut Michael Collins as prime command module pilot for third manned Apollo mission. Lovell had held same position on mission’s backup crew. Collins had undergone successful spinal surgery July 23 and would require three to six months recuperation. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., backup lunar module pilot, had been moved to command module pilot position on backup crew. Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., had been assigned to backup crew as lunar module pilot. Lovell joined Astronauts Frank Borman and William A. Anders on prime crew for mission scheduled for first quarter 1969. (msc Release; KSC Release KSC-374-68; AP, NYT, 8/9/68, 14; upi, W Star, 8/9/68; W Post, 8/9/68, A7; SBD, 8/9/68, 169; msc Roundup, 8/16/68, 1)
Press reported recently released testimony at February hearings of House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Department of Defense. Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. John P. McConnell had described Foxbat as only Soviet fighter aircraft “that we cannot match.” Undergoing late stages of testing, it had estimated mach 3 maximum speed, 70.000-	to 75,000-ft maximum altitude, 1,600-mi combat range without external fuel tanks, and 1,400-mph cruise speed at 50,000-ft altitude. U.S. observers believed fighter-bomber version could be operational in 1969 or 1970; advanced radar-equipped interceptor version with internally carried missiles could be in squadron service by 197Q or 1971. Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Harold Brown, had testified that U.S. was not behind U.S.S.R. in aircraft development, while Gen. McConnell had said that F—X (fighter experimental), U.S. fighter in Foxbat class, was still being designed and was “a little late.” (Transcript; Corddry, B Sun, 6/11/68,1)
U.K. became first nuclear power to ratify nuclear nonproliferation treaty. At Washington, D.C., ceremony, British Charge d’Affaires Edward E. Tompkins handed instruments of ratification to Director William C. Foster of U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. (NYT, 11/28/68, 9)
NASA’s Oso IV spacecraft (launched Oct. 18, 1967) had obtained valuable new data on three-dimensional structure of sun’s atmosphere, Leo Goldberg, Robert W. Noyes, William H. Parkinson, Edmond M. Reeves, and George L. Withbroe of Harvard College Observatory’s Solar Satellite Project reported in Science. During five weeks of experiment operation—before electronic failure of instrument detection system—more than 100 solar flares were recorded. More than 4,000 UV images in 52 different wavelengths over wide range of temperatures and heights in solar atmosphere were obtained. Most of emission lines represented had not been observed before with spatial resolution on solar disk. New instrument was being prepared for flight on OSO—G in 1969, to have twice spatial resolution and 10 times time resolution of instrument on Oso IV. (Science, 10/4/68, 95—9)
Senate, after secret session, defeated by vote of 45 to 25 amendment by Sen. John S. Cooper (R-Ky.) to eliminate from $71.8-billion defense appropriations bill the $387.4 million requested by Administration to start deployment of Sentinel antiballistic missile system. Final action on largest defense appropriations bill in U.S. history was deferred. {CR, 10/2/68, S11872-85; AP, W Star, 10/2/68, A4; Finney, NYT, 10/3/68, 1; Lardner, W Post, 10/5/68,1)	.
nasa announced appointment of Dr. Henry J. Smith, Deputy Director of Physics and Astronomy Programs, ossa, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Science), replacing Dr. John E. Naugle who was named Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Oct. 1, 1967. Dr. Smith would be Chief Scientist for ossa, responsible for obtaining and implementing scientific advice for the national space program, (nasa Release 69—70)
Astronomers reported in Science conclusion neither NASA’s Mariner V (launched June 14, 1967, for flyby of planet Venus) nor U.S.S.R.’s Venus IV (launched June 12, 1967) had reported atmospheric conditions near level of mean surface of planet. Von R. Eshleman and Gun-nar Fjeldbo of Stanford Univ., John D. Anderson and Arvydas J. Kliore of JPL, and Rolf B. Dyce of Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory (Puerto Rico) had made new determination of radius of planet, based on concurrent ranging from earth to Mariner V near encounter and to surface of Venus. Extrapolations of measurements had given surface values for mid-latitudes of close to 100 atmospheres pressure and 700°K temperature (within 100°), rather than Soviet values of 19±2 atmospheres and 544° ±10°K. Soviet probe apparently was not designed to work through such thick atmosphere. Simple ambiguity (times two) in Venus IV altimeter reading could explain supposition that probe reached Venus surface, “since this would bring all other data into excellent agreement.” (Science, 11/8/68, 661—5)
Dr. John C. Houbolt, Executive Vice President of Aeronautical Research Associates of Princeton, Inc., received AIAA Structures and Materials Award for his “original, definitive, and continuous research leading to the use of random processes in aircraft gust loads design.” (SBD, 4/4/68, 199)
Apollo 8 prime crew—Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders—held press conference at MSC on Apollo 8 flight plan. Commander Borman explained that an important feature of mission’s flight plan was establishment in advance of decision points when crew could decide whether to continue mission as planned or return to	earth: “. . . the	first one	[decision	point]	will be whether	we commit to	translunar	injection	[from	parking orbit] or not. . . . But even if we do commit ... we have regular abort times along the course to the moon, so that we could—in case of a system problem . . . stop at any time and come back. Then we finally reach a point where it would be swifter to just go on around the moon than it would be to try to abort. The next great point is before we burn lunar orbit injection.” Once in lunar orbit crew would receive abort data regularly and have option to return to earth every two hours. “The mission, if all works well, will be a relatively simple one,” Borman said. “. . . we designed Apollo, we said we were going to the moon, and . . . finally when we get down to examining the details and saying we are really going, people start getting a little queasy about it. But I have no hesitancy about the hardware.” (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 11/17/68, A8)
nas President Dr. Frederick Seitz announced William W. Rubey, professor of geology and geophysics at Univ. of California at Los Angles had been named Director of Lunar Science Institute, Houston, Tex. NAS had accepted interim responsibility for operation of Institute until consortium of universities could be formed to assume its direction. Formation of Institute had been announced by President Johnson March 1, 1968, to provide base for academic scientists participating in lunar exploration program, working in Lunar Receiving Laboratory, or using other facilities of Manned Spacecraft Center devoted to study of the moon. It was to serve also as center for analysis and study of lunar data obtained from NASA unmanned missions, (nasa Release 68—191; NAS Release) October 31—November 1: Soviet academician and aerospace scientist, Prof. Leonid I. Sedov, visited Univ. of Tennessee Space Institute during AlAA-sponsored tour of U.S. At press conference he said U.S.S.R. would reach moon from orbital station but this was not crux of Soviet effort in space. “Other planets are just as important.” Zond-type satellites would circumnavigate other planets and return. In question and answer period following lecture he said U.S.S.R. would not conduct manned lunar space operation within following six months. In lecture, Prof. Sedov said it was “obvious that space technology and the associated research have a pronounced stimulating effect on the development of the technological fields . . . essential for large-scale progress—particularly in the development of automatic control systems; in radio engineering, television, and telemetry; in computer technology; in the preparation of new materials and new devices; in miniaturization and minimum-weight design; in problems associated with accuracy and reliability of automatic systems. . . It was clear that “space technology has become pivotal in modern industry in the broadest sense of the word.” Dr. G. G. Chernyi, Moscow Univ. professor, also participated in seminar. (Transcripts; Aero Daily, 11/7/68,29) During October: Soviet Science in the News, Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., publication, said review of Soviet technical press indicated U.S.S.R. would attempt to orbit manned space station within the year and that it possessed “well-devised and thoroughly realizable designs.” First “rooms” of station would comprise Cosmos or Proton booster joined with Soyuz spacecraft. Additional rooms would combine solid and inflatable elements like polyethylene. Tests of water recovery systems in Pacific indicated broadening of Soviet techniques. Six vessels had been completed for ocean recoveries of spacecraft. Conclusion of Soviet scientists that weightlessness had adverse effect on human skeletal composition seemed to indicate space station would use artificial gravity. ‘Rotation of space station of from 40 to. 60 meters in diameter would generate sufficient artificial gravity to allow large number of scientists to work in space.” (SSN, 10/68, 1; Aero Daily, 10/16/68)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. engineer John W. Jones was granted patents 3,369,455 and 3,369,485 for new rocket-launching technique with potential military and space applications. Rockets encased in liquid-filled plastic sheaths were fired from a gun, after which sheath fell away, solid propellant ignited, and rocket continued on its own power. Jones said high-altitude research probes could be conducted using seven- or eight-inch gun at one-half to one-fourth cost of present methods. Protective sheath and liquid permitted use of new thin-walled military rockets which had better flight performance and traveled twice as fast as standard artillery shell. (Jones, NYT, 2/24/68, 37; Patent Off Pio)
ESRO announced cancellation of TD—1 and TD—2 solar astronomy satellites, which were to have been built under $20-million contract by an international consortium and launched from U.S. by Thor-Delta rockets. Italy had refused to pay its share of costs, feeling its share of work too slight to justify contribution, John L. Hess later reported in New York Times, Earlier U.K. had refused to contribute to proposed budget expansion of eldo, partner with ESRO in plans for European satellite communications system [see April 16]. (Reuters, NYT, 4/26/68, 16; Hess, NYT, 4/28/68,24)
Univ. of Colorado physicist Dr. Edward U. Condon announced that Univ. $500,000 ufo study for usaf had been completed on schedule. Dr. Condon declined to discuss conclusions and said final report would be submitted to nas in September. He protested May 14 Look magazine article, which called project fiasco, but said completion of field investigations were not related to controversy. Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.), citing article on House floor, questioned scientific profundity and objectivity of project and urged Congress to take over ufo investigation from usaf. (CR, 4/30/68, H3087; Clark, NYT, 5/1/68, 5)
Investigation of Nov. 15, 1967, X—15 accident by NASA board indicated that pilot, Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) who died in crash, had suffered disorientation and operated controls improperly. Mistaking roll indicator for heading indicator, he had increased heading error, causing aircraft to spin uncontrollably at mach 5 and 230,000-ft altitude and then to go into severe pitch oscillation and disintegrate at altitude above 60,000 ft. Board requested that Government report on MH—96 control system experience and recommended use of telemetry for directional readings by NASA X—15 ground control center, careful checkout of experiments and equipment for next X—15 flight, inclusion in pilot’s physical examination of special tests for tendency toward vertigo, and development of additional methods to maintain proper heading under ballistic flight conditions, (frc Release 20—68; NASA Release 68-126)
Library of Congress had acquired from former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., The John Glenn Papers, 90,000 items representing national and international response to his first manned space flight, Feb. 20, 1962. Majority of letters covering 1962—64 were from ordinary citizens, largely elementary school children. Other items included subject files, space manuals, news clippings, scrapbooks, invitations, certificates, awards, maps, and charts which Library’s Information Bulletin said “reflect the contemporary need for a popular hero—one who can be held up to the young and who at the same time must undergo the rigorous pressures brought about by ‘instant’ fame and worldwide recognition.” Papers provided “many insights into contemporary social history.” Glenn had been asked for his opinion on every conceivable topic. (Sifton, LC Info Bull, 8/29/68)
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories scientists John W. Salisbury and Graham R. Hunt reported in Science they had found hypothesis of particle-size control of albedo incompatible with hypothesis of abundant limonite on Mars. Their observations indicated that proposal that polarimetric, spectrometric, color, and albedo measurements of light and dark areas on Mars proved limonite was major soil constituent was irreconcilable with proposal that variations in size of particle could be responsible for albedo difference between light and dark areas. They showed relative albedo was reversed from blue to red for limonite samples with different-sized particles. Observations of Mars revealed no blue-red albedo reversal between areas. Although evidence was insufficient for choice between hypotheses, they believed Mars soil was most likely, for geological reasons, to be composed of silicates stained or coated with ferric oxides. (Science, 7/26/68, 365—6)
nasa test pilots Donald L. Mallick and Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., flew XB—70A to 42,000-ft altitude and mach 1.62 in flight from Edwards AFB. Purpose of flight was to evaluate performance at variety of speeds, check exciter vane function, determine ground effects during low approach, and evaluate pilot proficiency during touch-and-go landing. (XB—70 Proj Off)
President Johnson presented 1968 Enrico Fermi Award in White House ceremony to Dr. John Archibald Wheeler, Princeton Univ. physicist, for “pioneering contributions to understanding nuclear fission and to developing the technology of plutonium production reactors and his continuing broad contributions to nuclear science.” Award carried gold medal, citation, and $25,000. (PD, 12/9/68, 1956; W Post, 12/3/68, A2; W Star, 12/3/68, A6)
NASA announced changes in Aerospace Safety Panel personnel: Dr. Charles D. Harrington, President of Douglas United Nuclear, Inc., was elected Chairman. Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, Deputy Director (Technical) at MSFC and Special Assistant to Apollo Spacecraft Manager, resigned from panel to devote full time to these assignments. Newly named to panel were: Frank C. Di Luzio, President of Raynolds Electrical and Engineering Co., Inc., and Vice President of eg&g, Inc.; Gen. Orval Cook (usaf, Ret.); and Dr. Harold Agnew, Weapons Div. Leader, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory. Dr. William A. Mrazek, Assistant Director for Engineering and Chief Engineer for Industrial Operations at msfc, was named consultant, (nasa Release 68-98)
nasa’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, flown by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed eleventh flight from Edwards afb. Vehicle with full load of fuel was carried to altitude, where successful jettison test was performed before launch from B—52 aircraft, (nasa Proj Off)
In Washington Post, Thomas O’Toole said Howard R. Hughes organization’s holding company, Hughes Nevada Operations, had requested public disclosure of alleged dod study by Harvard Univ.’s Dr. George Kistiakowsky and mit’s Dr. Jerome Wiesner and James Killian. Company claimed Special Report on Underground Testing concluded there was no reason for continued underground atomic tests, dod spokesman denied existence of study, while Science Adviser to President Johnson, Dr. Donald F. Hornig, said only that he had met with top physicists in November to discuss safety of underground testing. “We may make a public report on it. The subject seems to be of enough importance to warrant a public airing.” (W Post, 12/6/68, 87) Primary mission objective was to demonstrate flight operation to support two experiments provided by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and Univ. of Wisconsin for at least 30 days. Secondary objective was to obtain scientific data over a range of star magnitudes and wavelengths for at least 50 hr. Experiments would observe interstellar dust and extremely young hot stars in UV portion of spectrum not visible to human eye or earth-based observatories. Satellite would be able to collect six hours of UV data per day—twice as much as had been obtained in 15 yr from 40 sounding rocket launches. Through its complex ground-command spacecraft-attitude system Oao II would be aimed at individual objects in space with precision never before attained by an orbiting satellite. Information from experiments would be radioed to earth as digital data for analysis by experimenters. By Dec. 10 all spacecraft equipment bad been turned on and operated satisfactorily: satellite had been placed in its sunbathing mode with its solar panels oriented toward sun; its six star trackers had been activated; three of the trackers had been locked on to preplanned guide stars; and satellite had established three-axis stabilization. Smithsonian experiment initial power had been turned on. Wisconsin Experiment Package would be turned on Dec. 11. Oao II was second in series of four spacecraft in NASA’s OAO program to obtain precise astronomical observations of celestial objects above earth’s atmosphere. Oao I had been launched into almost perfect orbit April 8, 1966, but had failed because of power supply system malfunction and probable high voltage arcing in star tracker. OAO program was managed by GSFC under ossa direction, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 68—186K; ksc Release KSC-68; upi, W Star, 12/8/68, A5; O’Toole, W Post, 12/8/68; AP, W Star, 12/9/68, A6; SBD, 12/10/68, 172; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 12/12/68, A5)
NASA named five-man board with counsel to investigate crash of Lunar Landing Research Vehicle piloted by Astronaut Neil Armstrong at Ellington afb, Tex., May 6. Board would determine probable cause of accident, identify and evaluate corrective actions, and evaluate implication for llrv and lunar module design and operations. (NASA Release 68-90)
Apoilo 7 and 8 flight crews sign memorial document for White House Treaty Room. Signers are Heft to right): Astronaut!, R, Walter Cunningham, Donn F. Eisele, Walter M. Sckirra, Jr. (Apollo 7); William A. Anders, James A. Lovell, Jr^ and Frank Borman (Apollo 8). Standing are Charles A. Lindbergh (ioho also signed), Mrs. Johnson, President Lyndon B. Johnson, retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb, and Vice President Hubert H, Humphrey. dons would be made by land surface stations 300 mi apart throughout world with exception of desert areas. Further data would be passed on by weather ships, upper-air sea stations, aircraft, and meteorological satellites. (W Star, 12/9/68, A8) Committee claimed single entity could make more balanced investment choice on whether to lay more cables or launch satellites and would eliminate need for duplicate transmission facilities. Conclusions were challenged in dissenting footnote to report by Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of NASC, who said merger would inhibit development of satellite technology and reduce technological competition between cables and satellites that could result in lower rates. Report also would recommend informal merger of postal and telegraph services, with Western Union Telegraph Co. permitted to operate in post offices; relaxation of fcc restrictions on cable TV to protect broadcasters; and Government sponsorship of experimental program to test TV’s usefulness in assisting minority groups. (Finney, NYT, 12/9/68, 1; 12/10/68, 1; Aug., W Star, 12/12/68, A13)
William Leavitt in Air Force and Space Digest asked: “Are antiballistic missile systems necessarily provocative and ‘destabilizing’ in the sense that they will inevitably set off a new spiral in the arms race? Many— but hy no means all—scientists answer ‘yes’ to these questions, despite impressions to the contrary.” Director of Oak Ridge National Laboratory Dr. Alvin Weinberg, who would answer “no” to abm question, was quoted: “The deployment of abms on both sides has been deplored as the first step in the unending arms spiral that eventually will consume everything, including our vision of abundance. But suppose ABMs and other defensive measures turn out to be effective, and at the same time there is no escalation of offense in unending spiral. The knife-edge of delicately balanced terror would then be blunted.” (Leavitt, AF/SD, 1/68, 72-4)
aec announced selection of Dr. John Archibald Wheeler of Princeton Univ. to receive its $25,000 Enrico Fermi Award for 1968 for “his pioneering contributions to understanding nuclear fission, and to developing the technology of plutonium production reactors, and his continuing broad contributions to nuclear science.” Award would be presented in ceremony Dec. 2, 26th anniversary of first sustained controlled nuclear reaction, (aec Release I,—224)
NASA test pilots l/c Emil Sturmthal and Col. Joseph F. Cotton flew XB—70A to 39,400-ft altitude and mach 1.23 in flight from Edwards AFB. Purpose was to check exciter vane function, aeroelasticity, stability, control, and gust and canard loads and determine ground effects during load approaches. (XB—70 Proj Off)
U.S patent No. 3,390,336 was issued to Dr. Michael J, DiToro, Vice President for Science of Cardion Electronics, for Adapticom, instrument that corrected multipath reception or time-spread responsible for fuzziness and consequent errors in high-speed radio and telephone communications and eliminated ghosts from facsimile transmission. (Jones, NYT, 6/15/68,49)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, testified before House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Independent Offices and HUD that there would be no duplication of experiments on DOD’s Manned Orbital Laboratory (mol) and NASA’s Orbiting Workshop. They would operate in different orbits, nasc, Welsh said, was stressing “those types of space activities from which we can see relatively direct benefits to the general public.” (Transcript; Aero Daily, 4/23/68, 11-F)
The successful completion of the current phase of the automated exploration of the Moon and our planetary successes to date provide the capability, experience, and framework for the next step forward in the exploration of the planets,” NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee. Advanced Planetary Mission Technology (apmt) effort, begun in Fiscal Year 1968 at the conclusion of the Mariner Y, Lunar Orbiter, and Surveyor Programs, and deferral of Voyager was “directed at planning and technology for potential planetary missions in the early 1970’s.” Emphasis had shifted from automated to manned exploration and return of lunar samples. “Regardless of missions planned by the U.S.S.R. during the opportunities in 1969, 1971, and 1973,” Dr. Naugle said, NASA’s “systematic approach . . . will be meaningful and more likely to be complemented by the U.S.S.R. missions than duplicative.” (Testimony)
Sen. John S. Cooper (R-Ky.) led bipartisan drive in Senate to deny dod FY 1969 funds to begin deployment of Sentinel abm system. There was “no present threat to American security from a Chinese intercontinental ballistic missile attack,” he said, and it was “difficult to believe they would invite the certain destruction of their country by a nuclear attack upon the U.S.” when they attained the capability. Coalition hoped to postpone Sentinel deployment for at least one year by striking approximately $600 million for further r&d. (Finney, NYT, 6/14/68, 18; AP, W Post, 6/14/68, A28)
President Johnson submitted to Senate nomination of GSFC Deputy Director, Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr., as Deputy Administrator of Environmental Science Services Administration. He would succeed Dr. Werner A. Baum, who had accepted presidency of Univ. of Rhode Island. Dr. Townsend, scientific administrator and ionospheric physicist, had been head of Naval Research Laboratory’s Rocketsonde Branch and Deputy Science Coordinator of Project Vanguard before he joined nasa in 1958 as Chief of Space Sciences Div. {PD, 6/17/68, 960; essa Release ES 68—38; W Star, 6/11/68; W Post, 6/11/68)
frc announced cuts in FY 1969 budget dictated closing out X—15 aircraft program in fall 1968. Major setback was Nov. 15, 1967, crash which resulted in death of pilot Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf). Main task in 191 flights to date had been study of problems of manned controls in high-speed, high-altitude aircraft. Remaining tasks concerned testing of atmospheric reentry conditions. As successor to X—15 —holder of speed record of 4,534 mph and altitude record of 354,200 ft —officials would consider aircraft capable of taking off from ground under own power, achieving earth orbit, reentering, and landing at virtually any point on earth. (AP, C Trib, 1/22/68)
nas published report of NASA-sponsored two-year study of planetary astronomy by nas-nrc Space Science Board’s 16-scientist panel headed by Dr. John S. Hall, Director of Lowell Observatory, Ariz. Planetary Astronomy: An Appraisal of Ground-Based Opportunities recommended assignment of high priority to erection of 60-in optical telescope in mountains of northern Chile, where atmospheric conditions permitted favorable view of Mars, in time to observe planet’s closest approach to earth in almost 50 yr, August 1971. Also recommended were construction of large dish antenna in U.S. for planetary radar astronomy; two large radiotelescope arrays in California and West Virginia, plus third planetary radio facility to pick up signals at short wavelengths; and 120-in infrared telescope in desert region where vapor would be less likely to interfere with infrared radiation. (Text; Wilford, NYT, 9/20/68, 29)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, flown by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, completed first powered flight after air launch from B—52 aircraft near Lancaster, Calif., to demonstrate successful operation of XLR—11 rocket engine and to investigate effects of engine operation on basic stability and control of wingless vehicle. Manke said craft climbed and maneuvered in “marvelous fashion.” Increased performance expected in successive flights would simulate lifting-body spacecraft during terminal portion of flight. Manke ignited two of four chambers in HL—10’s rocket engine and climbed from 35,000 to 43,250 ft, reaching top speed of 610 mph (mach 0.8) during 184-sec engine burn. Eventually speeds of 1,000 mph and altitudes to 80,000 ft were expected. Oct. 23 HL—10 flight had ended with early shutdown of rocket engine, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 68-198; frc Release 26-68; AP, B Sun, 11/14/68, A10; latns, W Post, 11/14/68, A22)
Dr. Alan H. Barrett and Dr. William J. Wilson of mit reported in Science discovery of hydroxyl radio emissions from four infrared stars in Cygnus constellation, observed from National Radio Astronomy Observatory in West Virginia. They speculated that emissions indicated definite stage in stars’ evolution. (The older a star gets the hotter it becomes, until it has almost no oxygen and hydrogen.) Further studies, supported partially by NASA, would be conducted during next few years in attempt to determine how far young stars had progressed in process of evolution by observing hydroxyl emissions. {Science, 8/23/68, 778-9; Wilford, NYT, 8/25/68,19)
In Washington Sunday Star William Hines said NASA announcement of plans for 1974 Mars landing marked revival “of a project that was sacrificed last year on the altar of the great God Apollo whose manned moon program was gobbling up all the funds at NASA’s disposal. It also marked the first positive action by NASA in two years directed to starting rather than terminating activities.” Its timing, one month after presidential election, seemed “to provide a tantalizing clue to the Nixonian philosophy about space.” Hines said it was likely new administration would heed post-Apollo views of NAS which had recommended more attention to scientific exploration of space with instruments. (W Star, 12/15/68, F4)
Apollo 204 accident was reviewed in Senate Report No. 956, issued by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “The thorough investigation by the Apollo 204 Review Board . . . determined that the test conditions at the time of the accident were extremely hazardous. However, the test was not recognized as being hazardous by either NASA or the contractor prior to the accident. The committee can only conclude that NASA’s long history of successes in testing and launching space vehicles . . . led to overconfidence and complacency.” Committee recommended that “safety ... be considered of paramount importance in the manned space flight program even at the expense of target dates” and urged NASA to keep “appropriate Congressional committees informed on significant problems arising in its programs.” Individually, three Committee members—Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), Sen. Edward W. Brooke (R-Mass.), and Sen. Charles H. Percy (R-Ill.)—filed more critical separate reports. Sen. Brooke and Sen. Percy stated: “. . . NASA’s curious reticence to supply these facts and figures [Phillips Report] relevant to a thorough evaluation of Apollo program management brought the credibility of NASA and its top management into sharp question [and] this initial lack of candor as to the existence and then the status of the Phillips report threatened one of the essential assets of the space program—the confidence of the American public and their elected representatives.” Sen. Mondale said NASA “has an unfortunate habit of swamping Congress with engineering details and starving it for policy and management information. . . . Congress should be able to count on frank answers to pertinent, responsible, and legitimate inquiries.” Criticizing Committee’s report, Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) said in news release later, “Although the Senate Committee does charge NASA with such misdemeanors as overconfidence and complacency, the report remains a whitewash and an evasion of the real issues involved.” (Texts)
U.S.S.R. would increase pace of its space program in preparation for manned circumlunar flight, John N. Wilford reported in New York Times. Although no official Soviet flight schedules had been announced, informed sources speculated that U.S.S.R. would conduct manned earth-orbital flight, possibly within three months, during which cosmonauts in redesigned Soyuz spacecraft would practice rendezvous with another vehicle; unmanned circumlunar flight during summer 1968; and manned flight in fall 1968, in which cosmonauts or animals would circle moon in Soyuz spacecraft and return to earth. (Wilford, NYT, 2/18/68, 18)	_
XB-70A, flown by nasa test pilots Donald L. Mallick and Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., reached 63,000-ft altitude and mach 2.54 in flight from Edwards afb. Accomplished successfully were ilaf systems check; exciter vane tests; evaluation of stability, control, and handling qualities; and observation of duct turbulence, (nasa Pro] Off)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey spent five hours in briefings at ksc, ascending to spacecraft level of Apollo 8 moon rocket, performing simulated rendezvous and formation flying inside mock spacecraft, and lunching with NASA officials and Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. During visit, he said: “The space program has contributed greatly to the structure of our nation. ... I have felt it has been underfunded at times and we will pay the price. I feel it is a wise investment on the part of Congress and the public. I’ll do what I can as a private citizen and a former chairman of the space council to see it is funded.” (ksc Release ksc—496—68; AP, W Star, 11/20/68, A8; AP, W Post, 11/20/68, Cl; Today, 11/20/68, 1) _
Within limited budget, nasa was “attempting increased emphasis on Astronomy” using manned spaceflight capabilities, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Space Science and Applications Subcommittee. Advanced studies and supporting R&T programs would be expanded in FY 1969 to lay “ground work for a major program in space astronomy.” Flight program in space physics was being “supported at reduced levels,” primarily because of OGO phaseout, but resources would be needed “to capitalize on analysis of data obtained.” Decline in data and experiments, despite output from Explorer and Pioneer programs, might be stemmed, but nasa “considered it much more important to use our requested resources to develop a program which will enable us to fly new experiments, to make new investigations, and to explore new regions of interplanetary space.” Development of two new Pioneer spacecraft would be initiated in FY 1969, to reach past Mars and toward Jupiter, with first launch proposed for 1973. (Testimony) *	nsf announced award of first nine grants under National Sea Grant College Program Act of 1966 to encourage development of national marine resources. Grants, which totaled nearly $2 million, included three to help higher education institutions develop broadly based major programs for increasing utilization of marine resources and six to support individual sea grant projects, (nsf Release 68—112)
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, and JPL Director William H. Pickering had been named cowinners of American Astronautical Society’s 1967 Space Flight Award for outstanding achievement in advancement of space flight and space science. (AP, W Star, 4/21/68, A5)
Interview with Dr. Donald F. Hornig, Science Adviser to President Johnson, appeared in New York Times. Dr. Hornig said problem facing his successor, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, was finding funds for science and technology, to preserve “the vitality, the creativity and the entrepreneurial surge of the establishment.” Next science adviser would have to orient new administration to give science proper place in overall scheme. One of America’s great strengths was recognition that science, like economics, was part of everything. New administration would have to set course for space program after manned lunar landing. It would have to decide how to improve nation’s health care, deal with environmental pollution, and face technological problems of keeping world free of nuclear war. Particularly important task would be advancing vitality of basic science enterprise—research devoted to quest for knowledge with no immediate applications in mind. (Schmeck, NYT, 12/5/68, 28)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana flew X—15 No. 1 to 264,000-ft altitude and 3,443 mph (mach 4.71) during flight from Edwards AFB to conduct WTR experiment and check horizon scanner, sky brightness, fluidic probe, and fixed alpha ball. (X—15 Proj Off)
President-elect Richard M. Nixon introduced his Cabinet on nationwide TV from Washington, D.C. Among appointments, William P.	Rogers, Washington attorney and Eisenhower Administration Attorney General, would serve as Secretary of State; Rep. Melvin R. Laird (R-Wis.), as Secretary of Defense; and Massachusetts Gov. John A. Volpe, as Secretary of Transportation. (Herbers, NYT, 12/12/68)
Director of Defense Research and Engineering, Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., testified before House Committee on Armed Services on FY 1969 defense research, development, test, and evaluation program. “We have a strong technical-military position today only because we built a strong research and technology base in the past. . . .Yet there are some indications that the program is eroding.” The “net effect of continuing this trend will be a serious weakening of our long-term national security position.” Research and technology funding in FY 1968 was “about 70% of the FY 1964 level, a critical 30% reduction.” (Text; P SB, 6/9/68)
President Johnson announced promotion of Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders (Maj., usaf) to lieutenant colonel under his policy of granting one-grade promotion to military astronaut after his first successful space mission. (Maynard, W Post, 12/29/68, A4; PD, 1/6/69, 5)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Deputy Administrator whom retiring Administrator James E. Webb had said would be named Acting NASA Administrator by President Johnson, represented “new breed of scientist-administrators making their way into government,” said John Lannan in Washington Evening Star. Unlike Webb, he was new to Government, having come up through “the scientific ranks of the sprawling General Electric Co. over a period of 19 years.” As Webb’s chief deputy since March, Dr. Paine had been authorizing and signing major announcements but had yet to confront Congress. He and Webb saw eye-to-eye, he had said, on agency’s current program emphasis, which had been criticized as too heavily oriented to manned flight. “I am a very strong supporter of doing as much as we can in planetary areas.” Dr. Paine said, “but it’s one of those cases where you’ve got limited resources and you’re trying to do all the things you can. You’ve got to do things in aeronautics; we’ve got to finish up the Apollo program; and we’ve got to do more in earth resources (surveying them from space) here on this planet.” A lot of NASA’s future “is in the questions that we’ll be raising as we continue to probe the planets.” On balancing space needs against problems of cities, Dr. Paine felt U.S. suffered from “what I would call almost a national hypochondria ... in many ways crippling some of the forward-looking things we’re able to do. ... I feel that one of the very highest priority matters is the war on poverty and the problems of the cities. But in the meantime, we’re making . . . a lot of progress in the civil rights area and really, this nation is a good deal healthier than we’re giving it credit for today.” He was confident of a resurgence of public interest in space once the Apollo program got underway. (W Star, 9/17/68, A4)
Nearly 1,000 scientists and educators attended “crisis” meeting called by New York Academy of Sciences to demand science be declared “disaster area” because of threatened $6-billion Federal budget cut. Federal R&D funding, after decade of average 22% annual expansion, had risen only 2.5% annually since 1964, while number of scientists had risen 20%. It was feared resulting crush would damage U.S. leadership in science and technology. MIT Provost Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner said, “If the Congress continues to do what it is now doing we’ll wake up with another sputnik in a decade.” Federal R&D funding had risen from $74 million in 1940 to $16.9 billion in 1968 with October 1957 “shock of Sputnik” giving greatest impetus. Cut of $6 billion would mean “we’re going to cut not only into the fat, but into the flesh of lots of areas,” Dr. Donald F. Hornig, President’s Science Adviser, said. NASA’s sustaining university program had been one of chief casualties of recent cutbacks with budget slashed from $45 to $10 million yearly, forcing drop from 1,300 to 50 training grants which had produced more than 1,000 Ph.D.s since 1961. Government officials had chided scientists for being ill-prepared for leveling of Federal support and for alleged detachment from political realities. (Reinhold, NYT, 6/21/68, 1)
nasa announced that H. Julian Allen, who joined naca in 1936, would retire as Director of Ames Research Center Nov. 15. arc Associate Director John F. Parsons would serve as Acting Director. Leading authority on supersonic and hypersonic wind-tunnel design, Allen had originated concept of bluntness for reentry shapes—as used in Apollo spacecraft—and had received naca’s Distinguished Service Medal, NASA medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement, aiaa Sylvanus A. Reed Award, and Air Force Assn.’s Air Power Trophy. After his retirement Allen would be available to NASA as a consultant, (nasa Release 68-183; SBD, 10/28/68, 272; nasa Ann)
NASA was conducting three separate studies to determine reasons for failures of May 18 launch of Nimbus B, Aug. 10 launch of Ats IV, and Sept. 18 launch of Intelsat III—-which had brought its launch record down to 0.500 average. Before May failure, agency had compiled “almost incredible” launch record, said Thomas O’Toole in Washington Post. Sources close to NASA had said agency was conducting fourth investigation to determine whether there was “something systemic at the root of the trouble.” One theory was that decline in NASA launch activity in 1968, with 42 attempted launches thus far compared to 69 at same time in 1967, had caused similar drop in attention to detail. Second theory was that layoffs and turnover in launch crews had cut down efficiency and introduced element of inexperience. Third theory was that nasa was suffering from “a sudden case of overconfidence brought on by its long string of launch successes.” Seven-man hoard to investigate failure of first Intelsat III mission met for organization session. Board, convened by Dr. John E. Naugle, nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, would have five observers in addition to seven voting members and would be chaired by Daniel G. Mazur, Assistant Director for Technology at GSFC. (nasa Release 68—160; NYT, 9/21/68, 14; W Post, 9/24/68, A10)
U.S.S.R.’s Zond V automatic research station had apparently suffered series of errors during reentry that could have been fatal if men had been on board, John Lannan reported in Washington Evening Star. According to one unidentified U.S. source, Zond V had entered atmosphere and “skipped” back out as planned, but then skipped along top of atmosphere and reentered “at a peculiar angle.” Reentry caused g forces and heat loads that would have been fatal to crews if aboard, and spacecraft landed thousands of miles short of its intended landing area, which was probably on land in Soviet territory. Chicago Tribune later supported theory that Zond V’s reentry was a disaster and reported that U.S. sources said evidence indicated spacecraft had: (1) failed to circle as close to moon as intended, and was thus unable to obtain useful photos of possible landing sites; (2) reentered earth’s atmosphere at angle much steeper than planned, causing friction temperatures that would have killed cosmonauts; and (3) landed in water accidentally instead of in Soviet territory as planned. (W Star, 9/28/68, Al; C Trib, 10/1/68)
usaf test pilot Maj. William J. Knight was named 1968 winner of Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy as “world’s outstanding pilot for exceptional individual piloting performance.” He had piloted X—15 No. 2 to 4,520 mph Oct. 3, 1967. Maj. Knight held both command pilot and usaf astronaut’s command wings, having piloted research aircraft to 280,000-ft altitude. (NYT, 10/20/68, 84; CSM, 10/21/68)
At NASA Pasadena (Calif.) Office third annual awards ceremony, Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, said: “During the next few years . . . our efforts in astronomical observations, in space applications and in planetary exploration, should receive priority. ... In astronomy, perhaps more than in any other scientific discipline, major progress has been achieved when a new observing technique is used. In the next several years we will provide our astronomers with such new observational tools—telescopes and detectors in space above the absorbing and obscuring effect of the earth’s atmosphere. ... we envision a complementary program using both manned and automated observational platforms leading to permanent observatories in space in the next 10 to 15 years. On the other hand, OAO, oso, and the small astronomy satellite will carry the burden of automated observation, while the Apollo Telescope Mount provides us with early experience in the contribution man can make in astronomy. Before very many years, it should be possible for us to move into astra-type systems in which we combine the best of both techniques, i.e., long-term automated instruments in orbit of a cost and complexity which justify their being serviced and maintained by man. . . . “Although . . . post Apollo plans are much more modest than previously announced, even at these reduced levels, it should be possible to carry out some important near-earth and extended lunar missions following the Apollo landings. However, there remains no clear picture as to the future of manned space flight beyond the use of the launch vehicles and rockets left over from Apollo. The resolution of the future goals of manned space flight must await the . . . next administration.” (Text)
NASA announced that sinus condition that was aggravated by pressure changes and had not responded to treatment led to grounding—perhaps permanently—of Astronaut John S. Bull. Astronaut Robert A. R. Parker had suffered spine fracture during parachute training at Williams afb, Ariz., but injuries were not thought to be serious. (AP, B Sun, 5/16/68, A3; W Star, 5/16/68; H Post, 5/16/68, 8)
NASA Assistant Administrator for Administration William E. Lilly presented NASA’s FY 1969 administrative operations (AO) budget to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. He said $648.2 million was requested and “the same stringent measures that were required in FY 1968 to operate at a level of $628 million have been continued into FY 1969.” (Testimony)
President Johnson at news conference announced that resignations of A. B. Trowbridge as Secretary of Commerce and Charles Murphy as member of Civil Aeronautics Board had been accepted. With Senate approval, Trowbridge would be succeeded by C. R. Smith, Chairman of Board of American Airlines, and Murphy, who would become consultant to President, by John H. Crooker of law firm Full-bright, Crooker, Freeman & Bates. {PD, 2/19/68, 295—300)
NASA issued Apollo Status Summary. In preparation for first manned Apollo flight, Apollo 7 spacecraft command module (cm) and service module (sm) had been mated in ksc altitude chamber to confirm compatible operation systems. Saturn IB launch vehicle 2nd-stage engine was being modified to strengthen propellant feed lines to augmented spark igniter. Apollo/Saturn 503 mission might be first manned Saturn V flight. Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin, Vance D. Brand, and Joe H. Engle had successfully completed eight-day vacuum chamber test of Apollo 2TV—1 cm and sm at msc June 24. All tests necessary to help verify Apollo for first manned flight had been completed, with review of test data in progress. Last of seven scheduled verification tests of modified Apollo earth landing system had been postponed to complete analysis of all possible test conditions before drop of 13,000-lb full-scale Apollo cm from aircraft at Naval Air Facility, El Centro, Calif. Test would simulate severe landing condition using one of two drogue parachutes and two of three main parachutes. Ultimate load test of two modified Apollo drogue parachutes in reefed condition was scheduled no earlier than June 27. Repeat of unsuccessful test, it would be conducted from 13,00-lb parachute test vehicle at aircraft altitude of 46,000 ft. (Text; upi, W Post, 6/22/68, A8; SBD, 6/25/68, 270; 6/27/68, 285)
NASA announced publication of Teleoperators and Human Augmentation (nasa SP—5047), nasa—aec technology survey issued by NASA Office of Technology Utilization and written by Edwin G. Johnsen and William R. Corliss. It covered work of both agencies in development of teleoperators, including history of the robot-like machines, assessment of their impact on technology, and explanation of principal subsystems of those in use. Since 1948 “some 3,000 manipulator arms” had been built in U.S.—• “the advance guard of an army of man-machine systems now assembling to serve man in a variety of ways.” (nasa Release 68-62)
John N. Wilford described in New York Times front page article decline in U.S. space expenditures since 1966: “Under pressure from the war in Vietnam, civilian space spending has dropped from $5.9-billion in the peak year of 1966 to $4.8-billion this year, and it is expected to drop much lower in the fiscal year starting in July. Employment in space work at private companies, universities and Government centers has declined from 420,000 in 1966 to fewer than 300,000 today, and it is still dropping at the rate of 4,000 a month.” Signs of decline were clearly visible, in “ghost towns” that were once test sites, and in removal of numerous projects from NASA’s post-Apollo plans. Fortunately, impact of cutback was softened because NASA had not replaced many personnel who ordinarily left agency each year and because personnel dismissed were absorbed by growing aircraft industry and expanding military space program. But there was a growing feeling “that once astronauts have landed on the moon, they will have no other place of significance to go for several years because of sharp budget cuts. These cuts have trimmed to the bone all preparations for future missions. It is as if the astronauts are heading for a dead-end on the moon.” (NYT, 4/16/68, 1)
U.S. patent No. 3,381,917 was awarded to Wendell F. Moore, assistant chief engineer at Bell Aerosysterns Co., and Edward G. Ganczak, research associate, for Bell Pogo and Flying Chair, flying platforms on which pilot could stand or sit on fuel tank. Engine was kerosene turbojet. Both had arm pieces with which pilot directed thrust. Pilot could disembark without encumbrance, advantage useful to soldiers, policemen, or firemen. (Jones, NYT, 5/11/68,45)
sst prototype construction would be delayed one year because of design changes “which would result in significant improvements in the production airplane,” Boeing Co. President William M. Allen announced. Detailed plans of recommended changes were being prepared for faa approval. Although present design could result in airworthy flight-test aircraft, FAA and airline reviewers had concluded that prototype should have more substantial range and payload “to assure it is a sound foundation for an economically successful commercial aircraft.” First flights now would be in 1972. (Boeing Release; W Post, 2/23/68, A3; WSJ, 2/23/68, 4)
X—15 No. 1, flown from Edwards afb by nasa test pilot William H. Dana, successfully reached 255,000-ft altitude and 3,682 mph (mach 5.04) in 199th and last flight of program. Purpose was to conduct WTR experiment and check out fixed alpha cone and fluidic probe. Flight scheduled for Dec. 20 was later canceled because of adverse weather. It was not rescheduled because NASA announced completion of program [see Jan. 21 and Dec. 20]. (X—15 Proj Off; nasa Release 68-221; AP, W Post, 10/25/68; SBD, 10/29/68, 289)
Eugen Sanger Medal of German Society of Aeronautics and Astronautics was awarded to U.S. X—15 research aircraft team in Bonn, West Germany, for X—15 program’s contribution to advancement of space flight. Medal honored German rocketry leader, Dr. Eugen Sanger, first to define potential of hypersonic rocket aircraft, who died in 1964. John V. Becker of LaRC accepted award on behalf of NASA—USN—USAF team, (nasa Release 68—206)
Prof. J. Hoover Mackin, one of four experts chosen by NASA to examine first rock samples to be returned from moon, died in Houston, Tex., at age 62. He had held William Stamps Farish Chair in Geology at Univ. of Texas. (AP, W Post, 8/14/68, B6)
msfc announced award of $1,400 to msfc Test Laboratory Engineer John A. Hauser for invention of five-module system for purifying and filtering gas to purity necessary in development of Saturn rockets. (msfc Release 68-82)
Senate approved reappointment of Gen. John P. McConnell as Air Force Chief of Staff effective Aug. 1, 1968. {CR, 7/3/68; S8200; W Post, 7/4/68,4)
Tenth anniversary of Explorer I [see Jan. 31] was commemorated by JPL and Cal Tech with two-day program including symposium on First and Second Decades of Space Research and JPL open house. JPL Director, Dr. William H. Pickering, leader of first Explorer scientific task force, was chairman. Speakers included Dr. James A. Van Allen of State Univ. of Iowa, who had verified radiation belts bearing his name; l/g Austin W. Betts (usa), Army Chief of Research and Development; Dr. John W. Findlay, NASA Lunar and Planetary Missions Advisory Board Chairman; and Dr. Joseph Kaplan of ucla, U.S. Chairman of igy when Explorer I was launched Jan. 31,1958. In next 10 yr, “as an increasingly important area of scientific and technical research a balanced program in space must certainly be part of the activities of our Nation,” Dr. Kaplan said. “No more noble and useful service can be conceived than one which gives strength to . . . cooperation among the nations of the earth. Space certainly qualifies for such a role.” Dr. Findlay outlined possible missions “of strong scientific interest” to Mercury, Venus, Mars, and Jupiter in next decade. Gen. Betts voiced concern about attitudes toward exploratory efforts; he was “not convinced that we remember, the lesson” of Sputnik /. “Only some two weeks” after its launch, numerous programs were proposed for U.S. satellite—possible only because “far-sighted technical people had been planning for various applications of space for some time, and even though firm military requirements were not available.” (jpl Releases, 1/22/68, 1/31/68; Texts; Wilford, NYT, 2/2/68, 4; SBD, 1/26/68, 38)
Univ. of California physicist Dr. Edward Teller, at hearing on nuclear nonproliferation treaty before Senate Foreign Relations Committee, urged Congress to preserve option of giving nonnuclear allies control over “purely defensive” nuclear weapons systems. He was referring, he said, to system that could be exploded only over a nation’s territory, one involving “time-lock” of monthly inspection by donor nation, and one which would be proof against tampering or analysis designed to develop it into offensive system. (Maffre, W Post, 7/18/68, A4; Sherman, W Star, 7/18/68, A12)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb delivered John Diebold Lecture on Technological Change and Management at Harvard Univ. Graduate School of Business Administration. Speaking on “nasa as an Adaptive Organization,” he emphasized “how as well as what” in nasa’s buildup of capabilities and learning to “apply new ways of organizing and administering human and material resources.” ' Capabilities demonstrated during one week—second week of November 1967—in launching Ats III, Surveyor VI, Saturn V, and Essa IV represented “better than 90% of everything we would need to carry out almost any mission that even the most daring have placed on our space agenda for the next decade.” Measurements made by experimental spacecraft plus essa’s 24-hr-per-day operations were providing handsome returns in understanding and predicting weather. “This is one way our country says to every other country, every day, that we as a people want to use our new power over the forces of nature in a joint effort with them, with benefits to both of us, and not to threaten or to coerce them to follow some pattern laid down by us.” Magnification capability of Ranger and Surveyor opened way “for lunar and planetary investigations of a type and scope undreamed of before we learned to use the rocket technology.” Saturn V launch “demonstrated that we can have . . . the big-booster capability and the launch rate capability in which we have been behind the U.S.S.R.” Utility of Essa IV was “far beyond any we can achieve in any other way. It works ... all around the world, and feeds information into something like 296 stations in the United States and about 86 in 45 other countries. It is truly a working bird. . . . “I do not believe our Nation could have long continued as a great power if we had not built up the means to conduct operations in space. ... I believe we would have sacrificed our chances to keep pace in the technological competition that is the crucial test of our times. . . . We would have denied to ourselves the tools and the knowledge necessary . . . [for] problems that beset us and the rest of mankind the benefits that surely will follow from the full development of space applications.” (Text; W Post, 10/13/68, B5)
Tenth anniversary of first US. satellite, Explorer I, shown in 1958 photo with jpl scientists before abma—jpl launch. Still in orbit, 30.8-lb 80-inch assembly of instrumented tipper section and final-stage solid-propellant rocket had traveled 1bi billion miles. Left to right are John Smell; the late Dr. /, E. Froelich, jpl project director; Dr. Albert R. Hibbs; Karl IE. Linnes; and Robert Victor. (U.S. Army photo) American and Soviet space statistics: “The U.S, has placed about 500 vehicles in Earth orbit to 250 for the USSR. We have had 13 successful missions to the Moon, the USSR 8. Our reconnaissance spacecraft have obtained about 100,000 high-resolution photographs of the Moon; USSR craft have returned about 100. The U.S. has had three successful missions to the near planets in five attempts. Russia has successfully landed an instrumented package on Venus after an estimated 19 planetary attempts. We have accumulated nearly 2,000 hours of manned space flight time, compared with about 530 for the USSR. Our astronauts have performed multiple rendezvous and docking operations; the Soviets have demonstrated one automatic docking. We have logged over 12 hours of extravehicular activity; the USSR shows 20 minutes.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, critical of cuts in NASA budget, noted: “nasa has not been able to plan for post-Apollo projects with any degree of certainty. NASA has attempted production of the Saturn IB and Saturn V at the rate of two each per year. Frankly, this rate is too low to maintain the progress and momentum so painstakingly acquired in the space program over the past decade. “The dismantling of the high competence built up over the years at jpl and [msfc] has already begun. Both organizations are already losing valuable, highly trained people because of the insecurity and the lack of challenging work for them to do. And we face the grim reality of even further reductions and cutbacks. . . . The exploration of space has proven its worth, and has become deeply ingrained into the everyday fabric of our society. . . .” Space program would be examined closely by Congress, Dr. von Braun said, but “NASA’s record of accomplishments and the ability of its management will bear up well under the scrutiny. In determining what our space program should be during the coming years . . . members of Congress . . . [should] give careful consideration to where we are today in space, at the end of our first decade, and where we could be ten years from now, by building on the accomplishments of the past.” (EH; Texts; msfc Release 68—14; Clark, NYT, 2/1/68, 15)
President Johnson presented Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy to Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) for piloting X—15 rocket research aircraft to unofficial record speed of 4,520 mph (mach 6.70) Oct. 3, 1967. During White House ceremony President said, “What we learned from the X—15 program will enable us to improve on all our aircraft. The information gained from Major Knight’s ‘flying laboratory’ will make the airplanes of the future safer, faster, and more efficient.” (NASA PAO; W Post, 12/4/68, A3; SBD, 12/5/68,151; PD, 12/9/68,1660)
John Lannan in Washington Evening Star called GSFC “home base” for Apollo 7 astronauts. All their communications would pass through Center. Communicating with some or all lunar spacecraft would be 14 land stations, 4 ships, and 8 aircraft around the world, manned by 4,000 persons. All circuits used would be put together from GSFC switching centers. Except for astronaut’s electrocardiagram and his voice, all mission data would be channeled in digital form, which meant vast bulk of detail controlling system itself, in addition to mission data from Houston or spacecraft, could be handled rapidly by computers. (W Star, 9/2/68,1)
