Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin was uninjured when faulty landing gear on T—33 jet trainer forced belly landing at Ellington AFB, Tex. (AP, W Star, 8/16/69, A2)
Reporting findings from four months of Oao II data to 129th meeting of American Astronomical Society in Honolulu, Univ. of Wisconsin astronomer Dr. Arthur D. Code said: “It puzzles me to see so much ultraviolet light from the Andromeda galaxy (M31) and so little from M81 because they are rather old ‘garden variety’ galaxies. . . . There is a possibility that we might have discovered an old quasar a few million light years away.” Full impact of Oao II data would not be felt for couple of years. “Some theories on cosmology will have to be modified and others discarded. Practically all phases of optical astronomy will be affected.” Temperature figures assigned to young, hot stars with masses more than 15 times sun’s would require alteration. “These stars are considerably hotter than 20,000 degrees absolute. They are aging about twice as fast as we thought and are burning hydrogen at a very rapid rate.” OAO data thus far provided argument against steady-state theory of universe which maintained universe always looked same, from any point at any time, Dr. Code said. At same meeting, Joseph Purcell, oao Project Manager at gsfc, said Oao II’s observatory control system had exceeded its pointing accuracy requirement of one minute of arc by factor of two. “A subsequent oao will be 100 times more stable.” (nasa Release 69—51; Lannan, W Star, 4/4/69, A5)
In Science article advocating large-scale mobilization of scientists to solve world’s “crisis problems,” John Platt, Associate Director of Univ. of Michigan Mental Health Research Institute, said human race was on steeply rising “S-curve” of change. “We are undergoing a great historical transition to new levels of technological power. . . . In the last century, we have increased our speeds of communication by a factor of 107; our speeds of travel by 102; our speeds of data handling by 106; our energy resources by 103; our power of weapons by 106; our ability to control diseases by something like 102; and our rate of population growth to 103 times what it was a few thousand years ago.” Within last 25 years “the Western world has moved into an age of jet planes, missiles and satellites, nuclear power and nuclear terror.” But S-curve was beginning to level off. “This means that if we could learn how to manage these new powers and problems in the next few years without killing ourselves by our obsolete structures and behavior, we might be able to create new and more effective social structures that would last for many generations.” (Science, 11/28/69, 1115-21)
nasc Executive Secretary William A. Anders, Apollo 8 astronaut, told Western Conference of Young Presidents’ Organization in Phoenix, Ariz., that U.S. lost $13 billion each year in agricultural production from insects, disease, and fire. Use of satellite sensors could improve surveys of agricultural and forest resources, aid mineral and petroleum prospecting, obtain better inventory of earth’s water sources, detect natural and man-made geography changes, sense ocean currents and temperatures to aid fishing industry and improve routing of commercial shipping, and study effects of environmental and water pollution. While NASA space expenditures were averaging about $4.5 billion annually— about 2/3 of 1% of GNP—nearly $4 billion was spent in U.S. for nondurable toys and sport supplies, $4.7 billion for foreign travel, and over $6.5 billion in amusements. Anders urged international harmony through space. “We travel through space on a small planet. The Earth looked so tiny in the heavens that there were times during the Apollo 8 mission when I had trouble finding it. If you can imagine yourself in a darkened room with only one clearly visible object, a small blue-green sphere about the size of a Christmas tree ornament, then you can begin to grasp what the Earth looks like from space. I think all of us subconsciously think the Earth is fiat or at least almost infinite. Let me assure you that, rather than a massive giant, it should be thought of more as the fragile Christmas tree ball which we should handle with considerable care. . . . From space, the earth is indivisible. There are no flags, no national boundaries. Let us on Earth then use the Communications Revolution to break down the barriers which separate us, so that all of Earth’s people will be truly brothers.” (CR, 10/6/69, E8190—2; nasc pio) *. Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and wives arrived at Las Palmas, Canary Islands, for two-day rest before proceeding to Madrid and meeting with Gen. Francisco Franco during 38-day goodwill tour. (AP, NYT, 10/6/69)
In press interview Transportation Secretary John A. Volpe said he favored building SST. “I certainly don’t want to see our country play second fiddle . . . and if this is feasible and economical to build and operate and the economy of the nation budget-wise will permit it, I probably would like to see it go ahead.” (upi, W Star, 3/16/69, All)
NASA’s Annual Honor Awards Ceremony was held in Washington, D.C., with keynote speaker Dr. Charles H. Townes, Univ. of California at Berkeley physicist and member of President’s Task Force on Science Policy. Recipients of NASA Distinguished Service Medal were: l/g Frank A. Bogart (usaf, Ret.), msc Associate Director; Robert E. Bordeau, Assistant Director for Projects, GSFC; Dr. John F. Clark, gsfc Director; Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator, OMSF; Ozro M. Covington, Assistant Director for Manned Flight Support, gsfc; George H. Hage, Boeing Co. Vice President for Product Development and former NASA Apollo Program Deputy Director; Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Rocco Petrone, Apollo Program Director; l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Commander of usaf Space and Missile Systerns Organization (samso) and former Apollo Program Director; Julian W. Scheer, Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs; Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Deputy Administrator; Willis H. Shapley, Associate Deputy Administrator; and Gerald M. Truszynski, Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition. Distinguished Public Service Medal was awarded to Dr. Harry H. Hess (posthumously), former Princeton Univ. geologist and Chairman of NAS—NRC Space Science Board, and to Dr. Townes. Exceptional Bravery Medal was awarded to Charles J. Beverlin and Billy B. McClure of General Dynamics Corp. at ksc, each for prompt action during “accidental depressurization of an Atlas launch vehicle” which “prevented destruction of a Mariner Mars space vehicle and potential injury to his comrades.” Special recognition given to employees of NASA and leading aerospace industries for their role in successful Apollo lunar landing resulted in largest number of annual awards to date. Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal was awarded to 25 persons, Exceptional Service Medal to 97, and Public Service Group Achievement Award to 29. Other awards included Group Achievement Award, Public Service Award, and Certificate of Appreciation. (Program; NASA Release 69—143; nasa Personnel Div)
Rep. Louis Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), introduced for himself and Rep. William Chappell (D-Fla.) HJ.R. 834 “to redesignate the area in the State of Florida known as Cape Kennedy as ‘Cape Canaveral.’ ” Measure was referred to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (CR, 7/23/69, H6238)
Aerospace Corp. announced election of Dr. T. Keith Glennan, President Emeritus of Case Institute of Technology and first nasa Administrator (1958—1961), as Chairman of Board of Trustees. Sherrod E. Skinner retired as Chairman and l/g James H. Doolittle (usaf, Ret.), Vice Chairman, also retired during annual meeting of Board of Trustees. Skinner and Gen. Doolittle were awarded usaf Exceptional Service Award by Under Secretary of the Air Force John L. McLucas in El Segundo, Calif., ceremony Sept. 12 (Aerospace Release; CR, 9/25/69, E7813)
nasa’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by nasa test pilot John A. Manke, reached 78,000-ft altitude and mach 1.55 after air launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude west of Rosamond, Calif. Objective of flight, 23rd in series, was to obtain data on performance, stability, and control—especially roll control, (nasa Proj Off)
President Nixon in San Clemente, Calif., announced 1969 recipients of National Medal of Science, Federal Government’s highest award for distinguished achievement in science, mathematics, and engineering, including: Purdue Univ. chemist Herbert C. Brown, for “discovery and exploration of hydroboration reaction and for developing it into a major and powerful tool in chemical synthesis”; Princeton Univ. mathematician William Feller, “for original and definitive contributions to pure and applied mathematics, for making probability available to users, and for pioneering work in establishing Mathematical ReviewsJack S. C. Kilby, Texas Instruments Inc., for “original conceptions and valuable contributions in the production and application of integrated circuits”; and Wolfgang K. fi. Panofsky, Director of Stanford Univ. Linear Accelerator Center, for “classic experiments probing the elementary particles of matter and for contributions to advancing the means of experimentation in this challenging field.” {PD, 1/5/70, 10-1) During December: NASA issued Apollo 11: Preliminary Science Report (NASA SP—214), summarizing scientific findings of first manned lunar landing mission July 16—24. In foreword Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said: “The concept of traveling across the vastness of space to new worlds has stirred the imagination of men everywhere. . . . The success of this mission has opened new fields of exploration and research . . . which will lead to a greater understanding of our planet and provide a new insight into the origin and history of the solar system.” Report included photographic review of Apollo 11 mission with observations by crew—Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. Descriptions of geologic setting of lunar material, soil mechanics investigation, passive seismic experiment, laser ranging retroreflector, and solar wind composition experiment were provided by principal investigators. In addition to major findings reported Sept. 15 in summary by NASA Preliminary Examination Team (pet), SP—214 reported passive seismic experiment package deployed on moon had operated satisfactorily for 21 days and had detected seismic signals from astronaut activity or lm motions. Whether actual lunar seismic events had been detected was uncertain. Laser reflector deployed on moon had been used as target for earth-based lasers and distance to moon had been measured to within four-mile accuracy. Future studies would be made on distance variation to study motion of moon and earth. Preliminary analysis had been made on part of aluminum foil and showed helium, neon, and argon; isotopic composition of each element had been measured. (Text; NASA Release 69—160)
Sen. Spessard L. Holland (D-Fla.), for himself and Sen. Edward J. Gurney (R-Fla.), introduced S.J.R. 133 “to redesignate the area in the state of Florida known as Cape Kennedy as Cape Canaveral.” Measure was referred to Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs. (CR, 7/10/69, S7819)
William Hines said in Washington Evening Star: “It now seems entirely . possible that NASA may sneak into a Mars program without a specific go-ahead of the type given for the moon adventure in 1961. A case can be made that exploration of the planets is but a logical extension of exploration of the moon; that once the space frontier is crossed in 1969 everything else is evolutionary, not revolutionary. This sort of gradualism, which is analogous to a girl’s becoming a little bit pregnant, is just as effective in the long run as the flamboyant setting of spectacular goals, and probably a good bit more feasible in a time when there is already much grumbling about pre-occupation with other worlds when our own is in such a sorry state.” (W Star, 4/27/69, G4)
Apollo 10 mission would be launched from etr May 18 carrying Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford (commander), John W. Young (cm pilot), and Eugene A. Cernan (lm pilot), on eight-day lunar orbital mission. Final decision to fly mission as previously planned followed review of technical and operational data from ApoUo 9 (March 3—13). Mission would provide additional experience in combined system operation and, with exception of actual landing on lunar surface, was same as for lunar landing mission. While spacecraft circled moon at 69-mi (111.0km) altitude, Stafford and Cernan would separate lm from csm, pilot lm twice to within 10 mi (16.1 km) of preselected landing site, and return to csm. Crew would then make landmark sightings, take photos, and transmit live TV views of moon, earth, and spacecraft interior before returning to earth, (nasa Release 69—46)
Where the Legend Starts,” film depicting life of late Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, was being prepared in U.S.S.R., Tass announced. Gagarin, first man in space on Vostok I April 12, 1961, died in aircraft crash March 27, 1968. (AP, C Trib, 4/9/69)
Boeing 747 slated for passenger service with Pan American World Airways beginning mid-February 1970 flew from Seattle, Wash., to John F. Kennedy International Airport with 176 passengers in first public preview of jumbo jet flight. Passengers—PAA officials, flight crew, and press—were startled by shudder as plane’s wheels were buffeted by rough spots on runway. Phenomenon was repeated when plane touched down in New York after 4-hr 5-min flight. Passengers also were critical of “interior noise level in the rear half of the plane.” (Witkin, NYT, 12/3/69, 1)
Current Book-of-the-Month Club selection, The Andromeda Strain by Michael Crichton, would “hardly gladden the hearts” of those at NASA, said Walter Sullivan in New York Times. It dramatized dangers of back contamination that had “suddenly become a subject of sharp debate on the eve of the Apollo 11 mission to the moon.” (NYT, 6/15/69, E8)
President and Mrs. Nixon watched Apollo 8 films at White House showing attended by Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. Borman narrated. (Shelton, W Star, 1/31/69, Bl; PD, 2/3/69, 194)
President Nixon would ask Congress to appropriate $662 million over five years to assist in SST development, Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced. Federal Government would spend estimated $761 million through FT 1974, including $99 million in funds already appropriated, to construct and flight-test two prototype Boeing sst models. Total development cost was estimated $1.5 billion, with $1.3-billion Government participation to be repaid from sale of approximately 300 aircraft capable of carrying 300 passengers each at maximum 1,800-mph speeds, (dot Release 21069)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said to press representatives in Houston he was “surprised and disappointed” by May 19 speech of Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) suggesting slowdown in U.S. space program after lunar landing and exploration. “He is wrong,” Dr. Paine said. “The United States should not weakly yield technological supremacy in space to the Soviets. We should not ground our astronauts after Apollo.” He told press he did not want Apollo 10 astronauts in flight to moon to hear news of speech and would not include item in news reports sent up to spacecraft. (W Post, 5/21/69, A12)
William Teir, Saturn IB program manager at MSFC, became deputy director for management of Program Management directorate, (msfc Release 69—225)
Project Tektite Aquanauts Richard A. Waller, Conrad V. W. Mahnken, John G. Van Derwalker, and H. Edward Clifton were brought to surface and placed in decompression chamber for 19 hrs, after recordbreaking 59 days on ocean floor off St. John, Virgin Islands. They had submerged Feb. 15 in successful experiment to determine how men functioned for extended periods underwater. At news conference later, aquanauts revealed they had spent 25—40 hrs outside underwater habitat during first two weeks, moving no farther than 300 ft; later they averaged 70 hrs per week, swimming up to 3,000 ft from habitat to study marine life, ocean currents, and geology. (Lyons, NYT, 4/14/69, 17; AP, W Star, 4/15/69, Bll; W Post, 4/16/69, A9; 4/17/69; 4/19/69, A6)
nasa released first of hundreds of photos and moving pictures taken by Apollo 10 crew. Pictures showed moon from variety of positions and csm as seen from LM. Photo of Triesneck Crater showed network of broad rifles which resembled tracks left by large snowballs rolled over snow-covered plain. Photo of Sea of Tranquility, prime landing site, had only few rugged features, including medium-sized Moltke Crater and Hypatia Rifle. Pictures showed striking resemblance to aerial photos of Antarctica. Films included scenes of moon taken from lm at pericynthian and of Astronaut John W. Young shaving in CSM. (AP, B Sun, 5/29/69, Al; W Post, 5/29/69, A4)
President Nixon received report of 10-member ad hoc committee appointed Feb. 7 to review all aspects of SST program. Under Secretary of Transportation James M. Beggs, chairman, said no votes were taken by committee on recommendations to President; each member had submitted his suggestions to Transportation Secretary John A. Volpe and they were included in report, (upi, W Post, 3/29/69, A2)
Eyewitness to Space,” exhibit of works of over 70 U.S. artists commissioned by NASA to document its activities, opened at National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C. Show included paintings, drawings, and sculpture by James B. Wyeth, Mitchell Jamison, Norman Rockwell, Lamar Dodd, William Thon, and Robert Rauschenberg. Eight-foot montage of disparate space themes by Rauschenberg was largest lithograph ever made, according to Gallery’s Curator of Art H. Lester Cooke. (Constantine, W Star, 12/7/69, J8)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs to succeed Dixon Donnelly who had resigned in January. Nomination was submitted to Senate Dec. 2. (PD, 12/1/69, 1667; 12/8/69, 1702)
Venus, “least understood of the inner planets,” should be U.S. space program priority target, Kitt Peak National Observatory physicist Dr. Donald M. Hunten and Harvard Univ. physicist Dr. Richard M. Goody said in Science. Some fundamental data were available; quantitative theories had been stated; questions about atmosphere could be answered by feasible missions; and geophysicists’ interest had been aroused and offered specialized knowledge needed to understand complex processes. But NASA had no present plans for investigation of Venus’ lower atmosphere. Uncertainty as to Soviet intentions had been cited as reason for giving Venus low priority. But until collaboration with U.S.S.R. and other European countries could begin, “we have no choice but to base our judgment upon our own scientific and technical abilities and desires.” (Science, 9/26/69, 1317—23)
Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., formally announced candidacy for Democratic nomination for U.S. Senate seat being vacated by Sen. Stephen M. Young (D-Ohio). (NYT, 12/12/69, 33) December 12; NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 80,000-ft altitude and mach 1.4 after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude west of Rosamond, Calif. Objective of powered flight, 31st in series, was to obtain stability and control data, (nasa Proj Off)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 60,500-ft altitude and mach 1.6—vehicle’s fastest speed to date—after air-launch from B—52 aircraft west of Rosamond, Calif. Objective of flight, 27th in HL—10 series and 14th with power, was to obtain stability and control data at transonic speeds. (nasa Proj Off; AP, NYT, 10/29/69, 12)
Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins reported on Apollo 11 mission to joint session of Congress called in their honor. Astronaut Armstrong said: “Several weeks ago I enjoyed the warmth of reflection on the true meanings of the spirit of Apollo. I stood in the highlands of this Nation, near the Continental Divide, introducing to my sons the wonders of nature and pleasures of looking for deer and for elk. In their enthusiasm for the view they frequently stumbled on the rocky trails, but when they looked only to their footing, they did not see the elk. To those of you who have advocated looking high we owe our sincere gratitude, for you have granted us the opportunity to see some of the grandest views of the Creator. To those of you who have been our honest critics, we also thank, for you have reminded us that we dare not forget to watch the trail.” Astronaut Aldrin said: “Our steps in space have been a symbol of this country’s way of life as we open our doors and windows to the world to view our Successes and failures and as we share with all nations our discovery. The Saturn, Columbia, and Eagle, and the extravehicular mobility unit have proved . . . that this Nation can produce equipment of the highest quality and dependability. This should give all of us hope and inspiration to overcome some of the more difficult problems here on earth. The Apollo lesson is that national goals can he met where there is a strong enough will to do so.” Astronaut Collins said: “We have taken to the moon the wealth of this Nation, the vision of its political leaders, the intelligence of its scientists, the dedication of its engineers, the careful craftsmanship of its workers, and the enthusiastic support of its people. We have brought back rocks. And I think it is a fair trade. For just as the Rosetta stone revealed the language of ancient Egypt, so may these rocks unlock the mystery of the origin of the moon, of our earth, and even of our solar system,” Astronauts presented Congress with two U.S. flags which previously had flown over Senate and House of Capitol and had been carried to moon aboard Apollo 11 spacecraft. (CR, 9/16/69, H7937—9)
Once Vietnam war was over, Michael Harrington said in Washington Evening Star, there would be “money enough for both slums and space if the nation has the political will to appropriate it.” Space exploration could provide “economic alternative to war.” It was “simply not true that the United States must choose between the heavens and earth. By the mid-Seventies, this country will have achieved a $1 trillion gross national product and because of this . . . there will be almost $30 billion in ‘extra’ federal funds by 1972. That projection does not require any increase in taxes and it assumes that there will be a fairly high level of military spending.” (W Star, 1/7/69, A7)
President Nixon’s amendments to proposed FY 1970 space budget would support post-Apollo manned flight at expense of unmanned planetary space flight, William J. Normyle wrote in Aviation Week & Space Technology. In effect, NASA had received “almost all it wanted for planning post-Apollo manned lunar exploration.” Argument was expected in House Committee on Science and Astronautics over relative apportionment. (Av Wk, 4/21/69, 16—7)
Univ. of California astronomers Dr. E. Joseph Wampler and Dr. Joseph S. Miller reported'they had photographed winking of pulsar in Crab Nebula—first of pulsars to be unequivocally associated with observable star—by spinning disc before star’s image projected by 120-in telescope at Lick Observatory, Calif. Hole in disc, spun slower than flash rate of pulsar, permitted light from star to penetrate once each revolution. For first time star was shown photographically to be flashing on and off. Rate of light pulses was identical to that of previously observed radio pulses. {NYT, 2/1/69, 22; upi, W Post, 2/7/69, A6)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate Dr. William D. McElroy, Chairman of Johns Hopkins Univ. Dept, of Biology, as Director of National Science Foundation. Dr. McElroy would replace Leland J. Haworth, whose six-year term had expired. He was director of Mc-Collum-Pratt Institute at Johns Hopkins, former member of President’s Science Advisory Committee, and member of nas, aaas, American Chemical Society, and American Society of Biological Chemists. {PD, 6/23/69, 877)
Congressional sources quoted by John Finney in New York Times said White House had ordered cancellation of DOD’s mol program [see June 10] over dod and usaf objections and in response to mounting congressional pressure to hold down military spending. (NYT, 6/12/69, 1)
There is a good chance there is some form of life on Mars,” Los Angeles Herald-Examiner quoted Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, as saying in interview. “The planet has a thin atmosphere, the climate is tough but not completely unreasonable.” Changes of colors on Mars eould be vegetation. Mars’ seasons were like earth’s but twice as long. Its days were same length as earth’s. (Smith, LA Her-Exam, 6/19/69)
Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders returned to Houston, Tex., for biggest parade in city’s history, with quarter million spectators filling sky with ticker tape and balloons. Astronauts received city’s highest honors, bronze medals for heroism with motto “per aspera ad astra.” (AP, B Sun, 1/14/69, A8; upi, W Post, 1/14/69, A4)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, reached 54,000-ft altitude and 724 mph (mach 1.1)—first supersonic flight by HL—10—after 45,000-ft-altitude air-launch from B—52 aircraft. Primary purpose of 17th flight, made north of Four Corners, Calif., was to obtain stability and control data, (nasa Proj Off)
Space program could provide tools and knowledge to help eliminate air pollution, NASC Executive Secretary William A. Anders, former Apollo 8 astronaut, said in speech before Governors’ Conference on California’s Changing Environment in Los Angeles. With remote sensors in aircraft “pilot can quickly and accurately map pollution levels over a wide area and range of altitudes.” Pollution map of entire U.S. could be generated each day. “Thus, aircraft and satellites with these remote sensors offer the unique advantage of being able to view large areas through new eyeballs very quickly and selectively. Further, by computer, the data can be reduced to formats that can be quickly and easily understood.” Aircraft and satellite surveys would provide “data which supplement surface techniques and which, in some cases, can’t be gathered in any other way.” Rather than fantastically expensive, satellite measurements could “be competitive with surface systems.” (Text)
Washington Sunday Star editorial commented on proposals made at aaas meeting in Dallas, Tex., Dec. 26—31, 1968, for agency to establish priorities for Federal spending in research, education, technology, weapon development, and science. Dr. James V. Shannon, former nih director, had proposed creation of top-level council equal in stature to National Security Council and Council of Economic Advisers. Dr. Donald F. Hornig, President Johnson’s Science Adviser, had recommended adding Secretary of Science to Presidential Cabinet. Star said, “There will be strong opposition to both of these proposals. The cry of centralization will be raised.” However: “What is proposed . . . is a body of. informed advisers, whose duty it is to suggest ... to instruct the President, the Congress and public on the potentialities for good and evil that could result if a given path were followed. The President would still have to make the executive decisions. Congress would still control the purse. The public would still have the final verdict of the ballot. But all of them could use some responsible, expert guidance through the awesome and fantastic new world that lies just ahead.” (W Star, 1/5/69, Gl)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced 10-mo extension, to Oct. 25, 1970, of faa rule setting hourly flight quotas at five high-density airports serving New York, Chicago, and Washington, D.C. Decision was based “on operational experience . . . which clearly establishes that the traveling public has benefited substantially from this measure.” (faa Release 69—137)
H.R. 16, 17, and 204, bills to authorize award of Congressional Medal of Honor to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders, were introduced during first session of 91st Congress. {CR, 1/3/69, H33—42)
Senate, by vote of 58 to 22, rejected amendment submitted by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) to strike from H.R. 14794, dot FY 1970 appropriations bill, $80 million for SST development. (CR, 12/17/69, S17003, S17005—48)
Apollo 10 astronauts would each carry out about two hours of head exercises early in mission in attempt to prevent motion sickness which plagued previous Apollo astronauts, msc Deputy Director of Medical Operations, Dr. A. Duane Catterson, said. Exercises—which included nodding, rocking, and twisting head—would be done to point just below threshold of illness until normal adaptation occurred. Since pilots who regularly performed drastic maneuvers in aircraft seldom suffered motion sickness, astronauts had flown aerobatic jet flights in barrel rolls and high-gravity maneuvers during week before launch. (Cohn, W Post, 5/18/69, A8) Launch events occurred as planned and spacecraft—carrying Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford (commander), John W. Young (cm pilot), and Eugene A. Cernan (lm pilot)—entered initial parking orbit with 118.1-mi (189.9-km) apogee and 114.6-mi (184.4-km) perigee. Checkout followed lunar trajectory insertion; then csm, code-named Charlie Brown, separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) and lm, codenamed Snoopy. Crew successfully transposed csm and docked with lm. Excellent quality color TV coverage of docking sequences was transmitted to Goldstone tracking station and seen on worldwide commercial TV. Crew extracted lm from S—IVB and conducted 1st sps burn. All launch vehicle safing activities were performed as scheduled and successful propellant dump provided impulse to S—IVB for slingshot maneuver to earth-escape velocity. On second day, first midcourse maneuver was not required. Crew conducted midcourse maneuver number two, which was so accurate that third and fourth maneuvers were canceled. Five color TV transmissions totaling 72 min and showing excellent views of receding earth and spacecraft were made during translunar coast. Spacecraft entered moon’s sphere of influence on fourth day, May 21, at 61:50 get. Crew conducted first lunar orbit insertion maneuver with 356-sec sps burn to reduce speed to 5,474 fps and place spacecraft in initial lunar orbit with 196.1-mi (315.5-km) apolune and 68.6-mi (110.4-km) perilune. Second loi maneuver, 13.9-sec sps burn, circularized orbit with 70.8-mi (113.9-km) apolune and 67.8-mi (109.1-km) perilune. Crew tracked lunar landmarks and transmitted 29-min color TV of lunar surface. Cernan transferred to lm at 81:55 get for two hours of housekeeping activities and communications test. On fifth day Stafford and Cernan entered lm and checked out all systems before firing sm reaction control system thrusters to separate csm and lm ahout 30 ft and again for 2.3-mi separation, lm descent propulsion system burn propelled lm to within 9.6 mi of lunar surface over landing site No. 2. Crew had no difficulty identifying landmarks and Stafford said, “It looks like all you have to do is put your tail wheel down and we’re there. . . . The craters [around No. 2 landing site] look flat and smooth at the bottom. It should be real easy” for Apollo 11 landing, lm crew took numerous photos of lunar surface and provided continuous commentary on their observations after cameras malfunctioned. Astronauts described volcanoes and light-colored craters that glowed as if lit by radioactive substance. Crew conducted lm radar test during low-altitude pass which indicated 47,000-ft pericynthian (lowest point in orbit), dps phasing burn raised apocynthian (orbital high point) to 218.6 mi (351.7 km). lm descent stage was jettisoned and Res separation maneuver and staging were accomplished. Anomaly in automatic abort guidance system caused lm ascent stage to undergo extreme gyrations. By taking over manual control, Stafford reestablished proper attitude. APS insertion maneuver burn at pericynthian established equivalent of standard LM insertion orbit of lunar landing mission (51.8 by 12.9 mi), where lm coasted for one hour. Concentric sequence initiation at apocynthian, constant-delta-height maneuver, and terminal maneuver were conducted. lm successfully docked with csm at 106:33 get, after eight-hour separation; and lm crew returned to csm. On sixth day lm ascent stage was jettisoned; its batteries burned to depletion and it entered solar orbit. Crew made 18 landmark sightings and took extensive stereo and oblique photos of moon. Two scheduled TV periods were deleted because of crew fatigue and crew rested and prepared for return to earth, sps burn at 137:36 get injected csm into transearth trajectory after 61.5 hrs (31 orbits) in lunar orbit. Maneuver was so accurate that two other scheduled midcourse maneuvers were not necessary. During return to earth astronauts made star-lunar landmark sightings, live color TV transmissions, star-earth horizon navigation sightings, and csm S-band high-gain antenna reflectivity test. Pictures of moon from receding spacecraft were spectacular. Scheduled 10- and 29-min color TV broadcasts of earth, moon, and spacecraft interior were later followed by unscheduled TV transmission, which provided beautiful pictures of earth and brought total color TV broadcasts to 19 transmissions totaling almost six hours. On eighth day crew prepared for reentry and SM separated from CM on schedule. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned. Apollo 10 splashed down in Pacific at 12:52 pm edt May 26, 3.4 mi from recovery ship U.S.S. Princeton 192 hrs 3 min after launch and precisely on time. Crew was picked up and reached recovery ship at 1:31 pm edt. All primary Apollo 10 mission objectives and detailed test objectives were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor discrepancies, which were corrected. Flight crew performance was outstanding; all three crew members remained in excellent health and their prevailing good spirits were continually evident. Accomplishments included evaluation of LM steerable antenna at lunar distances; demonstration of lunar landing mission profile; low-level evaluation of lunar visibility; inflight demonstration of Weslinghouse color TV camera; testing of landing radar in near-lunar environment; and manned navigational, visual, and photographic evaluation of lunar landing sites 2 and 3, and in addition other possible lauding sites in highland areas. Apollo 10 was seventh Apollo mission to date, fourth manned Apollo mission, largest payload ever placed in earth and lunar orbits, and first demonstration of lunar orbit rendezvous. Mission acquired major quantities of photographic training materials for Apollo 11 and subsequent missions and numerous visual observations and photos of scientific significance. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had achieved all primary objectives and had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. First manned lunar orbital mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), had proved capability of Apollo spacecraft and hardware to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere at lunar velocity. Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) had proved capability of manned LM to operate in space. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; MSC was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, M5FC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj OH; NASA Release 69-68; W Post, 5/19-27/69, Al; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 5/19-27/69, Al; W Star, 5/19-27/69)
NASA and DOT award of $165,908 contract to Booz-Allen Applied Research Inc. for six-month study of total U.S. investment in aeronautical r&d since 1945 was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Joint effort was to develop methods of assessing national benefits which accrued from R&D development expenditures, (dot Release 22269)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced new faa regulation establishing maximum noise level for new subsonic transport aircraft at 93—108 effective perceived noise decibels—up to 10 epndbs less than those for noisiest aircraft already in service. Regulation would be effective Dec. 1, but aircraft like Boeing 747 with high-bypass-ratio engines for which application for type certificate was made before Jan. 7, 1967, would be granted additional time to comply, (dot Release 69-124)
President Nixon, at White House ceremony, presented National Space Club’s Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy to Apollo 8 astronauts and announced nomination of Acting Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to be NASA Administrator. Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., accepted award for himself and Astronauts Frank Borman and William A. Anders. Citation: “In an epic journey man for the first time in December 1968 soared out of the earth gravitational field, flew unerringly into a close orbit of the moon, then back to a precise and safe landing. This historic voyage performed at times before the largest television audience in history, and open for coverage by the world’s press, reflects the utmost credit on the United States Space Program, Congress, nasa, and thousands of companies and employees in industry representing all these, the courageous, competent crew of Apollo 8.” Following award presentation, President announced Dr. Paine’s appointment: “There has been a great deal of interest as to who would be the new head of NASA. ... we have searched the country to find a man who could take this program and give it the leadership that it needs, as we move from one phase to another. This is an exciting period, and it requires the new leadership that a new man can provide. But after searching the whole country for somebody, perhaps outside of the program, we found . . . that the best man in the country was in the program.” Dr. Paine in his response said: “I believe in the space program. I believe in this country, and I think that this country should indeed be the preeminent nation in space-faring, and ... I am sure that we can go ahead to . . . see that the NASA program in the second decade of space will even out-perform the accomplishments in the first.” (PD, 3/10/69, 369-71)
September 6: Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders were named winners of 1969 Harmon International Astronaut’s Trophy for December 1968 Apollo 8 mission. Maj. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf) was awarded Aviator’s Trophy for testing NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle. Harmon trophies were awarded annually to world’s outstanding pilots for feats of individual piloting skill, (upi, W Star, 9/7/69, A7)	.
faa Administrator John H. Shaffer announced allocations of $34,144,479 to construct and improve 177 U.S. airports under FY 1970 Federal-aid Airport Program. Appropriations, based on $30 million authorized by Congress and carryover funds from previous years, represented last year of funding authorized under current Federal Airport Act. Program stressed preservation and expansion of facilities at existing airports to accommodate high-performance, sophisticated aircraft; increasing airport capacity; relieving congestion; and continuing construction of airports initiated under earlier programs, (faa Release 69-59)
Apollo 11 astronauts discussed possible manned Mars landing by 1982 on CBS TV program “Face the Nation.” Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said, “I am quite certain that goals of the Mars variety are within our range, should we choose . . . that investment of our national resources.” First exploratory flights could be combined with earthorbiting spacecraft to develop long-term capability with same kind of spacecraft. It was “well within our capability” to be prepared for Mars launch in 1981. Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., said he was “not so sure . . . this is the time that we can accurately set a date like 1981.” Setting goal was worthwhile but as intermediate goals were reached “I believe we will be able to better define exactly what our longer term goals are in terms of ten years from now.” Astronaut Michael Collins said, “I don’t think 1981 is too soon. I think it is well within our capabality to do so.” Long-duration trip “requires careful design and testing of the equipment, which could easily be done in Earth orbit with a number of ancillary benefits.” He defended Bible reading in space and announced he would not fly in space again, because he found it increasingly difficult “to keep up year after year” with rigorous training required. (SBD, 8/19/69, 159; W Post, 8/18/69, A2; NYT, 8/18/69, 33)
National Aeronautic Assn, conferred title “Elder Statesman of Aviation” on Adm. Joseph J. Clark (usn, Ret.), Katherine Stinson Oteroo, and William A. Patterson, retired President of United Air Lines. (W Star, 11/15/69, A3)
President Nixon announced intention to appoint Abbott M. Washburn as U.S. Representative to Plenipotentiary Conference on Definitive Arrangements for the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium, with rank of Ambassador, succeeding William W. Scranton, whose resignation would be effective Dec. 31. {PD, 1/5/70, 5)
Transfer of usaf mol officers to NASA astronaut corps [see Aug. 14] was criticized in Washington Sunday Star by William Hines: “With the initial moon landing now an accomplished fact, the pace of manned space operations has slowed down to three flights per year. This means that no more than nine men can fly annually, and with 54 astronauts now on board, this, in turn, means an average of six years between flights.” Though pace might accelerate in time and future space stations would increase annual number of crew assignments, “the glamor and glory of being an astronaut—particularly a nonflying one—no longer compensates for the enforced idleness imposed by the modified flight schedule.” (W Star, 8/24/69, D4)
At Geneva luncheon during meetings of Disarmament Conference, U.S. and U.S.S.R. opened exploratory talks on proposed treaty banning use of seabed for stationing nuclear weapons, (upi, W News, 3/20/69, 2) for “national program for the development of a permanent space station and a logistic support system in a way that will not only serve the needs and goals of the civilian space program, but will also be capable of supporting future defense research and developments as needs become clearly defined.” (Text) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Deputy Administrator, said: “Although similar space technology is used in Apollo Applications and the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, there is no unnecessary duplication in the experiments planned. These activities require different equipment, different orbits and different timing. I believe that any attempt to combine the two programs would jeopardize the returns to each agency and would ultimately increase the cost. There is a distinct need to continue with manned space operations under both military and nonmilitary auspices. Cooperation between nasa and dod has been close, and will continue.” (Text) afa’s highest award, Henry H. Arnold Trophy, was presented to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. NASC Executive Secretary, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, received Gill Robb Wilson Trophy for Arts and Letters for his part in interpreting aerospace role in modern society, afa’s Citation of Honor went to l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) for his management of NASA Apollo program, and to Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) for “outstanding contributions to the Air Force and the nation for being the first to achieve hypersonic winged flight while piloting the X—15 aircraft to a speed of 4,534 miles per hour.” (afsc Newsreview, 3/69, 1; AFJ, 3/8/69, 30)
U.S. patent No. 3,420,471 was granted to John D. Bird, Howell D. Garner, Ernest D. Lounsberry, and David E. Thomas, Jr., LaRC engineers who assigned rights to NASA for jet shoes to enable astronauts to move in space. Wearer could rotate body by natural ankle and leg motions and control direction by turning body and aiming head in swimming motion. Previous devices for similar purpose required use of one or both hands or operation of complex arrangement of control jets and gyroscope sensors. Toe pressure in new shoes would release nitrogen through thruster in sole of each shoe. With electrical control, pressure would be applied to switch. Alternate method would be fluidic control, with toes pressing syringe. (Pat Off pio; NYT, 1/11/69, 39)
Apollo 8 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders, both U.S. Naval Academy graduates, presented Academy flag carried aboard Apollo 8 spacecraft to brigade representing 4,000 midshipmen at Annapolis. (AP, B Sun, 4/3/69, All)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 12: “It is almost incredible that such giant strides could have been made in the few months that separated Apollo 12 from Apollo 11.” Navigational capabilities available to Neil Armstrong last July were “so inexact that for days or weeks after his landing there was no certainty even as to just where Eagle had touched down. Intrepid, on the contrary, landed within a few hundred feet of Surveyor 3, the prime target of its crew’s planned collection activities. It will take months, perhaps years, to harvest the full scientific gains from Apollo 12. Already, however, it is evident that mankind is still at the stage where the more it learns about the moon, the more mysterious and puzzling that natural satellite appears to be.” (NYT, 11/23/69, 12)
Scientist-astronaut Dr. William E. Thornton, who had been grounded in spring, received usaf clearance to continue jet pilot training. Thornton had had difficulty landing because of distortion of vision called aniseikonia, which reduced hi§ depth perception. Vision had been corrected with special glasses, (upi, W Star, 8/26/69, A3; W Post, 8/26/69, A9)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 66,000-ft altitude and mach 1.6 in powered flight after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude west of Rosamond, Calif. Objectives of flight, 29th in series, were to obtain stability and control data and airspeed calibration, (nasa Proj Off)
Edgar L. Piret, U.S. Embassy Scientific Attache in Paris, accepted Prix Pierre Guzman gold medals on behalf of Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. Award had been established by Mme. Anna Emile Guzman in 1889 for first persons “to find the means of communicating with a heavenly body—Mars excluded” [see Aug. 13]. (AP, W Post, 12/9/69, A23)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 15th flight. Primary objectives were to expand flight envelope to mach 0.9 and to determine control characteristics at mach 0.9. Vehicle was air-launched from B—52 aircraft north of Four Comers, Calif., at 45,000-ft altitude and mach 0.7. Manke ignited three chambers of XLR—11 engine, rotated vehicle, climbed to 55.000-	ft altitude, and sustained flight at mach 0.9 for 100 secs. (NASA Proj Off)
NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 81,000-ft altitude and mach 1.42 after air-launch from B—52 aircraft west of Rosamond, Calif. Primary objective of flight, 24th in series and first with new engine, was to obtain stability, control, and engine data, (nasa Proj Off)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong (commander), Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (lm pilot), and Michael Collins (cm pilot) held press conference at msc. Astronauts were seated 50 ft from nearest newsmen and were partially enclosed in plastic booth as part of plan to limit crew’s contacts during 21 days immediately preceding flight and prevent development of illness. Collins told press that from CM viewpoint, Apollo 11 should not be very different from previous manned Apollo missions. He did not feel “slightest bit frustrated” about going to moon without landing on it: “I’m going 99.9 . . . percent of the way there, and that suits me fine.” lm flight plan would pick up where Apollo 10 left off with phasing maneuver, Aldrin explained. There would be number of “firsts”: “the ultimate test,” actual touchdown; 1/6 g environment; new thermal conditions; two-man EVA on lunar surface; sleeping in LM on moon; star sighting technique with alignment telescope on lunar surface; and powered ascent from moon with seven-minute engine burn. One of important early activities after exiting from lm on moon would be determining best pace for moving about: “. . . there have been several different techniques employed in the partial zero gravity training. And, it looks like you can walk conventionally one foot after another. It also looks as though you can do a two-footed hop—kangaroo style.” In training in aircraft flown at 1/6 g, “a fairly rapid pace” appeared quite easy to perform. “It looks like we shouldn’t have too much difficulty in moving at something like 6, 8, or 10 miles per hour.” Armstrong said crew would use “somewhat hybrid methods of manual and automatic” for descent to moon. “The predicted method at this point, although we have a great deal of flexibility and choice, based on the situation at the time, would he to maintain manual control of attitude and automatic control of throttle through the final descent from an altitude of somewhere between 500 and 1000 feet until such time as the automatic throttle rated descent was unsatisfactory, at which time we’ll go full manual on the throttle ... flying it in a manner like a normal vtol machine.” Code names for cm and lm had been selected as “representative of the flight, the nation’s hope,” Armstrong revealed, lm would be called “Eagle” for U.S. national emblem, and cm would be called “Columbia” for U.S. symbol, statue on top of Capitol, and Jules Verne’s fictional spacecraft, “Columbiad,” which flew to moon 100 yrs ago. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 7/6/69, Al) Borman and family visited Star City, home of cosmonauts outside Moscow, where he presented color film of Apollo 8. Cosmonauts presented Borman with model of Vostok 1, first manned spacecraft. Later Borman toured major space tracking station at Eupatoria near Yalta in Crimea. (AP, W Star, 7/5/69, A13; UPl, W Star, 7/7/69, A2)
sst economics were discussed by FAA Administrator John H. Shaffer before Long Island Assn, of Commerce and Industry in Manhasset, N.Y. Study of simulated sst operation in 1980s, with comparison of sst and subsonic jets based on total operating cost rather than direct operating cost and using 1969 values, had shown “sst beats the 707 substantially and comes much nearer to equaling the impressively low 747 costs.” Elements of ground support and overhead costs gained advantage of sst’s greater productivity in seat-miles per hour. “The 2707—300 [sst] is two thirds as big as the 747 and it flies three times as fast, so it will do twice as much as the 747 (and 4% times the 707 or DC—8) in the same time period.” By 1978, sst introduction date, aircraft’s total operating cost “comes within one-tenth of a cent per seat-mile of matching the 440-seat economy version of the 747.” (Text)
Dr. John M. DeNoyer, former Assistant Director for Research at U.S. Geological Survey, became Director of Earth Observations Programs in nasa Office of Space Science and Applications, (nasa Hq WB, 1/5/70)	_ _	_	_
usaf released three-volume Scientific Study of Unidentified Flying Objects, report of Univ. of Colorado scientists directed by Dr. Edward U. Condon. It concluded that “nothing has come from the study of UFOs in the past 21 years that has added to scientific knowledge. . . . Further extensive study of UFOs probably cannot be justified in the expectation that science will be advanced thereby.” Scientists felt “the reason that there has been very little scientific study of the subject is that those scientists who are most directly concerned, astronomers, atmospheric physicists, chemists, and psychologists, having had ample opportunity to look into the matter, have individually decided that UFO phenomena do not offer a fruitful field in which to look for major scientific discoveries.” In review of study, nas special review panel had concluded, “On the basis of present knowledge the least likely explanation of UFOs is the hypothesis of extraterrestrial visitations by intelligent beings.” Condon report recommended dod handle UFO sighting reports in normal surveillance operations and found no basis for contention that ufo data were “shrouded in official secrecy.” Report stated, “The history of the past 21 years has repeatedly led Air Force officers to the conclusion that none of the things seen, or thought to have been seen . . . constituted any hazard or threat to national security.” Report of two-year study, commissioned by USAF for $500,000, had been approved by nas panel. (Text; Sullivan, NYT, 1/8/69, 1; 1/10/69, 32; Boffer, Science, 1/17/69, 260—2)
New York City held ticker-tape parade for Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders, followed by presentation at City Hall Plaza of Medals of City of New York, luncheon at Lincoln Center, appearance at U.N., and Waldorf-Astoria dinner attended by 2,500 political leaders and guests. (NYT, 1/10/69, 30; Aarons, W Post, 1/11/69, Al; AP, B Sun, 1/11/69, A4)
At closed session of Senate Armed Services Committee Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, and Gen. John P. McConnell, Air Force Chief of Staff, said development of new intercontinental supersonic bomber was “perhaps our most urgent requirement.” Aircraft, with proposed asm system, would “provide insurance against unexpected Soviet developments.” {Homan, W Post, 4-/17/69, A9)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced faa plans to issue proposal to control emission of aircraft smoke in flight in effort to combat air pollution, (faa Release 69—129)
Welcome back to earth: Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (left to right inside the mobile Quarantine facility), were greeted by President Nixon aboard the V.S.S. Hornet after their splashdown. is back in orbit, having left Tranquility Base, and leaving behind a replica from our Apollo 11 patch with an olive branch.” LM docked with CSM at 128:03 get. Crew transferred with samples and film to csm, and LM ascent stage was jettisoned into lunar orbit. SM reaction-control-system separation maneuver placed CSM into orbit with 72,0 mi (115.9-km) apolune and 63.0-mi (101.4-km) perilune, where crew rested and prepared for return to earth. cm separated from SM on schedule at 194:49 GET. Because of deteriorating weather in nominal landing area, splashdown point was moved 247.4 mi downrange, where weather was excellent. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned. Apollo 11 splashed down in mid-Pacific at 12:51 pm edt July 24, 15 mi from recovery ship U.S.S. Hornet, 195 hrs 19 min after launch. Swimmers attached flotation collar and seven-man raft to spacecraft and helicopter dropped biological isolation garments, which were donned by astronauts inside CM and by one swimmer. Two other swimmers moved upwind of CM on another large raft. Postlanding ventilation was turned off and CM powered down, and astronauts climbed out and helped swimmer close hatch. Swimmer then decontaminated all garments, hatch area, flotation collar, and area around postlanding vent valves with Betadine disinfectant. Helicopter carried astronauts to recovery ship, where they entered 32-ft-long mobile quarantine facility (mqf) with recovery physician and technician. They were congratulated by President Nixon and Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, who were on board ship. Crew, physician, and technician remained inside mqf until it was delivered to Lunar Receiving Laboratory (lRl) in Houston July 27. cm was retrieved, placed in dolly on board recovery ship, moved to MQF, and mated to transfer tunnel. From inside MQF/cm containment envelope, mqf engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and CM was sealed until delivery to lrl. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown to Johnston Island and to Houston for transport to LRL. Primary Apollo 11 mission objective—to perform manned landing on moon and return—and all detailed test objectives were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor, corrected discrepancies. Flight crew performance was outstanding; all three crew members remained in excellent health and their prevailing good spirits and proficiency were major factors in mission’s success. Accomplishments included first manned lunar landing and return; first lunar surface EVA; first seismometer, laser reflector, and solar wind experiment deployed on moon; first lunar soil samples returned to earth; largest U.S. payload ever placed into lunar orbit (72,037.6 lbs at lunar orbit insertion); acquisition of numerous visual observations, photos and TV transmissions of scientific and engineering significance; and first operational use of mqf and lrl. Apollo 11 was eighth Apollo mission to date, fifth manned Apollo mission, and first manned lunar landing mission. Mission acquired major quantities of data for subsequent Apollo flights. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. First manned lunar orbital mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), had proved capability of Apollo spacecraft and hardware to operate out to lunar distance and return through earth’s atmosphere. Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) had proved capability of lm to operate in space under manned conditions. Apollo 10 (May 18—26, 1969) had successfully operated complete Apollo spacecraft on lunar orbital mission and had provided major quantities of scientific and training materials for Apollo 11. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69-83K; NYT, 7/16-25/69; W Post, 7/16-25/69; W Star, 7/16-25/69; B Sun, 7/16-25/69; PD, 7/28/69, 1016)
Intelligence briefings to high dod officials had indicated U.S.S.R. missile defense was three-quarters complete and had been slowed in recent months to improve its radar system, said William Beecher in New York Times. Briefings also indicated that antimissile system around Moscow, even when finished, would not alter balance of power between U.S.S.R. and U.S. or undermine U.S. retaliatory power. (NYT, 2/13/69, 1)
In Sydney, Australia, during world tour of Apollo 11 astronauts, Astronauts Michael Collins said NASA might someday send women on space flights, “nasa has never barred women,” he told news conference. “Flying background is usually what has prevented the young ladies from participating.” (AP, W Post, 11/2/69, 18)
In fourth big city welcome within one week, Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders received tribute from estimated 1.5 million persons in Chicago reception at which they were made honorary citizens of city, (upi, NYT, 1/15/69, 1)
naa announced Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders would receive 1968 Robert J. Collier Trophy for significant achievement in aeronautics and astronautics, as representatives of “entire United States space flight team for the successful and flawless execution of the first manned lunar orbit mission in history.” Trophy would be presented by President Nixon at Washington, D.C., luncheon May 7. (naa Release)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, was air-launched from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude and glided to successful landing. Purpose of flight, 16th in series at frc, was pilot checkout, (nasa Proj Off)
Astronauts Alan L. Bean, R. Walter Cunningham, and Joseph P. Kerwin were grounded by NASA for 30 days for minor infractions of aircraft flight rules. Groundings—apparent attempt by NASA to emphasize importance of safety during jet training flights—were first for astronauts ; in past, infractions had been discussed at weekly pilot meetings. (O’Toole, W Post, 1/7/70, A3)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced selection of Robert P.	Selfridge, Director of Greater Rockford (111.) Airport, to receive faa Award for Distinguished Service for his “contribution in developing and promoting the cause of General Aviation” and for his “constructive suggestions, imagination, dedication and service to the aviation users, above and beyond the role of an Airport Director.” (faa Release 69-67)
Florida Legislature passed concurrent resolution asking President Nixon and Congress to restore name “Cape Canaveral” to Cape Kennedy, subject to agreement by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), brother of late President John F. Kennedy. Original Spanish name meant “plantation of cane.” (AP, W Star, 6/7/69, Al)
Leonard Mandelbaum in Science briefly examined history of U.S. decision to adopt Apollo program. “Cautious approach” to manned space flight gave way after impact of April 12, 1961, “Russian spectacular” —flight of Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin—and U.S. Cuban foreign policy fiasco, Bay of Pigs. “Congress acted without hearing testimony of compelling military need. The Apollo decision was made without reference to any comprehensive and integrated national policy designed to maximize the use of scientific and technological resources for social objectives. ... It was a typical Cold War reaction.” (Science, 2/14/69, 649)
msc announced Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., had been cleared medically for return to space flight status following correction of inner ear disorder which had grounded him in 1963. (NYT, 5/8/69, 2; W Post, 5/8/69, A7)
U.S. Patent Office issued patent No. 3,456,387 to Clyde A. Tolson, Associate Director of Federal Bureau of Investigation, for equipment to operate emergency windows and exits in aircraft and space vehicles. Without action of occupants, sensors would detect abnormal conditions and computer would weigh considerations before opening appropriate escape exits. Patent No. 3,456,445 was issued to Curtiss-Wright Corp. for improved version of astronaut maneuvering unit, Cap Pistol, intended to propel man outside space vehicle by capsules spaced along tape strip and fired by engine in pistol fashion. Inventors were Joseph F. Loprete, Max Beniele, and Richard E. Biehl. (Pat Off PIO; Jones, NYT, 7/26/69, 31)	'
In Washington Sunday Star William Hines said: “Considering how very little he had to do with the whole enterprise, it is remarkable how much political mileage President Nixon got out of the flight of Apollo 11. The plaque, the phone call and the trip to greet the returning heroes all were benefits Nixon inherited rather than earned.” Official NASA space age history This New Ocean, published by GPO in 1966, mentioned Nixon only once in 648 pages “and there hardly as an aggressive champion of manned space flight.” Book said Nixon, as Vice President and as presidential candidate running against John F. Kennedy, had defended Eisenhower Administration’s attitude toward space which ruled out manned flights to moon in foreseeable future. “The new President’s belated enthusiasm blurs memories of the olden days,” Hines said. “But ‘This New Ocean’ remains, proving perhaps that all government-sponsored history books should be armed to self-destruct whenever a change of administration occurs.” (W Star, 1/21/69, E4)
NASA named Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong (.commander), Michael Collins (cm pilot), and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (lm pilot), as prime crew of Apollo 11 lunar landing mission scheduled for summer 1969. Backup crew would be Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr. (commander), William A. Anders (cm pilot), and Fred W. Haise, Jr. (lm pilot), (nasa Release 69—9)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, reached 79,000-ft altitude and mach 1.39 after air-launch from B—52 aircraft west of Rosamond, Calif. Purpose of flight, 25th in series and 12th using engine, was to obtain stability and control data at various angles of attack in speed range around mach 1.2. (nasa Proj Off)
Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), addressed National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., on impact of Apollo 8: “Many, if not most, of the world’s newspapers heralded the flight as evidence of the greatness of the United States. I’m told journalists in Germany, England and France speculated on the improved position that the U.S. would enjoy in the diplomatic arenas in which it is engaged in very important discussions. I’m told that a French paper went so far as to say that the lunar flight had vindicated Capitalism as the best system of government, and vindicated our free enterprise system as the most effective way to make progress. I’m aware from personal correspondence and discussions as well as reports in the press that scientists throughout the world have been equally impressed and that they’ve applauded the progress that this flight indicates for us.” Gen. Phillips described Apollo 9 mission as “far less spectacular than Apollo 8, but . . . more complex.” It would be “certainly one of the most vital missions that we’ve had in our mission sequence over the years that leads us to a lunar landing.” Risks would be different but “I personally think they’re a little greater than the risks which we knowingly accepted in committing the Apollo 8 mission.” Apollo 10 would be fifth Saturn V—505—with 106 command and service module and LM-4. Crew would be Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan. Scheduled for May, its objectives were “to demonstrate the performance of the crew, the space vehicle, and the mission support facilities during a manned lunar mission with the Command and Service Module and Lunar Module, and to evaluate the performance of the Lunar Module in a cislunar and lunar environment.” (Text)
NASA’s X—24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by nasa test pilot John A. Manke, reached mach 0.6 after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 40,000-ft altitude over South Rogers Lake Bed, Calif. Objectives of unpowered flight, sixth in series, were to check out new pilot, evaluate handling characteristics with 30° upper flap, and evaluate handling qualities at various roll gain settings of stability augmentation systems (SAS). (NASA Proj Off)	'
Testifying before Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Joseph B. Mahon, NASA’s Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Programs, OSSA, said NASA planned to use Titan IIIC and Titan Centaur to carry out high-velocity Viking mission in FY 1970. They would provide capability for both orbital and lander scientific experimentation and would expand launch window. After proof test flight in 1972 of integrated Improved Centaur and Titan III, configuration would be flown in support of 1973 Viking mission and other planetary missions, as well as earth synchronous missions using 4,000- to 8,000-lb spacecraft. Titan IIIC also would be used on two synchronous-altitude missions, ats—f and ats—G. (Transcript)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of $279,032 contract to Control Data Corp. Melville Space and Defense Systems Div. for 22-mo study of pilot warning instrument (pwi) systems that would improve pilots’ ability to detect other aircraft in flight, (faa Release 69—126) 160.7-mi (258.6-km) perigee, 655.3-min period, and 27.6° inclination. Primary NASA objective was to place spacecraft into synchronous transfer orbit accurate enough for apogee motor to place spacecraft into synchronous equatorial orbit. On Nov. 23 apogee motor was fired and spacecraft entered circular orbit with 22,216.5-mi (35,746.4-km) apogee, 21,558.3-mi (34,687.3-km) perigee, 1,431-min period, 2.44° inclination, and 1.3° per day eastward orbital drift. Drift rate was increased to 8° per day to ensure arrival on station over Indian Ocean by Dec. 30. All systems except primary communications system had been turned on and were operating satisfactorily. Skynet A was first of two U.K. military comsats scheduled to be launched over Indian Ocean under dod—u.k. agreement, usaf managed project for dod and would reimburse NASA for launch services. U.K. would reimburse usaf. Skynet B would be launched in May 1970. Spacecraft consisted of two concentric cylinders containing apogee motor, solar cells, despun antenna, high-pressure hydrazine stabilization system, and redundant x-band communications system. It was 32 in high, 54 in in dia, and had five-year lifetime. Initial operation of spacecraft telemetry and command functions were performed from usaf satellite control facility. Control of orbital operations would be transferred to U.K. telemetry command facility after spacecraft reached station, (nasa Proj Off; SBD, 11/26/69, 114)
Senate confirmed nomination of former Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins to be Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs. (CR, 12/12/69, D1201)
NASA was developing novel technique for photographing faint x-ray sources, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, Dr. John E. Naugle, told Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Testifying on supporting research and technology program, he said technique would reduce required exposure time 1/10 to 1/1000 and was “likely to revolutionize x-ray observations where telescopes are not usable.” Based on Princeton Univ. development and laser image-enhancement technique, it was “major technological advance as an outgrowth of the space program and should find applications in all fields of x-ray science.” gsfc was developing advanced gamma-ray telescope to observe center of galaxy and other celestial objects. Univ. of Colorado was developing advanced coronagraph to observe solar corona from earth orbit six months instead of the few minutes per year possible during solar total eclipse by ground-based observation. (Testimony)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., appeared in nationally televised press conference. Interview with four newsmen was conducted over closed-circuit TV, with astronauts at ksc and press 15 mi away. TV cameramen allowed in auditorium with crew had undergone thorough medical examinations. Armstrong, mission commander, said that after decade of planning and hard work astronauts were “willing and ready to attempt to achieve our national goal. This is possible because very many Americans across the nation have dedicated themselves to quality craftsmanship and ingenuity.” In response to question on astronauts’ attitudes toward mission, Armstrong said fear was not unknown, but added: “Fear is characteristic particularly of a knowledge that there may be something that you haven’t thought of and feel that you might be unable to cope with. I think our training and all the work that goes into the preparation for a flight does everything it can towards erasing those kinds of possibilities and I would say that as a crew we . . . have no fear of launching out on this expedition.” (Wilford, NYT, 7/15/69, 1, 20)
Climaxing day of cross-country celebrations, President and Mrs. Nixon hosted formal state dinner at Century Plaza Hotel in Los Angeles to honor Apollo 11 astronauts, their wives, and “historic achievement of the first manned landing on the moon.” Guests included other astronauts and wives; widows of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and Edward H.	White II; Mrs. Esther Goddard, widow of rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard; NASA and other space program officials; U.S. and international aviation pioneers; Cabinet members; Chief Justice and Mrs. Warren E. Burger; governors of 44 states; members of Joint Chiefs of Staff; Diplomatic Corps members representing 83 nations; Mrs. Dwight D. Eisenhower, widow of former President; former Vice President and Mrs. Hubert H. Humphrey; and Congressional leaders. President asked NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to read citation of posthumous awards: “The National Aeronautics and Space Administration awards posthumously to Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White, and Roger B. Chaffee the NASA Distinguished Service Medals for professional skill, courage, and dedication to duty in Project Apollo. They gave their lives in their country’s historic undertaking to realize the goal of landing men on the moon and returning them safely to earth.” President also asked Dr. Paine to read citation of NASA Group Achievement Award to Apollo 11 Mission Operations Team “for exceptional service in planning and exemplary execution of mission operational responsibilities for . . . first manned lunar landing mission.” Award was presented to Apollo Flight Control Engineer Stephen G. Bales, who bad made decision to proceed with lunar landing when computers failed just before Eagle’s landing on Sea of Tranquility, on behalf of 400,000 persons who had contributed to Apollo program success. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, as nasc chairman, presented Medal of Freedom, nation’s highest civilian honor, to Apollo 11 astronauts for participation in “a unique and profoundly important adventure. The accumulated scientific knowledge and technological ability of mankind made man’s first step on the moon practicable; the courage and skill of men like these made it possible. Their contributions to this undertaking will be remembered so long as men wonder and dream and search for truth on this planet and among the stars.” Replying to honors, Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., said: “What Apollo has begun we hope will spread out in many directions, not just in space, but underneath the seas and in the cities, to tell us unforgettably that we can do what we will and must and want to do.” During evening orderly crowd of peace and antipoverty protesters gathered outside hotel. (PD, 8/18/69, 1141—2, 1148—51; Roberts, NYT, 8/15/69, 14; B Sun, 8/14/69, Al)
DOD reported Soviet SS—9 missile had been test-fired with multiple reentry vehicles for first time over U.S.S.R.’s Pacific testing area at 5,000-mi range. Missile, of which U.S.S.R. had deployed 200, was capable of carrying warhead of up to 25 mt or three warheads of 5 mt and was only Soviet missile credited with hard-site destruction capability. Portions of its booster had been used in testing FOBS, (dod Release 310—69; Homan, W Post, 4/23/69, A26) D.C. William L. Sjogren, Paul M. Muller, and Dr. Peter Gottlieb reported discovery that brought to 12 total mascons mapped on moon’s near face and leading and trailing edges and that were expected to refine gravity model used in Apollo navigation. Dr. Gottlieb said latest gravity model produced significant agreement with analysis of tracking information from Apollo 8 mission Dec. 21— 27, 1968. JPL researchers were working with MSFC to predict accurately landing sites several orbits before spacecraft landing. Most data available had been taken from spacecraft in lunar orbit of about 60 mi. JPL team expected new and possibly higher resolution data from Apollo 10 when lunar module orbited at lower altitude, (jpl Release 514; NASA Release 69—61)
Rep. Lester L. Wolff (D-N.Y.) proposed in House that Apollo 11 spacecraft be commissioned “The John F. Kennedy.” (CR, 6/10/69, H4639)
Atomic scientist Dr. Edward Teller thought nuclear explosion on moon would be scientifically useful, Associated Press reported after New York interview. Vibrations would be source of seismographic measurement for study of moon’s interior. “The best information on earth” came from nuclear explosions, “because the energy-generating event is confined very sharply both in space and in time.” Factors making moon extremely inhospitable to life—absence of air and water—were highly desirable to researchers, since “change that has taken place billions and billions of years ago is still visible today.” Dr. Teller also favored development on moon of research station powered by nuclear reactor that heated lunar rocks to high temperature and liberated oxygen for breathing purposes. There was probability rocks also contained water, which reactor could reduce to hydrogen and oxygen for making rocket fuel to power short-range rocket trips on moon and soft-landing interplanetary spacecraft. Moon’s environment might lead to advances in low-temperature physics and surface chemistry in electronics, which could result in development on earth of smaller, more efficient, and more sophisticated electronic equipment, particularly for information-storing and information-reordering. (Nicholson, AP, W Star, 6/1/69, Al)
Apollo 11 booster, spacecraft, and Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., completed final countdown rehearsal test. Astronauts achieved simulated liftoff at 9:32 am edt—exact time of scheduled July 16 launch. Final countdown for manned lunar landing mission would begin July 10. (AP, B Sun, 7/4/69, A10)
President Nixon announced selection of Gerard C. Smith, former Assistant Secretary of State for Policy Planning, as Director of Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. Adrian S. Fisher had been acting director since resignation of William C. Foster. {PD, 2/3/69, 188)
President Nixon accepted pro forma resignation of Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council. Appointed by President Kennedy 'in 1961, Dr. Welsh had been Council’s first and only appointed executive secretary. (W Post, 2/5/69, A7; AP, W Star, 2/5/69, 1)
NASA named flight crews for Apollo 13 and 14 lunar landing missions. Prime crewmen for Apollo 13 were Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr. (commander), Thomas K. Mattingly II (cm pilot), and Fred W. Haise, Jr. (lm pilot). Backup crew was composed of Astronauts John W. Young, John L. Swigert, Jr., and Charles M. Duke, Jr. Apollo 14 prime crewmen were Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (commander), Stuart A. Roosa (cm pilot), and Edgar D. Mitchell (lm pilot). Backup crewmen were Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Joe E. Engle. Both missions would include lunar exploration and deployment of Apollo lunar surface experiment packages (alsep) . Total lunar surface stay time would include two EVA periods of three hours each and would not exceed 35 hrs. Flights would be first for Astronauts Mattingly, Haise, Roosa, and Mitchell, (nasa Release 69—115)
In Washington Post review of Contact! The Story of the Early Birds by Henry Serrano Villard, John Osgood said: “Despite the technical complexities of the recent translunar injection, the mystique of flight remains undiminished 65 years after Orville Wright managed his mere 120 feet of powered flight. Mystique or no, it is still difficult to comprehend what drove the early aeronauts to attempt feats which most often won them the contempt and ridicule of their countrymen.” (W Post, 2/18/69, B4)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine was sworn in by Vice President Spiro T, Agnew ,as NASA Administrator in ceremony in Vice President’s office. Dr. Paine said: “I am particularly anxious to see that in the second April 3; Dr. Thomas O. Paine (right) was sworn in as Administrator of the National Aeronautics anil Space Administration by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew. decade of space we bring down to the people on earth more of the benefits that can be obtained from this wonderful new technology. . . . Such areas as navigation, communications and particularly earth resources are things that are very much on our minds as we look out to the moon and beyond.” (nasa Hq WB; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 4/4/69; AP, W Post, 4/4/69) * National Geographic Society’s Hubbard Medal for research, exploration, and discovery was presented by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A, Anders in Constitution Hall, Washington, D.C. Vice President Agnew said: “The possibilities of space exploration are so infinite they overwhelm the mind. The speed with which we have reached this new threshold of hope itself is awesome. Less than half a century has passed since the Hubbard Award was presented to Colonel Charles A. Lindbergh for his solo flight from New York to Paris. Less than a decade has passed since Colonel John Glenn was awarded the first Hubbard Medal for exploration in space.” Award, one of Nation’s highest honors, had been given only 24 times in 63 years, for outstanding achievement in geography and exploration. First medal had gone to Robert E. Peary in 1906 for Arctic explorations. Earlier in day at National Geographic headquarters, Apollo 8 astronauts had received General Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1968, awarded to military or civilian usaf member making most outstanding contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace, (ngs Release )
Rep. William G. Bray (R-Ind.) introduced H.J.R. 844, providing for distribution of Apollo 11 lunar samples to Governors of 50 states. (CR, 1/29/69, H6486)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders as Executive Secretary of nasc to succeed Dr. Edward C. Welsh. It was highest Government post ever offered to an astronaut. {PD, 5/19/69, 705; Kirkman, W Post, 5/15/69, A25)
New York Times editorial: “On that eventful day when the first men walk on the surface of Mars, they will find much ‘magnificent desolation’ akin to that seen by Neil Armstrong and Edwin Aldrin when they strolled on the moon last month. That virtual certainty emerges from the brilliantly successful exploration of the red planet just completed by Mariners 6 and 7. Their expedition lacked the human drama of Apollo 11, but the scientific information they returned may well qualify the two Mariners as the most scientifically productive enterprise men have yet carried out in space.” (NYT, 8/11/69)
New York Times editorial on Aug. 12 Apollo 11 news conference in Houston: “What came through most clearly in yesterday’s enthralling first-hand report by the Apollo astronauts was the infinitesimal margin by which Eagle escaped either catastrophe or a decision to abort the moon landing. Either of the two major problems that emerged in those nerve-wracking moments before touchdown—the overburdened computer and the near-exhaustion of their fuel supply before Neil Armstrong and Edwin Aldrin found a suitable landing spot—might have forced a very different ending to the historic mission. That all turned out perfectly is a tribute to the astronauts’ skill, courage and poise as well as to the ability of the back-up personnel at Mission Control in Houston.” (NYT, 8/13/69, 40)
Rep. Louis Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), introduced H.R. 465 “providing for the establishment of the Astronauts Memorial Commission to construct and erect with funds a memorial in the John F. Kennedy Space Center, Florida, or the immediate vicinity, to honor and commemorate the men who serve as astronauts in the U.S. space program.” (CR, 2/19/69, H1087)
First royalty-bearing license under NASA’s foreign patent program had been granted to Nippon Electric Co., Ltd. in Tokyo, NASA announced. Invention bearing NASA-owned patent No. 484,436 and made by gsfc’s Joseph G. Haynos, was concerned with connections between solar cells that permitted flexibility and low weight. Company had made initial payment to NASA for exclusive manufacturing rights in Japan and agreed to continue royalty payments for duration of license. (nasa Release 69—40)
Space Task Group report to President on post-Apollo space program [see Sept. 15] was released at White House press conference by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew and Space Task Force Group members Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator; Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force; Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Presidential Science Adviser; and William A. Anders, nasc Executive Secretary. Vice President Agnew said Task Group had rejected “crash program of the magnitude that would turn loose every bit of our technological ability” to achieve quickest possible manned Mars landing because “there are competing priorities in a difficult time of inflation.” Task Group had also rejected “foregoing the substantial benefits that have come out of the Apollo program, the benefits of National prestige.” Dr. Paine said all three options recommended to President in report would enable NASA to “hold together the team” and provide “major challenge.” Dr. DuBridge said all three options held “heavy emphasis on earth applications, satellites, for studying the geology, the geography, the atmosphere of the oceans of the earth and bringing space technology directly and immediately to the benefit of the people on earth. All three programs also . . . include heavy emphasis on scientific programs, to extend our scientific knowledge of the earth itself, of the moon, through additional lunar expeditions, interplanetary space and additional scientific information about the moon and the planets.” He also cited emphasis on international collaboration. (Transcript) NASA released America’s Next Decade in Space: A Report for the Space Task Group. Major points had been incorporated in Task Group report. (Text)
The notion has occurred to more than one person that NASA, having reached the moon and now fearing its way to the planets possibly blocked by budgetary obstacles, might find the requisite new worlds to conquer right here, at home,” William Hines said in Washington Sunday Star. It was “fundamental precept of modern technology that anything which can be imagined can be accomplished. A cure for cancer, an end to poverty, a cleanup of the environment, termination of the Vietnam war, even effective nuclear disarmament? If it is conceivable it is achievable.” While nasa could be depended on to give good account of itself in scientific and engineering situations, “its ability to handle problems with a big ‘people’ component is largely untested.” Since “people-problems” were predominant these days, maybe NASA wouldn’t work out so well after all. “But on the second thought, no other government agency is showing much flair for coping with the human element, either.” (W Star, 9/21/69, C4)
Liverworts grown in lunar soil at LRL had reached three-inch height and were “green and happy,” Washington Post said, while controls, grown in earth soil, were “puny—not even an inch high—and pale.” Difference in plants, commonly found on rocks and in forests and among first to grow in volcanic areas, had been considered small when first noted in August. However, LRL Chief of Preventive Medicine, Dr. William Kemmerer, now called difference “one of the really unexpected results of the lunar mission.” Plant tests had been conducted to see if lunar material caused harm to earth plants. Control plants had been grown in desert soil. Tobacco cells and soy bean cells in culture with lunar soil had done better than controls in earth soil; ferns were growing “more spectacularly” than some grown in earth soil. Man’s knowledge of trace mineral requirements in plants and animals was “very, very limited,” Dr. Kemmerer had said. “I don’t think we’ll find something going on in lunar nutrition that we don’t find on the earth, I do think important questions have been raised.” (Cohn, W Post, 11/14/69)
At gsfc, satellite mapping authority Dr. John A. O’Keefe was preparing first precise maps of Tibet using photographs taken from 100-mi altitude by U.S. astronauts and data obtained between 1890s and 1935 by Swedish explorer Sven Hedin during only extensive survey of area by outsider. Expedition’s survey sightings on mountain peaks were being applied to numerous photographs from space. Revised maps would be published in Sweden. (Sullivan, NYT, 2/13/69, 14)
In Physical Review Letters, Univ. of Maryland physicist Dr. Joseph Weber described detection.of gravity waves from unknown source but in two places simultaneously. Coincidences were observed on gravitational-radiation detectors over 1,000-km base line at Argonne National Laboratory and at Univ. of Maryland. Probability that coincidences were accidental was “incredibly small.” NSF-supported study provided first real evidence of existence of gravity waves postulated by Prof. Albert Einstein more than 50 yrs ago. (Physical Review Letters, 6/16/69, 1320—24; Lannan, W Star, 6/15/69, A25)
San Francisco Mayor Joseph Alioto urged San Franciscans to fly U.S. flag from Apollo 11 blastoff to splashdown and to sound every bell, siren, and whistle in the city at splashdown. (AP, W Post, 7/17/69, A27)
White House announced Apollo 11 crew on way to moon was carrying Soviet commemorative medals brought back to U.S. by Astronaut Frank Borman, who had received them from widows of Cosmonauts Yuri A. Gagarin and Vladimir M. Komarov during his Moscow visit. Apollo 11 also carried Apollo 204 crew patch and commemorative medals struck for families of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White, and Roger B. Chaffee before astronauts died in Jan. 27, 1967, fire. President Nixon said, “The names of Gagarin and Komarov, of Grissom, White, and Chaffee, share the honors we pray will come to Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins. In recognizing the dedication and sacrifice of brave men of different nations, we underscore an example we hope to set: that if men can reach the moon, men can reach agreement.” (PD, 7/21/69, 999)
Committee of air traffic controllers said it had evolved program which would enable FAA to postpone restrictions scheduled to go into effect April 27 at five major airports. Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization would petition Secretary of Transportation John A. Voilpe to substitute “revamped procedures which would make operations safer and more efficient,” said F. Lee Bailey, counsel. Restrictions would curtail services into New York, Chicago, and Washington, D.C. {NYT, 2/8/69)
usaf promoted Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins to full colonel. In congratulatory message Gen. John P. McConnell, Air Force Chief of Staff, said Apollo 11 mission was “indeed a momentous achievement” and promotion was “token of appreciation for the part you played.” (upi, NYT, 7/25/69, 28)	<
In Nature, Stanford Univ. astronomer Dr. Edward K. Conklin reported recording earth’s motion using background radiation believed to have been produced at early stage in universe’s expansion. If theory was correct, radiation defined extremely distant reference frame for measurement of earth’s motion. Recording showed 100-mi-per-sec movement in direction midway between direction of Big Dipper and star Arcturus. (Nature, 6/7/69, 971—2)
Number of eminent selenologists had confirmed dating of Apollo 11 moon rocks at 4.5 billion yrs or more, to presumed formation of solar system, indicating lunar surface was far older than any material originating on earth’s surface, John Lannan said in Washington Evening Star. Same lunar scientists had “lashed out” at what they claimed were NASA’s “restrictions on the free flow of scientific information.” Lunar investigators would present findings at January symposium but many felt “information of such significance should be published immediately through normal scientific channels.” Counterargument was “that ail the investigators get an even break this way.” (W Star, 11/7/69, Al)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 21st flight after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude west of Rosamond, Calif. Objectives were to obtain stability, control, and performance data at speeds up to mach 1.35. (nasa Proj Off)
Within 76 hrs after Apollo 11 splashdown, Bantam Books and New York Times published We Reach the Moon, 416-page paperback account of U.S. space program from 1961 through Apollo ll’s success. Early publication was effected by nearly 2% yrs of planning. Book went to press immediately after July 24 splashdown while aerospace reporter John Noble Wilford was completing text. Final copy was telexed to Chicago printer July 25. First printing comprised 375,000 copies. Hardcover edition would be published by W. W. Norton & Co. in September. (NYT, 7/29/69, 16)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of $200,000 faa contract to Univ. of Tennessee at Knoxville for two-year study of methods of reducing sonic boom, to help faa establish certification standards for new aircraft, (faa Release 69—127)
At msfc ceremony, NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, presented awards to 117 center employees and industry representatives, mostly in recognition of exceptional service to Apollo program. Employee awards included NASA Medal for Distinguished Service to msfc Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun; Deputy Director, Technical, Eberhard F. M. Rees; Deputy Director, Management, Harry H. Gorman; Director of Science and Engineering Hermann K. Weidner; Vice Commander, Aeronautical Systems Div., m/g Edmund F. O’Connor (usaf) ; Director of Program Management Lee B. James; and Deputy Director of Science and ^Engineering Ludie G. Richard. NASA Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement was presented to James A. Downey, III; Erwin Fehlberg; Gerhard B. Heller; Robert J.	Nauman; and Joseph L. Randall. Other awards received were NASA Medal for Exceptional Service by NASA employees and NASA Certificate for Distinguished Public Service by industry personnel, (msfc Release 69—222)
NASA announced appointment of John A. Whitney as Assistant General Counsel for Procurement Matters, (nasa Release 69—167)
faa announced it had amended its Dec. 3 rule intended to ease congestion at five of Nation’s busiest airports. Amendments provided for extra sections of scheduled air carrier flights without regard to established quotas at all airports except John F. Kennedy, increase in flight quotas at Kennedy between 5:00 pm and 8:00 pm, effective date June 1 instead of April 27, and termination date of Dec. 31. (faa Release 69—23)
Sen. Edward W. Brooke (R-Mass.) delivered Landon Lecture at Kansas State Univ.: “With this new generation of weapons [mirvs] about to sprout from the arsenals of the Soviet Union and the United States, I have been joined by almost half the Senate and a sizable number of House members in calling for a joint moratorium on flight tests of the so-called mirv systems.” (Text)
nasa advocated “balanced, broad-based Planetary Exploration Program” as “feasible and practical” part of U.S. space program, Donald P. Hearth, Director of Planetary Programs, ossa, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Basic goals were to increase understanding of origin and evolution of solar system and life in solar system and understanding of dynamic processes shaping man’s terrestrial environment—“increasing our understanding of the planet Earth, how it has evolved, and how it may evolve in the future through a comparative study of the other planets in the solar system.” Approach would be broad-based exploration of several planets—• Jupiter, Mercury, Venus—over period of time, combined with direct measurements of Mars surface in orbital and lander missions. Pioneer F and G spacecraft (planned for launch in 1972 and 1973) and new cooperative project with West Germany, Helios, would open “new era” in solar system exploration, studying effects of radial distance on interplanetary medium close to sun. (Testimony)
Apollo 8 astronauts were honored in Nation’s Capital. Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, and William A. Anders received NASA Distinguished Service Medal from President Johnson at White House. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Acting Administrator, read citation, identical for each astronaut, except for designation as commander, command module pilot, or lunar module pilot. Borman received award “for outstanding contributions to space flight, engineering, technology and exploration as Commander of Apollo 8, mankind’s first venture beyond Earth into orbit around the Moon. During this flawless mission from December 21 to December 27, 1968, he made critical decisions and carried out complex maneuvers to fly into precise translunar injection, lunar orbit, and transearth injection flight paths to a successful reentry and splashdown within 5,000 yards of the recovery vessel. His scientific observations during the journey to and from the Moon and during 10 orbits of the Moon have added significantly to man’s knowledge. He displayed outstanding leadership, courage, professional skill and devotion to duty in accomplishing all planned mission objectives, significantly advancing the nation’s capabilities in space. As one of history’s boldest explorers, he has blazed a new trail for mankind out into the vastness of extraterrestrial space.” President Johnson said: “Our space program, and this, its most spectacular achievement, have taught us some very invaluable lessons. We have learned how men and nations may make common cause in the most magnificent and hopeful enterprises of mankind. We in the United States are already engaged in cooperative space activities with more than 70 nations of the world. We have proposed a variety of adventures to expand international partnership in space exploration. This morning I renew America’s commitment to that principle and to its enormous promise. The flight of Apollo 8 gives all nations a new and a most exciting reason to join in man’s greatest adventure.” President Johnson presented retired NASA Administrator James E. Webb as “the single man most responsible for successfully administering this program and, I think, the best Administrator in the Federal Government.” Astronauts gave President Johnson miniature copies of recent international space treaties which they had carried aboard Apollo 8 spacecraft and “picture of the ranch” (photo of earth taken from space). {PD, 1/13/69, 35-6) After awards ceremony astronauts were driven in motorcade to address joint assembly of Congress attended by nine Supreme Court Justices. Borman told Congress: “The one overwhelming emotion that we carried with us is the fact that we really do all exist on the small globe. And when you get to 240,000 miles, it really isn’t a very large earth.” He said voyage was not just an American achievement; “we stood on the shoulders of giants,” from Newton and Galileo to present day scientists and space explorers. “If Apollo 8 was a triumph at all,” Borman said, “it was a triumph of all mankind.” At State Dept. Auditorium press conference, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs Julian Scheer announced Astronaut Frank Borman had been appointed Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at msc. During conference astronauts disclosed they had not seen moon during approach to lunar orbit; presented slides indicating presence of volcanics on back of moon; and announced their conclusion that conditions on pseudolanding site, B—1, indicated “lighting conditions are . . . adequate for a lunar landing, which was one of our objectives of the flight.” Borman said, “I came away with the idea that the moon may be more homogeneous than I had realized . . . that you could get a spoon one place and find it just about the same as the samples somewhere else.” In answer to question, he said, “I don’t believe we found anything that would be of concern to future flights. We flight-tested the ground system. We flight-tested the airborne system. The command module and service module have effectively performed their designed task, their designed mission, with the exception of docking. We have got magnificent machinery. We have superb ground support.” Following press conference, astronauts and their families were guests at Smithsonian Institution dinner in Washington, D.C. (Transcript; NASA Release 69-8; Wilford, NYT, 1/10/69, 1; Maynard, W Post, 1/10/69, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 1/10/69, 1)
William R. Frye described magnificence of Apollo 10 liftoff in Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “TV cameras do not do it justice. It is like 100 claps of thunder, each following the other with machine-gun speed. “The flame that leaps from behind the rocket could have come straight from Dante’s inferno. It is too bright to be seen with comfort by the naked eye. The earth trembles beneath the feet, two miles away. Then the towering rocket, nearly twice as high as Niagara Falls, twothirds the height of the Washington Monument, creeps with agonizing slowness the first few feet off the ground, enveloped by a white cloud. “Then it is gone—and man is left to wonder and to pray.” (P Bull, 5/19/69)
Royal Crown Cola International announced former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., had become its president. He had been chairman since January 1967. (NYT, 2/8/69)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., practiced splashdown and anticontamination procedures they would use after return from moon in July. Astronauts donned plastic-coated biological isolation garments and sprayed each other with Betadine disinfectant before leaving dummy spacecraft in Gulf of Mexico, (upi, W Star, 5/25/69, A6)
Secretary of State William P. Rogers told Senate Foreign Relations Committee during hearings on nonproliferation treaty that he hoped U.S.—U.S.S.R. missile talks would be under way before it became necessary for U.S. to start deployment of proposed Sentinel abm system. He said U.S. would have obligation under treaty to enter into strategic arms talks with U.S.S.R. and expressed hope such talks could begin within six months. (Transcript, 377—8)
At Explorers Club symposium in New York scientists, educators, community leaders, and students discussed significance of Apollo 8 mission. William Booth, Chairman of Commission on Human Rights in New York, said, “I still am quite disturbed by the fact that we’re dying at home, people are about to starve. There’s overpopulation and underproduction of food in the world. We haven’t been able to solve these problems and here we are going off to the moon.” Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said flights were “a means of concentrating our energies toward building a technological capability.” Moon flight had played “same role as Lindbergh’s flight to Paris” in that it demonstrated new capability. Space program was paying economic dividends in communications, mineral exploration, and new materials. Dr. Maynard M. Miller, Chairman of Explorer Club’s World Center for Exploration Foundation, said, “The word ‘impossible’ has a different meaning after Apollo'8. Perhaps its real contribution will be as a symbol of man’s willingness to dare to do something great.” (Wilford, NYT, 1/5/69, 26)
NASA Associate Administrator, Dr. Homer E. Newell, and Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology John L. Sloop presented paper “Planning Space Technology for the 1970’s” to National Security Industrial Assn, in Washington, D.C. Technology readiness for manned missions beyond the moon depended “very heavily upon (1) carrying the technology through proof-of-concept or prototype phase in order to assure long-life, reliable flight equipment and operations, and (2) precursor missions, particularly an Earth orbiting laboratory and lunar exploration that provide an opportunity to obtain the needed technology.” Technology needed for manned Mars exploration “represents capabilities that are very useful in many space missions and for some non-space applications as well, particularly with regard to long-life equipment and man’s performance under stress.” (Text)
Successful results of seeding hurricane Debbie on Aug. 18 and 20 were announced by Secretary of Commerce Maurice H. Stans and Secretary of the Navy John H. Chafee at Washington, D. C., press conference. Analysis of silver iodide seeding had suggested storm was weakened by intervention. While scientists could not state absolutely that hurricanes could be modified, Secretaries pledged their departments to intensified effort in Project Stormfury, joint venture of essa and usn. (Schmeck, NYT, 12/5/69, 90)
Chemical analysis of moon rocks at Lunar Receiving Laboratory had disclosed their age might range from 2 billion to 4.5 billion yrs—far greater than most scientists expected—lunar scientists in touch with lrl colleagues said. It was “almost conclusive evidence that it has been billions of years since these rocks crystallized.” Finding might settle difference between geologists who had viewed lunar surface as having had continuous history and those like Dr. Harold C. Urey who believed moon was ancient, undisturbed place made of material which would help unfold history of early planets. Later, msc Director of Science and Applications, Dr. Wilmot N. Hess, said Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer and Dr. John Funkhouser of State Univ. of New York, Dr. Joseph Zahringer of Max Planck Institute in Heidelberg, and Dr. Donald Bogard of msc had measured solar particles trapped in lunar rocks to determine lunar material’s age. (Cohn, W Post, 8/24/69, Al; upi, W Star, 8/25/69, A4)............................
Sequence of five color photos of Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., performing extravehicular activities on lunar surface were released by NASA. Vivid sequence showed Aldrin descending ladder to surface, walking near LM, posing near U.S. flag, deploying seismometer, and walking with Armstrong’s reflection visible in his visor. NASA also released two-part 16—mm film which showed moon fading away as LM ascended and Lm’s rendezvous with CSM in lunar orbit. It also showed Astronaut Michael Collins shaving inside CSM. (W Post, 8/1/69, A7; Witkin, NYT, 8/1/69, 16)
Senate considered H.R. 12307, FY 1970 Independent Offices and hud bill which contained $3,715 billion NASA appropriation. It rejected by 22 to 46 amendment by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) that would have reduced FY 1970 NASA funds by $100 million. Conference report accompanying bill noted considerable concern about “future of funding for manned lunar programs because of budget constraints . . . and a question of National priorities.” Conferees suggested Congress, NASA, and Administration review manned lunar program policy for future “and decide and determine policy” and that Committees on Appropriations be “advised at earliest possible date.” (CR, 10/11/69, D1046, S13989, S14010-6, S14025-50, S14053; House Conf Rpt 91-649)
S. 705 was introduced in Senate by Smithsonian Institution regent Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), for himself and regents Sens. J. William Fulbright (D-Ark.) and Hugh D. Scott (R-Pa.) to authorize $2 million for planning and land acquisition for world’s largest radioradar astronomical telescope. Proposed 440-ft “big dish” antenna would be enclosed in 550-ft geodesic dome and cost about $37 million. It would be made available to appropriate scientists everywhere. (CR, 1/28/69, S967—8; W Star, 4/1/69, Bl)
ComSatCorp President Joseph V. Charyk told Annual Meeting of Shareholders in Washington, D.C., key goal of establishing global comsat system was “within immediate view.” When Early Bird [Intelsat /] “was launched just four years ago, there were only a handful of experimental stations in Europe and the United States. Today, there are 25 earth stations operating in 15 different countries of the world, with many more nearing completion. It is expected that a total of 43 stations will be in service by the end of this year and that 26 different countries will have direct access to all forms of high quality communications that the global system of satellites makes economically available to them.” By 1972 “there will be more than 70 stations operating in nearly 40 countries of the world, thereby making this high quality means of communications available directly to practically every nation on earth.” At end of first quarter of 1969 1,209 full-time circuits were being leased, up from 777 at end of 1967. Leased voice and record tariffs published by international carriers represented 40% reduction in Atlantic and Pacific areas since advent of comsats. Transmission of TV via satellite increased from 225 hrs in 1967 to 666 hrs in 1968, with 40% reduction in TV rates. (Text)
Robert J. Collier Trophy for 1968 was presented to Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A, Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, at Statler Hilton Hotel ceremony in Washington, D.C. National Aeronautic Assn, award was made annually for greatest achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in U.S. toward improving performance, efficiency, and safety of air or space vehicles, (naa News; W Star, 5/8/69, A3)
Senate adopted S.R. 13 establishing numerical size of Senate standing committees for 91st Congress and adopted S.R. 14 and S.R. 15 electing majority and minority standing committee membership. Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences was reduced from 16 to 15 members, with Republican Sens. Len B. Jordan (R-Idaho) and Charles E. Goodell (R-N.Y.) dropping off. Senate also approved appointment of Sens. Barry Goldwater (R-Ariz.), Charles McC. Mathias, Jr. (R-Md.), and William B. Saxbe (R-Ohio) to committee. Democratic assignments on committee remained unchanged. (CR, 1/14/69, S152-87)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, announced reorganization of Hq. Space Applications Programs Office in recognition of increasing importance of applications satellite programs. Leonard Jaffe, former Director of Space Applications Programs, had been named Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications, responsible for near-term and long-range planning and interagency policy coordination. As Acting Director of Earth Observations Programs Office—one of two new program offices into which Space Applications Programs Office was being divided—he would supervise R&D efforts in meteorology and earth resources survey including tiros, Nimbus, Synchronous Meteorological Satellite, ERTS, and sounding rocket programs in support of meteorology. Dr. Morris Tepper would continue to direct scientific activities. Communications Programs Office—concerned with R&D for communications, navigation, traffic control, and geodetic satellites; ATS program; and comsat support—would have as its Director Dr. Richard Marsten, Manager of Advanced Programs Technology, RCA Astro-Electronics Div. Dr. Marsten’s NASA appointment would become effective June 23. (NASA Release 69—76)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) introduced S. 3003, “to provide for more effective control over the expenditure of funds by the Department of Defense and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration for independent research and development.” Measure was referred to Senate Committee on Armed Services. (CR, 10/8/69, S12100)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins received first Pere Marquette Discovery Award of silver medal from Father Marquette Tercentenary Commission of Marquette Univ. (CR, 12/4/69, E10223)
New tempest was brewing in national scientific community over whether defense establishment absorbed exorbitant portion of U.S. scientific and technological energies, John Lannan said in Washington Evening Star. In New York, younger physicists had called for political activism at annual meeting of American Physical Society Feb. 3. mit group, Union of Concerned Scientists, had scheduled day-long “research stoppage” March 4 and initiated letter campaign to spread its views to other institutions. Union’s proposals included “a critical and continuing examination of government policy in areas where science and technology are of actual or potential significance”; redirection of research from defense-oriented to environment-oriented projects; opposition to antiballistic missile system; and organization of scientists into effective and vocal political action group. (W Star, 2/5/69, A7; Sullivan, NYT, 2/9/69, E7)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, flown by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 19th flight after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude north of Four Corners, Calif. Manke fired engine at full power for 66 secs and at half power for 40 secs, reaching 64,500-ft altitude. Objectives—expansion of flight envelope to mach 1.2 and collection of stability, control, and performance data —were met. (nasa Proj Off; UPl, W Star, 5/29/69, A16; SBD, 6/4/69, 152)
Flying magazine issued special report on F—111, including “The People vs. the F—111” by John Fricker and “The F—111—a Pilot’s Verdict” by Richard B. Weeghman. Fricker called F—111 “not guilty” of charges that concept of commonality was invalid, that selection of General Dynamics Corp. instead of Boeing Co. as prime contractor was result of “political consideration,” that F—111 suffered from excessive flight restrictions, that it was unsafe, and that it was “operational flop.” To charge that cost escalation of F—111 program had been excessive, Fricker delivered verdict “Guilty, with mitigating circumstances”—factory, engineering, and research costs had risen twice as much as originally estimated. (Flying, 5/69)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate Secor D. Browne to be member of Civil Aeronautics Board for remainder of term expiring Dec. 31, 1974. He would replace John H. Crooker, who had resigned effective Sept. 30. Browne would also be designated cab Chairman. (PD, 9/15/69, 1249)
While spaceborne, Apollo 9 Astronaut James A. McDivitt was selected to receive Ancient Order of Hibernians’ John F. Kennedy Medal for National Civic Service. Award would be presented by Irish-descent society in Newark, N.J., May 10. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 3/10/69, Al; W Post, 3/10/69, A5)
Flaws in F—Ills produced to date were detailed by l/g John W. O’Neill, Vice Commander of afsc, and l/g George S. Boylan, Jr., Deputy Chief of Staff, Programs and Resources, usaf Hq., in testimony before Senate Committee on Appropriations. Aircraft were seriously short in engine power for nonnuclear missions. Their weight had grown without commensurate engine power increase and thus acceleration time was now four minutes. Outlay of $80 million was necessary to overhaul 450 F—Ills to correct serious flaw in wing boxes. (Testimony)
NASA’s alleged neglect of pure science research goals in favor of engineering pursuits and “glamor” had caused undercurrent of dissatisfaction among scientists, Science noted. When interviewed by Science Dr. F. Curtis Michel, Dr. Donald U. Wise, and Dr. Elbert A. King, who had resigned from NASA recently, declined to attribute their resignations directly to major dissatisfactions with nasa and denied that they had resigned to protest emphasis on engineering rather than scientific research. They did, however, express some dissatisfaction with role of basic science in space exploration and impatience with NASA’s management of scientific projects and admitted they were lured from nasa by prospects of new positions that offered more time for scientific research. (Science, 8/22/69, 776—8)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) introduced, for himself and cosponsors, S.J.R. 285, authorizing Senate Foreign Relations Committee to undertake comprehensive study of all possibilities for international cooperation in space exploration. (CR, 11/18/69, S14593—4)
Dethronement” of Dr. Charles Stark Draper as head of mit Instrumentation Lab had resulted from campaign waged by “coterie of selfappointed zealots who insist that defense research is ‘war research’ and cannot be tolerated,” William Leavitt said in Air Force and Space Digest article. On campus these days, “genius is not enough to keep you on the job. Your work has to he politically, morally, and socially acceptable” to these zealots. [AF/SD, 12/69, 46—50)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 50,000-ft altitude and mach 0.9 after air-launch from B—52 aircraft at 45,000-ft altitude north of Four Corners, Calif. Flight objectives were to complete pilot checkout and to obtain stability and control data, (nasa Proj Off)
ERc announced it had developed and successfully flight-tested “Flying Baton,” simple, low-cost device to provide eye-level artificial horizon for pilots. Developed by Center’s William J. O’Keefe, device could contribute to more “head-up” flying, be used for precision attitude flying, and allow pilot more time to look outside aircraft, (erc Release 69-19)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Jesse L. Mitchell, Director of Physics and Astronomy in ossa, and Joseph Purcell, OAO Project Manager at GSFC, for their contributions to Oao II, at GSFC ceremonies. Dr. Frederick Seitz, nas president, received Distinguished Public Service Medal, special award, for leadership in solid-state physics. Without solid-state circuitry, Oao II would not have been possible. Additional awards were presented to 13 persons from Government, industry, and universities for Oao II efforts, gsfc oao project team, Atlas/Centaur personnel from LeRC, and launch operations personnel from ksc received Group Achievement awards, (nasa Release 69—78)
In Life, Hugh Sidey said: “It was just exactly eight years ago that John Kennedy set the moon goal and called the nation into ‘the exciting adventure of space.’ There have been great space moments in these years, but they have faded rather rapidly as the earth problems pressed in. Now there is a lasting excitement which will build to the big launch [Apollo 11] this summer and probably will linger for months or years. . . . History suggests that man, despite his obvious and obsessive miseries, craves something to lift him beyond himself. War too often has been one outlet. Americans in particular have needed a quest, across the mountains or the continent, into the sky and the sea, to the poles or inside the atom.” This pointed up “classic dilemma in presidential leadership.” Did national pride in space achievement and its technological and military benefits mean more to nation than plans for aid to education, welfare programs, or feeding the hungry? “It could be that the world’s ills are not too great to allow such dreams. It could also be that Americans cannot live without them.” (Life, 6/6/69, 4)	•
NASA had put into operation $2.6-million, six-story-high flight simulator for advanced aircraft (fsaa) at arc, arc announced. Largest piloted-aircraft simulator ever built would provide research data on handling characteristics of faster and larger jets to ensure safe control by their pilots. Designed by arc engineers John C. Dusterberry, Maurice D. White, and Shizuo Doiguchi, simulator had motion-generator with 100 ft of lateral motion, 10 ft of vertical motion, and 8 ft of forward and backward motion, combined with pitch, roll, and yaw motions. It was operated by general-purpose, digital-analog computer, which could be programmed with flight characteristics of most aircraft, fsaa could simulate aerodynamics of hypersonic and supersonic flight by reentry vehicle-such as space shuttle, (arc Release 69—13)
At Smithsonian Institution ceremony, X—15 No. 566670, one of three rocket-engine aircraft built to test flight environment in upper atmosphere, took its place near Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk Flyer and Charles A. Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis. Aircraft had been officially retired with completion of joint nasa—usaf X—15 program in December and flown from Edwards afb, Calif., as cargo to be refurbished by Smithsonian. First X—15 built, it made first captive flight March 10, 1959,	and flew first glide and power flights June 8, 1959, and Jan. 23, 1960.	It completed last flight in test program Oct. 24, 1968, to total 81 free flights and 142 flights with B—52 mothership. Of three X—15s built by North American Rockwell Corp. and Thio-kol Chemical Corp., No. 3 had been destroyed in Nov. 15, 1967, crash which killed pilot, Maj. Michael J. Adams (usaf) ; No. 2 was being displayed at Air Force Museum, Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio. X—15 program had cost $300 million and established records for 354,200-ft altitude and for 4,520 mph (mach 6.7) speed. At ceremony Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, said it was difficult to believe designer’s dream of 15 yrs ago had already found its way into museum. (Program; NASA Release 69—56; dod Release 327-69; NYT, 6/15/69, 70)
dot and hud announced $166,734 project for studies to recommend short- and long-term relief from aircraft noises at John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York; O’Hare International Airport, Chicago; Bradley International Airport, Hartford, Conn.; and Cape Kennedy Regional Airport, Fla. Studies were to define noise problems, to identify activities affecting problems, to identify approaches to land
Senate Interior Committee held hearing on July 10 S.J.R. 133 by Sens. Spessard L. Holland (D-Fla.) and Edward J. Gurney (R-Fla.) to return original name, “Cape Canaveral,” to Cape Kennedy. Sen. Gurney said name “Canaveral” “may well be the oldest geographical point in the United States, certainly on the east coast, recorded even before the ancient names of Cape Cod and Jamestown.” ksc would retain late President John F. Kennedy’s name. Witnesses suggested . name change had been made “with high emotions” and without proper legal proceedings. Cape had been renamed for late President by executive order from President Lyndon B. Johnson Nov. 29, 1963. (Greider, W Post, 11/25/69, A3)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and 20 otjier persons quarantined in Lunar Receiving Laboratory were released shortly after 9:00 pm cdt—four hours earlier than planned. Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations, Msc, said astronauts, who had been confined since July 24, showed no signs of any possible infection from exposure to moon. He cautioned that astronauts might become ill after release— not from lunar contamination, but from earth organisms to which they were highly susceptible after long period of isolation. Report on health of persons under quarantine would be presented by NASA Aug. 11 to Interagency Committee on Back Contamination, which had approved early release. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 8/11/69, Al; AP, W Post, 8/10/69, A7) _
British Aircraft Corp. chief test pilot Brian Trubshaw flew Anglo-French Concorde 002 supersonic airliner on successful 24-min maiden flight from Filton Airfield, near Bristol. Aircraft, built to reach 1,400-mph speed, flew at 300 mph during flight, which copilot John Cochran termed “marvelous.” French version Concorde 001 made maiden flight March 2. (W Star, 4/10/69, A13; AP, W Post, 4/10/69, A12)
Project Tektite civilian aquanauts Richard A. Waller, Conrad V. M. Mahnken, John G. Van Derwalker, and Dr. H. Edward Clifton set 32-day record for remaining under water in “habitat” off St. John Island in Caribbean. Previous record was held by former Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter, who had remained submerged 30 days in 1965. In Project Tektite* aquanauts were trying for 60-day submersion. (dod Release 204-69; upi, W Post, 3/20/69, A2)
In Washington Evening Star William Hines said: “. . . Space Administrator Thomas 0. Paine was dead right when he acclaimed Project Apollo as ‘a triumph of the squares.’ ” While word “square” was in disrepute, “you will find no umbrage taken by the clean-cut stars of this week’s cosmic drama if you called them squares. They are, and probably proud of it. There was no fight from Neil Armstrong when Congress told him to plant an American flag on the surface of the moon. , . , The Apollo program is not only run by squares, but for squares, as well; its thrills and glories appeal to the vast majority of Americans who, at the bottom, are just as square as any Armstrong on Earth—Jack or Neil or any other.” (W Star, 7/13/69, D2)
U.S. Geological Survey Director William T. Pecora said in Washington, D.C., that rocks brought back by Apollo 11 were geologic “hors d’oeuvre” but Apollo 12 rocks “will be a veritable feast.” Geologists were delighted “by the onsite descriptions provided by astronauts Conrad and Bean” who were “eager rock hounds.” (upi, NYT, 11/25/69, 32)
Sen. Edward W. Brooke (R-Mass.), for 37 cosponsors, introduced on Senate floor S.R. 211, “sense of the Senate” resolution urging President Nixon to propose to U.S.S.R. immediate suspension by U.S. and U.S.S.R. of flight test of multiple missile warheads and strongly supporting prompt negotiations with U.S.S.R. on weapon issues. (CR, 6/17/69, S6538)
Science magazine published letter from Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, clarifying his views on cost effectiveness evaluation of Earth Resources Satellite system. He reiterated opinion he stated in Dec. 1968 Earth Resources Satellite System report: “Precise determination of cost effectiveness at this early stage ... is not possible. . . . The magnitude of the economic benefits simply cannot be calculated in the absence of the type of data which the system is designed to produce.” Conclusions of studies already completed had constituted “strong evidence that precision was not possible. Yet, I am reassured by the fact that all such studies . . . have concluded that the potential economic benefits will exceed the costs of such a system by a substantial margin and some predict that benefits will someday .be measured in billions of dollars annually. It is my personal conviction that an operational ers system will ultimately prove highly cost-effective.” Karth said he considered it “nasa’s responsibility to experiment with new space systems that appear to have potential, and to conduct the necessary research and development which will lead to a firm foundation for a subsequent determination as to whether operational systems should be built. In this context, I believe cost effectiveness is not an appropriate standard to apply in advance to NASA’s experimental work, though it is certainly applicable when the time comes to decide whether to go forward with an operational system.” (Science, 5/30/69, 1009)
usaf communications and navigation satellite programs were outlined by l/g John W. O’Neill, Vice Commander of afsc, in TRW Space Log. afsc was testing new uhf communication terminal in conjunction with Tacsat I tactical comsat and had tested uhf shipboard, jeep, van-mounted, and team-pack terminals as receivers for satellite communications. Second-generation defense comsats would have earth coverage antennas and also steerable narrow-beam antennas to direct energy to two “spotlighted” areas on earth’s surface, permitting use of small terminals instead of large ground stations. Proposed navigation satellite system would consist of bigh-altitude satellites transmitting navigation signals with worldwide coverage, ground stations to track and command satellites, and user receiving equipment. Navsat would provide all four armed services with common grid for mobile operations and could be used by aircraft, ships, submarines, and foot soldiers. Potential for aircraft carrier operations was being studied. Computer revolution would provide new data processing equipment “with infinite potential for influencing satellite design and function” in future. “We are pressing hard for progress in laser technology, which appears to have excellent potential for communication applications. We are also pushing the development of new sources of power in space in which a breakaway from our heavy reliance upon the solar cell could make future satellite development a whole new game.” (TRW Space Log, Summer/Fall 69, 3—17)
In Kinshasa, Republic of Congo, Apollo 11 astronauts were awarded National Order of the Leopard, Congo’s highest decoration, by President Joseph D. Mobutu for “setting an example to all mankind.” (C Trib, 10/24/69)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced appointment of Dr. Robert J. Mackin, Jr., as Manager of Space Sciences Div., succeeding Dr. Donald P. Burcham. Dr. Burcham had been named Research and Advanced Development Manager for Space Science, JPL Office of Research and Advanced Development, (jpl Release 517)
U.K.’s Royal Geographical Society awarded special gold medal—its first for space exploration-—to Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong for leading Apollo 11 mission. Other gold medalists included Capt. Roald Amundsen, first to reach South Pole; Adm. Robert E. Peary, first to reach North Pole; Sir Edmund Hillary, conqueror of Mt. Everest; and Sir John Hunt, leader of Everest expedition. (AP, W Star, 7/28/69, A5)
Apollo 11 astronauts attended celebrations in their hometowns. In Wapakoneta, Ohio, Neil A. Armstrong was cheered by crowd estimated at 10 times normal 7,000 population, addressed teen-age rally, and led parade including Gov. James A. Rhodes, Dr. Albert D. Sabin (developer of oral polio vaccine), and comedian Bob Hope—all Ohioans. Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., on second visit to hometown as astronaut, presented Montclair, N.J., Library with autographed photo of plaque left on moon; Library named its science collection in his honor. Astronaut Michael Collins, who was born in Rome, Italy, visited New Orleans, La., as his adopted hometown. He attended luncheon in his honor and visited NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility. (W Post, 9/7/69, A3)
National Investigations Committee on Aerial Phenomena challenged USAF’s Condon Report on UFOs [Jan. 8]. At Washington, D.C., press conference Maj. Donald E. Keyhoe (usmc, Ret.), head of private committee, said investigation examined only “about 1%” of “reliable, unexplained” ufo sightings supplied to it. He said his files contained 11,000 reports of sightings, of which 3,000 were unexplained, (upi, W Star, 1/11/69, 1)	■
Lunar Science Institute and Msc’s Lunar Receiving Laboratory were preparing for “lunar knowledge explosion” expected to follow first manned lunar landing, Washington Evening Star reported. Laboratory would quarantine astronauts and lunar samples brought back from landing, storing samples for study and distribution to scientists. Institute, funded by NASA and administered through nas by Rice Univ., would facilitate lunar research by nonspace scientific community, Administrator Robert C. Wimberley said in interview. Directed by William C. Rubey, Institute was soon to be turned over to consortium of universities. U.S. Public Health Service, nas, Dept, of Interior, Dept, of Agriculture, and NASA had planned 30-day quarantine and study of moon material and 21-day quarantine of astronauts. Samples would be sealed on lunar surface and would be flown from recovery carrier to Laboratory after spacecraft return. Astronauts were to be transferred from spacecraft into sealed van through plastic tunnel aboard carrier [see May 16]. Van would be delivered to nearest port and then flown to Houston to sealed-off laboratory. Objective was to prevent importing viruses, some of which had been known to survive thousands of years under unlikely conditions. During three-week debriefing, crew would live in glassed-in quarters including medical area. Samples would be maintained under vacuum seals until opened in high-vacuum chambers containing remotely controlled equipment. Once photographed, catalogued, and processed, content and structure would be studied to determine composition and origins. (W Star, 3/12/69, A13)
aiaa announced election of Honorary Fellows: Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.; German rocket pioneer Hermann Oberth; and Northrop Corp. founder John K. Northrop. Dr. Seamans, former NASA Deputy Administrator, was honored for “organizing the research, development and operational base which produced the Apollo program.” Honors would be presented at Oct. 23 banquet in Anaheim, Calif, (aiaa Release)
At first day ceremonies for commemorative moon landing stamp in Washington, D.C., Postmaster General Winton M. Blount presented Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, with albums containing 32 stamps each. He said: “In the largest sense we pay tribute today to the spirit of man. We cannot separate the accomplishments of Apollo 11 from those of Yostok 1; we cannot separate the contributions of Michael Collins, or Edwin Aldrin or Neil Armstrong from those of Goddard and Einstein, Kepler and Newton, Copernicus and Galileo. We know this. And in the knowing again we find hope. For if men of all nations, together, can achieve dominion over the heavens, men of all nations, together, can achieve peace on earth for men for all time.” Armstrong said astronauts had deferred cancellation of stamps until they were reunited in cm, July 22. They had then grasped canceler simultaneously and pressed it upon die-proof version of commemorative stamp affixed to unaddressed envelope. Cancellation date remained July 20, day of lunar landing. (PO Dept Release 135; Shandler, W Star, 9/10/69, A3)
Apollo 11 recovery physician, Dr. William R. Carpentier, reported from inside Mobile Quarantine Facility onboard U.S.S. Hornet that astronauts had completed preliminary medical examination and were “fine.” Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong’s slight ear infection had disappeared and all three astronauts were in excellent condition. (Wooten, NYT, 7/26/69, 1)
Visiting Soviet Cosmonauts Konstantin P. Feoktistov and Georgy T. Beregovoy left New York’s John F. Kennedy International Airport for Moscow after two-week U.S. visit. During airport interview Feoktistov said he liked U.S. astronauts’ “sincerity and hopeful approach to life.” Beregovoy said, “Friendship is a force which will help the world to conquer space.” Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman was at airport to see them off. (NYT, 11/5/69, 52)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins held first postflight press conference at MSC, narrating 45-min film of mission and answering questions. On meaning of lunar landing, Collins said it was “technical triumph for this country to have said what it was going to do a number of years ago, and then by golly do it. Just like we said we were going to do. Not just . . . purely technical, but also a triumph of the nation’s overall determination, will, economy, attention to detail, and a thousand and one other factors that went into it.” To Aldrin mission meant “that many other problems perhaps can be solved in the same way by taking a commitment to solve them in long time fashion. I think that we were timely in accepting this mission of going to the moon. It might be timely at this point to think in many other areas of other missions that could be accomplished.” Armstrong said moon landing heralded “beginning of a new age.” He said moon was “stark and strangely different place, but it looked friendly . . . and proved to be friendly.” Astronauts had much less trouble than expected on lunar surface. Primary difficulty was that “there was just far too little time to do the variety of things that we would have liked to have done. . . . We had the problem of the 5 year old boy in a candy store. There are just too many interesting things to do.” Armstrong said that during landing they “were concerned about running low on fuel on range extension we did to avoid the boulder field and craters. We used a significant percentage of our fuel margins and we were quite close to our legal limit.” On possibility of abort during period they were receiving alarm signals, Aldrin said procedure in preparation simulations had been always to “keep going as long as we could. . . . The computer was continuing to issue guidance . . . and it was continuing to fly the vehicle down in the same way that it was programmed to do. The only thing that was missing ... is that we did not have some of the displays . . . and we had to make several entries ... to clear up that area.” Armstrong added, “We would have continued the landing so long as the trajectory seemed safe. And landing is possible under these conditions, although with considerably less confidence than you have when you have the information from the ground and the computer in its normal manner available to you.” (Transcript)
Federation Aeronautique Internationale posthumously awarded its highest honor—Gold Medal—to nasa test pilot Joseph A. Walker for “his many enduring contributions to the advancement of aviation made during a 21-year flight research career marked by extraordinary perfection and valor.” . Award was received by his widow at Edwards afb ceremony. As FRC chief research pilot, Walker had flown X—15 to its highest altitude, 354,200 ft (67 mi); was first man to fly llrv astronaut training craft; was author of 20 technical papers and articles; and had taught Apollo 11 commander Neil A. Armstrong at frc. (frc Release 17—69)
Behind “computerized smoothness” of Apollo 12 countdown, there was “smoldering and sometimes explosive struggle” at ksc among scientists, engineers, and Government officials over how to run space program, John Noble Wilford said in New York Times. General uncertainty over future of NASA and of space priorities was fueling “internal feud” which began to be exposed after July Apollo 11 lunar landing. Successful Apollo 12 flight could intensify controversy by raising “stakes” in struggle. Scientists wanted greater emphasis on scientific experiments; scientist-astronauts were disenchanted at slim prospects of space flights; engineers, especially at MSC, resented scientists’ attitude. (NYT, 11/11/69, 1)
Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) presented to House petition by 729 scientists, engineers, and students in these fields, submitted by Scientists for Social and Political Action, care of Dr. Martin L. Perl of Stanford Univ. It called for open Congressional hearings to review substance and direction of entire military R&D program including abm system. (CR, 4/30/69, H3220) During April: nas—nrc Space Science Board published Sounding Rockets: Their Role in Space Research, report by Committee on Rocket Research recommending that NASA increase annual expenditures on rocket research to $27 million by 1971 and thereafter restore its earlier policy of increasing support 12% per year; that nsf, Naval Research Laboratory, and usaf immediately increase their support by 36%, and then maintain an annual 12% increase until 1975; and, additionally, that support for rocket research be increased by appropriate ratio to compensate for any reduction in satellite support. Report noted sounding rockets were responsible for dozens of major scientific discoveries, including discovery of solar x-rays emanating from millionth-degree corona of sun; for mapping of solar spectrum and structure of earth’s atmosphere; and for existence of three new branches of astronomy—uv, x-ray, and gamma-ray. Greatest single advantage of sounding rockets for studying upper atmosphere was unique ability to obtain direct, vertical profiles at altitudes of 24.8 to 124.3 mi (40 to 200 km), (nas-nrc-nae News Rpt, 4/69, 2; nas pio)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of $544,302 faa contract to Laboratory for Electronics, Inc., to develop two low-cost, solid-state, microwave-instrument landing systems (ils) for stol aircraft operations at faa’s National Aviation Facilities Experimental Center in Atlantic City, N.J., and at suitable operational STOLport such as Dulles International Airport near Washington, D.C. (faa Release 69-38)
U.S. delegate to U.N. William B. Buffum, responding to Soviet tribute to Apollo 11 astronauts by U.S.S.R. delegate Aleksey V. Zakharov, said before Security Council he hoped “fraternal spirit” demonstrated by astronauts and cosmonauts would lead to greater cooperation on earth also. {NYT, 7/25/69, 31)
NASA had assured Post Office Dept, that master die for 10-cent moon landing commemorative stamp [see July 9] had gone all the way to lunar surface as planned. It had returned to earth in cm and been rushed to Washington, D.C., July 31 after decontamination at msc. However, moon letter envelope with die proof of moon landing stamp had not been postmarked on lunar surface. Because of tight schedule for lunar eva, letter had heen left with Astronaut Michael Collins in cm Columbia while Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Al-drin, Jr., worked on moon. “Moon Landing” postmark had been applied during return voyage. Letter had been decontaminated at msc and returned to Postmaster General Winton M. Blount Aug. 5. (Fairies, W Star, 8/10/69, Hll)
Defense Secretary-designate Melvin R. Laird announced retention of Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., as Director of Defense Research and Engineering. (Kelly, W Star, 1/13/69, A5; upi, W Star, 1/14/69, A6)
Senate unanimously adopted S.R. 224, introduced by Sen. Michael J. Mansfield (D-Mont.) for himself and Sen. Everett M. Dirksen (R-Ill.), expressing gratitude on behalf of Senate and of all American people for “dedication, devotion, courage and effort of all associated with the Apollo program and with the Apollo 11 mission.” (CR, 7/25/69, S8575)	...	.
Senate adopted by 85—0 vote amendment offered by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) to S. 2546, FY 1970 military procurement authorization, which would require study and review by Comptroller General of profits made by Government agencies, including NASA, on contracts for which there had been no formally advertised competitive bidding. {CR, 9/17/69, S10743—52)
Time magazine said Astronaut Frank Borman had amused audiences during February 1969 European tour by claiming Apollo 8 astronauts deserved overtime pay because they had aged about 300 microseconds more than people on earth during moon mission. At NASA’s request, Univ. of Maryland physicist Carroll Alley had calculated effects on astronauts of phenomena described in Einstein’s relativity equations— time ran slower for object as its speed increased, and time accelerated for object as it moved away from body exerting gravitational force. Alley found Apollo 8 spacecraft speed was predominant factor when it was within 4,000 mi of earth; time slowed and astronauts actually aged more slowly. Beyond 4,000 mi, effects of earth’s gravity lessened as Apollo’s time passed 300 microseconds faster than earth’s. Despite Alley’s calculations, said Time, Borman’s claim was valid only for Astronaut William A. Anders, who made his first space flight on Apollo 8. Astronauts Borman and James A. Lovell had been crew-mates on Dec. 4-18, 1965, Gemini VII, when time dilation effect was dominant for entire two weeks. They had aged less than those on earth by 400 microseconds. Lovell’s time also had been slowed during four-day Gemini XII mission Nov. 11—15, 1966, by about 100 microseconds. “Thus,” said Time, “during all their missions in space, Lovell and Borman respectively spent 200 and 100 microseconds less time than was recorded on earth—which means they were paid for more time than they actually worked.” [Time, 3/7/69, 42)
In letter to Attorney General, Sen. William F. Proxmire (D-Wis.) asked that Justice Dept, investigate possible violations of Federal law in handling of Government’s contract with Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for production of C—5A aircraft and urged that dod immediately freeze funding for C—5A. (Proxmire Off; Nossiter, W Post, 5/6/69, A3)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Michael Collins, their families, and NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, flew in presidential jet from Houston to New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles during day of cross-country celebrations. Three-hour New York visit included greeting at City Hall by Mayor John V. Lindsay, motorcade to U.N. for greeting by TJ.N. Secretary General U Thant, and ticker-tape procession to John F. Kennedy International Airport for departure to Chicago. New York Public Events Commissioner John S. Palmer estimated crowds at 4 million; other observers said there were fewer and blamed ahead-of-schedule appearance and TV coverage. In Chicago, welcoming crowd was estimated at 3.5 million. Mayor Richard J. Daley greeted party at Civic Center and presented medals symbolic of honorary citizenship to astronauts and Dr. Paine. Illinois Gov. Richard B. Ogilvie said, “To these first citizens of the new epoch, the people of Chicago and Illinois offer their profound admiration and respect.” Astronauts spoke to 15,000 young people in Grant Park before returning by helicopter to O’Hare International Airport for flight to Los Angeles. Mayor Samuel W. Yorty met party at Los Angeles International Airport. After brief ceremony, party sped to Century Plaza Hotel for reception preceding state dinner. (Lelyveld, NYT, 8/14/69, 1; Ober-dorfer, W Post, 8/14/69, Al; NASA pao)
In Senate, Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) called for at least temporary halt in usaf plans to purchase Lockheed C—5A cargo aircraft while U.S. Comptroller General studied aircraft’s costs and value to be gained from further purchases. (CR, 8/13/69, S9972-8)
jpl Director, Dr. William H. Pickering, announced appointment of Dr. Clarence R. Gates as manager of JPl’s newly established Mission Analysis Div. New division would incorporate Systems Analysis section, Systems Analysis Research section, and jpl Navigation Program which Dr. Gates had headed since 1968. (jpl Release 524)
Special six-cent postal stamp honoring Dec. 21—27, 1968, Apollo 8 mission had been approved by Post Office Dept., Postmaster General W. Marvin Watson announced. Stamp would be issued May 5, seventh anniversary of Freedom 7, first U.S. manned suborbital space flight, by Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (PO Dept Release 14)
New direct value for sun’s thermal radiation of 125.7 w per sq ft, obtained from Mariner VI and VII en route to Mars, was nearly twice as accurate as old value of 129.5 w per sq ft, NASA announced. JPL Mariner project engineer Joseph A. Plamondon said change in probable error in new measurement was one-half that of old figure. Results of inflight measurements obtained with temperature-control flux monitors (tcfm) monitoring solar radiation since Mariners’ launch Feb. 24 and March 27 would be compared with preflight predictions of solar radiation and spacecraft temperature variations in flight, to establish new standard for temperature-control design and testing. Data from TCFM agreed with data obtained by NASA from high-altitude experiments on Convair 990. research aircraft and X-15. (NASA Release 69—69; jpl Release 518)
National Academy of Engineering announced election of 44 U.S. engineers to membership. Included were Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, honored for “technological leadership in defense research and engineering,” and Edward Wenk, Jr., Executive Secretary of National Council on Marine Resources and Engineering Development, for “major contributions to the design of military submarines and other underwater equipment,” fNAE Release)
William Hines in Washington Sunday Star said June 10 cancellation of usaf mol program would eliminate “wasteful, ill-conceived and costly project set in motion four years ago principally to still the clamoring of aerospace lobbyists for ‘military presence in space,’ whatever that might mean.” Longer term effect would be “inevitable blurring of a meaningless and arbitrary—but still restrictive—line separating U.S. civilian and military space activities.” (W Star, 6/22/69, C4)
Analysis of lunar soil samples supported theory that moon once was part of earth and became separated in cataclysmic tidal wave, Dr. John A. O’Keefe, Assistant Chief of GSFc’s Laboratory for Theoretical Studies, said in lecture at Northern Illinois Univ. Theory would explain why both earth’s crust and moon were deficient in precious metals, nickel, and cobalt and would account for indications of intense heat in moon’s formation. Heavy metals would have sunk to earth’s core when it was molten; moon had no heavy core, so it must be part of earth’s crust. (UPl, LA Her-Exam, 11/4/69; W News, 11/4/69)
American Academy of Achievement presented 1969 Gold Plate “Man of Achievement” Awards to Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, and to Apollo 8 Astronauts William A. Anders and Frank Borman. (LA Her-Exam, 6/19/69; AFJ, 6/21/69, 30)
NASA’s Apollo 10 lunar orbital mission was proceeding well toward launch readiness for 11:49 am EST May 18, Deputy Apollo Program Director George H. Hage told NASA Hq. briefing. Flight readiness test had been successfully completed April 9. Countdown demonstration test (cddt) would begin April 27, completing cryogenic propellant flow May 2; crew participation in cddt would begin May 3. Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford (commander), John W. Young (cm pilot), and Eugene A. Cernan (lm pilot) would be launched from ksc Launch Complex 39, Pad B—being used for first time—on eight-day mission in which crew would enter lunar orbit, separate lm from CSM, and pilot lm to within 50,000 ft of lunar surface. Mission would include 11 different crew operations on TV and Westinghouse Electric Corp.-developed “experiment involving color TV if we can develop it and get it prepared to fly in time to support this mission. If we are able to ... we would do most of the pictures with color TV rather than black and white. . . .” (Transcript)
New York Times Magazine profile quoted NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine: Late President John F. Kennedy’s decision to try to put man on moon by end of 1960s was “bold act that is standing the test of time damned well,” Dr. Paine had said. “Our ability to function now in a new environment a decade after Jack Kennedy is going to be a very challenging test for us. Do we understand that environment? Can we achieve a new consensus without the ‘Pearl Harbor’ of a Russian lead in space? We’re not really talking about the space program anymore. The space program is finished. You wouldn’t speak about Columbus’s voyage as the sail-powered water craft program. What Columbus’s journey was all about had nothing to do with water. It was the extension of man’s dominion, new life styles, new forms of government, new societies.” Dr. Paine believed U.S. had no choice but to push ahead. “A nation that turns down a challenge like this is a nation that’s on its way out.” (Buckley, NYT Magazine, 6/8/69, 34-63)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins visited Canadian Parliament in Ottawa. Canadian Prime Minister Pierre E. Trudeau said astronauts’ contributions to science and humanity “will live as long as mankind lives.” Astronauts would conclude two-day Canadian visit with Dec. 2 visit to Montreal and tour of nearby factory where lm landing pads were made, (upi, W Post, 12/4/69, B3)
Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, discussed aeronautical portion of DOD FY 1970 program before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearing on NASA appropriations. Upsurge in DOD aircraft weapon systems development was “reflected in the DOD fiscal year 1970 budget of $1,372 million for aircraft and related equipment R.D.T. & E., an increase of about $387 million” over FY 1969. High-priority programs were USN’s F—14A air defense fighter and S—3A carrier-based antisubmarine warfare aircraft; USAF’s F—15A air superiority fighter, advanced manned strategic aircraft (amsa), and ax close-support aircraft; and USA’s heavy helicopter (hlh). Comsat program included Defense Satellite Communications System, Tactical Satellite Communications Program, and Very Low Frequency Propagation Satellite. (Transcript)
In Washington Daily News column Sen. Everett M. Dirksen (R-lll.) said: “Unknowing voices clamor to us to give up the search into the unknown. They ask us to spend the money on things here on earth. They ask for something that already has been done. Where do you think the money is spent that sent Apollo 11 to the moon? It wasn’t spent on the moon. There are no creatures there to benefit from the billions spent to finally land Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin in the Sea of Tranquility. The money was spent here on earth, where it enriched the laborers, the craftsmen, the technicians, the engineers, the scientists— and their neighborhoods. It enriched the millions and millions of people who always benefit from industry. . . . (W News, 8/8/69, 23)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins, with wives, were welcomed by President Nixon at White House ceremony on their return from 44,650-mi around-the-world goodwill journey. President called 38-day, 29-stop tour of 22 countries “most successful goodwill trip in the history of the United States.” First men on the moon had demonstrated they were “the best possible ambassadors America could have on this earth.” Armstrong said astronauts had been receive'd everywhere, “not just as individuals, but as representatives of the United States” and of “scientific and technological accomplishment . . . that serves as a symbol ... of a willing and talented nation assembling its resources and firm in its will ... to share for the benefits of all mankind.” During journey, astronauts had given 22 news conferences, been received by 20 heads of state, and received decorations on nine occasions. (PD, 11/10/69, 1563; Robertson, NYT, 11/6/69, 22)
Commemorative stamp to be issued May 5 in honor of Dec. 21—27, 1968, Apollo 8 mission would include phrase “In the beginning God . . .” on photo of earth as seen from moon, taken by Apollo 8 crew. Postmaster General Winton M. Blount said phrase, read from Genesis by Astronaut William A. Anders during lunar orbit Christmas Eve 1968, would be included in response to many requests. Stamp would be first U.S. stamp with religious wording since 1961. (upi, W Post, 2/28/69)
Planned U.S. participation in 1971 Paris Air Show was announced in Washington, D.C., by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe and Secretary of Commerce Maurice H. Stans, dot would coordinate exhibition of U.S. aircraft on flight line, (dot Release 26669)
President Nixon announced nomination of NASA Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs Philip N. Whittaker to be Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Installations and Logistics. He also announced appointment of former Gov. William W. Scranton of Pennsylvania as U.S. Representative to Intelsat Conference with rank of Ambassador, replacing Ambassador Leonard H. Marks, who resigned March 21. (PD, 4/14/69, 533-4; W Star, 4/9/69, A8)
Thomas W. Ray, historian at Defense Communications Agency, became Assistant NASA Historian for Manned Space Flight, replacing William D. Putnam, who had resigned in August to join rand Corp. (NASA Note)
End of era in satellite watching would come with discontinuation in June 1970 of Smithsonian Institution’s optical tracking program, John Lannan said in Washington Evening Star. NASA already was terminating 10-yr support of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s efforts at Cambridge, Mass. Optical tracking had cost $4 million annually since 1958, first through nsf, then NASA. Program had led to nationwide “Dial-A-Satellite” telephone net by which tape-recorded messages told callers where satellites could be seen in sky. Service had become “Dial-A-Phenomenon” to note ecological, geophysical, and astronomical events, since decay of only visible satellites, Echo 1 and Echo II. Smithsonian Observatory had watched satellites with worldwide battery of Baker-Nunn cameras, which had been phased out except for observing maneuvers in major space flights. Observatory’s geodetic program was being expanded, with two lasers operational, one on Mount -Hopkins, Ariz., the other in Athens, Greece, but financial support had been halved for current fiscal year and would be cut to $1.3 million in 1971. (W Star, 12/10/69, A26; Smithsonian pao)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced President Nixon had nominated John H. Shaffer, Vice President of trw Inc., as Federal Aviation Administrator. Shaffer would replace Acting faa Administrator, David D. Thomas, who would remain as Deputy Administrator. (dot Release 2469)
Tass announced that Luna XV was still functioning normally in lunar orbit with 109.4-km (68-mi) apolune, 16.1-km (10-mi) perilune, 1-hr 54-min period, and 127° inclination. Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said Luna XV had conducted two midcourse corrections and speculated that spacecraft was preparing either to land or to observe Apollo 11 landing. (AP, B Sun, 7/21/69, Al) Harlem, many of 50,000 attending soul music festival booed lunar landing announcement. At massive “Moon In” at Central Park, enthusiastic crowd of young people watched landing on huge outdoor TV screen in steady downpour and bought “lunar dogs,” “Apollo rock candy,” and “moon picnic” boxes. Composer and band leader Duke Ellington made singing debut with “Moon Maiden,” song he wrote to celebrate Apollo 11 success, taped for ABC. New York Times sold out 950,000 copies of July 21 issue announcing lunar landing and announced it would reprint entire edition July 24 as souvenir. Special Florida Times-Union edition datelined “Moonday, July 21” sold out in Jacksonville within two hours. Estimated 8,000 Western Electric Co. employees left work or failed to show up in protest against being denied access to TV or radios on job during lunar landing. Des Moines, Iowa, TV stations received some complaints from viewers over absence of regular programs.	, Crime rate fell in Los Angeles, while in Savannah, Ga., 17 prisoners sawed their way out of Chatham County prison branch while guards watched Apollo 11 on TV. At msc, Houston Welfare Rights Organization members demonstrated around display of lm, calling on U.S. to set new goal—elimination of poverty. (AP, B Sun, 7/22/69; W Post, 7/21/69; 7/22/69; Apollo 11 Mission Commentary, 7/21/69; NYT, 7/17/69, 7/27/69) • Millions around world hailed Apollo 11 landing: Soviet Premier Alexsey Kosygin complimented U.S. on lunar landing and expressed interest in widening U.S.—U.S.S.R. space cooperation during July 21 Moscow discussion with former Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, who was ending Soviet visit. Soviet TV did not carry live coverage of Apollo 11 lunar landing July 20; Tass announcement was read by newscaster and carried in two-paragraph item on Pravdals front page. Evening paper, Izvestia, accorded story more space and featured photo of astronauts on moon. On TV, Cosmonaut Konstantin P. Feoktistov described landing as “major landmark” and said crew had coped “brilliantly” with mission. Georgy Petrov, Director of Soviet Institute for Cosmic Research, called Apollo 11 “outstanding achievement” but said more data per ruble could have been gathered by unmanned probes. Statue dedicated to Apollo 11 astronauts was unveiled July 21 in sports stadium at Cracow, Poland. In U.K., Queen Elizabeth watched lunar landing on TV, then cabled President Nixon “warmest congratulations.” Prime Minister Harold Wilson expressed “heartfelt relief.” At Jodrell Bank Experimental Station astronomers applauded and director, Sir Bernard Lovell, said that “the future has been revolutionized.” David Threlfall collected $24,000 on five-year-old bet that man would land on celestial body before 1971. Betting shop had given him thousand-to-one odds [see May 29]. In Wollongong, Australia, local judge heard cases while watching Apollo 11 lunar landing on portable TV set. Czechoslovakia issued two postage stamps July 21 commemorating lunar landing, while record crowds at U.S. Embassy exhibition tapered off after exhausting supply of Apollo giveaway materials. Five thousand Hungarians walked through American Embassy in Budapest July 21, picking up USIA pamphlet Man on the Moon. In Romania, bouquets were tossed through U.S. Embassy fence to foot of flagpole and several Romanians reported large numbers of Bulgarians were crossing border to watch live TV coverage of Apollo 11. Cuban government decided not to jam Voice of America broadcast of Apollo 11 lunar landing. In Algiers news was ignored except for announcement in government-controlled newspaper that “the man is on the moon.” In Ghana, village chief listening to voa broadcast feared astronauts might fall off moon if not careful. In Bangkok, freedom for 622 pardoned prisoners was delayed because guards refused to leave TV sets showing Apollo 11. Lunar landing stole top play in Israel and Egypt, from accounts of their fierce fighting at Suez Canal. In Singapore, girl born half hour after lunar landing was named Luna. In Pakistan, boy baby was named Apollo. Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, and Indian Parliament gave standing ovation to Apollo 11 astronauts at opening of day’s business in New Delhi July 21. In Japan, Emperor Hirohito called off customary daily stroll and interrupted lunch to watch Apollo 11 on TV. Iroquois Indians in Brantford, Ontario, Canada, feared lunar landing might plunge earth into darkness and release monsters from earth’s core. Their medicine man and chief, Joseph Logan, Jr., had said moon was sacred to his people and “we are not supposed to disturb her.” In Taipei, Formosa, Nationalist China Parliament member Hsieh Jen-chao invited Apollo 11 astronauts to attend Moon Festival honoring rabbit which Chinese legend said lived on moon and could provide eternal life. Some devout Moslems in Somalia refused to believe Apollo 11 lunar landing was reality. Following radio, press, and word-of-mouth announcement, fist fights broke out July 21 in Mogadiscio streets between believers and disbelievers. Parents of baby boy born on lunar landing day broke with Muslim tradition and named child Armstrong Abdurahman Osman. In Brussels workers in radio and TV studios suspended strike during transmission of Apollo 11 mission film. In Brazil several thousand persons cheered as they witnessed televised lunar landing at Museum of Modern Art in Rio de Janeiro while church bells rang outside. In Santiago de Chile people rushed out of restaurants to look at moon, forgetting it was midafternoon when they learned of lunar landing. While rest of world focused on lunar landing, one quarter of world’s population labored through sixth moon of Chinese lunar year unaware of event. Approximately 800 million people in Communist China had heard no news of lunar landing. Only deviation from “total blackout on space exploration” was July 17 story of Astronaut Frank Borman’s visit to Moscow, reported by New China News Agency. (C Trib, 7/22/69; W Post, 7/21-22/69; W Star, 7/22/69; NYT, 7/22/69; B Sun, 7/21—22/69; Am Embassy, Prague, Bucharest, Brussels, Budapest, Mogadiscio)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. founder Allan H. Lockheed died in Tucson, Ariz., at age 80. He had begun career at 16 as auto mechanic, taught himself to fly, and in 1915 established aircraft manufacturing firm with brother Malcolm. In 1926 he formed partnership with John K. Northrop which developed into Lockheed Aircraft Corp. They pooled resources to produce Lockheed Vega aircraft, which set 27 records from 1928 to 1932. Lockheed resigned in 1929 but served as adviser to several aviation companies. (UPI, W Star, 5/28/69, B7; W Post, 5/28/69, CIO)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloting by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 68,000-ft altitude and mach 1.2 during 22nd flight west of Rosamond, Calif. Purpose was to obtain performance, stability, and control data. (NASA Proj Off)
Special Task Force report submitted to President Nixon Jan. 8 but not released by White House called for NASA revamping and shift in space priorities, John Lannan said in Washington Sunday Star. Panel, chaired by Univ. of California at Berkeley physicist Dr. Charles H. Townes, included Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, then NASA Deputy Administrator; Dr. James A. Van Allen of Univ. of Iowa; Dr. Harry H. Hess, chairman of nas—NRC Space Science Board; and Dr. Walter Orr Roberts of National Center for Atmospheric Research. Report recommended continuation of $6-billion space effort, with $2 billion for dod and rest for NASA; disapproved of any commitment to large orbiting space station; and urged commitment to unmanned planetary probes. It considered NASA’s present structure inappropriate for post-Apollo program and urged bringing “an outstanding scientist into its top administrative ranks.” It was desirable to avoid manned versus unmanned operations argument and to focus on search for most appropriate role for human being in entire system. NASA organization was not “adapted to this approach.” nasc should be chaired by President rather than Vice President. Panel advocated lunar exploration and gave high priority to use of space for commercial and civil benefits. It urged space spending at Vl% to 1% of gnp and proposed U.S. intensify efforts toward international cooperation in space, Lannan reported. (W Star, 6/1/69, Al)
There was no question that manned Mars mission could be “organized, equipped and flown, possibly by 1985 or 1986,” William Hines said in Washington Sunday Star. “But the cost of such a flight would be tremendous.” Apollo had cost $25 billion over eight years. Project Mars “would cost four times as much over a period twice as long.” Taxpayers and legislators “should listen to the professional pitchmen of space with a dubious ear, demanding facts instead of the sort of rhetoric Dr. George E. Mueller delivered on Apollo 11 splashdown day.” (W Star, 8/3/69, C4) across in Martian summer and increased to 3,500 mi across in winter. (Auerbach, W Post, 8/5/69, Al)
Apollo 11 astronauts would leave three items on lunar surface to commemorate landing, NASA announced. Silicon disc, 1%-in-dia, would carry statements by Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon; messages of goodwill from leaders of 73 countries; list of leaders of Congress and members of four congressional committees responsible for NASA legislation; and names of NASA’s top management, past and present. Statements, messages, and names had been etched on disc by process used to make microminiature electronic circuits. Each message had been reduced 200 times, to barely visible dot. Three- by five-foot nylon American flag with tubing along top edge would be erected on eight-foot aluminum staff on airless moon. Two other U.S. flags and flags from 136 nations and 50 U.S. states would be carried to moon and returned to earth. Plaque left on lm descent stage would bear images of two hemispheres of earth and inscription “Here men from the planet earth first set foot upon the moon July 1969, A.D. We came in peace for all mankind.” It would bear names of Apollo 11 crew—Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins—and President Nixon, (nasa Releases 69—83E, 69-83F, 69-83H)
Secretary of State William P. Rogers told Washington, D.C., news conference Nixon Administration was resolved to continue test firings of advanced strategic missiles. He said tests would not affect chances for U.S. success in disarmament talks with U.S.S.R., scheduled for summer, and that they should be continued even after negotiations had begun, (Grose, NYT, 6/6/69, 1)
Nixon Administration was responding to nasa requests for $200 million supplemental r&d funds by “emphatically ordering future reductions” in FY 1970 budget, said William J. Normyle in Aviation Week & Space Technology, bob had told NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, to plan on $140-million loss despite conclusions of House subcommittees that NASA’s R&d should be increased $234.4 million. Until Nixon decisions on U.S. space future, cut would “wipe out” work on space stations, shuttle/logistics vehicles, and manned lunar exploration. Feasible future programs were being studied by President’s ad hoc committee which would report in September. (Av Wk, 4/14/69, 27-8)
NASA announced that 8 of 14 aerospace research pilots trained for USAf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory program terminated June 10 would join NASA. One, l/c Albert H. Crews (usaf), would be assigned to Flight Crew Operations Directorate at MSC. Seven would be astronauts, bringing total number of active NASA astronauts to 54: Maj. Karol H. Bobko (usaf), l/cdr Robert L. Crippen (usn), Maj. Charles G. Fullerton (usaf), Maj. Henry W. Hartsfield, Jr. (usaf), Maj. Robert F. Over-myer (usmc), Maj. Donald H. Peterson (usaf), and l/cdr Richard H. Truly (usn). Effective date for new assignments had not been set. Maj. Bobko, Maj. Hartsfield, and Maj. Peterson would complete studies for graduate degrees before assuming astronaut duty, (nasa Release 69-120)
Associated Press said Austin, Tex., Judge John R. Brown had granted request of atheist Madalyn Murray O’Hair for three-judge Federal court to hear her suit against NASA seeking to prevent astronauts on duty from practicing religion [see Aug. 6]. (AP, W Post, 8/16/69, A3)
Australian Prime Minister John G. Gorton announced in Canberra that Australian government had accepted U.S. proposals for “a joint United States-Australian defense space communications facility” at Woomera, South Australia, site of Australian Weapons Research Establishment. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 4/24/69, Al)
Defense Secretary-designate Melvin R. Laird announced at press conference that Stanley R. Resor would remain as Secretary of the Army, Rhode Island Gov. John H. Chafee would be nominated Secretary of the Navy, and former NASA Deputy Administrator, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., would be nominated Secretary of the Air Force in Nixon Administration. (Wilson, W Post, 1/7/69, 1) usn saw post-Vietnam war need for modernization, with emphasis on nuclear-powered escort ships; usaf wanted new fighter, manned bomber, deployment of interim bomber, and revamping of U.S. air defense force. Dr. John S. Foster, Director of Defense Research and Engineering, said: “The Soviets have four characteristics of special concern to the r&d community. They are technically advanced, they are strong economically, they have an aggressive military posture—and they work behind a veil of secrecy. The one that makes competition difficult is secrecy. To counter it, the United States must have technological superiority. We must have been there, technically, before them.” (W Star, 1/6—8/69)
In Washington Evening Star, William Hines said, “If a successful farmer suddenly started economizing on seed, his neighbors and family would begin to doubt his judgment, if not his sanity. Yet this is precisely what Uncle Sam is doing in cutting back the financing of scientific research. Despite denials from budget officials in the past weeks, federal support of science in fiscal 1970 continues on an alarming down-trend that has been apparent for several years. It has been said that in an advanced economy like ours, research expenditures are ‘seed money’ and the analogy is apt. Like individual seeds in a field, not every research dollar germinates, and not all those that do mature. But total return is vastly greater than outlay—and that is the story of science as well as of agriculture.” (W Star, 1/26/69, C4)
President Nixon submitted following nominations to Senate: Gen. John D. Ryan (usaf) to be usaf Chief of Staff, Adm. Thomas H. Moorer (usn) to be Chief of Naval Operations for additional two-year period, and Gen. Earle G. Wheeler (usa) for reappointment as Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, for additional one-year term. {PD, 6/16/69, 845)
At small White House dinner, Apollo 10 Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan presented President Nixon and Vice President Agnew with four wrinkled flags which had been carried aboard spacecraft during mission. Stafford told President, “. . . these flags have been to the moon and 31 times around it, so we thought you’d like to have them just the way we brought them back. That’s why we didn’t press out the wrinkles when we had them framed.” (Dean, W Star, 7/1/69, Dl)
NASA and public TV would participate in first full-scale experiments in use of satellites to transmit TV programs domestically, John W. Macy, Jr., President of Corp. for Public Broadcasting announced. Scheduled for near future, tests would transmit public broadcasting programs using Ats III spacecraft in orbit and NASA ground stations at Rosman, N.C., and Mojave, Calif., to indicate technical problems and operating costs of satellite transmission. NASA had authorized first regular use of its satellites domestically for other than purely scientific purposes in letter to Macy, Chairman of Satellite Task Force organized by cpb to represent public broadcasting interests in satellite field, (cpb Release)
If NASA’s Apollo 11 successfully landed on moon July 20, “it will be a proud moment for Americans and a costly one for British bookmakers, who will pay out at least $172,000 in bets they wish they had never made,” Karl E. Meyer reported in Washington Post. Big winner would be David Threlfall of Preston, Lancashire, who in April 1964 bet £10 ($24) that man would land on moon before January 1971. Since odds were 1,000 to 1, Threlfall would collect $24,000 from William Hill Organization betting firm. As one broker explained: “When you think about it, it’s a bit ridiculous. This is one of the few times we’ve made a mistake—the man in the street knew more about space than we did.” (W Post, 5/29/69, A4)
Mars’ reddish color might be attributed to carbon suboxide, Univ. of Massachusetts physicists William T. Plummer and Robert K. Carson reported in Science. They had found reflection spectrum of Mars could be well matched from 0.2 p through 1.6 p and farther by polymers of carbon suboxide. (Science, 11/28/69, 1141—2)
Senate confirmed nomination of Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders as Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council. (CR, 6/19/69, S6736)
Report on aviation safety for 1968 was submitted to House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce by Joseph J. O’Connell, Jr., Chairman of National Transportation Safety Board. For all scheduled air carrier services there had been one fatal accident for about every 500,000 hrs, or for every 100,000 transcontinental flights. One passenger had been lost for every 370 million passenger miles flown. Number of fatalities in scheduled domestic and international passenger service had been second worst of decade; but accident rates, fatal and nonfatal, continued downward for total scheduled air carriers. In general aviation, rate for fatal accidents per hours flown had increased but remained below rates of 1965 and before and was third best in decade. Total number of fatal accidents—692, killing 1,374 persons— was highest in history. (Text; NYT, 2/9/69, 94)
Die proof of 1.05- by 1.80-in 10-cent airmail stamp commemorating “First Man on the Moon,” attached to envelope, would be carried by Apollo 11 and canceled on Moon by Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Postmaster General Winton M. Blount announced. On return to earth, die would be used to produce commemorative stamps for August issue. Hand-canceled “Moon Letter” would undergo 21-day decontamination period at lrl and be returned to Post Office Dept, for display in Washington, D.C., and later throughout U.S. and abroad. Stamp was designed by Paul Calle, modeled by Robert J. Jones, and engraved by Edward R. Felver and Albert Saavedra. It depicted astronaut stepping from spacecraft onto lunar surface. (PO Dept Releases 107, P—37; W Post, 7/10/69, A13)
Rep. John V. Tunney (D-Calif.) introduced H.J.R. 810, “designating the day which man lands on the moon, and the anniversary of that day each year thereafter as a national holiday to be known as ‘Space Exploration Day.’ ” Resolution was referred to House Judiciary Committee. (CR, 7/8/69, H5725)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe said in Washington, D.C., that committee of academicians, committee within DOT, and committee representing other agency executives had begun extensive review for Nixon Administration to determine whether Government should continue subsidizing SST development. (Herbers, NYT, 2/8/69, 1; Reuters, W Post, 2/8/69, A2)
Spain awarded its Grand Cross of Aeronautic Merit to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. (upi, NYT, 10/4/69, 23)
If jpl were taxed as business it would bring in estimated $840,000 and reduce property tax rate in La Canada-Flintridge, Calif., district from $4.20 to $2.56, according to La Canada School Superintendent, Dr. Donald Ziehl. Instead, he told School Board, district would receive $85,000 from Government under fixed-amount system used in lieu of property tax on Federal facilities. (Michals, Glendale News-Press, 3/19/69)
Wendell F. Moore, assistant chief engineer at Bell Aerosystems Co. and developer of rocket belt which could lift man and carry him length of football field, died in Niagara Falls, N.Y., at age 51. He had won John Price Wetherill Medal of Franklin Institute of Philadelphia in 1964 for his invention, first flight-tested in 1961. (upi, NYT, 5/30/69) May 29—June 8: 28th Salon Internationale de l’Aeronautique et de l’Espace —Paris Air Show—featured nearly 550 exhibitors representing 14 nations. U.S., with largest pavilion, emphasized space achievements, taking “Countdown Apollo” as theme. On opening day biggest display attraction, said United Press International, was Apollo 8 spacecraft, which Apollo 9 Astronauts James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart unveiled in ceremony attended by U.S. Ambassador to France, R. Sargent Shriver. U.S. exhibit also included F—1 and J—2 engines of 1st and 2nd stages of Saturn V rocket and full-scale model of Apollo 11 lm. French prototype of Concorde 001 supersonic transport was flown over Paris for first time and later took its place on apron at Le Bourget Airport among 150 aircraft, helicopters, and gliders. Opening day also marked signing of agreement for joint development of short-haul airbus by French Transport Minister Jean Chamant and West German Economics Minister Karl Schiller. Spokesman for U.K. manufacturer Hawker Siddeley said firm was still negotiating on building wings for 250-seat airbus. U.S. exhibited 490-passenger Boeing 747 but did not show Lockheed C—5A, world’s largest aircraft. U.K. exhibits at Air Show included Concorde 002, British prototype; Hawker Siddeley Harrier vtol jet fighter; and Hawker Siddeley Nimrod, maritime reconnaissance version of Comet. French exhibits included Dassault Mirage fighters and Dassault Hirondelle turboprop. U.S.S.R.’s chief entry was 500-passenger An-22 turboprop airliner. (Amer Av, 5/26/69, 33-6; upi, W Star, 5/29/69, A10; Reuters, NYT, 5/30/69, 40)
Joseph P. Loftus, Jr., Manager of MSC Program Engineering Office, described plans for future Apollo lunar exploration at MSC press conference. Technological objectives were to increase scientific payload to lunar orbit and to lunar surface, permit high flexibility in landing site selection, increase lunar orbit and lunar surface stay time, increase lunar surface mobility with self-propelled lunar roving vehicle, develop and demonstrate advanced techniques and hardware for expanded manned space mission capabilities, develop techniques for achieving point landings, and demonstrate closed-loop onboard navigation capability as applicable to advanced missions. Scientific objectives were to investigate major classes of lunar surface features, surface processes, and regional problems; collect samples at each site for analyses on earth; establish network of surface instrumentation to measure seismic activity, heat flow, and disturbance in moon’s axis of rotation; survey and measure lunar surface from lunar orbit with high-resolution photography and remote sensing; investigate near-moon environment and interaction of moon with solar wind; map lunar gravitational field and internally produced magnetic field; and detect atmospheric components resulting from neutralized solar wind and micrometeoroid impacts. Achievement of scientific objectives would be facilitated by addition of scientific instrument module (sim) under service module sector door, sim would consist of scientific instruments mounted on shelves behind door, which would be deployed pyrotechnically after crew left lunar surface. Spacecraft would also use new modular equipment storage assembly (mesa) . “Unlike the existing mesa it is modular and people, instead of having to take many things out of compartments and stick them into a bag .' . . here you simply take hold of a handle . . . and lift out an entire shelf. On that shelf are all the things required for the next eva period. So, it is one movement instead of a dozen.” One tank of hydrogen and one tank of oxygen would be added to extend mission capability to I6V2 days. Since each eva period would increase up to 5 hrs and total lunar stay time would increase up to 200 hrs, lithium hydroxide would be increased for portable life-support system and for spacecraft, and insulation would £e increased on top of spacecraft around docking tunnel. Minor changes would be made to interior garments so crew would have more suitable environment and crew would remove spacesuits and sleep in hammocks during rest periods on lunar surface. (Transcript)
At dedication of Robert Hutchings Goddard Library of Clark Univ., Worcester, Mass., Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) said: “I am for the space program. But I want to see it in its right priority: One which will let it continue into the future and not have to be cut back or abandoned because the nation that supports it is hobbled by internal disorder. And so, once the lunar landing and exploration are completed, a substantial portion of the space budget can be diverted to the pressing problems here at home. We should develop a plan for an orderly programmed exploration of outer space. But we no longer need an accelerated program. ... We should continue an orderly and rational space program for the advancement of man’s knowledge of the universe and for the considerable benefits it will bring us here at home.” NASA program “has been the first time, outside wartime, in which the nation has organized its scientific and industrial disciplines and techniques, “Our challenge today is to use the same techniques and the same discipline: To lower the cost of production of home building . . . ; to develop command and control systems in the fight against crime; to apply the versatility of computers to education and worker training and the vital work of neighborhood health centers; to organize government and scientific resources to find new and cheaper ways to end the destruction of our environment. The American team of government, industry and labor has been able to achieve Dr. Goddard’s impossible dream: Certainly the same industries, the same employees, the same techniques and support can be applied to the urgent business here at home.” (Kennedy Off Release) Honorary Doctor of Laws degrees were awarded to Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.); J. Leland Atwood, President of North American Rockwell Corp. and general chairman of Goddard Library program; and Jack S. Parker, General Electric Co. Vice Chairman; and Doctor of Science degree to Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. Mrs. Robert H. Goddard, widow of U.S. rocket pioneer, spoke during ribbon-cutting ceremony at which Dr. Charles G. Abbot, 97-yr-old Smithsonian Institution Secretary Emeritus and Dr. Goddard’s close friend, received ovation from audience of 4,000. MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, and North American Rockwell Corp. Vice President Francis D. Tappaan received Clark Univ. chairs during luncheon after ceremonies. (Program)
m/g James T. Stewart, former Vice Director of usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program, had been named afsc Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems, Gen. James Ferguson, afsc Commander, announced. Gen. Stewart would replace m/g John L. Zoeckler, who retired from usaf July 31. (afsc Release 130.69)
Best seller of books published by New York Times during year was We Reach the Moon by John Noble Wilford. Book sold 1 million copies in U.S. and abroad. (NYT, 2/22/70)
The supersonic Soviet airliner Tu-144 following its landing at Sheremetyevo Airport, Moscow, after a public-demonstration test flight. {AP wirephoto) will be executed with the same precision that marked the early stages of this trip.” ( W Post, 5/22/69, A24) John Lannan in Washington Evening Star; “Where manned space flight once was fraught with fright and peril, it seems to have moved into an era of fun and games. . . . The astronauts have learned to fly their spacecraft, the ground crews to launch them and the Defense Department to recover them. What remains is to use this accumulated knowledge, and that’s what NASA is attempting to do.” It all pointed to fact that “space flight has come of age.” (W Star, 5/21/69, A4) Marquis Childs in Washington Post: “When the moon landing . . . is completed the cost to the government will be just under $24 billion. The achievement represents an unprecedented orchestration of the resources of science and technology. The contrast with the failures here on earth to begin to try to cure rudimentary ills could hardly at this moment of grave uncertainty be sharper.” (W Post, 5/21/69, A25) Christian Science Monitor editorial: Apollo 10 mission “has again posed the old, old question: If mankind can achieve so spectacularly in space, why cannot we improve matters faster here on earth? The answer, surely, is that it is simpler to mobilize the complex electronics and space-science gadgetry to rocket a spacecraft to the moon than it is to coordinate the manifold and conflicting human emotions, ambitions, and processes necessary for cleaning up the cities, thrusting the black revolution forward with a minimum of friction, and banishing earth’s pollutants. The earth problem is moTe complex than the moon problem. Yet success in the moon venture will offer assurance that the earth challenge can be met. “So let no one call the moon venture a waste of ambition, treasure, achievement. The whole brilliant enterprise is immensely horizon-widening, thought-expanding.” (csm, 5/21/69)
Dr. William D. McElroy, nsf Director, announced 36-mo extension of Deep Sea Drilling Project, which was nearing end of 18-mo contract period. To date, holes up to 3,231 ft deep had been drilled at more than 66 sites in Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, in water depths up to 20,140 ft, to retrieve sediment samples that had rained onto ocean floor for millions of years. Project sought data on inner space—history and origins of ocean basins and continents. Contract extension—from June 30, 1970, to June 30, 1973—covered additional drilling during 15 two-month cruises of drilling ship Glomar Challenger, (nsf Release 69-144)
Press conference on results of NASA’s Oao II orbiting astronomical observatory (launched Dec. 7, 1968) was held at NASA Hq. OAO Project Manager Joseph Purcell of GSFC said spacecraft’s five months of orbital operations had been “a fabulous success” and all spacecraft systems were operating normally. As of last week, he said, “we had 137 mission days. [Univ. of] Wisconsin [experiment] has been pointed to 846 different locations in the sky [and] 344 of those were unique objects that they were studying. SAO, the Smithsonian package, has been pointed at 483 separate locations and taken some 1,172 pictures.” (Transcript)
Project Tektite, multiagency-industry program to determine ability of men to perform scientific research mission while living isolated on ocean floor under saturated diving conditions for long period, began at St. John, Virgin Islands. Four U.S. aquanauts, Richard A. Waller, H. Edward Clifton, John G. Van Derwalker, and Conrad V. W. Mahnken jumped into sea at Beehive Cove and swam to “habitat,” underwater capsule moored 42 ft below sea level for 60-day experiments. Tektite program was jointly sponsored by usn, NASA, and Dept, of the Interior, with participation by U.S. Coast Guard. Prime contractor, General Electric Co., furnished undersea habitat. NASA and usn behavioral and biomedical teams would observe aquanauts continuously to identify psychological and physiological reactions to long-term mission performed in hostile and isolated environment common to undersea and space missions, (nasa OMSF pao; Lannan, W Star, 2/16/69, A3; 2/17/69, A6)
Safe landing of Apollo 11 in Pacific made “splash applauded around the world,” New York Times said. In U.S.S.R. TV viewers had live coverage for first time during mission as Moscow TV station hooked into Eastern Europe’s Intervision network for live transmission of astronauts being deposited on carrier Hornet. Later, station devoted first two-thirds of final newscast to Apollo 11 and announced that Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny had sent telegram to President Nixon offering “our congratulations and best wishes to the space pilots.” Soviet Academy of Sciences president Mstislav V. Keldysh called voyage “a big contribution to space exploration and further progress of world science.” Cosmonauts sent message to Apollo 11 crew: “We . . . closely followed your flight. We wholeheartedly congratulate you on the completion of your wonderful journey to the moon and safe return to earth.” In London Lloyd’s of London’s Lutine Bell tolled twice for good news of splashdown of Apollo 11. Sir Bernard Lovell, Jodrell Bank Experimental Station Director, said, “The successful conclusion of this immense project marks the beginning of a new phase when man must concern himself with the greatest issues of peaceful coexistence in extraterrestrial space.” Thunderstorm in Paris drove many people off streets at time of splashdown. On Riviera, bells tolled for five minutes and ancient cannon boomed. Mayor Pascal Rossini of Ajaccio, Corsica, sent invitation to astronauts to visit Corsica during 1969 bicentennial of Napoleon’s birth. In Warsaw crowd of 300 Poles broke into applause at U.S. Embassy. Over Pacific on Qantas airliner flying under Apollo reentry point, crew and 80 passengers saw space capsule reenter. In Canberra Prime Minister John Gorton invited astronauts to visit Australia. Pope Paul VI sent telegram to President Nixon with prayer “that this immense achievement may foster peace and prosperity and scientific and moral progress for all mankind.” Congratulatory messages were sent by President Giuseppe Saragat of Italy, President Yahya Khan of Pakistan, Prime Minister Eisaku Sato of Japan, President Chung Hee Park of South Korea, U.N. Secretary General U Thant, President Gustav Heinemann of West Germany, and Prime Minister John Gorton of Australia. (Collier, NYT, 7/25/69, 31; Mills, B Sun, 7/25/69, A6; AP, B Sun, 7/25/69, A6)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) released report on Safeguard ABM system prepared at his request by Harvard law professor Abram Chayes and MIT provost Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner and scientists George W. Rathjens and Steven Weinberg. It said that “the Sentinel/Safeguard anti-ballistic missile system should not be deployed at this time.” Recommendation was based on conclusions system was unlikely to perform according to specifications under nuclear attack, was susceptible to penetration, and was not well adapted to perform missions assigned to it. Deployment would probably start “new round in the arms race” and “seriously impede the conclusion of an arms control agreement.” (Kelly, W Star, 5/7/69, A8; Chapman, W Post, 5/7/69, Al)
