Cancellation of 8 743 070 first day covers of moon landing postage stamp—nearly trebling previous top of three million covers canceled—was announced by Postmaster General Winton M. Blount. Requests for souvenir envelope commemorating July 20, 1969, Apollo 11 lunar landing had been received from 100 different countries and reached 60 000-80 000 daily within days after stamp was announced July 9, 1969. Stamp sales totaled 9 614 685, with value of $961 468.50. Previous record had been set in 1962 for stamp commemorating first U.S. earth-orbiting flight by Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr. (PO Dept Philatelic Release 3)
faa Deputy Administrator David D. Thomas announced his resignation and retirement, effective Feb. 15. He had joined faa as air traffic controller in 1938 and had worked his way up to second-ranking job in agency. Following resignation of Gen. William F. McKee in 1968, Thomas had served as acting faa administrator for eight months. (NYT, 1/19/70,71; UPl, WPost, 1/20/70, A12)
William Hines in Washington Sunday Star praised NASA handling of Apollo 13 investigation: Handling “contrasted sharply” with that following Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire. “Administrator Thomas 0. Paine is undoubtedly directly and personally responsible for the change. Paine seems to be one of the few high officials in Washington with a decent respect for the opinions—and the intelligence—of the taxpaying public/^ WStar, 7/12/70, B4)
JPL Lab-Oratory reproduced crystallotype print from daguerrotype of moon made by John A. Whipple in 1851. Accompanying article included description by Whipple of difficulties in obtaining photo. Whipple account and daguerrotype had first appeared in July 1853 issue of Photographic Art-Journal. Daguerrotype was “one of the oldest close-ups of the Moon on record,” jpl said. (Lab-Oratory, 5/70, cover, 3)
New York City Mayor John V. Lindsay addressed more than 300 mayors at National League of Cities Conference in Atlanta, Ga.: “The human potential of technology is boundless. We have only scratched the surface. For the sake of our cities and for the sake of the men and women in out aerospace, industry, we must learn more.” Mayor Lindsay said aiaa and city of New York would sponsor first annual Urban Technology Conference in May 1971. Conference would focus on application of space techniques and talent to urban crisis. “From it we hope to learn how to convert the creativity that put a man on the Moon into an ally in the struggle to help men live in our cities.” (A&A, 1/71,9)
In profile of Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., new OST Director and Science Adviser to President, New York Times said Dr. David’s goal was “to combine science and technology with the human factor in society.” Associate had said Dr. David was skeptical of value of manned space program and felt space program should be pushed in “very studied fashion.” (NYT, 9/15/70,26)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe and Canadian Minister of Transport Donald C. Jamieson agreed in Washington, D.C., to exchange information on problems of automobile and aviation safety and pollution common to both countries, (dot Release 2670)
In experiment to test validity of Einstein theory of relativity, jpl astronomer Dr. John D. Anderson and Cal Tech astronomer Dr. Duane 0. Muhleman measured radio signal from Mariner VI just before it swung behind sun. If Einstein theory was correct, precise distance-measuring system built by jpl engineer and coinvestigator Warren L. Martin and 64-m (210-ft) antenna at Goldstone tracking station in Mohave Desert would register slowup of 200 millionths of second in roundtrip signal from satellite. Einstein said velocity of light was slower in gravitational field near sun than in interplanetary space where gravitational fields were weaker. (NASA Release 70-62)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of $3million dot contract to Grumman Aerospace Corp. to design 480-km-per-hr (300-mph) tracked air-cushion research vehicle (tacrv). (dot Release 6370)
FAA issuance of advance notice of proposed aircraft engine emission standards, soliciting comments, was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Studies had shown that one percent of total U.S. air pollution might be attributed to aircraft emissions. (faa Release 70-28)
Discovery that glassy portion of 4.6-billion-yr-old lunar sample 12013 [see May 26] was chemically more like some tektites from Java than like any terrestrial igneous rock was reported in Science by GSFC scientist Dr. John A. O’Keefe. Glassy portion of Apollo 12 moon rock satisfied all chemical criteria for tektite. “Tektites are relatively recent and acid rocks, whereas the moon is chiefly ancient and basaltic; hence, tektites are probably ejected volcanically, rather than by impact, from the moon.” (Science, 6/5/70, 1209-10)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate four assistant directors of NSF: Edward C. Creutz to be Assistant Director for Research; Lloyd E. Humphreys to be Assistant Director for Education; Lewis Levin to be Assistant Director for Institutional Programs; and Thomas B. Owen to be Assistant Director for National and International Programs. Nominations were submitted to Senate March 31, 1970. (PD, 3/30/70, 444; 4/6/70, 475)
West German government was ready to accept partnership arrangement with U.S. in seven-year space shuttle program, William Hines reported in Washington Sunday Star. Nixon Administration had “gone openly shopping” for foreign assistance in project. There was dispute over how far negotiations had gone, “but the West Germans believe they have been offered a 10 percent piece of the action in exchange for about $570 million in. . .Deutschemarks, payable 300 million marks annually for seven years.” NASA had said discussions had been going on with eight foreign countries. (W Star, 2/15/70)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, successfully completed third flight from frc. Captive portion—usually conducted on separate flight—was completed at 9100-km (30 000-ft) altitude to verify B-52/adapter/heavy-weight M2-F3 compatibility, check out propellant system, and check out jettison system. Flight portion followed air launch from B-52 aircraft at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude to expand launch envelope, study transonic configuration, investigate lateral phugoid present on M2-F2, check out reaction control system, and evaluate nose window requirements. (NASA Proj Off)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, received British Interplanetary Society awards commemorating man’s first lunar landing at special meeting of Society in London. Awards were silver replica of Apollo 11LM presented to NASA and gold medals for Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (Spaceflight, 5/70, 191)
Nomination of Thomas W. Moore as member of Board of Directors of Corp. for Public Broadcasting for term expiring March 26, 1976, was submitted to Senate. Term of John D. Rockefeller III had expired. (PD, 8/31/70, 1116)
Pan American World Airways’ Boeing 747 arrived at London Airport after first passenger transatlantic crossing. Aircraft, world’s largest passenger plane, carried 361 passengers—mostly staff—on 6-hr 30min flight from John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York. First regularly scheduled passenger flight had been set for Jan. 21. (NYT, 1/13/70,73)
Preliminary results of uncompleted proof-test program had shown “F111	fleet will be structurally sound, and that it will indeed perform its intended mission,” Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, said in letter to Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.), Chairman of Senate Armed Services Committee. (Text)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) introduced S. 4241 to authorize NSF “to conduct research and educational programs to prepare the country for conversion from defense to civilian, socially-oriented research and development activities.” NASA was named, with aec and dod, to participate in conversion efforts. (CR, 8/14/70, SI3457-66)
faa air traffic controllers would delay final descent for landing of turbojet aircraft until close to their destination airport and climb aircraft out as rapidly as possible after takeoff, in program announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe to increase safety and reduce noise at U.S. airports, (faa Release 70-94)
American Institute of Physics held meeting at Rockefeller Univ. in New York. Dr. Frederick Seitz, President of Rockefeller Univ., received Karl Taylor Compton Award for distinguished statesmanship in science. During interview following meeting Dr. William D. McElroy, NSF Director, said NSF had begun testing use of large teams of scientists from different disciplines under Federal funding as new approach to basic scientific research. -NSF had allocated $70 million in 1970 for studies of pressing national and social matters. Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, MIT Provost and science adviser to President Kennedy, said priorities had been misplaced. He advocated a national science policy. “If I invented a new military system to stop tanks, I could get $100 million at the snap of my fingers. But if I say we want to develop a new method of medical care, I don’t know if I could raise $ 10 million. ” Dr. Harvey Brooks, Harvard Univ. Dean of Engineering, said: “The central problem is how science can be reasonably responsive to social problems without destroying itself as science. The health of science depends on its capacity to develop its own intellectual laws. If it attempts to become too responsive, it loses its integrity, and I see a danger of that happening now.” (Reinhold, NYT, 10/6/ 70,1)
Senate rejected, by vote of 43 to 22, amendment to H.R. 17123, $19.3billion FY 1971 military procurement authorization, to ensure that weapon systems and subsystems were thoroughly tested before production was begun. Amendment, proposed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), had been called “fly-before-you-buy.” (CR, 8/17/70, SI3529-44; SBD, 8/17/70, 202)
New York Times editorial commented on appointment of Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., to succeed Dr. Lee A. DuBridge as President’s Science Adviser: “Not surprisingly for one who has been engaged in industrial research for many years, Dr. David has indicated he is most concerned with applied areas such as health-care delivery, transportation, housing and defense. But he is certainly aware that the long-term scientific and technological health of the nation depends on the vitality of its basic research enterprise. Even the best medical organization in the world will be able to do little to conquer cancer. . .until molecular biologists and other basic scientists understand why cells grow out of control and how to prevent them from doing so. As science adviser, Dr. David will have to help assure that basic research is not sacrificed to the urgent demands for solving society’s immediate problems.” (NYT, 8/21/70)
Assistant Under Secretary of State for Public Affairs and former astronaut Michael Collins addressed meeting of Foreign Service Wives Assn, in Washington, D.C.: “By the year 2000 or 2100, people will look back on the 1970s and find it incredible that cancellation of the space program was proposed______It is inevitable there will be colonization of other planets, despite the risks.” Collins told group he hadn’t been sure oi success of first manned lunar landing until he and colleagues were safely enroute home; “that was the first time I felt any certainty about it. ’ (W Star, 4/28/70, B7)
frc announced NASA had assumed operational control of one of two YF-12 aircraft being flown in joint nasa-usaf program to obtain information from sustained cruise flight at mach 3 and altitudes in 23 000-m (75 000-ft) range for use in development and operation of commercial and military supersonic aircraft and proposed space shuttle. Two nasa flight crews, each consisting of pilot and flight test engineer, had been assigned to program. Pilots, Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., and Donald L. Mallick, were former XB-70 pilots for nasa. (frc Release 9/10)
Local 9 of American Federation of Technical Engineers, afl-cio affiliate, had filed suit in District Court in Washington, D.C., against nasa to compel space agency to fire contract employees before it fired civil service employees, Washington Post reported. Union attorney William Peer had said NASA fired civil service employees and then hired other workers through private contractors. NASA had denied that it had added private contract employees to payroll following Aug. 17 notice of dismissal issued to 51 civil service employees. (Latham, WPost, 8/26/70)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe testified on DOT action in President Nixon’s program against air piracy, before House Committee on Ways and Means. As first step, dot had urged ICAO to establish basic principles for effective sanctions: State in which hijacked aircraft landed was obligated to permit passengers and crew to continue journey and to return aircraft and cargo to owners. State to which hijacker fled was obligated to extradite or prosecute hijacker. Multilateral sanctions should be taken against states that failed to fulfill obligations. U.S. had urged ICAO to draft international convention providing legal basis for effective sanctions. To finance program of placing armed Government employees on U.S. carriers and extension of surveillance equipment at airports, dot had submitted $28-million FY 1971 budget amendment to Senate Appropriations Committee. Agency proposed costs of program be borne by 0.5% increase in 8% ticket tax on domestic airfares and increase of $2 in $3 head tax paid by passengers on international flights. (Text)
NASA announced it was inviting 450 scientific and technical leaders to Space Station Utilization Conference to be held at ARC Sept. 9-11. Invitees would participate in planning of manned earth orbital space station scheduled for 1976-1978 launch. Laboratory was to be operated in space for 10 yrs. At conference, panels would be formed to screen potential space station uses and panel recommendations would provide material for related study in summer 1971. (NASA Release 70-137) E.	Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. Among those honored were Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders; Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Roger B. Chafee, and Edward H. White II, killed in Apollo fire; Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and wife Valentina V. Nikolayeva-Tereshkova, Gherman S. Titov, Aleksey A. Leonov, Vladimir A. Shatalov, and Konstantin P. Feoktistov; and late Cosmonauts Vladimir M. Komarov and Pavel I. Belyayev. Others honored included Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, former NASA Deputy Administrator; N. E. Golovin, White Sands rocket scientist; Willy Ley, rocket scientist and author; Dr. W. R. Lovelace, former nasa Director of Space Medicine for Manned Space Flight; Theodore T. von Karman, aerodynamics expert; Joseph A. Walker, NASA X-15 test pilot; and Alan T. Waterman, NASA consultant and first NSF Director. Names had been selected by Working Group on Lunar Nomenclature and were approved by IAU officials. Other names approved included those of medieval Persian poet-astronomer Omar Khayyam, U.S. physicist Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer, U.S. scientist George Washington Carver, mythological figures Icarus and Daedalus, and apocryphal Chinese rocket inventor Wan Hu. (McElheny, W Post, 8/15/70, Al; AP, W Star, 8/22/70, A2; SAOPIO; Sky and Telescope, 11/70,262-6) Communications with Skynet B were lost suddenly during apogee motor firing Aug. 22. Search for spacecraft was being conducted by NORAD. Skynet B was second of two U.K. military comsats launched in IDCSP-A program under dod-U.K. agreement. USAF managed project for DOD and would reimburse NASA for launch services. U.K. would reimburse USAF. Skynet A, launched Nov. 21, 1969, was operating satisfactorily over Indian Ocean. (NASA Proj Off; B Sun, 8/20/70, A3) August /9.-U.S.S.R.. launched Cosmos CCCLVIIinto orbit with 466km (289.6-mi) apogee, 271-km (168.4-mi) perigee, 91.9-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 24. (GSFC SSR, 8/31/ 70; 11/30/70)
U.S. space program was “in a kind of limbo, waiting, really, to be reborn and reconstituted,” William Leavitt said in Air Force and . Space Digest. As Apollo stretched out, “NASA space planners are already working toward the first launch in 1972 of Skylab, which is really the unheralded beginning of the long-awaited US manned space-station program.” (AF/SD, 7/70,60-4)
U.S. District Court Judge John H. Pratt, in Washington, D.C., refused to order release of top-secret report prepared by team headed by physicist Richard L. Garwin at request of President Nixon and said to be critical of SST. Judge Pratt dismissed suit brought by Sierra Club, Friends of Earth, and cities of New York and Boston to compel release of report. (Ungar, WPost, 8/22/70, A3)
LeRC Director Bruce T. Lundin announced appointment of G. Mervin Ault as Assistant Director of Power and Materials Directorate, Dr. Bernard Lubarsky as Assistant Director for Aeronautics, and Edward F. Baehr as Technical Consultant to the Director. (LeRC Release 70-51)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate William D. Ruckelshaus as Administrator of Environmental Protection Agency. Agency would bring together major Federal pollution control programs, effective Dec. 2. Nomination was submitted to Senate Nov. 16. (PD, 11/9/70, 1545-6; 11/23/70,1583)
Lunar Science Institute near MSC in Houston, Tex., was dedicated at ceremonies attended by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, other nasa officials, and some 70 space scientists who had gathered early for Jan. 5 opening of Apollo 11 Lunar Science Conference at MSC. Dr. Paine said, “This is the institution to help us bring all the expertise we need together to solve the riddles of the moon.” LSI, created by 49-university Universities Space Research Assn., had one-year contract with NASA, renewable annually. Facilities would be open to all scientists, including those from Iron Curtain countries. Dr. William W. Rubey, Univ. of California and Rice Univ. geologist, would be Director. (HPost, 1/5/70)
Edward C. Polhamus of LaRC Stability and Performance Branch testified before Senate Committee on Government Operations’ Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations during F-lll hearings. Extensive wind-tunnel tests of F-lll during aircraft’s development stage had led LaRC engineers in 1963 to conclude F-lll would not meet USAF specification for primary mission dash requirement; aircraft would not develop maneuver capability at supersonic speeds specified by contractor; and aircraft’s directional stability was extremely low at supersonic speeds. Primary mission shortcoming had been “associated with a high drag level which required significant design changes to solve.” Polhamus said contractor, General Dynamics Corp., had insisted F-lll would exceed primary mission requirement “and did little in the way of airframe modification.” (Testimony; PInq, 4/8/70, 2)
U.S.S.R. celebrated National Cosmonauts Day—ninth anniversary of Vostok I, first manned orbital space flight by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin April 12, 1961. Soviet press reviewed U.S.S.R. space triumphs and praised 18 cosmonauts. Except for brief announcement in Pravda that Apollo 13 had “departed for the moon,” press ignored third U.S. manned lunar landing attempt. AP reported mood of Soviet people was not festive and quoted one Muscovite as saying, “It seems a bit silly celebrating Gagarin’s first space flight while the Americans are paying their third visit to the moon.” (B Sun, 4/13/70, A5)
Milky Way galaxy was losing gravitational energy at rate equivalent to mass of 1000 suns annually, Maryland Univ. physicist Dr. Joseph Weber said during third Cambridge Conference on Relativity at Institute for Space Studies in New York. Dr. Weber had measured flow of gravitational energy and computed energy being lost from source of waves in galaxy’s center. Results indicated that eventually a star like the sun, at galaxy’s edges, would break free of weakening gravity and fly off into space. One estimate had placed event at hundreds of millions of years in future. (AP, B Sun, 6/10/70, A3)
Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D. Mitchell tested Apollo lm in vacuum chamber at ksc in preparation for Apollo 14 lunar landing mission. Mission was scheduled for Dec. 3 pending evaluation of Apollo 13 Review Board Report. (UPi. NYT, 6/18/70,9) June /6-J7: Final critical-design review of manned lunar roving vehicle was held at MSFC to decide on final design configuration leading to hardware manufacture and testing. First of four flight-mode] lunar rovers was scheduled to fly aboard Apollo 16 lm, set for 1971 launch, (msfc Release 70-112; MSFC PAO) June /7:U.S.S,R. launched Cosmos CCCXLI^from Plesetsk into orbit with 350-km (217.5-mi) apogee, 203-km (126.1-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 64.4° inclination. Satellite reentered June 25. (GSFC SSR, 6/30/70; SBD, 6/18/70,224)
President Nixon announced appointment of new members of President’s Science Advisory Committee: Dr. Solomon J. Buchsbaum, Vice President of Research, Sandia Laboratories; Dr. Theodore L. Cairns, Assistant Director, Central Research Dept., E. I. du Pontde Nemours & Co.; Dr. James S. Coleman, Dept, of Social Relations, Johns Hopkins Univ.; Dr. Val L. Fitch, Princeton Univ. physicist; and Dr. Lloyd H. Smith, Jr., Chairman of Dept, of Medicine, Univ. of California, San Francisco Medical Center. New members would serve until Dec. 31, 1973. They succeeded William R. Hewlett, who had resigned, and Dr. Ivan L. Bennett, Jr., Dr. Sidney D. Drell, Dr. Charles P. Slichter, and Dr. Charles H. Townes, whose terms had expired. (PD, 3/16/70, 357-8)
Oral history of space flight on 647 reels of tape assembled over six years had been presented to Smithsonian Institution’s Air and Space Museum, Washington Daily News reported. Assembled by Michael Kapp, Vice President of Capitol Records Co., tapes began with reminiscences of Mrs. Esther Goddard, widow of rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard, and went through Apollo 11 mission. Six-record LP album had been excerpted from tapes. (W News, 10/27/ 70)
Lawrence Radiation Laboratory scientists Dr. John W. Gofman and Dr. Arthur Tamplin were engaged in “bitter, name-calling battle” with aec while nuclear power industry “watched uneasily,” Donald Rothberg said in Washington Post. Dr. Gofman and Dr. Tamplin claimed Federal standards allowed too much exposure to radiation and that if every American had maximum permissible dose of radiation, cancer deaths would increase by 32 000 per year, aec said claim was unfounded and incorrect. Watching debate was power industry, “with its 17 nuclear plants now generating electricity, 47 under construction and 48 more proposed.” (WPost, 7/23/70, Al)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H.	Dana, successfully reached mach 0.7 after air launch from B-52 aircraft at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude. Objectives of glide flight— first in M2-F3 series—were to check out pilot, evaluate center-fin modification, determine aileron characteristics, evaluate stability augmentation system modifications, and evaluate speed brakes. (NASA Proj Off)
faa announced formation of interagency committee including representatives of NASA, DOD, and dot to prepare five-year national plan for development and implementation of new microwave-scanning-beam instrument landing system for civil-military use. System was major recommendation of dot’s Air Traffic Control Advisory Committee in March 5 report to Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. (faa Release T 70-32)
Dr. Donald F. Hornig—Vice President and Director of Eastman Kodak Co., professor at Univ. of Rochester, and former Presidential Science Adviser—was named President of Brown Univ. in Providence, R.I., effective June 1. (W Star, 3/14/70, A2; Science, 3/20/70, 1597)
Sen. William B. Spong, Jr. (D-Va.), introduced S.J.R. 221, providing for construction of monument in Washington, D.C., commemorating Apollo 11 lunar landing. Resolution was referred to Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs. (CR, 7/16/70, SI 1535)
President Nixon received 45-min briefing by NASA officials at GSFC on problems of Apollo 13 mission. Dr. John F. Clark, GSFC Director, said President was deeply concerned about mission’s difficulties. Later President entertained Danish Prime Minister Hilmar Bauns-gaard at White House dinner. President said: “I think tonight of three men ... in outer space coming around the moon . . . . I do know that they have the spirit of the Vikings. They are men of adventure. They are men of courage. Back home—I talked to the wives of two of the men and the mother of the one who is not married—they have women, who like the wives and the mothers of the Vikings of old waited at home with faith that their men would come back.” President, at his request, was informed during dinner of success of Apollo 13 maneuver which put spacecraft on homeward course. (PD, 4/20/70, 538; Lyons, NYT, 4/15/70, 1; Beale, W Star, 4/15/70, FI)
Robert H. Gray, Director, Unmanned Launch Operations at KSC, became Deputy Director of KSC Launch Operations. John J. Neilon, Deputy Director, Unmanned Launch Operations, assumed post of Acting Director, Unmanned Launch Operations. (KSC Ann)
Edward H. White II Memorial Museum was dedicated at Hangar 9 of Brooks AFB, Tex., in honor of Astronaut White, who died in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire. Museum, near White’s home town of San Antonio, Tex., would be devoted largely to aerospace medicine. In dedication address, l/g John W. O’Neill, afsc Vice Commander, said: “Space is our new world, a final frontier. ... it is also a medium through which attack is possible, which means that we must learn everything we can about it for the defense and security of the nation.” Space science and technology had spawned “new generations of materials, systems and processes, for both military and consumer goods.” Of 12 000 new products and techniques developed during last decade, “very large percentage derives directly from space and missile development.” Most “satisfying and gratifying” space spinoffs were in health and medical field—“new type of wheel chair adapted from the moon walker. . .or chemicals used in the treatment of tuberculosis and mental illness that were originally derived from missile fuels. Or spray-on instrumentation for remotely monitoring the condition of heart patients. Or the numerous new materials and techniques being applied to. . .health care.” (Text)
Apollo //lunar landing had been voted biggest news story of 1969 in poll of Associated Press member newspapers and radio and TV stations, AP announced. Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Apollo 11 commander, had been voted top newsmaker of year. AP poll ranked Vietnam war second biggest story and “story of Sen. Edward M. Kennedy’s political fortunes” third. (Rock, AP, W Star, 1/1/70, A3)
NASA was reviewing policy of allowing astronauts to sell publications exclusive personal stories, John N. Wilford said in New York Times. Review had been initiated because current contract with Life magazine would expire July 24. Though magazine denied it had made decision to renew or to drop contract, astronauts’ attorney had said he would entertain contract discussion with other publications. NASA committee, which included three astronauts, was expected to announce policy decision within few weeks. While details of Life contract had not been made public, Wilford said it was understood magazine had paid astronauuts $200 000 a year and provided $100 000 worth of life insurance. (NYT, 3/4/70, C13)
Senate approved nomination of William D. Ruckelshaus to head Environmental Protection Agency. (CR, 12/2/70, S19272)
First public TV programming via satellite was inaugurated by transmission of South Carolina etv Network program from Columbia, S.C., via NASA’s Ats III to public TV network station in Los Angeles. Program featured John W. Macy, Jr., President of Corp. for Public Broadcasting, addressing special “Satellite Dinner” in Columbia honoring South Carolina General Assembly, cpb would reimburse NASA for costs of experiment. (NASA Release 70-22)
James H. Wyld Propulsion Award was presented to Hans G. Paul, Chief of MSFC Propulsion Div. and Joseph G. Thibodaux, Jr., Chief of MSC Power and Propulsion Div. during aiaa 6th Propulsion Specialist Conference in San Diego, Calif. Paul was cited for “outstanding leadership in research and development of Saturn launch vehicle propulsion”; Thibodaux, for “outstanding leadership in research and development of Apollo spacecraft propulsion.” (MSFC Release 70-114)
White House announced that President Nixon had asked Apollo 13 astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr., to visit Iceland, Switzerland, Greece, Malta, and Ireland as his personal representatives. Mission would include visit to 21st International Astronautical Congress in Constance, Germany, where astronauts would address session in October. They would be accompanied on tour by Mrs. Lovell and Mrs. Haise; Swigert was bachelor. Group would depart Oct. 1 and return Oct. 15. (PD, 9/28/ 70,1258)
Dr. Donald J. Williams, Director of National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Space Disturbances Laboratory in Boulder, Colo., revealed plans to study space weather by squirting small blobs of electrically charged gas out of earth-orbiting satellite. He told 1970 Meeting of Interagency Conference on Weather Modification at Virginia Beach, Va., noaa would fly simple experiment on small geophysical monitoring satellite. “When activated 22 300 miles [35 900 km] above the nighttime earth, the device will trigger a self-quenching flow of electrons into the upper atmosphere. Our proposed experiment in modifying space weather requires interacting with our environment in a scientifically significant yet totally non-destructive way.” If initial release of plasma from satellite caused artificial aurora scientists would “be able to deduce the exact shape of the magnetic field line that passes through the satellite’s position. In addition, the. . .experiment should provide information on diffusion of plasma along field lines, diffusion across field lines, and electric fields deep in the magnetosphere.” Naturally occurring electron-precipitation events were accompanied by many terrestrial effects, including auroral displays, radiopropagation disturbances, and intense, short-lived fluctuations of earth’s magnetic field. If noaa experiment enhanced precipitation from magnetosphere into ionosphere scientists “would then be more certain of the natural processes that cause storms and should be able to improve our predictions of radar clutter and the quality of polar radio communications in future, naturally occurring storms. Once we know more about the magnetosphere, the triggering mechanism of electron precipitation events and their enhancement into geomagnetic storms, we can then consider ways to modify or control such storms when they occur naturally. Thus, the small noaa experiment riding piggyback on a geophysical satellite may be our first step toward ultimate control of our space environment.” (noaa Release 70-85-285)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, successfully completed captive flight from frc to verify compatibility of B-52 aircraft, adapter, and vehicle; check out systems; and verify check list, (nasa Proj Off)
usaf X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 19th flight in joint nasa-usaf research program from frc. Purposes of flight were to expand flight envelope to mach 1.25, obtain lateral directional derivatives at mach numbers greater than 1.15, obtain longitudinal trim and lift-to-drag ratio data with 30° upper flap, and determine effect of upper flap on approach and landing. (NASA Proj Off)
Papers of Robert H. Goddard, edited by Esther C. Goddard and G. Edward Pendray, were reviewed in New York Times Book Review by I. Bernard Cohen: “Goddard was not universally appreciated during his lifetime; few dreamers are. He was often ridiculed as ‘the moon man.’ Today his name is commemorated in laboratories and professorships, but his greatest lasting memorial does not carry his name. It is the background of theoretical principles, engineering devices and practical experience, in the decades between World War I and II, that are embodied in every rocket that flies today.... These splendid volumes, handsomely printed and well illustrated, should go a long way to making known the personality of this shaper of our times.” (NYT Book Review, 8/2/70)
Joint dod-dot test program to determine value of helicopters in providing medical assistance to automobile accident victims and others requiring emergency medical care was announced by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird and Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Program would use UH-1 helicopters of Army’s 507th Air Ambulance Corps at Fort Sam Houston, Tex., in San Antonio area July 15 through Dec. 31. (dod Release 577-70)
Washington Post editorial commented on launch of Project Tektite II: “As the astronauts get ready to soar to the heights, it is worth mentioning that a group of aquanauts have sunk to the bottoms—in this case, the crew of Tektite II.... The drama of undersea exploration is considerably less than probes into outer space; but, in many ways, the world on the floor of the sea is more mysterious, more demanding—and potentially richer in what it offers mankind—than anything on the craterscape of the moon.” (WPost, 4/10/70, A18) April 11-17: NASA’s Apollo 13 (AS-508)—carrying three-man crew, LM-7 Aquarius and CSM-I090dyssey—was launched on lunar landing mission, but 56 hrs into flight toward moon mission was aborted because of SM oxygen tank rupture. In most serious inflight situation experienced in manned space program, crew foljowed lm “lifeboat” emergency plan, transferring to lm and using its systems and supplies to swing around moon and back to earth on fastest feasible course. Emergency procedures were used to make electrical power, water, and oxygen last to end of journey. Crew returned to CM and jettisoned lm before reentry and splashed down safely in Pacific April 17. Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 185.5-km (115.3-mi) apogee and 181.5-km (112.8-mi) perigee. During 2nd-stage boost S-II center engine cut off 132 secs early and remaining four engines burned 34 secs longer than predicted. Space vehicle velocity after boost was 68 m per sec (223 fps) lower than planned, causing S-IVB orbital insertion burn to be 9 secs longer than predicted, but sufficient propellants remained for translunar insertion. Onboard TV was initiated at 1:35 GET for 5 1/2 min. Second S-IVB burn, on schedule at 2:41 get, injected spacecraft on translunar trajectory. csm separated from S-IVB and lm Aquarius. Onboard TV initiated after separation for 72 min clearly showed csm “hard-docking” with lm, ejection of csm/lm from S-IVB/IU at 4:01 get, S-IVB auxiliary propulsion system (aps) evasive maneuver, and spacecraft exterior and interior. First S-IVB APS burn, lasting 217 secs beginning at 6:00 GET, aimed stage for lunar target point so accurately that second burn was not required. S-IVB/IU hit lunar surface at 77:57 GET (8:10 pm est April 14) at 259 m per sec (8465 fps) and energy equivalent to 11.5 tons of tnt at 2.4° south latitude and 27.9° west longitude— 137.1 km (85.2 mi) from Apollo 12 seismometer that detected impact. Seismic signal for S-IVB/IU was similar to signal from Apollo 12 lm Intrepid that had impacted moon Nov. 20, 1969, but was 20-30 times larger and lasted 3 hrs 20 mins—four times longer. Signal was so large that ground command had to reduce seismometer gain to keep recording on scale. Suprathermal ion detector experiment (side) deployed by Apollo 12 crew recorded jump in the number of ion counts after S-IVB/IU impact. Instrument, in lunar shadow, recorded no ions at time of impact; count increased from few ions 22 secs after impact to 250 and up to 2500 before decreasing to few ions and back to none. Scientists speculated ionization had been produced by 6300 K to 10 300 K (6000°C to 10 000°C) temperatures generated by impact or that particles that reached up to 60 km (37 mi) had been ionized by sunlight. Translunar insertion maneuver was so accurate that midcourse correction No. 1 (MCC-1) was not necessary. MCC-2, for 3.4 secs at 30:14 get, placed spacecraft on desired hybrid circumlunar trajectory with closest approach of 114.9 km (71.4 mi). MCC-3 was not necessary. Good-quality TV coverage of preparations for and performance of midcourse maneuver was transmitted for 49 min, beginning at 30:03 GET, including dumping waste water from spacecraft fuel cells with moon visible in background. While joking with Mission Control, Swigert suddenly remembered that he had failed to file his Federal income tax return, but was assured that he could be granted an extension. “Hey, we’ve got a problem here,” Swigert told ground controllers. “This is Houston, say again please.” “Houston, we’ve had a problem,” Lovell replied. And Haise reported “a pretty large bang associated with the caution and warning. A few minutes later crew reported spacecraft was venting something—later determined to be oxygen—out into space. Astronauts could see blizzard of particles flying out of sm, presumably from ruptured tank. Despite desperate efforts improvised on board and suggested by Mission Control, nothing seemed to halt drop in oxygen pressure. Spacecraft dipped repeatedly, apparently because of venting gas. By 57:24 get, Mission Control reported tank No. 2 pressure was “slowly going to zero and we’re starting to think about the lm lifeboat.” Swigert replied, “Yes, that’s something we’re thinking about, too. We’ve been talking it over. ...” Decision was made to abort mission. Astronauts hurriedly had to salvage enough oxygen to supply CM during reentry and keep gyros operating until lm navigation equipment could be powered up. With only minutes of power remaining, crew fed oxygen into reserve tank and hooked up emergency batteries to csm navigation gyros until lm was powered up. Crew activated lm, powered down csm, and used lm systems for power and life support. Astronauts remained calm as they wrestled with procedures to stabilize spacecraft and stretch consumables. All information on April l !-17: Officials conferred at the flight directors' consote in the MSC Mission Operations Control Room as Apollo 13 astronauts attempted to bring (heir crippled spacecraft safely back to earth. Dr. Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations, leans an elbow on the console at far left. Circling to the right in front of him are Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager fames A. McDivitl; Deputy Director of Flight Operations Howard W. Tindall, Jr.; Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director at NASA Headquarters; and Dr, Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Flight Operations. Apollo Mission Director Chester M, Tee stands in front of Dr. Kraft. Sealed at the console (center, left to right) are Flight Directors Gera id D. Griffin and Glynn S. Lunney. Behind the console (left to right) are Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin and Vance D. Brand. Flight Dynamics Officer Philip C. Shaffer, Retro Officer fohn S. Llewellyn, Flight Dynamics Officer Charles F. Dreferich, and Lawrence S. Can/u, guidance navigation and control engineer at MSC. mission—including details of accident and emergency procedures— were made public immediately as data were received, Public’s apparent boredom at beginning of mission was transformed into deep concern for astronauts’ safety. Messages and offers of aid were sent to U.S, from world leaders and prayers were offered by religious leaders on every continent. MCC-4 was conducted with lm’s descent propulsion system (dps) at 61:30 GET, placing Apolio 13 on free-return trajectory around moon on which CM Otfyssey would splash down in Indian Ocean at 152:00 GET. Both lm guidance systems were powered up and primary system used for 263.4-sec dps burn at 79:28 get as spacecraft swung out from behind moon, two hours after closest approach. Bum produced 262-m-per-sec (860 fps) differential velocity, shortened predicted return time to 143:53 GET, and moved predicted landing point to mid-Pacific. After maneuver, passive thermal control was established and lm was powered down to conserve consumables. “Aquarius has really been quite a winner,” Haise said to Mission Control about three hours later. “When this flight’s all over we’li really be able to figure out what a LM can do.” During remainder of transearth coast crew continued emergency procedures to deal with shortage of water to cool LM electronic systems, decreasing temperatures in both cabins, and buildup of carbon dioxide in lm. Fearing that CM instruments needed for reentry might freeze, crew kept spacecraft in passive thermal control—“barbecue mode” of rotation to let sun uniformly heat all sides, Astronauts met cooling water shortage by filling every plastic bag they could with water from CM and carrying it to lm. Shortage of air-cleaning lithium hydroxide in LM was met by rigging combination of cm and lm cartridges; following instructions worked out on ground, crew built adapter and ran lunar spacesuit air hoses from LM fans through tunnel to connect to cm air-scrubbing canisters. Transmission of health data was eliminated and communications held to minimum to conserve electricity. Crew tried to keep warm by wearing boots carried for walking on moon, sleeping in narrow tunnel between LM and CSM that seemed warmer, and wearing extra clothing. Apr// 75-/7; MCC-5 at 105:19 get, by 15-sec LM DPS burn, decreased velocity by 2.3 m per sec (7.5 fps) and raised entry-flight-path angle to -6.52°. Crew partially powered up csm to check thermal conditions. Because of unusual spacecraft configuration (with LM still attached) and LM’s inability to survive reentry heat, officials on ground developed new reentry procedures and verified them in ground-based simulations. A 30-man team at MIT’s Charles S. Draper Laboratory worked throughout night studying stressed Apollo 13 guidance system and working out new trajectories. Simulations and programming of emergency problems were conducted by NR engineers in Downey, Calif., by Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., in LM at KSC, and by Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and David R. Scott at msc, so that almost every move Apollo 13 crew made had first been proved out on ground. MCC-7 was successfully accomplished at 137:40 get with 22.4-sec LM RCSburn, resulting in predicted -6.49° entry-flight-path angle. Crew viewed and photographed SM when it was jettisoned at 138:02 get, reporting that one entire panel was missing near S-band high-gain antenna and that great deal of debris was hanging out. CM was powered up and lm was jettisoned at 141:30 get. SNAP-27 nuclear generator carrying 3.9 kg (8.6 lbs) of radioactive plutonium fell from lm into Pacific northeast of New Zealand. “Farewell, Aquarius, and we thank you,” Mission Control responded to spacecraft’s report “lm jettison.” “She sure was a good ship,” Swigert added later. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned and Odyssey splashed down in mid-Pacific southeast of American Samoa at 142:54 get (1:07 pm est April 17), 6.4 km (4 mi) from recovery ship U.S.S. Iwo Jima. Astronauts—exhausted but in good health—were picked up by recovery helicopter and were safely aboard recovery ship less than one hour after splashdown. Primary Apollo 13 mission objectives—to make selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of materials in preselected Fra Mauro area; deploy and activate ALSEP; develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment; and photograph candidate exploration sites—were not achieved. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced April 17 that Apollo 13 Review Board, headed by LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright, would be established to determine cause of accident. Apollo 13 flight crew performance was outstanding throughout mission; calm, precise reaction to emergency and diligence in configuring and maintaining lm was noteworthy. Despite lack of adequate sleep and low temperature in spacecraft, neither performance nor spirits faltered. Similarly, performance of flight operations team was outstanding in planning and aiding crew to safe return. Apollo 13 was 10th Apollo mission and third manned lunar landing attempt. Accident was first inflight failure in 22 manned flights in U.S. space program. Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) and Apollo 11
Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, received Society of Manufacturing Engineers Interprofessional Cooperation Award at dinner in Detroit, Mich., for giving U.S. “through his work in jet propulsion, missilery, and telemetry ... a viable defense system while contributing substantially to her pre-eminence in the investigation of outer space.” (Pasadena Star-News, 4/2/70)
R/A Donald B. MacMillan (usn, Ret.), last survivor of 1909 Peary expedition that discovered North Pole, died at age 95. (NYT, 9/9/70, 48)
Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D. Mitchell completed testing of Apollo 14 lm in vacuum chamber at KSC, in preparation for launch to moon Jan. 31, 1971. (W Post, 9/19/70, A7; SBD, 9/21/70, 85)
Univ. of Maryland astronomer Dr. Joseph Weber had located source of gravity waves that permeated universe in concentrated area near constellation Sagittarius at center of Milky Way, New York Times reported. (NYT, 2/22/70, F4)
John Leyton, President of Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization, said in Washington, D.C., that addition of SSTto existing mix of aircraft would necessitate creation of entire new traffic control system in U.S. To enable SST to respond to traffic control instructions would require 320 km (200 mi) of maneuver space. (W Star, 9/25/70, A4)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird discussed “basic asymmetry” between U.S. and U.S.S.R. efforts in nuclear weapons field at AP annual luncheon in New York: From 1965 to 1967 U.S.S.R. had more than tripled its inventory of strategic offensive nuclear weapon launchers—from 500 to 1700, including 200 heavy bombers—and quadrupled total megatonnage in its strategic offensive force. U.S. in same period had not increased established level of 1710 strategic nuclear missile launchers, had reduced heavy bomber strength of 780 by over 200, and had reduced megatonnage by more than 40%. “Except for the minimum ‘hedge’ that safeguard will provide, we have not responded to the Soviet strategic offensive buildup with new deployment programs. We did not respond in past years because the United States deliberately chose to assume that the Soviet buildup was aimed at achieving a deterrent posture comparable to that of the United States. We have not responded this year because. . .we fervently hope that salt can render such a response unnecessary.” (Text) Cal Tech physicist Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg said detailed studies of Apollo 12 moon rocks had shown preliminary estimates of their age to be off by some 800 million yrs. Evidence from Apollo 11 and 12 lunar sample studies indicated moon—and possibly earth and some major planets—had at least one period of sustained turbulence, lasting about 300 million yrs and beginning some billion years after moon and rest of solar system originated. Solar system was estimated to be 4.6 billion yrs old. At news conference following meeting, Dr. Wasserburg said he uid collaborator, Cal Tech physicist Dr. D. A. Papanastassiou, had found age of lava-born Apollo 12 rocks to be 3.4billion yrs, rather than preliminary estimate of 2.6 billion yrs. Apollo 11 rocks were found to be 3.65 billion yrs old. Evidence indicated both areas of moon had been formed from same sustained process lasting some 300 million yrs. There was “widespread outpouring” of lava over sea regions of moon about 3.5 billion yrs ago. Evidence suggested Sea of Storms, where Apollo 12 rocks were found, had almost same age as Sea of Tranquility, Apollo 11 lunar site. (AP, LA Times, 4/23/70) Dr. Rhodes W. Fairbridge, Columbia Univ. geologist, reported finding territory which was earth’s south polar region in Upper Ordovician period, about 450 million yrs ago, in middle of Sahara desert. Finding supported belief that phenomenon of sliding land masses known as continental drift had occurred. (Blakeslee, NYT, 4/21/ 70, 1) At closing session scientists, with exception of ESSA’s Dr. S. Fred Singer, maintained earth and moon had simultaneous and similar origin despite differences between lunar rocks and those of earth. Dr. Singer agreed moon had most likely been captured in earth’s gravitational field “very shortly” after earth’s formation about 4.6 billion yrs. ago. Dr. John A. O’Keefe of GSFC thought earth and moon were once single planet that broke apart. Dr. A. G. W. Cameron of Yeshiva Univ. felt earth and moon had formed in same gaseous cloud, (upi, NYT, 4/27/70) April21: Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr., described their initial reaction to Apollo 13 accident to press at msc. Lovell explained: “Fred was still in the lunar module, Jack was back in the command module in the left-hand seat, and I was halfway in between the lower equipment bay.. .when all three of us heard a rather large bang, just one bang. Now, before that, Fred. . .had actuated a valve which nominally gives us the same sound. . .so when this bang came we really didn’t get concerned right away, but I looked up at Fred and Fred had that expression like it wasn’t his fault, and we suddenly realized that something else had occurred, but exactly what we didn’t know.” Swigert said he had felt vibration accompanying bang and then noticed master alarm and main bus B undervolt light. “I transmitted to Houston that we had a problem and proceeded to. . .look at the voltage. . .[which] at that time was completely normal. . ..” Swigert thought bang had occurred in LM and Haise, in lm, thought it had occurred in cm. Lovell said his first impression was “that we had had an electrical problem that caused this bang.... That quickly went away and then I looked out the window and saw this venting and my concern was increasing all the time. It went from I wonder what this is going to do to the landing to I wonder if we can get back home again. It was apparent.. .that the only way to survive the situation was to transfer to the lm. ...” Lovell said decision on date, crew, and destination of Apollo 14 would be made after debriefings and investigation by Apollo 13 Review Board. If NASA “wants this crew to go back to Fra Mauro, we’ll be glad to go. If they decide to send another crew or not to go to Fra Mauro, that’s their decision.” (Transcript)
NASA’s X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 14th flight from frc. Vehicle was launched from B-52 aircraft at 12 800-m (42 000-ft) altitude and reached 19 800 m (65 000 ft) and mach 0.95. Data on lateral directional derivatives at mach 0.9 and longitudinal trim and lift-to-drag ratio were obtained. (NASA Proj Off)
Intention to create separate faa office to deal with total air transportation security problems, including aircraft hijacking, was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. (faa Release 70-57)
Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., were debriefed on Apollo 13 mission at msc, tape-recording details for almost eight hours. NASA released 6Vi-min 15-mm movie of mission, including scenes of astronauts after SM explosion. Film showed Lovell rubbing his hands vigorously as if trying to warm them, Haise sleeping with his hands folded inside his spacesuit to keep them from floating free in weightlessness, and Swigert studying flight plan. (AP, WPost, 4/21/ 70, A4)
Development of world’s most powerful continuous-beam laser, with energy output capable of driving sports car, was described by Dr. Edward T. Gerry of Avco Research Lab. during annual meeting of American Physical Society in New York. Laser could produce 30 kw of power in narrow beam and 60 kw in divergent beam. Values were triple those of most powerful continuous-beam lasers in operation. Avco laser resembled rocket engine. Nitrogen-carbon dioxide gas was heated to 1900 K (3000°F) in one chamber and shot through nozzle into second chamber at supersonic speed. Carbon dioxide molecules emitted photons which mirrors focused into beam of light emitted from chamber. At news conference following meeting, scientists denied lasers were being built for use as “death rays.” Wayne State Univ. scientist Dr. Alexander J. Glass said scientists in U.S., U.S.S.R., and France were developing increasingly larger lasers that produced 100 kw of light energy in few trillionths of second. (Lyons, NYT, 4/30/ 70,20)
Discovery of tektite glass in Apollo 12 sample 12013, reported June 5th by gsfc scientist Dr. John A. O’Keefe, was debated in Science by Dr. O’Keefe, Univ. of Houston geologist Elbert A. King, Jr., and lrl scientists R. Martin and Weldon B. Nance. Analyses of sample by King, Martin, and Nance had led them to conclude that “there is no existing chemical or mineralogical observation or data that uniquely support the idea that tektites originate from the moon. There are abundant chemical data that support a close genetic relationship between tektites and terrestrial rock materials. These data have been presented or summarized by numerous authors. Tektite glass has not been found in samples from Apollo 12 (or Apollo 11).” Dr. O’Keefe responded: “They find that the material is crystalline rather than glassy. The crystals are, however, evidently rather fine; from statistical considerations it can be judged that the agreement of the two major-element analyses given for samples of only a few tens of millograms is likely only if the crystals are of the order of 100m m [0.04 in] or smaller in diameter. This raises the question whether they are the products of devitrefication. In any case, the former existence of a liquid of this composition seems to be implied. Evidence of somewhat similar liquids was found in the Apollo 11 sample.” (Science, 10/9/70, 199-200)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Rudolph A. Peterson, Chairman of Executive Committee of Bank of America, to succeed William A. Hagerty as member of ComSatCorp Board of Directors until 1973. (PD, 7/27/70,969, 986)
President Nixon presented Presidential Medal of Freedom to Apollo Mission Operations team at MSC. Citation read: “We often speak of scientific ‘miracles’—forgetting.. .that these are the product of hard work, long hours and disciplined intelligence. The men and women of the Apollo mission operations team performed such a miracle, transforming potential tragedy into one of the most dramatic rescues of all time. Years of intense preparation made this rescue possible. The skill, coordination and performance under pressure of the mission operations team made it happen. Three brave astronauts are alive and on Earth because of their dedication, and because at the critical moments the people of that team were wise enough and selffiossessed enough to make the right decisions. This extraordinary eat is a tribute to man’s ingenuity, to his resourcefulness and to his courage.” Award was accepted by Sigurd A. Sjoberg, Director of Flight Operations, on behalf of himself, Glynn S. Lunney, Milton L. Windier, Gerald D. Griffin, and Eugene F. Kranz. Following award cereriiony President and Mrs. Nixon left Houston for Honolulu with Apollo 13 astronauts’ wives, Mrs. James A. Lovell, Jr., Mrs. Fred W. Haise, Jr., and parents of bachelor astronaut, John L. Swigert, Jr. In Honolulu, President Nixon presented Presidential Medal of Freedom to Apollo 13 astronauts. He said in part: “we have received over 100 messages from foreign governments—from the Soviet Union, from Poland, other countries behind the Iron Curtain, from countries in the free world. This is truly a welcome from all the people of the world to three very brave men.” Citation on each medal read: “Adversity brings out the character of a man. Confronted suddenly and unexpectedly with grave peril in the far reaches of space, he demonstrated a calm courage and quiet heroism that stand as an example to men everywhere. His safe return is a triumph of the human spirit—of those special qualities of man himself we rely on when machines fail, and that we rely on also for those things that machines cannot do. “From the start, the exploration of space has been hazardous adventure. The voyage of Apollo 13 dramatized its risks. The men of Apollo 13, by their poise and skill under the most intense kind of pressure, epitomized the character that accepts danger and surmounts it. Theirs is the spirit that built America. With gratitude and admiration, America salutes their spirit and their achievement.” (PD, 4/27/70,548-50)
USAF X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke in joint program, successfully completed 18th flight, reaching mach 1.15 after air launch from B-52 aircraft at 13 700-m (45 000ft) altitude from frc. Objectives of powered flight—first at supersonic speed—were to expand flight envelope to mach 1.1, obtain lateral directional derivatives at mach numbers greater than 1.0, obtain longitudinal-trim and lift-to-drag-ratio data with 40° upper flap, obtain longitudinal derivatives, and make 270 knots-indicated-air-speed approach, (nasa Proj Off; upi, WPost, 10/15/70, A4)
Appointment of L/G Benjamin O. Davis, Jr. {usaf, Ret.), as Director of Civil Aviation Security for dot was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. (dot Release 20370)
Successful heating of portion of upper atmosphere with high-powered radio beam was reported at American Geophysical Union meeting in San Francisco by Dr. William F. Utlaut, Deputy Director of noaa Institute of Telecommunication Sciences at Boulder, Colo. Two-million-watt beam had raised temperatures by 30% over 4300-km (2700-mi) area 298 km (185 mi) above earth. Heated zone had expanded and emitted more infrared light than usual and radio echoes became unusually fuzzy. Dr. Utlaut said understanding of these phenomena could have bearing on quality of commercial and defense communications, (upi, NYT, 12/10/70)
dod proposal to save Lockheed Aircraft Corp. from bankruptcy by adding $1.45 billion to Government payments on four Lockheed contracts was outlined by David M. Packard, Deputy Secretary of Defense, in letter to Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.), Chairman of Senate Armed Forces Committee, (dod Release 1057-70; Text)
Transfer of sst program from faa to Office of Secretary of Transportation and appointment of William M. Magruder, Deputy Director of Commercial Engineering at Lockheed California Co., as Director of Supersonic Transport Development Program were announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. (dot Release 7670)
faa released aviation forecast covering FYs 1970-1981: Passengers carried in scheduled service by U.S. carriers would increase after 1971 at average rate of 12% annually. Figure more than doubled that forecast for remainder of national economy, but was below 18% annual rate 1965-1969. Passengers carried by U.S. scheduled carriers would reach 522 million in 1981—more than triple 1969 total of 168 million. Domestic travel would account for 460 million of 1981 total; international travel, 62 million. Revenue passenger-miles flown by U.S. scheduled carriers would grow from 120 billion in 1969 to 450 billion in 1981. (faa Release 70-40) May 6-7; NASA held Conference on Materials for Improved Fire Safety at MSCto demonstrate to industry NASA-developed technology available to consumers. Rep. Jerry L. Pettis (R-Calif.) said in keynote address: “The successful r&d program conducted by NASA in the field of nonmetallic fireproof materials has produced a ‘quantum jump’ that can greatly affect many major industries and has profound life-preserving implications.” (CR, 5/13/70, E4249-51; MSG Roundup, 5/22/70,1) May 7; Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced that Apollo 14 would be launched no earlier than Dec. 3 toward landing on moon’s Fra Mauro, intended landing site of aborted Apollo 13 mission. “Our present assessment is that the modifications to the oxygen tanks in the Service Module that have already been identified will require several months. ... We will take whatever time is necessary and not commit to a specific launch date until the Apollo 13 Review Board completes its work and makes its findings and recommendations.” Flight crew for Apollo 14 would be same as originally announced: Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (commander), Stuart A. Roosa (cm pilot), and Edgar D. Mitchell (lm pilot). (NASA Release 70-67)
Astronautical Multilingual Dictionary of the International Academy of Astronautics, conceived by the late Dr. Theodore von Karman, was published by Academia Publishing House of Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences in Prague. Executive editor was Ing. J. Vlachy and scientific editor Prof. R. Pes'ek. U.S. coeditors were Dr. Woodford A. Heflin of usaf’s Air University Aerospace Studies Institute and William H. Allen of NASA. Other coeditors were in U.S.S.R., Germany, France, Italy, Argentina, and Czechoslovakia. (Text; Air University Dispatch, 4/10/70,18)
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, said chances were high that Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II would develop German measles next week and that, in his opinion, Mattingly’s lack of immunity would not permit him to fly on Apollo 13 April 11. NASA had not officially ruled out Mattingly for flight, but countdown was proceeding on schedule and backup cm pilot John L. Swigert, Jr., was undergoing intensive training in Apollo simulators at KSC. (O’Toole, WPost, 4/10/70, A2)
Families of Apollo 13 astronauts monitored flight communications on NASA squawk boxes and watched TV in their homes. Mrs. Marilyn Lovell and Mrs. Mary Haise kept older children home from school. Parents of unmarried Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., remained at home in Denver, Colo. (AP, NYT, 4/15/70,29)
Aircraft hijacking was discussed by David Hoffman in Washington Post: “That hijacking entails much more today than the Havana detour, a sidetrip costing passengers frayed nerves and the airline $3000, has begun to sink home in official Washington. It has now become an instrument of international policy, a play within a play about the cold war. Quite apart from whether a treaty might help, there exists no treaty. That testifies to the concern of governments, this one included.” {W Post, 9/9/70, A15) At meeting on future of Apollo, scientists proposed crater Tycho near moon’s south pole and Descartes, hilly region near Ocean of Storms, as sites for two of remaining four Apollo program lunar landings. Cal Tech geologist Dr. Leon T. Silver said, “If you had only two missions left to make, you’d send one of them to Tycho.” Tycho offered samples from area of one of last collisions of large meteor with lunar surface, samples from moon’s original southern hills, and samples from deep within moon that had come to surface after impact that had created Tycho. Flight path to and from Tycho would enable astronauts to photograph and examine almost half visible face of moon from lunar orbit. Astronauts could leave scientific instruments less than 1609 km (1000 mi) from moon’s south pole, to give earth-bound scientists listening post on lunar region that would otherwise go unexplored. Surveyor VII photos had shown Tycho landing to be strewn with many varieties of rocks. Difficulty with Tycho landing was that Apollo crew might have to use so much fuel getting to it that they would not have enough to return if they encountered difficulty on approach, Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., said. Donald K. Slayton, msc Chief of Flight Crew Operations, said NASA was studying possibility of Tycho landing: “Our position so far is that Tycho is a bad place. ... But, if we can figure the reasonable way to do it.. .and decide it’s a reasonable place to go, then Tycho becomes a candidate for landing.” Descartes, second site favored by scientists, contained relatively young volcanic material and also crust on surface away from volcanic highlands that might be as old as moon itself. It was thought to be one of two Apollo sites where tnoonquakes might be occurring; other was hills of Fra Mauro, Apollo 14 landing site. Dr. Alfred E. Ringwood of Australian National Univ. told seminar he had concluded from study of Apollo 11 and 12 lunar samples that moon once had heat source 160-480 km (100-300 mi) beneath surface that was emitting 1500 K (2200°F) temperatures. Heat had emanated from abundance of radioactive minerals in moon’s depths, he proposed, and partially melted moon’s inner rock, which then flowed to lunar surface through pores or forced its way upward as it expanded where pores did not exist. Upswelling rock, Dr. Ringwood said, caused lunar features visible on moon’s face. He speculated that moon had lost most of its radioactivity and heat 2 billion yrs earlier. Dr. Charles P. Sonnett, ARC scientist, said he had found “little bumps” of magnetism along lunar surface when studying signals from instruments left on moon. Bumps suggested that radioactive heat was coming to surface and causing parts of moon to behave as if they had magnetic field. Moon was “strong and rigid to depth of 200 mi [322 km],” Dr. Sonnett said, “but I believe that all you need is a porosity of about 10 per cent in that crust to have a warmer and more plastic material leak to the top.” Dr. Rolf Meisner of Univ. of Hawaii said analysis of data from Apollo 12 lunar seismometer led him to believe that moonquakes could not be caused by breaks in moon’s crust but were caused by warm gases escaping from beneath lunar surface in response to earth’s increased gravitational pull. He had recorded 14 moon-quakes, all of which seemed to come from about 240 km (150 mi) east-southeast of seismometer in Fra Mauro hills, where Apollo 14 was to land in February 1971. Dr. Thomas Gold, Cornell Univ. astronomer, argued that lunar maria contained dust and not lava. Lack of electrical activity of surface material and the way Apollo moonquake detectors had reacted to tremors and impacts could mean there was deep deposit of powder. Acoustical signal from Apollo 12 lunar seismometer was “compatible with a deep layer of a very homogenous nature in which the speed of sound is uniform.” (O’Toole, WPost, 9/12/70, A3; 9/13/70, A27; Hill, H Chron, 9/13/70)
aiaa announced reelection of Dr. Ronald Smelt as aiaa President and of Dr. John C. Houbolt as Vice President-Technical and election of eight new Directors: Dr. Mac C. Adams, Vice President and Deputy Group Executive of Avco Government Products Group and former NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology; A. Scott Crossfield, Division Vice President for Flight Research and Development for Eastern Air Lines; Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Deputy Director; Carlos C. Wood, Division Vice President of United Aircraft Corp.’s Sikorsky Aircraft Div.; Edward N. Hall, Assistant Chief Scientist for United Aircraft Corp.’s Corporate Technical Staff; Dr. Walter T. Olsen, LeRC Assistant Director; Alan Y. Pope, Director of Aerothermodynamics for San-dia Corp.; and Charles W. Duffy, Jr., Director of Personnel for Boeing Co.’s Commercial Airplane Div., sst Branch, (aiaa Release)
Former Presidential science advisers testified on NAS funding before Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare’s NSF Subcommittee. Dr. James R. Killian, Jr., mit Board Chairman, said he could recall “no time when financial outlook was so bleak” in 30 yrs of college administration work. Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, mit Provost, said cutbacks in scientific research might cost U.S. world leadership in science and technology and economic well-being in future. Dr. George B. Kistiakowsky, Harvard Univ. chemist, said budget stringency and “selective and uncoordinated pruning” by Government agencies had damaged U.S. scientific effort. Dr. Donald F. Hornig, President-elect of Brown Univ., concurred with colleagues. (Schmeck, NYT, 4/24/70, 9)
afsc announced reassignment of m/g Edmund F. O’Connor, Vice Commander of Aeronautical Systems Div., Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, to become Deputy Chief of Staff for procurement and production at afsc Hq. Aug. 1. He would be succeeded at Wright-Patterson by M/G John B. Hudson, (asfc Release 180.70)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Michael Collins attended unveiling of painting “Crew of Apollo 11” by Ronald Anderson of Dallas, Tex., at National Portrait Galley in Washington, D.C. Oil painting would be presented to Smithsonian Institution. (AP, W Star, 7/27/70, B4)	.
At annual meeting of American Chemical Society in Houston, Tex., Univ. of Chicago lunar chemist Dr. Anthony Turkevich described lunar highlands as “comparable to the continents of earth, floating like icebergs on a more dense medium of deeper rocks.” Only chemical basis of comparison between lunar plains and highlands had been provided by Turkevich-designed experiment flown on Surveyor mission to highland region near crater Tycho. Compared with Apollo II lunar sample data, experiment data proved plains were darker and denser than highlands because they contained twice the abundance of elements heavier than calcium. Moon’s chemical content also showed “evidence for a crust on the moon.” Dr. John A. Wood of Smithsonian Astophysical Observatory presented corroborating evidence based on traces of highland material in Apollo ll samples. He explained meteoroid impact at nearby highland area might have showered lighter-colored material—anorthosite—on plain where Apollo II landed. Anorthositic crust, formed by melting, probably covered moon at one time. Then giant craters, which became plains, were blasted into crust by early impacts and lavas from beneath surface welled into holes and solidified. Dr. Wood estimated depth of crust at 24 km (15 mi), but other scientists were skeptical. In interview following meeting, Cal Tech chemist Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg said crust was thin “like the skin of an onion.” (Wil-ford, NYT, 2/24/70, 25)
Apollo 12 commander Charles Conrad, Jr., accepted Silver Quill Award of American Business Press on NASA’s behalf at dinner in Wahington, D.C. Award was given for “greatest exploration expedition in the history of mankind,” abp Board Chairman Donald V. Buttenheim said. It also recognized “tremendous feat of organization of human and material resources” and translation of discoveries and development of manned space flight into “down to earth benefits of the new technology for the good of industry, America, and all mankind.” (abp Release, 1/1/70; abp Off)
Appointment of Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., as ost Director and presidential science adviser had evoked surprise, D. S. Greenberg said in Science, because “unlike his five predecessors” he was not “member or protege of the fairly small group that had dominated the upper levels of government science since Sputnik.” Dr. David had been “picked by members of President Nixon’s personal staff without consultation with the then-incumbent, Lee A. DuBridge.” There had been “no inclination to ask the White House science advisory apparatus to assist in finding a successor when it was time for Dr. DuBridge to go.” (Science, 10/23/70,417-19)
Sen. Joseph M. Montoya (D-N. Mex.) introduced S. 4453, “to establish a Department of Science and Technology, and to transfer certain agencies and functions to such Department.” Bill provided that NASA, NSF, and AEC be transferred to new department. (CR, 10/12/ 70, SI7689-95)
Appointment of John P. Olsen, Assistant to Senior Vice President of U.S. Smelting, Refining and Mining Co., as Deputy Under Secretary of Transportation was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. He would succeed Charles D. Baker, who had been appointed Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Policy and International Affairs, effective April 28. (dotRelease 8970)
Explorer I. first U.S. satellite (launched Jan. 31. 1958), reentered the atmosphere over the South Pacific after completing 58 408 revolutions and traveling 2.67 billion kilometers (1.66 billion miles) during its 13-year lifetime. To celebrate the launch. Vice President Richard M. Nixon visited Jet Propulsion Laboratory Feb. 17. 1958. Examining the spacecraft model with him (left to right above) were Dr. Clark B. Millikan. Director of the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory at Cal Tech: Dr. Lee A. Du Bridge, President of CalTech: Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of JPl; Dr. Jack E. Froehlich. Explorer Project Director at JPL; V, C. Larsen, Jr., Laboratory Administrator at ipl: and Robert J. Parks, Chief of JPl. Guidance Control Division. ty Associate Administrator for Planning, Dr, Wernher von Braun held press conference on NASA planning procedures: Skylab program would consist of four flights. First would be an unmanned flight boosted by two-stage Saturn V—only first and second stage, with third stage replaced by orbital workshop, now called Skylab. “It will be this country’s first orbital space station. Attached to this Skylab is an airlock module, and a multiple docking adapter, to which arriving command and service modules can dock for crew exchange. And ajso attached to it is the ATM.. .a manned solar observatory that will be serviced by the people living in the Skylab. One day after this Skylab has been launched into orbit and has deployed its solar panels, both on the ATM and the Skylab itself, it will be visited by a Saturn IB-launched command and service module, bringing the first crew complement of three. The command module will dock to the multiple docking adapter, the crew will slip through the docking adapter and the airlock, into the workshop. . . . And the men will stay up there for 28 days.” Crew would then “crawl back into their command module, detach.. .use the service module to deboost themselves, and the command module will reenter the ocean and make a normal Apollo landing. “About three months after the first flight, another flight will go up, and this time the crew stay.. .will be extended to 56 days. ... And finally, there will be a third revisit, again of 56 days, after which the third crew will descend. The Skylab will then go into storage and can potentially be reactivated any time thereafter if more revisits are planned.” Even without budget restraints, it would be “something like 1977 before we could have a [space] shuttle flying.” NASA was “in continuous touch with the Air Force” in space shuttle and space station field. “The armed forces. . .have the duty to look into everything that may have a defense aspect; and so it is entirely proper that they want to understand the ramifications of space.” (Transcript)
Interview with Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., dod Director of Defense Research and Engineering, was reported by Air Force and Space Digest. Dr. Foster believed U.S. held considerable lead over U.S.S.R. in basic space technology and application of that technology to military requirements. U.S. programs in communications, mapping, warning, surveillance, weather, and other activities related to military had been extremely rewarding. In manned military space operations, “we will come to realize that there are military needs in space that cannot be accomplished without placing much larger payloads in orbit.” {AF/SD, 7/70, 31-6)
dod announced appointment of Dr. James W. Mar, professor of aeronautics and astronautics at MIT, as USAF Chief Scientist, effective Sept. 14. Dr. Mar would succeed John J. Welch, Jr., who would return to ltv, Inc. (dod Release 740-70)
faa-dot Certificate of Commendation was presented by faa Administrator John H. Shaffer to Col. A. B. McMullen (usaf, Ret.) for outstanding contribution to development of general-aviation airports throughout U.S. and for his lifelong dedication to advancement of airport facilities throughout the world. Certificate was presented during ceremonies at National Aviation Club in Washington, D.C. (faa Release 70-30)
President Nixon presented National Science Medals in White House ceremony. Recipients had been announced Dec. 31, 1969; Purdue Univ. chemist Herbert C. Brown, Princeton Univ. mathematician William Feller, Jack S. C. Kilby of Texas Instruments Inc., and Wolfgang K. H. Panofsky, Director of Stanford Univ. Linear Accelerator Center. (PD, 2/23/70, 190-1; 1/5/70, 10-1)
Timing of Apollo 13 could upstage U.S.S.R. ’s plans for “biggest ideological event in Soviet history, the Lenin centennial,” New York Times reported. Mission had been launched on 1970 Leninist Subbotnik—day when loyal citizens donated full day’s work to their country. Second day of Apollo 13 mission was Cosmonauts Day, anniversary of Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin’s triumph as first man to orbit earth. Apollo 13 astronauts were scheduled to return to earth the day before the Lenin anniversary, “almost exactly at the hour that Secretary General Leonid I. Brezhnev is scheduled to crown his career by delivering the major address commemorating the founder of the Soviet system.” (Schwartz, NYT, 4/13/70)
Stages in development of Soviet space stations were described by Boris Petrov in Soviet Academy of Sciences journal Vestnik Akade-mii Nauk SSSR: “First.. .small stations. . .with three to twelve men, with a period of existence of from one month to a year or slightly longer, will be put into circumterrestrial orbit. ... Well elaborated and tested compartments of space vehicles and individual stages of carrier rockets will be used as the main units of those stations.” Orbital stations could be orbited in assembled state by carrier rockets or in parts, with one or two dockings. Station crew could be delivered by transport space vehicle and crews exchanged. One of main tasks of stations would be medical and biological experiments. Orbital stations would be created “of block design, assembled in circumterrestrial orbit in parts,” with maximum 10-yr life and 12- to 20-member crew. Petrov saw advisability “of very large multipurpose orbital base stations” for crews of 50 to 70 and, ultimately 100 to 120. U.S.S.R. had in view not simply space station but system of space stations. (AF Mag, 6/71,54-9) November I: Nixon Administration was “moving to make the hydraheaded Federal science and technology apparatus more responsive to the nation’s needs,” New York Times reported. New effort, to be tested in early 1971, would identify priorities in science and technology and weigh them to determine “where they will rank in the struggle for Federal dollars.” oSTand nsf officials had said in interviews that they were determined to bring better order into system of Federal research agencies. Reorganization efforts would focus on $14-billion-a-year r&d programs to translate scientific knowledge into better housing, mass transportation, cleaner air, and “healthier people.” Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser, had emphasized that pure and basic research, currently allotted $2 billion per year, would be specifically exempted from reorganization. Current r&d budget was lowest in five fiscal years and smallest in decade in terms of constant dollars. (Lyons, NYT, 11/1/70, 1)
John H. Chaffee, Secretary of the Navy, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, announced selection of United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. to develop and produce high-performance, afterburning turbofan engines for USN F-14B and usaf F-15 fighter aircraft. Target price for first 90 engines was $448 162 600; first increment to be funded was $47 450 000. (dod Release 162-70)
During May: In Astronautics and Aeronautics, jpl scientists William G.	Breckenridge and Thomas C. Duxbury discussed applications of spacecraft- based navigation data for outer-planet missions and described processing of spacecraft-based science and engineering data from 1969 Mariner Mars missions. They concluded: “Stringent navigation requirements for proposed outer-planet missions make even the projected ability of a solely Earthbased system marginal, and so have emphasized the need for an onboard system.” (A&A, 5/70,44-9)
Situation at KSC and in area on first anniversary of Apollo 11 launch was described by John N. Wilford in New York Times. Since July 1969, employment at KSC had dropped from 23 500 to 16 500 with major Apollo contractors hardest hit. At least 750 workers would be laid off as result of $12.2-million cut in Patrick afb contract with Pan American World Airways, Inc., for operation of tracking stations. ‘‘For the entire Cape Kennedy area, it has been a year of economic woe, frustrated growth plans, for-sale signs and broken personal dreams. This is no ghost town, but the space-rush boom— which in a decade doubled the Brevard County population to 230 000— is definitely over.” Dr. Kurt H. Debus, KSC Director, had said, “We are on a downward trend but this should reach a level as of September.” (NYT, 7/17/70, M27)
Fairchild Hiller Corp. Vice President Edward G. Uhl told stockholders at annual meeting that company had filed protest with NASA. U.S. Comptroller General, and President Nixon over April 8 NASA award of $50 000 000 contract to General Electric Co. for design and manufacture of experimental commercial spacecraft, according to Washington Evening Star. Fairchild Hiller General Counsel John F. Dea-ly said company was protesting on four points: GE submitted proposal six days after deadline and made technical changes contrary to NASA regulations; GE’s cost savings were not genuine savings to Government; NASA’s selection procedure on contracts was not adequate; and Fairchild Hiller was not given fair and proper evaluation of its technical innovations for spacecraft. (Harris, W Star, 4/23/70, D9)
Safely home, the Apollo 13 crew stepped aboard the U.S.S. Iwo Jima recovery ship after splashdown in the South Pacific. Leaving the helicopter (at top, from left) are Astronauts Fred W. Raise, Jr., James A. Lovell, Jr., and JohnL. Swigert, Jr. Li the once-tense Mission Operations Control Hoorn at msc (at bottom), Dr. Donald K. Slayton (left of center), Director of Flight Crew Operations, shook hands with Apollo Mission Director Chester M. Lee as arriving Astronaut Lovell appeared on the TV monitor. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Dkector, stands behind Lee, with Flight Control Division Chief' Eugene F. Kfanz sitting at the console in front. (July 16-24, 1969) manned missions had successfully landed on moon and returned to earth with lunar samples. (NASA Proj Off; FonF, 4/16-22/70, 253-5; W Star, 4/12-14/70; NYT, 4/15/70; 4/18/70; 4/19/70; W Post, 4/15/70; 4/18/70, Al; msc Hist Off; Off NASA Administrator)
FRC announced tests had demonstrated that unpowered approaches and landing maneuvers of space shuttle could be made safely and readily by qualified professional pilots and did not require highly trained test pilots. United Air Line's captains Donald C. McBain and James V. Mitchell had flown landing approaches of four-engine jet transport configured to simulate space shuttle during NASA study of energy-management techniques for proposed shuttle orbiter. (frc Release 18-70)
Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins received Robert J. Collier Trophy for “their high courage and stunning success in accomplishing man’s highest adventure in recorded history—the first moon landing.” Award was presented at Washington, D.C., luncheon given by National Aeronautic Assn, and National Aviation Club, (naa Release; NR News, 5/15/70, 1)
Society that could afford to spend as much as U.S. did on cokes, cosmetics, tobacco, and liquor could afford its space expenditure, William H. Bayley, NASA Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Acquisition, said in jpl Lab-Oratory. Between 1959 and 1969 U.S. had devoted $30 billion to space program, $40 billion each for cosmetics and soft drinks, almost $80 billion each for cosmetics and soft drinks, almost $80 billion for tobacco, and some $110 billion for alcoholic beverages—about four times cost of space program. Annual space expenditure had been about one half of 1% of gnp, and about 1 /20th of defense expenditure. Most expensive space program had been Apollo at $24 billion, 93% of which was spent for goods and services provided by private industry. To date, “no money at all has been spent on the Moon or planets; it has all been spent right here on earth.” (jplLab-Oratory, 4/70,4-19)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe appointed Herbert W. Richardson, professor of mechanical engineering at MIT, as dot Chief Scientist, (dot Release 17670)
Moon once had magnetic field six percent as strong as earth’s, according to studies of Apollo moon rocks by Colorado Univ. geologist Dr. Edwin E. Larson and Univ. of Toronto scientists William Pierce and David Strangway, Denver Post reported. Studies had revealed moon rocks had stable magnetization, Apollo 11 dust samples were AVi billion yrs old, and solidified crystalline rocks were V/2 billion yrs. Presence of nickel-iron in Apollo 11 rocks indicated that frequent meteoroid activity had fragmented them. Little or no free water or oxygen existed on moon. (D Post, 8/26/70)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe and Under Secretary of Transportation James M. Beggs met with West German Minister of Transport and of Postal Affairs and Communications George Leber in Washington, D.C. They agreed to give priority to continuing collaboration on r&d in transportation technology, (dot Release 2170)
Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell described planned eva and equipment for Apollo 14 mission at Washington, D.C., press briefing. After landing LM on moon’s Fra Mauro, Mitchell and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., would leave LM and explore lunar surface with equipment stored on 9-kg (20-lb) mobile equipment transporter (met). On previous lunar landing missions astronauts had ended up with more equipment than they could carry, met would carry cameras, special sample containers, work table, lunar portable magnetometer, trenching tools, hand tool carrier, extension handles, tether, and other tools, thus freeing astronauts’ hands, met would be pulled over lunar surface by special handle that could be held with pressurized glove without being gripped. (Transcript; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/17/70, A5)
ComSatCorp sent annual report to shareholders on 1969 activities. Financial report had been released Feb. 20. In letter to shareholders ComSatCorp President Joseph V. Charyk and Chairman James McCormack said: “Outstanding progress has been made in the establishment of the global communications satellite system. . .a goal toward which comsat and the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (Intelsat) have worked since inception. This basic goal was achieved when a satellite was placed over the Indian Ocean in the summer of 1969. ... In addition, the pace of earth station development by national entities in many countries has been significant. Investment worldwide of about $200 million in earth stations and more than $100 million in satellites reflects a widespread confidence in the present and future benefits of satellite communications.” Highlights of 1969 included achievement of major intelsat goal, global coverage by comsat; full commerical operation of 22 new antennas in 18 countries; start of construction on Intelsat IV series satellites and selection of Atlas-Centaur as series launch vehicle; completion of ComSat Laboratories, major r&d facility; and reaffirmation by ComSatCorp of its readiness to finance, establish, and operate domestic comsat system. (Text)
The city of Chicago welcomed the Apollo 13 astronauts anti flight controllers with ticker tape, confetti, and cheers during a parade around the Loop. Honorary citizenship awards were given John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr. (absent), and the city’s Medal of Merit was given to flight commander James A. Lovell. Jr, nated into a growing number of more precise disciplines—each becoming more productive the narrower its focus became.” But "in recent years this process has been reversed and we are now seeing the growth of interdisciplinary sciences and a striving for a more ali-encompassing grasp of the physical world and even broader relationships. . . . This type of growth is essential if science is to be the guiding force—as it must be—behind our evolving mankind.” (Text)
U.S., U.K., Switzerland, and West Germany began efforts through International Red Cross toward release of passengers held hostage in Jordan after Sept. 6 multiple aircraft hijacking. U.S. Secretary of State William P. Rogers met in Washington, D.C., with representatives of 10 Arab countries. International Federation of Airline Pilots met in London on Israeli proposal of aviation boycott of Arab countries in reprisal. U.N. Secretary General U Thant urged international community “to adopt prompt and effective measures to put a stop to this return to the law of the jungle.” (FonF, 9/3-9/70, 638)
U.S. Secretary of State William P. Rogers discussed Sept. 6 aircraft hijackings with representatives of Israel, U.K., West Germany, and Switzerland in Washington, D.C., and met with President Nixon. (FonF, 9/3-9/70,638)
President Nixon in San Clemente, Calif., announced appointment of Rolf Eliassen, and reappointment of Howard G. Vesper and William Webster, as members of General Advisory Committee to aec for terms expiring Aug. 1,1976. (PD, 8/3/70, 998)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong’s May 24-June 5 visit to U.S.S.R. was reviewed in Christian Science Monitor: “To those few Russians who saw him, the first man to walk on the moon was unquestionably a big hit. But overall, his 12-day goodwill visit was an unobtrusive affair that stayed very much in the realm of Soviet officialdom.” Armstrong had arrived in Leningrad May 24 to attend May 20-29 cospar Conference. “Although he was in Leningrad for five days, only one Leningrad newspaper made any mention of him and Russians for a long time were not aware he was even in the country.” It was only after his arrival in Leningrad that Armstrong was invited by Soviet government to stay longer in U.S.S.R. He had “no exposure to Soviet public” during Novosibirsk visit. In Moscow, press had given more coverage. Armstrong had told press he had been “most emotionally moved” by meeting with Mrs. Yuri Gagarin and Mrs. Vladimir Komarov, widows of Soviet cosmonauts. (Saikow-ski, CSM, 6/5/70)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., were given ticker-tape parade welcome in Chicago, where they addressed 800 at luncheon and later spoke to 2500 high school students. Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., third Apollo 13 astronaut, was indisposed, (upi, HPost, 5/2/70)
Use of range and Doppler tracking data to determine earth-moon mass ratio and mass of Mars was described in Science by jpl astronomers John D. Anderson, Leonard Efron, and S. Kuen Wong. Accurate navigation of Mariner VI and VII to Mars had required use of twoway, phase-coherent range and Doppler tracking data from nasa-jPLDeep Space Network. Coverage of both Mariners from launch to encounter with Mars, closest approach to Mars, and beyond had provided new information on ratio of mass of earth to that of moon; Mars gravity field, particularly planet’s mass; and ephemerides of Mars and earth. Data complemented Doppler data from Mariner IV with exception of inconsistency of about 0.0004% in values for mass of moon determined from lunar trajectories. Determinations of mass of Mars by Mariner IV and V/ were in agreement. (Science, 1/16/70, 277-9)
faa Administrator John H. Shaffer said in speech before Aviation/ Space Writers Assn, in New York that faa was not satisfied with Boeing 747 jumbo jet emergency evacuation system after Jan. 13 tests at Roswell, N. Mex. If problem of chute failure was not solved by Jan. 21, scheduled start of Pan American World Airways’ 747 service between New York and London might be delayed. (Lindsey, NYT, 1/15/70, 77)
International reaction to Apollo 13 spashdown: European Broadcasting Union said in Geneva that TV audience at splashdown might well have been biggest TV audience of all time. In American Samoa, girls were limbering up for siva-siva dance to greet astronauts. Pilgrims prayed their thanks in India. Press item from Johannesburg, South Africa, said witch doctor named Mago-mezulu had tossed bones which told him Apollo 13 astronauts would return safely but that “these men have interfered with God and he has turned them back. This is a warning that the Americans should stop landing on the moon.” Thousands in Lima, Peru, received permission to take early lunch to watch final moments of splashdown. In Canada, Prime Minister Pierre E. Trudeau expressed “great relief.” Queen Elizabeth wired congratulations from England to President Nixon. Roman Catholic Archbishop of Westminster John Cardinal Heenan said, “Thank God.” Telephone operator at U.S. Embassy in London was inundated with calls. She said, “People were sobbing with obvious relief and happiness. I just don’t know what to say to them” (Johnson, WPost, 4/18/70, Al; Arnold, NYT, 4/18/70, 1; Waldron, NYT, 4/18/70, 13)
At White House press conference former astronauts Michael Collins, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, and William A. Anders, NASC Executive Secretary, described arrangements that had kept President Nixon informed on Apollo 13 crisis. President had had access to direct TV, radio, and telephone contact with MSC Mission Control. He had talked with NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O.	Paine, and Astronaut Frank Borman there. Collins and Anders had set up “squawk box” into Mission Control outside President’s office and briefed President and his staff on developments. President’s chief concerns had been CM-SM separation, and crew’s safety and physical condition. Collins said, “The fact that we had this incident really changes very little. We have always known that such a situation could develop and he [President] does not feel that it should unduly cloud the future when it comes to space exploration.” (Transcript)
Apollo 13 astronauts were taken in three helicopters from U.S.S. Iwo Jima to Tafunda Airport in American Samoa, to set foot on solid ground for first time since mission launch. They were greeted by Samoan Governor John M. Haydon. Governor presented IRS form 1040A to Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., who had forgoten to file his income tax before departing on mission. Colorfully dressed crowd of more than 3000 cheered astronauts during half-hour reception before their departure in usaf C-141 jet aircraft for Hawaii to meet President Nixon. (Trumbull, NYT, 4/19/70,1)
NAS released Venus: Strategy for Exploration, report of NASAsupported study by scientific panel chaired by Harvard Univ. astronomer Dr. Richard M. Goody and Kitt Peak National Observatory astronomer Dr. Donald M. Hunten. Report urged unmanned scientific study of Venus with Planetary Explorer spacecraft, 385-kg (850-lb) “universal bus’’ capable of carrying entry probes, orbiters, balloons, and landers. Estimated cost of unmanned Venus probe program was $ 100-million total for first three missions and up to $25 million for each succeeding mission. Program would be undertaken in addition to planned NASA program of planetary exploration. Panel urged Venus exploration because information on cloud cover blanketing planet and planet’s carbon dioxide atmosphere could contribute to understanding of general atmospheric systems, including earth’s, and conflicting theories could be tested with relatively simple measurements. Determination of concentration of hydrogen atoms and compounds could reveal whether oceans once covered Venus and, if so, what happened to them. Panel urged that higher failure risks be accepted for Venus missions to lower equipment costs, that experimental operations be simplified, that landers be permitted to impact on Venus, and that NASA cooperate with space organizations of other nations in planning and carrying out investigations. (Text)
President Nixon submitted to Congress nomination of Adm. Willard J. Smith (uscg, Ret.) to be Assistant Secretary of Transportation, replacing Walter L. Mazan, who had resigned. Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe established Office of Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Safety and Consumer Affairs and announced nomination of Adm. Smith to new post. (PD, 8/10/70, 1033; dot Release 17070)
First charting of exact locations of six continental land masses as they drifted across globe for millions of years at rate of about 10 cm (4 in) annually was reported by ESSA marine geologists Dr. Robert S. Dietz and John C. Holden in Journal of Geophysical Research. Calculations, made by using geological landmarks to plot maps, showed that original “supercontinent” of Pangaea had split midway through Triassic geological period, about 200 million yrs ago, into land masses of Laurasia (now North America, Europe, and Asia) and Gond-wana (now Africa, South America, Australia, Antarctica, and India) through sea floor’s spreading, welling up of molten material called magma from earth’s mantle through rift in ocean bed. Subsequent spreading had separated continents. (Journ of Geophysical Research, 9/10/70,4939-55)	_
Reorganization of faa engineering and development activities was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Move would place functions of faa Aircraft Development Service in Systerns Research and Development Service. National Aviation Facilities Experimental Center at Atlantic City, N.J., and National Airspace Systems Program Office would come under direction of Associate Administrator for Engineering and Development, (faa Release T70-17) April3: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCXXIX from Plesetsk into orbit with 241-km (149.8-mi) apogee, 210-km (130.5-mi) perigee, 88.9-min period, and 81.4° inclination. Satellite reentered April 15. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/70; SBD, 4/6/70, 168)
Apollo II Astronauts Michael Collins (left) and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (right), were presented the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy by Dr. Robert C, Seamans, Jr. (center (eft), Secretary of the Air Force. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, represented Astronaut Nei! A. Armstrong, who was unable to be present. veloping itpr for use by NASA on Nimbus-E, scheduled for launch in 1972. (essa Release 70-28)
Nixon Administration policy toward Federal graduate aid was discussed in Science by John Walsh: There were signs “the Administration is veering away from a policy'of changing the primary form of direct federal support to graduate education from fellowships and training grants to guaranteed loans. For those who feared that the prevailing system of federal grants was to be supplanted there is some consolation that the grants are headed down but not out.” While NASA had liquidated sustaining university programs, agency would still provide indirect support of graduate students through research assistantships financed under $75 million in research grants to universities approved in past budgets. (Science, 6/26/70,1559-61)
Discovery of 2500-yr-old solar observatory at ancient ceremonial center of Monte Alto near Escuintla, Guatemala, was reported in London Times dispatch printed in New York Times. Harvard Univ. anthropologist Edward M. Shook had dated observatory provisionally to 500 B.C. (NYT, 9/21/70) During seminar on threat to U.S. security, Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., DOD Director of Defense Research and Engineering, said U-S.S.R. had “more than 300 large SS-9 icbms operational or under construction.” . Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, said in speech that usaf must modernize its strategic offensive and defensive forces to remain creditable deterrent to aggression. He was concerned over increased numbers and total payload of Soviet ICBMs and Soviet deployment of initial ABM systems and extensive abm research. Apollo 11 Astronauts Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins received H. H. Arnold Trophy, Air Force Assn.’s highest award, on behalf of Apollo team “responsible for achieving man’s first landing on the moon—the flight crew, industry and government.” L/G Samuel C. Phillips, SAMSO Commander and former Apollo Program Director, accepted award on behalf of Federal Government and J. L. Atwood, former NR president and chief executive officer, accepted on behalf of industry. (SBD, 9/11/70, 52;W Star, 9/9/70, A2; Getler, W Post, 9/24/70, A27; PInq, 9/24/70,2) September 22:	U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCLXIV from Plesetsk into orbit with 294-km (182.7-mi) apogee, 201-km (124.9-mi) perigee, 89.4-min period, and 65.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Oct. 2. (GSFC SSR, 9/30/70; SBD, 9/28/70,118)
Discovery that velocity of sound waves through Apollo 11 and 12 moon rocks was roughly one third that through earth’s rocks was reported in Science by Edward Schreiber of Queens College, City Univ. of New York, and Orson L. Anderson of Lamont-Doherty Observatory. Scientists compared sound velocity in various earth materials with that of lunar samples. Materials which exhibited “compressional velocities that are in consonance with those measured for lunar rocks” included provolone, emmenthal, muenster, and cheddar cheese—“which leads us to suspect that perhaps old hypotheses are best, after all, and should not be lightly discarded.” (Science, 6/26/70,1579-80)
NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H.	Dana, successfully completed 35th flight after air launch from B:52 aircraft at FRC. Purposes of powered flight were to obtain data with speed brakes open at supersonic speed and to obtain additional stability and control data at supersonic speeds. If data were satisfactory XLR-11 engine would be replaced by hydrogen-peroxide landing engines for powered approach and landing phase of program. (NASA Proj Off)
New York State Attorney-General Louis J. Lefkowitz had filed suit against 58 domestic and foreign airlines using John F. Kennedy International and LaGuardia Airports to require improved noise abatement devices on jet aircraft, Washington Post said. (W Post, 7/4/70, A4)
Federal financing of sst would be “complete misplacement of national priorities,” Mayor John V. Lindsay of New York said in letter to Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.), Chairman of Senate Appropriations Committee’s Subcommittee on Transportation. “I am prepared to do all in my power to prevent any sst from landing at New York’s airports until it is proven safe both to our environment and to the health of our citizens.” (upi, W Star, 9/4/70, A5)
faa study had shown that if rush-hour commuters traveled from suburban areas to downtown business sections by aircraft, they would generate one eighth of air pollution emitted by private automobiles, Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe said. Study completed by Center of Transportation at Rutgers Univ. had found from research in Connecticut-New York-New Jersey area that 36 metric tons (40 short tons) of pollutants emitted in morning and evening by commuter automobiles could be reduced to 4.5 metric tons (5 short tons) if aircraft were used instead. Number of commuters who would voluntarily change to aircraft, if available, had been determined at approximately 30%. (faa Release 70-78)
William M. Magruder, Director of dot’s Supersonic Transport Program, told Washington, D.C., press conference that he was satisfied with sst design, which would produce aircraft profitable for airline operators and Nation. With sale of 500 SSTs, U.S. Government would recover entire cost of its share of development program. Magruder produced letter from NASC Executive Secretary William A. Anders saying sst production was sound. (AP, W Star, 5/23/70, A2)
U.S. Court of Appeals was studying suit to force disclosure of SST report prepared by panel headed by physicist Richard L. Garwin at President Nixon’s request, Washington Evening Star said. Suit, filed by conservationist Sierra Club and Friends of the Earth, had been dismissed Aug. 21 by U.S. District Court Judge John H. Pratt on grounds report was covered by doctrine of executive privilege. (W Star, 12/8/70, A3)
NASA announced appointment of Donald P. Hearth, Director of Planetary Programs in OSSA since 1967, as GSFC Deputy Director, effective April 6. Hearth had joined NASA in 1962 as Manager of Advanced Programs and Technology. In 1966 he became Assistant Director for Planetary Flight Programs and was Deputy Director of Voyager Program in 1967. (NASA Release 70-35)
usaf Chief of Staff, Gen. John D. Ryan, approved flights of seven heavily instrumented F-llls needed in r&d programs. Remaining 226 F-llls continued to be grounded pending final determination of test and inspection procedures to ensure against repetition of manufacturing defect that led to fatal Dec. 22, 1969, crash. (AP, NYT. 2/12/70, C9)
Introduction to the Solar Wind by John C. Brandt was reviewed in Science by Roger A. Kopp of National Center for Atmospheric Research. In 1958 it had been argued that sun’s 995 800 K (1 000000°F) corona must expand continuously into space with supersonic velocities near earth’s orbit. Subject had remained in controversy until 1962 observations from Mariner II indicated plasma outflow from sun with 400-km-per-sec (249-mps) velocities and mean particle density of about 10 per cc (0.06 cu in) at orbit of earth. “The obvious place to begin a discussion of the solar wind is at the sun, and the author sets the stage by summarizing current knowledge of classical solar physics.” (Science, 9/18/70, 1195-6)
House leaders of both parties urged that U.S. push ahead with space exploration despite Apollo 13 abort. Speaker John W. McCormack (D-Mass.) said in floor speech, “There may be a small minority who will urge that we pull back our space efforts. This is not my position. Neither am I convinced it will be the view of the Congress or the overwhelming majority of American people.” House Minority Leader Gerald R. Ford (R-Mich.) said he concurred. Chairman George P. Miller (D-Calif.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics said committee would not conduct investigation of Apollo 13 accident but would review findings of NASA inquiry board. (CR, 4/20/70, H3247,3276; upi, WPost, 4/2/70)
Time magazine named “the Middle Americans” its Men and Women of the Year: “They sent Richard Nixon to the White House and two teams of astronauts to the moon. They were both exalted and afraid. The mysteries of space were nothing. . .compared with the menacing confusions of their own society.” Middle Americans admired “men like Neil Armstrong and, to some extent, Spiro Agnew.” Apollo 11 and 12 were “a quintessential adventure of American technology and daring.” Astronauts were “paragons of Middle American aspiration. Redolent of charcoal cookouts, their vocabularies an engaging mix of space jargon and ‘gee whiz,’ the space explorers gave back to Middle America a victory of its own values. It was little noted, except in Middle America where such things still matter, that among Neil Armstrong’s extraterrestrial baggage was a special badge of his college fraternity, Phi Delta Theta. He used it symbolically to establish Moon Alpha Chapter.” Some liberals had “grumbled that the Apollo program’s $26 billion would have been better spent on curing hunger or the urban malaise.” Yet Middle Americans “reveled in the lunar landings precisely because they were victories purely accomplished; in Vietnam, in the carious slums, in the polluted environment, no clear victories seemed possible any longer.” (Time, 1/5/70, 10-2)
Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), for himself, Sen. Clifford P. Case (R-N.J.), Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), and Sen. Jacob K.	Javits (R-N.Y.), submitted amendment to H.R. 17548, FY 1971 Independent Offices and hud appropriations bill which would reduce NASA R&D appropriation by $110 million—amount requested by NASA for design and definition of space shuttle and station. Sen. Mondale said: “This project represents NASA’s next major effort in manned space flight. The $110 million.. .is only the beginning of the story. NASA’s preliminary cost estimates for development of the space shuttle/station total almost $14 billion, and the ultimate cost may run much higher. Furthermore, the shuttle and station are the first essential steps toward a manned Mars landing.. .which could cost anywhere between $50 to $100 billion. I have seen no persuasive justification for embarking upon a project of such staggering costs at a time when many of our citizens are malnourished, when our rivers and lakes are polluted, and when our cities and rural areas are decaying.” (CR, 6/29/70, S10057-8)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented National Geographic Society’s Hubbard Medal to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins at ceremonies in Washington, D.C. Medal honored exceptional research, exploration, and discovery. (Program; upi, WNews, 2/16/70)
Ninth anniversary of first U.S. manned space flight, by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., in Freedom 7Mercury spacecraft. Apollo 13 astronauts visited Grumman Aerospace Corp. plant at Bethpage, N.Y., where lm Aquarius was built. Astronauts received rousing cheer from 15 000 workers. Aquarius received rousing cheer from astronauts. (UPI, W Star, 5/6/70, A2; MSC Hist Off)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced appointment of William M. Huey, special consultant to faa Administrator and Deputy Administrator, to fill new position of faa Deputy Assistant Administrator for General Aviation Affairs, (faa Release 70-89) Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, said in speech at meeting: “nasa and the aerospace industry are not uniquely qualified to solve our domestic problems. The domestic problems, including those of the physical environment, are largely social, economical, and political. The need for new technology, for research and development, does exist in some areas, but certainly is not the driving force in obtaining solutions.” Solutions “must come from sociologists, economists, and politicians—not engineers and scientists. We in aerospace should. . .assist wherever and whenever we can: We have developed techniques of management that may apply; there are technological problems that we are qualified to tackle; and there are areas where space technology, and the applications of space technology, apply directly. We should assist, but we should not think or encourage others to believe that we can solve all of our domestic problems.” Space program had “one major deficiency—a gap in manned space flight after Skylab, a hiatus of four years or more when no American will be in earth orbit, or anywhere in space.” Gap had to be accepted because of lack of funding. Decision to cancel Viking or delay space shuttle would be wrong. “Viking is the major scientific experiment of the decade, and a delay in starting the shuttle would only delay the hiatus, not eliminate it.” If shuttle development was advancing when gap occurred, Dr. Low believed gap would not be “unacceptable.” NASA was building “the next generation of space vehicles, a generation that will far surpass existing capabilities to explore space, to use space, to live and work in space.” (Text) Sen. Mike Gravel (D-Alaska) told meeting: “Our space program is being viewed with increasing skepticism. Future historians will smile at the irony of our situation. Immediately following the fantastic feat of sending men to the surface of the Moon and back in safety, our national resolve in expanding this effort faced a mounting wave of domestic criticism. The irony of homo sapiens for the first time standing upright on his planet and not availing himself of his full ability to explore and experiment in the universe. The irony of not moving forward as aggressively as possible from a new beginning almost as fundamental as the beginning of life itself.” (SBD, 10/23/70, 23) Work of dot Transportation Systems Center, formerly NASA erc, was described by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe: Center was “already working on harbor advisory radars for the Coast Guard, phased array radars for the faa, crash sensors for the Federal Highway Administration, and alcohol detectors for the National Highway Safety Bureau. In communications we are studying wayside systems for tracked air-cushion vehicles and data links from ground controllers to cockpit displays. Computer systems are being adapted to automated scanning of highway traffic films and simulation of ground and air traffic patterns controllers must learn. The architecture of large, real-time computers for air traffic control systems is also under study.” (Text) JPL engineers Ronald F. Draper and Thomas R. Gavin* said technology for long-lived, unmanned spacecraft for Grand Tour flybys and separate orbiting missions to Jupiter and outer planets was well advanced for 1977 and 1979 missions. Thermoelectric outer planet spacecraft (tops) under development at jpl would use radioisotope thermoelectric generators, with nuclear energy supplying power beyond range where solar panels and batteries were effective. Scientific experiments and spacecraft control problems would be handled by self-test and repair (star) computer with sufficient backup units for 10 to 15 yrs operation, (jpl Release 564) Richard S. Johnston, MSC Deputy Director for Biomedical Engineering, announced that final two Apollo missions would land at Descartes, upland valley surrounded by craters, and Marius Hills, near Imbrium Basin. Sites had been selected because material there would furnish new data on age and origin of moon. (AP, W Star, 10/ 20/70, A4) Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Deputy Director, received $5000 aiaa Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award for “outstanding management and leadership in directing the planning and operational control of all United States manned space flight missions from the first Mercury suborbital mission through the first Apollo lunar landing.” Dr. Maxime A. Faget, MSC Director of Engineering and Development, received $500 Spacecraft Design award for ‘‘outstanding leadership and technical ability which resulted in the conception and design of this nation’s first manned spacecraft, the Mercury capsule system.” Glynn S. Lunney, Chief of msc Flight Director’s Office, received $500 Lawrence Sperry Award for “outstanding performance as a flight director during the Gemini and Apollo manned space flight missions; for exceptional leadership, professional skill and personal dedication which contributed to the success of this Nation’s first manned lunar mission, and particularly during the flight of Apollo 13.” Dr. Walton L. Jones, Director of Biotechnology and Human Research Div. of NASA oart, received John Jefferies Award of $500 and certificate for “outstanding contributions to the advancement of aerospace medical research.” Von Karman Lecture award of $1000 and travel allowance of $1500 was awarded to Dr. Erik L. Mollo-Christensen, mit meteorologist, (aiaa Release; msc Roundup, 9/25/70, 1) NASA and dot sponsored session on national aeronautical programs, with Charles J. Donlan of NASA omsf as theme chairman. Exhibit was prepared by LaRC, LeRC, and arc. Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., NASA Assistant Administrator for Policy, chaired panel discussion on problems facing aeronautics in U.S., including vehicles, airport systems, and airway systems. Historical session, “American Advancement into Space,” was chaired by Royal D. Frey of usaf Museum at Wright-Patterson afb and Dr. Loyd Swenson of Univ. of Houston. Organized by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, session heard description by Col. John A. MacReady (usaf. Ret.) and Sally MacReady Liston of early experiments to combat known and unknown hazards of first attempts to climb into space, narrative by l/g William E. Kempner (usaf, Ret.) of flight of Explorer I into stratosphere, description by Cdr. George W. Hoover (usn, Ret.) of usn developments leading to space, and story by Col. Joseph F. Cotton (usaf, Ret.) of XB-70. (Program; NASA Hist Off) On Oct. 24 Tass announced that Zond VIII had circled within 1120 km (696 mi) of moon, studied space, photographed moon, and was returning to earth. Spacecraft splashed down in Indian Ocean Oct. 27 and was recovered by Soviet vessel Tama. Tass said spacecraft brought back “extremely important photographs needed for studies of the geological and morphological qualities of the moon.” Zond VIIIwas eighth spacecraft in Zond series and second spacecraft to land in water; first had been Zond V (Sept. 15-22, 1968). Zond VI(Nov. 10-17, 1968) and Zond VII(Aug. 8-14, 1969) had circled moon and returned to earth with data and photos, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/70; Gwertzman, NYT, 10/22/70, 1; SBD, 10/28/70, 249; 10/29/ 70, 256; B Sun, 10/28/70, A5; SF, 4/71, 138-9)
White House announced appointment of r/a Don A. Jones as Acting Director of National Ocean Survey and of Dr. John W. Townsend as Acting Associate Administrator of National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (noaa) until offices were filled under provisions of noaa reorganization plan. Adm. Jones was member of essa Commissioned Officers Corps and had been Director of Coast and Geodetic Survey since 1965. Dr. Townsend had been essa Deputy Administrator since 1968, Chief of NASA Space Sciences Div. 1958-1959, and gsfc Assistant Director and Deputy Director 1959-1968. (PD, 11/2/70,1457)	,
Sen. John L. McClellan (D-Ark.) on Senate floor accused NASA of secretly altering low bid of Fairchild Hiller in competition for $50-million contract for ats-f and G spacecraft and of permitting General Electric Co. to reduce overhead costs in its final offer so that total was below that of Fairchild Hiller Corp. He compared procurement project with dodtfx competition and contract awards. “I believe that a thorough review of the phased procurement source selection system should be undertaken. . .in order to determine whether the system should be modified, changed, or eliminated.” (CR, 7/9/70, S10974-5)
William T. Piper, founder of Piper Aircraft Corp.—one of world’s largest light-aircraft corporations—died at age 89. Piper, known as “the Henry Ford of aviation,” had built more aircraft than anyone else in the world, including durable, inexpensive Piper Cub. (Krebs, NYT, 1/17/70,31)
Science published letter on environment from John Caffrey of American Council on Education: “I date my own reawakening of interest in man’s environment to the Apollo 8 mission and to the first clear photographs of the earth from that mission. My theory is that the views of the earth from that expedition and from the subsequent Apollo flights have made many of us see the earth as a whole, in a curious way—as a single environment in which hundreds of millions of human beings have a stake. ... I suspect that the greatest lasting benefit of the Apollo missions may be. . .this sudden rush of inspiration to try to save this fragile environment—the whole one—if we still can.” (Science, 3/20/70,1561)
Astronauts Alan L. Bean, R. Walter Cunningham, and Joseph P. Kerwin, grounded Dec. 23, 1969, for minor infractions of aircraft flight rules, resumed training in T-38 jet aircraft at msc. (upi. W Star, 1/21/70, A7)
intelsat announced election of new officers of Interim Communications Satellite Committee, for term of office beginning July 1. John A. Johnson, ComSatCorp Vice President-International and U.S. representative to intelsat, would succeed Carlos Nunez A. of Mexico as Chairman. Yves Fargette, Regional Director of French Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, would succeed Johnson as Vice Chairman, (intelsat Release 70-19)
Apollo 13 Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., told news conference at Coast Guard Academy in New London, Conn.: “In the past it has taken a war to force technology to advance at an abnormal rate. The space program did it in peacetime, and to me this makes much more sense.” Swigert defended proposals for Mars exploration: “If we can learn more about our solar system and have those benefits accrue to the economy, I would say it is worthwhile.” (AP, W Post, 9/10/70)
Grand Tour” of outer solar system was discussed by William Hines in Chicago Sun-Times: “The grand tour idea came out of Caltech several years ago after a graduate student in Prof. Homer J. Stewart’s aeronautical engineering department calculated the added energy that could be imparted to a spacecraft by the massive gravitational fields of various planets. This information, together with the unusual configuration of outer planets in the 1980s, was patched together by Stewart into the grand tour concept. Theoretically, Stewart calculated, it should be possible to fire a spacecraft into a near-miss trajectory toward Jupiter and then let that planet, biggest in the solar system, take over. Jupiter would add energy, and hence velocity, to the spacecraft.... This would send the craft toward Saturn, where more energy would be borrowed from the ringed planet’s gravitational field, and then on to Uranus for more of the same, Neptune and finally Pluto.” (C Sun-Times, 3/9/70)
International participation in erts program was discussed in Astronautics A Aeronautics by John Hanessian, Jr., and John M. Logsdon, of George Washington Univ.: “Broad participation in erts. . .makes sense only if a global operational Earth-resources-survey system follows. The design and institutionalization of such a system will test the ingenuity of national and international policy makers, and any steps which may make their task less complex are desirable. Widespread international involvement in the ERTS program would be such a step. And it would.. .serve [both] the needs of many nations of the world and the national interest of the U.S. Many constraints on broad participation in erts stem from the level of funding and the pace now planned for the program. Thus it falls within the power of the U.S, to eliminate them. This we should do.” (AAA, 8/70, 56-63)
More than 50 engineers at msc and at NR’s Downey, Calif., plant were working through weekend to complete “life history” of ruptured Apollo 13 oxygen tank, John N. Wilford reported in New York Times. “The only time in the tank’s history even the slightest doubt was raised about its preflight condition was during precountdown preparations .... Technicians reported having trouble draining the liquid oxygen from the tank after a test. The tank seemed to empty slower than usual. But the next time it was checked out, the drainage problem did not occur.” Report on tank’s manufacture, installation, testing, and flight would be submitted to Apollo 13Review Board. (NYT, 4/19/70,54)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced that Dulles International Airport in Chantilly, Va., would be site of June 1972 U.S. International Aeronautical Exposition. One million visitors were expected to view more than 500 exhibits. (DOT Release 16670)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced appointment of Robert H. Binder, Director of Office of International Transportation Policy and Programs, to succeed Hugh J. Gownley as Deputy Assistant Secretary of Transportation for International Affairs. Gownley had retired July 31. (dot Release 23870) November 11:U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCLXXVIIfrom Baykon-ur into orbit with 286-km (177.7-mi) apogee, 204-km (126.8-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 65.0° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 23. (GSFC SSR, 11/30/70; SBD, 11/13/70, 53)
In Washington Sunday Star William Hines advocated abandonment of sst program “and substitution of a longer range objective: a hypersonic transport airplane (hst) to become operational around 1990.” R&D for 500-passenger, 8000-km-per-hr (5000-mph) global-range hst was “going to be bought and paid for anyway” as part of NASA’s space shuttle program. This would be a classic case of ‘spinoff’—a byproduct of the space program useful to the civilian economy.” There seemed little doubt “that an aerospace-plane capable of shuttling Earth-to-orbit could be adapted to serve long-range world markets as a pure airplane if travel demands could be shown to justify its construction.” sst was “not a spinoff but a drainoff.” Its “most dubious aspect” was “direct federal subsidy of r&d, which in effect amounts to a $1.5 billion loan to private enterprise at zero interest,” Hines said. (W Star, 1/18/70, C4) During Week of January 18: India successfully test-fired four Rohini rockets at Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station. Additional launches would be conducted following week. (AP, W Post, 1/23/ 70, A21)
Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D. Mitchell took fourhour walk-through of planned eva activity in ksc training area in preparation for Apollo 14 lunar landing mission Jan. 31, 1971. (Marshall Star, 12/9/70,1)
New standards for certification of transport aircraft over 5670 kg (12 500 lbs), effective May 8, were announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Standards included warning system to alert pilots to failing power-operated control system; operating procedures for flight in turbulence; design of airframe for dynamic loads from continuous turbulence, with flight load measurements required for new aircraft with unreliable methods of predicting load intensities; system for preventing condensation on inside of windshield during flight and taxiing; greater redundancy in control system designs; flight tests to demonstrate freedom from flutter through transonic speed range; protection of empennage from bird strikes; more comprehensive airframe lightning protection criteria; additional fire protection for powerplant; dual locking for all critical removable fasteners; protection of fuel system components in event of gear-up landing; design precautions to minimize hazards of turbine rotor failure; fail-safe criteria for aircraft systems; changes in design standards to accommodate modern instrumentation and to require basic flight and navigation instrument at each pilot station; and improvements in reliability of hydraulic systems, (faa Release 70-35)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, completed fourth flight—and first powered flight—from frc. Objectives were to expand flight envelope to mach 0.8, check out engine operation, obtain stability and control data at mach 0.8, investigate lateral phugoid present on second flight but not on third, check reaction control operation, and investigate landing visibility. Engine shut down prematurely, after launch from B-52 aircraft, precluding completion of all planned maneuvers. Investigation was under way. (NASA Proj Off)
National Transportation Safety Board released contents of its letter to faa recommending safety measures to protect Boeing 747 passengers. And Reuben B. Robertson III ot Ralph Nader’s Center for Study of Responsive Law, in letter to Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe, charged faa with suppressing news of “near tragedies” aboard 747s. Later Washington Post said both actions stemmed from Sept. 17 and 18 incidents in which 747 engines had disintegrated in flight. There had been no injuries. (Hoffman, W Post, 10/2/70, A3)	.
MSC Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton, on behalf of himself and msc Flight Crew Operations staff, received 1969 IEEE Reliability Award in Los Angeles for exceptional contributions to field of reliability. (NASA Hq Reliability & Quality Assurance Newsletter, 3/70, 2)
Analysles of argon in Apollo II crystalline rocks at LRL were reported in Science by MSC scientist Dr. Donald D. Bogard, State Univ. of New York scientists Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer and Dr. John G. Funkhouser, and Max Planck scientist Dr. Josef Zaehringer. Crystalline rocks from Sea of Tranquility had yielded potassium-argon dates as old as 3.8 billion yrs. Crystalline rocks from Ocean of Storms gave potassium-argon ages as old as 2.8 billion yrs. Scientists concluded that maria were ancient lunar features. Potassium-argon ages of rocks from Ocean of Storms showed more argon loss than rocks from Sea of Tranquility, indicating Ocean of Storms rocks had experienced more severe shock effects or longer cooling rates. (Science, 10/9/70,161-2)
Dr. Donald G. Rea, former NASA Deputy Director for Planetary Programs in ossa, would become jpl Assistant Laboratory Director for Science March 16, NASA announced. In newly created post Dr. Rea would be responsible for managing jpl’s total science program and would act as jpl’s chief scientist. (NASA Release 70-37)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr.—in Lucerne, Switzerland, on European goodwill tour—visited Swiss Transport Museum and Longines Planetarium. They were shown representation of view of earth from Mars. (nasa Hist Off)
Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., were honored by City of New York at luncheon in Philharmonic Hall. Astronauts were greeted by Mayor John V. Lindsay and serenaded by N.Y. Police Dept. band. (AP, B Sun, 6/4/70, A3)
Four-man LaRC team emerged from space station simulator at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., Huntington Beach, Calif., after successful completion of 90-day test to develop regenerative life support systems for advanced manned spacecraft [see June 13]. Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong greeted crewmen John H. Hall, Terry Donlon, Stephen G. Dennis, and Wilson Wong. Project chief engineer Karl Houghton said test could have continued beyond scheduled 90 days. (AP, NYT, 9/12/70, 8; Langley Researcher, 9118/70, 1)
Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., would replace Thomas K. Mattingly II as CM pilot on Apollo 13 mission April 11, Dr, Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced. Mattingly, exposed to German measles, had not developed immunity and was expected to show symptoms of disease next week. “The recommendation of ApriMO: nasa announced that Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., would replace Thomas K. Mattingly II as cm pilot on Apollo 13 mission. Cancellation of the mission had been considered following Mattingly's exposure to German measles. Below, Dr. George M, Low (left). Deputy Administrator, conferred with Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers at April 10 launch status meeting at Kennedy Space Center. everyone. . .was unanimous that Apollo 13 be launched tomorrow,” Dr. Paine told press at ksc. Decision was made after Swigert demonstrated in intensive training that he could replace Mattingly on short notice. “When it comes to the problems you can get into in the command module. . Jack [Swigert] literally wrote the book on the malfunctions and how to overcome them,” Dr. Paine said. Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton said Swigert had performed critical maneuvers flawlessly in training. “Our simulator people said it couldn’t be done. . .but we anticipated more problems than we had. We were all surprised. It went very smoothly.” (Wilford, NYT, 4/11/70, 1; O’Toole, WPost, 4/11/70, Al)
On first anniversary of Apollo IVs first manned lunar landing, Apollo 11	Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., with NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, visited Apollo 11 spacecraft exhibit at state capitol in Jefferson City, Mo., and received plaque from Missouri Gov. Warren E. Hearnes. Later they flew to New York, where they presented 113 g (4 oz) lunar sample to U.N. Secretary General U Thant. Sample would remain on exhibit at U.N. Presenting sample, Dr. Paine said: “What the full significance of Apollo will be to the world of the future, no one can yet predict. We must await the verdict of history. But as we continue to learn and to explore, I am inclined to think that our first moon landing may some day be thought of as the turning point when man first demonstrated that he can open new worlds, where eventually exciting new extraterrestrial societies will be founded. Mankind will move onward to settle and colonize other worlds, and the United Nations will encompass new territories, if not new dimensions.” NASA centers and tracking stations around world celebrated anniversary throughout week. (NASA Release 70-125; upi, NYT, 7/21/70; Text)
George Washington Univ. published International Aspects of Earth Resources Survey Satellite Programs by John Hanessian, Jr., reprint of article published in Journal of the British Interplanetary Society: International participation in experimental earth resources survey satellite program was possible in several forms, each both advantageous and disadvantageous for U.S. and participating country. “The technical constraints and realistic expectations need to be carefully considered in any feasibility evaluation that may be carried out....” Technical assistance from industrialized countries or regional or international multilateral agencies would be necessary for developing countries. “It is also quite possible that private industry could play a leading role in such efforts.” Potential participation of U.S.S.R. “must be viewed not only with the optimism engendered by recent statements, but also by reflection on the experience of a decade of space history.” Survey satellite concept “could provide an ideal opportunity for the technologically advanced nations of the world to converge their interests with the aspirations of the many developing countries in their effort to build a just, peaceful, and economically progressive world community.” (Text)
John L. Steele, Senior Correspondent of Time-Life News Service, praised James E. Webb’s book Space Age Management in speech at Time-Life and Kaiser Corp. luncheon to direct attention to need for pollution control. Former NASA Administrator Webb had written that space accomplishments could “usher in new era of great advances for us and for mankind. . .because our accomplishments indicate a fundamental improvement in man’s ability to find and use new knowledge.” These included new ways in which large-scale organized efforts were managed; encouragement of multidisciplinary efforts using science, engineering, and management; new techniques and tools for research in social and physical sciences; and “creative manner in which these are applied to the solution of age-old problems.” With these accomplishments U.S. had shown, Webb had written, “that we can perform the most difficult and challenging tasks without departing from or damaging our fundamental values or our democratic institutions.” (CR, 5/28/70, S8008-9)
New mineral found in Apollo 11 samples had been named “armalcolite,” incorporating letters of Apollo 11 astronauts’ names, Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins, msc announced. Name had been included in Proceedings of Apollo 11 Lunar Science Conference of Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta (cq.), dedicated to Apollo 11 crew, and had been approved by Nomenclature Committee of International Mineralogical Assn, (msc Release 70-82)
NASA had applied for patent on magnetic hammer that synthesized small quantities of clear and yellow diamonds from graphite, msfc announced. Devised by msfc engineers John R. Rasqum and Marvin F. Estes, process produced diamond grit of kind used by industry for cutting operations. Hammer, which might be used for making other crystals, had been developed for use in Saturn rocket production. (msfc Release 70-265)	' Apollo 11 July 19-20, 1969. (Program; NASA Hist Off; CR, 12/17/70, HI 1884-5)
Nomination by President Nixon of Apollo 10 astronauts Cdr. John W. Young and Cdr. Eugene A. Cernan, both USN, for permanent promotion to captain was announced by White House. President and Mrs. Nixon honored Apollo 13 astronauts and wives at White House dinner. (PD, 6/15/70,756)
Washington Post quoted German police as saying Astronaut Joseph H. Engle had escaped uninjured from head-on automobile collision in Southern Bavaria. Engle was in Germany to visit Noerdlingen Crater with Apollo 14 crew on mission to familiarize crew with rocks similar to moon rocks expected to be encountered. (W Post, 8/16/70, A30)
Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., was sworn in as OST Director and Science Adviser to President Nixon in Washington, D.C., ceremony. President Nixon said, “This nation needs to strengthen its support of basic ,science so that the practical applications which will benefit us all can be forthcoming.” (PD, 7/21/70,1213-4)
U.S. reaction to Apollo 13's successful splashdown: Sign at msc was changed from “Our hearts are with the Apollo 13 crew,” to “Sigh of relief party here tonight.” Mission Control broke into applause before whipping out traditional cigars to fill huge room with blue smoke. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, MSC Director, observed that mission had not been complete failure. Spacecraft had gone around moon—feat that would have caused sensation two years before. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, said later in day, “I’m a little tired and bedraggled but I’m feeling 10 or 20 years younger than I did yesterday.” In New York, thousands watched recovery on giant TV screen at Grand Central Terminal. Loud applause sounded when capsule appeared in sky, at splashdown, and when astronauts appeared. Hot dog stand operator at Vanderbilt Ave. and 47th Street assured pas-sersby, “It’s all right.” Long strands of multicolored ticker tape and bushels of confetti poured from skyscraper windows. At City Hall, Mayor John V. Lindsay said, “Now they are safely back and New Yorkers join with men everywhere in saying’welcome home.’” Church bells pealed throughout Nation. Traffic came to standstill in Indianapolis, Los Angeles reported no crime for brief period, and dice stopped rolling in Las Vegas briefly. Richmond, Va., department store manager, watching crowd before store TV set, said everybody “had a quiet smile, but it was curious the way they stood iooking at all that good news—silently and almost as if they were still praying.” (WPost, 4/18/70, Al, All; NYT, 4/18/70, 1, 13)
Armed Forces Management editorial by Michael Getler said nuclear test ban treaty “came only after the Soviets unilaterally broke a testing moratorium to gather what they needed to know in the vital area of weapons effects, and the ink was barely dry on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space Treaty when the Pentagon announced the Russians were testing a new Fractional Orbital Bombardment System that was certainly a spiritual, if not technical, violation of that pact.” (AFM, 5/70, 13)
NASA held 12th Annual Honor Awards Ceremony in Washington, D.C., with Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, as keynote speaker. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Dr. Thomas O. Paine, former NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.; Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, and Alan L. Bean; and Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr. Vice President said award ceremony was “perhaps the most significant since NASA was founded. Those individuals we honor have accomplished goals that required over a decade of vision, hard work, determination and courage by thousands in the NASA, industry, and university research and development team. ... NASA has had an outstanding beginning, successfully meeting its challenging mission and goals.... Though some reordering of national priorities and some fiscal constraints will not permit us to do all the things we would like to do in the immediate future, the future still holds many challenges and wonderful opportunities.... I am proud of you, the President is proud of you. We salute you.” Dr. Low said NASA could look forward to new achievements in program designed “to maintain that hard-earned lead, but one that also recognizes the many other problems that we as a nation must face. Today,we are moving forward on all...fronts—we have accepted the challenge of the future—a challenge in aeronautics, a challenge in science, a challenge in applications, and above all, a challenge in the exploration of the unknown.” Presidential Medal of Freedom was presented to Apollo 11 and Apollo 13 astronauts and to Apollo 13 Mission Operations Team. Herbert W. Grandy, Stationary Engineer at GSFC, received Exceptional Bravery Medal for responding quickly and “without regard for personal safety” to smoke alarm in gsfc building housing satellites, computers, and clean rooms—preventing loss of thousands of dollars and sustaining serious injuries. Group Achievement Award was presented to LeRC Dynamic Power Systems Group; FRC, ARC, and LaRC Lifting-Body Team; Wallops Station Solar Eclipse Sounding Rocket Project; and USN Solar Eclipse Underwater Salvage Team Associated with Recovery of Payload. Outstanding Leadership Medal was presented to Robert L. Krie-ger of Wallops Station and to former ERC Director James C. Elms. Other awards included Exceptional Service Medal to 18 persons and Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 17. (Program; NASA Release 70-196; NASA Activities, 12/15/70)
l/g John W. O’Neill (usaf), afsc Vice Commander, testified on status of F-lll aircraft before Senate Committee on Government Operations’ Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. USAF investigation of Dec. 22, 1969, crash that had killed two pilots near Nellis afb, Nev., had shown “structural failure of the left wing occurred at very low altitude, during a normal dive recovery after a routine delivery of air-to-ground ordnance. Although the aircrew escape module performed as it was designed, time between ejection and ground impact did not allow the recovery chute to open.” Metallurgical flaw, “somewhat like an ultra-thin hairline crack, existed in the lower plate of the wing pivot fitting.” In addition to usaf investigations, special ad hoc committee of Air Force Scientific Advisory Board had reviewed findings and technical data. “We have concluded that the flaw was introduced at a subcontractor facility at some point during the manufacture of the lower plate. ...” No modifications to present structure were planned but structural inspections of all F-llls would “utilize improved ultrasonic inspection techniques and procedures developed as a direct result of this problem.” Program would cost estimated $31.2 million. First aircraft were to be completed and returned to flight status in June 1970. All aircraft should be restored by shortly after first of year. (Testimony)
Lightweight double-wall meteoroid shield developed for enlarged propulsion system of Mariner Mars 1971 was described in Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets by jpl scientist John R. Howard. Outer sheet of Teflon-impregnated glass fabric and multilayer thermal insulation was more effective than aluminum sheet of same weight because of impact phenomena modification by heterogeneous first sheet and impact energy absorption by thermal insulation. Series of tests over range of impact velocities with projectiles of glass, nylon, and syntactic paste had been conducted. Linear extrapolation had shown that composite outer sheet was sufficient for specified meteoroid threat. (JSR, 1/70,69-72)
Dr. Wernher von Braun (feff), former msfc Director, was sworn in as nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning by Dr, Thomas O. Paine, Administrator. lifting-body vehicle and to Apo//o 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, William A, Anders, and James A. Lovell, Jr., for first manned Right to moon. (Program; afsc Newsreview, 4/70)
NASA’s X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, reached mach 0.98 at 20 000-m (66 000-ft) altitude after air launch from B-52 aircraft from FRC. Objectives of powered flight, 16th mission in X-24A series, were to evaluate handling qualities at 5° angle of attack at mach 0.95, determine lateral directional derivatives at mach 0.94 with 40° upper-flap deflection, and determine longitudinal trim and lift-to-drag data with 40° upper flap. (NASA Proj Off)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar D. Mitchell visited Noerdlingen Crater near Tuebingen, West Germany, during field trip to familiarize themselves with kinds of rock they expected to find on moon. (AP, WPost, 8/12/70, A7) August 12: Development by MSFC scientists John W. Kaufman, Dennis W. Camp, and Robert E. Turner of “maxometer” that could record Seak hurricane velocities of more than 320 km per hr (200 mph), was escribed in Marshall Star. One version of maxometer was antispark severe-environment sensor that could withstand extreme temEeratures of Saturn rocket engine exhausts and acquire peak ex-aust-gas-flow speeds during launch. Other version was ambient environment sensor for recording peak wind speeds in thunderstorms, squall line activity, tornadoes, and hurricanes. Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. had turned concept into dynamic pressure disc-spring device to measure 555-km-per-hr (345-mph) speeds to study air flow from launch of Saturn vehicles, essa had installed maxometer at National Hurricane Center at Miami and at Booth-ville, La., to gather hurricane data. (Marshall Star, 8/12/70, 1)
Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, accepted Franklin Institute’s William M. Vermiyle Medal on behalf of NASA at Philadelphia ceremony. Award cited NASA for “a decade of unprecedented managerial, scientific and technological achievement culminating in the incredible triumph of landing men on the Moon and returning them safely to earth.” NASA was first organization to receive medal; previous awards for outstanding contributions in industrial management had been made only to individuals. (Franklin Institute Release)
Discovery (through infrared radiometric observations) of local temperature in Jupiter’s North Equatorial Belt far in excess of those at level of solid ammonia clouds and (through visual observations) of orange-brown coloration within belt were described in Science by MIT astronomers John S. Lewis and Ronald G. Prinn. Astronomers concluded that high-resolution spectroscopic examination of spots might result in detection of water vapor in Jupiter’s atmosphere. “In the design of Jupiter flyby and orbiter missions for the 1970’s, the possibility of conducting related experiments in the immediate vicinity of the planet should be considered.” Data could reduce uncertainties in design parameters of entry probes. Astronomers also suggested that, in multilayer cloud model, solar uv photolysis of hydrogen sulfide in regions where ammonia clouds were sparse or absent should lead to production of inorganic chromophores—molecular coloring agents. (Science, 7/31/70,472-3)
Results of study by arc geologist Dr. William L. Quaide contradicted 4.5-billion-yr age reported for oldest sample at Jan. 5-9 Lunar Science Conference in Houston, arc announced. Most of thick layer of lunar soil and rocks at Tranquility Base appeared to have been formed from local volcanic bedrock underlying Apollo 11 landing site. Bedrock had been dated by three methods at approximately 3.65 billion yrs old. Same dating methods had shown one sample to be almost 1 billion yrs older, or 4.5 billion yrs old. Dr. Quaide had found when individual particles of rock were taken from soil and dated they again measured at 3.65-billion-yr age. (arc Release 70-1)
Testimony on Apollo 13 mission was given before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator; Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr.; Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director; and Apollo Flight Director Glynn S. Lunney. Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., was unable to attend. Dr. Paine said: “The Apollo 13 mission was a failure. We did not succeed in America’s third lunar landing attempt and we were therefore unable to explore the moon’s Fra Mauro formation. This hilly region remains a high priority objective in our lunar program. . .. We cannot yet say which of the remaining Apollo missions will be sent there. Although the Apollo 13 mission failed, we regard the recovery actions that followed.. .as a gratifying success which will contribute greatly to the nation’s space flight competence.” There was no reason “why this setback should be—or should be made to be—the occasion for a major change in the course of the nation’s space program. We have clearly demonstrated the basic soundness of the Apollo system and of our operational procedures. ... From a technical standpoint, there is no question but that we are prepared to move forward in the 1970’s with the space program we have outlined to you....” Dr. Paine said President Nixon “fully shares this view.” (Testimony) Dr. Petrone testified: “This long arduous voyage continuously presented the challenge to balance the spacecraft systems required to perform necessary functions against the availability of consumables, of water, electrical power, oxygen, and the lithium hydroxide to remove the carbon dioxide. The options available to flight and ground crews in every case permitted acceptable courses of action to be selected. During this emergency situation, the remaining systems performed in an outstanding manner meeting the unusual demands placed upon them. At the same time, the flight and ground crews demonstrated exceptional confidence in meeting these sets of unusual circumstances.” Mission ended with “set of consumables which were within about two percent of what we had predicted back at 63 hours or about seven hours after the problem occurred,” Lunney told Committee. “If the consumable posture. . .had worsened or if we had absorbed another failure. . .we would have had to resort to scheduling communication times with the crew.” Although probably within 12 hours to 24 of running out of most critical consumable, water, “had we proceeded into.. .duty cycling the communications gear onboard, we probably could have stretched that period.” Astronaut Lovell described crew’s feelings during crisis: “We soon realized that our only hope of survival was to go into Aquarius, power up its systems and use the systems and the consumables on board. . .for a return home. And it was here that we realized that it was now a case of survival.” Spacecraft was on trajectory that “would have entered us in a sort of permanent orbit, some . 230. . .thousand miles [370 000 km] in apogee, and maybe a thousand [1600 km] or so in perigee. ... Again, the ground came through, and gave us. . .the free trajectory burn, which was required to get us back to earth. My main concern at this point was to get this spacecraft back within the earth’s atmosphere.” (Transcript)
Air Force and Space Digest editorial by John L. Frisbee advocated “show and tell” method of alerting U.S. public to Soviet nuclear threat: “Today’s public skepticism about the realities of Soviet nuclear power, and its intended uses, is somewhat reminiscent of the skepticism that existed in the fall of 1962, concerning allegations of Soviet missile-site construction in Cuba. That earlier skepticism disappeared when photos of the Cuban missile sites, taken from high-flying U-2 aircraft, were made public.” One way to awaken U.S. public to current Soviet threat “might be to release some of the satellite photography on which US analysis of the threat is based.” (AF/SD, 8/70,8)
NASA’s X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, completed 13th flight from frc. Two of four rocket chambers failed to fire after air launch from B-52 aircraft at 12 800m (42 000-ft) altitude and desired speed (mach 0.95) was not achieved. Some data were obtained at about mach 0.7 and below. (NASA Proj Off)
Cancellation of Apollo 15 and 19 had eliminated six more astronauts from chance at moon trip, NASA Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton said in MSC interview. Of 49 astronauts on flight status, 39 had not yet flown in space. Many would not have opportunity for at least five years because of NASA budget cutbacks. Five astronauts had resigned since Apollo 11 lunar landing and further resignations were “very possible.” Slayton said he would not deter astronauts from resigning. “The facts of life are, we don’t need them.” (upi, NYT, 9/10/70, 54)
City council of Roermond, the Netherlands, had announced it would name street after Apollo 13 and include names of Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., in street signs, AP reported. (WPost, 4/20/70, A8)
In Science, Project Tektite I scientific team—Dr. H. Edward Clifton, Conrad V. W. Mahnken, John G. Vanderwalker, and Richard A. Waller—discussed results of February-April 1969 experiment sponsored by NASA, USN, Dept, of Interior, and General Electric Co. to provide data for behavioral, biomedical, and engineering studies and marine sciences program. Between 10% and 20% of waking time had been devoted to psychological tests for biomedical studies. Minor external ear infections contracted by*all divers was only health problem to affect scientific program. Experiments had demonstrated advantages of underwater habitation and saturation diving for biological and geological research: opportunity for continuous monitoring of organisms or processes and for more research time in water. (Science, 5/8/70,659-63)
John D. Hodge, Manager of msc Advanced Missions Program Office, left NASA to become Director of Transportation Systems Concepts for DOT’S Transportation Systems Center at Cambridge, Mass. Hodge had received NASA Medal for Exceptional Service twice during 10-yr NASA service, (msc Release 70-60)
Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, announced establishment of Civil Systems Projects Office at jpl to “develop applications of the laboratory’s capabilities for solution of problems in medical engineering, public safety support, urban land use and transportation.” Office would be headed by Howard H. Haglund, former Surveyor Project Manager, (jpl Release 548)
William J. Normyle commented on July 15-17 Conference on Space Shuttle Technology at LeRC in Aviation Week & Space Technology: “Problems facing the development of the system were far more evident than solutions.” Lack of resolution had led to decision to hold another conference in nine months, by which time NASA “will have produced some key solutions.” It was clear at meeting “that experts in a number of fields differ with their colleagues on selection of such basics as thermal protection, design configuration, materials, integrated avionics, operations and crew systems.” (Av Wk, 7/27/70, 17)	.	.
Challenge and objectives of space science and applications program for next decade were outlined by Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, before House Committee on Science and Astronautics during NASA FY 1971 authorization hearings: “In the allocation of its scarce resources NASA is emphasizing those projects which help solve immediate problems and deferring to a later year those major new starts whose objectives are primarily to gain the new knowledge. Obviously, we cannot continue to defer such promising scientific projects indefinitely without mortgaging the economic health, the technical progress, and the security of this Nation. “In the immediate future these postponements are tolerable because of our active ongoing program. Future Aeronomy and Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (imp) Explorer missions will be directed at the earth’s environment: improved oso’s will study the sun and provide data for correlation with ecology studies; the Small Astronomy Satellites (sas) will start giving us continued data on galactic x-rays and gamma-rays; and future missions of the OAO will continue the successful observation program begun with oao-2. Before the middle of the decade, we will visit two additional planets, Jupiter and Mercury. We will orbit Mars in 1971 and land in 1976. Under our supporting programs, we are analyzing space data, developing theories to explain the findings; we are conducting relatively less expensive but very productive investigations with sounding rockets and airplanes; and are developing concepts and investigations for future missions.” Establishing scientific priorities, allocating proper resources to research, and deciding between various expensive scientific projects would continue to be “a most difficult problem.” NASA would work with in-house scientists, advisory groups, and nas and nae “to be sure that the scientific projects we are undertaking are sound and worthy of support.” (Testimony) Donald P. Hearth, Director of Planetary Programs, ossa, testified on continuation of Mars program before Committee: “The results of the Mariner 6 and 7 missions have affected very little the probability that life, in some form, may exist and they have not dampened the enthusiasm of the biologist to search for life on Mars. The apparent low nitrogen content in the atmosphere can be tolerated by many organisms. In fact, biota can be readily conceived which do not directly utilize gaseous nitrogen at all. The results have increased the geological interest in Mars primarily due to the discovery of the chaotic and featureless terrains. An understanding of these geological differences could shed new light on the origin and evolution of Mars and, thereby, on the origin and evolution of the solar system as a whole. We are, therefore, continuing the Mars program. . . . However because of the need to minimize expenditures. . .it has been necessary to delay the Viking missions from 1973 to 1975.” (Testimony) R. B. Marsten, Director of Communications Programs, OSSA, testified on broadcast service of NASA advanced flight experimentation in satellite communications: “Broadcast services come in three classes—the distribution class, which, through a relatively small satellite, would broadcast program material to large receivers, perhaps co-located with local broadcast transmitters for rebroadcast in the conventional mode; a somewhat larger satellite in the community mode, which would broadcast to moderate size receivers located in village squares, or in remote areas and connected to a cable distribution system for redistribution of the program material to viewing sets; and. . .direct broadcast mode, in which multi-kilowatt power level satellites broadcast directly to the user, who may have a conventional TV receiver. This application has the potential of providing instant national service where there is no ground infrastructure, and is much talked about now for educational purposes.” (Testimony) Jesse L. Mitchell, Director of Physics and Astronomy Programs, OSSA, said in submitted statement that research with instrumented aircraft was integral part of NASA program. “This research helps to bridge the gap between groundbased experiments and those that require the more expensive rockets and space vehicles. We have conducted auroral and airglow research observations of the solar corona during total eclipses and infrared observations. The ability to investigate interstellar dust and other celestial objects by observing their infrared emissions is opening up a promising line of research. A small jet aircraft has been used to take a 12-inch [305-mm] infrared telescope to 50 000 feet [15 200 m] above the earth. At this altitude, much of the infrared radiation from the universe is observable; in contrast, at the surface of the earth it is obscured by water vapor. Investigators from the University of Arizona have used a Lear jet from ARC for observations of planets, stars, and galaxies at wavelengths from 30 to 300 microns.” They had discovered centers of galaxies were bright in infrared. Because of importance of this area of astronomy, “36-inch [914-mm] telescope is presently being constructed to be placed in a C-141 jet airplane. This plane and the larger telescope will constitute a unique and effective airborne astronomical observatory.” (Testimony) Joseph B. Mahon, Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Programs, OSSA, submitted statement on NASA plans for use of Titan IIIC and Titan-Centaur booster configuration. Titan IIIC would be used to launch ATS-Fand ATS-G into synchronous orbit. Introduction of Titan-Centaur configuration in time scale to support Viking mission would represent "vital portion of the effort associated with the Centaur Program in Calendar Years 1971,1972, and 1973.” NASA and USAF had concluded basic management agreements for operation of Titan IIIC and Titan-Centaur systems, usaf would act as Titan IIIC launch vehicle systems manager, responsible to NASA mission direction. NASA would be Titan-Centaur launch vehicle systems manager but would use selected elements of existing usaf contractor organizations. Titan III complex at etr would be modified to provide single launch pad capability for supporting planetary opportunities with two launches from the same pad. Plans for Titan Ill-Centaur included engineering proof flight of all-up Viking configuration late in 1973. First operational use was planned for 1974 to support He-lios-A solar probe, subject to discussions with West Germany. During FY 1970, preliminary design and program definition effort for Titan Ill-Centaur would be completed and final design and qualification effort initiated, as well as action for procurement of proof-flight vehicle and supporting hardware. (Testimony)
Establishment of faa Office of Air Transportation Security to cope with criminal acts against aircraft and airports was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Office would replace FAA Office of Investigations and Security and would emphasize deterrence of aircraft hijacking. Carl F. Maisch, Director of Office of Investigations and Security and former FBI agent, had been named director of new office, (faa Release 70-81)
Work of Grover Moreland, “Neil Armstrong of the rockcutters, the man entrusted with. . .stretching the first precious lumps of moon matter into as many research laboratories as. . .possible.. .without losing a particle,” was described in Washington Sunday Star magazine Sunday. Moreland had prepared 60 or 70 thin sections from Apollo 11 samples and 15 or 20 from Apollo 12. They were studied under petrographic microscope for mineral content and origin and under electron probe for detailed chemical analysis. He shaved sections as thin as 0.15 mm (0.006 in) and had perfected method of impregnating porous matter with plastic to prevent crumbling. (Schad-en, Sunday, 9/6/70,14-5)
usaf’s X-24A lifting-body vehicle piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke reached 18 300-m (60 000-ft) altitude and mach0.85 during second powered flight after air launch from B-52 aircraft at 12 200-m (40 000-ft) altitude from frc. Purpose of flight—11th in X-24A series and first for a NASA pilot—was to obtain stability and control data. (NASA Proj Off)
Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, announced formation of Mariner Venus-Mercury Office at jpl, headed by project manager Walker E. Giberson. (jpl Release 543)
Baltimore Sun editorial commented on Communist Chinese satellite launch: “Of course Peking still runs far behind America and Russia in nuclear and space development... . But not nearly so far behind as only a few years ago. And apart from conjectures about progress in missilery, "Following Star' [satellite] is a reminder of the potential military dimensions of space which may acquire a new importance now that China has entered the extraterrestrial realm.” (B Sun, 4/28/70, A10)	_ April29: Members of Apollo 13 Review Board entered Apollo simulator alMSC and, using recorded data, reconstructed tense moments after explosion disabled spacecraft April 13. Board member Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong said purpose of reconstruction was to give investigators better appreciation of accident from crewmen’s point of view. (W Post, 4/30/70, A27) *	Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, presented Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy to Apollo If crew—astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins, since named Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs—in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Award, established by National Geographic Society in 1961 for USAF members and units, honored crew for making most outstanding contribution to U.S. aerospace progress during 1969 by accomplishing first manned lunar landing, (dod Release 35970)	.	. *	essa announced award of $1.6-million contract to Gulton Industries Data Systems Div. to construct infrared temperature profile radiometer (ITPR), advanced satellite instrument for obtaining temperature sounding through atmosphere to earth’s surface, essa was de
Complex space tug NASA was planning as part of integrated space transportation system was described in Washington Evening Starby John Lannan. Tug would be assembled like “astronaut’s erector set.” It would consist of propulsion, living, cargo, and electronic control modules and could be “put together or broken down to meet any immediate need.” Tug would be used to land men on moon for long-term stays, to push and pull large pieces of space hardware to assemble them into space stations or interplanetary vehicles, and for astronaut rescue. Tug, launched into orbit aboard shuttle, would never return to earth. It was designed for 3-yr, 10-mission lifetime and would be chemically re-refueled with oxygen and hydrogen replenished by tanker shuttle. NASA expected tug to deliver 27 20031 750 kg (60 000-70 000 lbs) of gear to lunar surface during 28-day lunar surface mission. NASA wanted vehicle to be capable of 90° orbit change and of servicing geosynchronous satellites at 35 900-km (22 300-mi) altitude. (W Star, 9/19/870, Al)
Expansion of Project mast (military assistance for safety in traffic), joint test program to determine value of helicopters in providing medical assistance in emergencies [see July 15], was announced by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird and Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Program would be expanded to area surrounding Colorado Springs, Colo., and Seattle, Wash, (dod Release 634-70)
Delays caused by sun’s gravity in return of radio signals by Mariner spacecraft had verified Einstein theory of relativity, jpl astronomer Dr. John D. Anderson said in report to Conference on Experimental Tests of Gravitational Theories at Cal Tech. In tests begun April 30, Anderson and team including Dr. Duane O. Muhle-man of Cal Tech and Dr. Pasquale B. Esposito and Warren L. Martin of JPL had taken several hundred radio measurements of Mariner VI and VII in wide-range solar orbit using precise distance-measuring system and 64-m (210-ft) Goldstone antenna. Experiments tested validity of theory that velocity of light was slower in gravitational field near sun than in interplanetary space where gravitational fields were weaker. “Our experiments to date show that Einstein’s predictions are right, to within 2 to 4 per cent. The best measurements we have thus far indicate a maximum delay of about 204 microseconds for Mariner VI, as compared with an expected 200 microseconds using Einstein’s theory.” Findings cast doubt on more recent theories of Dr. Charles Brans and Dr. Robert H. Dicke that Einstein’s formulations could be incorrect by 1% “If the Brans-Dicke theory were correct, the time delay would be much less. . .perhaps about 186 microseconds. .. .if the much older Newtonian theory were correct, there would have been no time delay at all.” (nasa Release 70-200)
Former Astronaut Michael Collins was sworn in as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs in Washington, D.C. He would be responsible for State Dept, relations with U.S. public, particularly youth. (State Dept Release 3)
NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 26 800-m (88 000-ft) altitude and mach , 1.4 during powered flight after air launch from B-52 aircraft at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude west of Rosamond, Calif. Purpose of flight, 33rd in series, was to obtain stability and control data at various mach numbers and angles of attack. (NASA Proj Off)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, discussed further opportunities for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in space with Soviet academician Dr. M. D. Millionshchikov during luncheon given by Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., nominee for posts of ost Director and Science Adviser to President Nixon, at Cosmos Club in Washington, D.C. (NASA Off of Admin; Paine speech text, 9/14/70)
Holt, Rinehart and Winston published Operation Overflight, in which author Francis Gary Powers said information supplied by Lee Harvey Oswald, identified by Warren Commission as assassin of President John F. Kennedy, might have enabled Russians to shoot down his U-2 espionage aircraft in 1960. Powers believed Oswald had supplied U.S.S.R. with data on MPS-16 height-finding radar equipment. (AP, B Sun, 4/20/70, 6)
Apollo 14 Commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., said in Houston that he was concerned that cutbacks in space program, with ensuing layoffs, might lead to poor workmanship at KSC, “I think we would be naive if we didn’t assume that people are unhappy.” (IY Post, 7/12/ 70, A5)
Dr. Louis Morton, professor of history at Dartmouth College and Chairman of American History Assn. Committee on the Historian in Federal Government, had been named Chairman of NASA Historical Advisory Committee for 1970-71, NASA announced. Dr. Morton was formerly with U.S. Army Office of Military History. Other members of NASA Historical Advisory Committee were Dr. Daniel J. Boorstin, Director, Museum of History and Technology, Smithsonian Institution; Prof. David Bushnell, Univ. of Florida; Prof. A. Hunter Dupree, Brown Univ.; Prof. Melvin Kranzberg, Case Western Reserve Univ.; Prof. Rodman W. Paul, Cal Tech; Robert L. Perry, rand Corp. Economics Div.; and Prof. John B. Rae, Harvey Mudd College. Executive Secretary of Committee was Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian. (NASA Release 70-78)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of $97 880 cost-sharing contract to Northern Research and Engineering Corp. to establish design criteria for control and reduction of oxides of nitrogen emitted from jet aircraft engines, (faa Release 70-65)
