Latest edition of Jane’s All the World’s Aircraft, published in London, listed series of Cosmos satellites that could intercept other spacecraft in orbit, determine their purpose, and “blow them to pieces.” In report of Soviet orbital interception tests during year, publication said Cosmos 397 (launched Feb. 25) had passed near Cosmos 394 (launched Feb. 9) “and was subsequently destroyed in an explosion.” Cosmos 400 (launched March 19) had been “intercepted” by Cosmos 404 on 404’s launch date, April 3. In preface, editor John W. R. Taylor also said U.S. maintained satellites in stationary orbit over Pacific, including one with “fantastic 11-ton reconnaissance camera,” to monitor launches of Soviet and Red Chinese long-range missiles. (upi, NYT, 10/24/71,4)
afsc announced reassignment of officers: m/g Lee V. Gossick, Deputy Chief of Staff, Systems, would become Chief of Staff for afsc on departure of m/g Clifford J. Kronauer; m/g Kenneth W. Schultz, Deputy for Minuteman, samso, Norton afb, Calif., would succeed m/g Gossick as Deputy Chief of Staff, Systems; b/g Abner B. Martin would succeed m/g Schultz as Deputy for Minuteman; b/g Herbert A. Lyon, Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff, Systems, afsc, would succeed b/g Martin as Deputy for Reentry Systems; b/g William W. Gilbert, Vice Commander of usaf Flight Test Center, Edwards afb, Calif., would command European Communications Area, with additional duties as Deputy Chief of Staff, Communications, usaf, Europe. (afsc Release 216.71; afsc pio )
Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations, announced at msc that Apollo 14 Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., had become first man to gain weight while in space. Other two crew members had lost weight: Edgar D. Mitchell had lost 0.5 kg (1 lb) and Stuart A. Roosa had lost 4.5 kg (10 lbs). Shepard had gained 0.5 kg (1 lb). NASA physicians were making fluid tests on astronauts to determine reason for weight loss during space flight. (Altman, NYT, 2/11/71, 40)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented LM similar to those used for Apollo 11, 12, and 14 lunar landings to Michael Collins, Director of Smithsonian Institution’s Air and Space Museum and Apollo 11 astronaut. LM would remain on permanent display at museum. (Smithsonian Release 111—71; NASA PAo)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa began preflight semiquarantine at ksc to minimize their exposure to disease or illness that could delay Jan. 31 liftoff toward moon. Astronauts would be restricted to three buildings and contacts would be limited to 160 persons, all of whom had undergone comprehensive medical examinations, (upi, W Star, 1/11/71, A9)
faa award of $229 746 planning grant-offer to New Jersey Dept, of Transportation for master plan of v/sTOLport to serve New York metropolitan and northern New Jersey areas was announced by FAA Administrator John H. Shaffer, (faa Release 71-168)
Senate by vote of 61 to 28 rejected amendment proposed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) to terminate usn F—14 fighter aircraft program by deleting $801.6 million from H.R. 8687, $51-billion FY 1972 military procurement authorization. (CR, 9/29/71, S15329— 15405)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Dr. H. Guyford Stever as nsf Director. Dr. Stever would succeed Dr. William D. McElroy, whose resignation would be effective Feb. 1. Dr. Stever was member of National Science Board and of Advisory Panel to House of Representatives on Science and Astronautics. He had served as usaf Chief Scientist and as Chairman of President Nixon’s PreInauguration Task Force on Science and Technology. {PD, 11/22/71, 1528, 1542)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) introduced S. 1261, to authorize nsf “to undertake a loan guarantee and interest assistance program to aid unemployed scientists and engineers in the conversion from defense-related to civilian, socially-oriented research, development, and engineering activities.” (CR, S3225—31)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, testified in FY 1972 authorization hearings before House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “. . . true boundaries of our ecological system have not been determined, but they certainly extend to the known dimensions of the universe. The forces and laws which affect the most distant star are directly relevant to the problems of energy generation and control on Earth. Mankind is just beginning to grasp the fact that all natural systems are intimately related and interdependent” and man must learn “to manage wisely what he can, and to live in equilibrium with what is beyond his control. It is to these ends . . . that we have structured the nation’s continuing space activities in science and applications.” Most significant new astronomy program element was heao, “designed to unlock some of the most profound and puzzling secrets of modern physics.” There was evidence that in pulsars and quasars “a whole new regime of power generation exists and operates at levels that cannot be explained by modem nuclear physics.” Understanding these energy processes might lead to harnessing of powers “heretofore unimaginable.” Both planetary and lunar exploration should provide clues to earth’s past and future, to factors that caused long-period environmental changes and how to control them. Earth observations program also was addressed to fundamental problems of environmental and ecological management. Satellites could see, record, and transmit information on causes and effects in global air-ocean-earth interactions. Trend in U.S. space science and applications had been decreasing budget and launch rates; ossa had had to “cut back ongoing projects, dispense with backup payloads, stretch launch schedules and mission intervals, and defer promising new projects,” but had “preserved a steady momentum and a balanced program thrust wherever possible.” High level of productivity in science, exploration, and applications had been possible “because of the background in technology, in engineering, in conceptual thinking that was built up earlier.” But many valuable and important missions had been deferred into future, “a future we expect will permit us to revolutionize the way space is explored and used.” Key feature of this revolution would he reusable space shuttle “that makes access to space for man and machines an economical, routine excursion rather than the difficult task it presents now.” (Transcript)
Immediate report from nasa on role of Dale D. Myers, Deputy Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in award of $500-million space shuttle engine contract to NR Rocketdyne Div. was requested by Rep. William R. Cotter (D-Conn.). In statement to press, Rep. Cotter said Myers “as co-chairman of the joint NASA-Pentagon space transportation system committee, may have been instrumental in cutting off Air Force funding of Pratt & Whitney’s space shuttle research under the XLR—129 program.” Cotter said Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. had based its contention of superior “technical knowhow” on shuttle engine development [see Aug. 3] on its 10-yr XLR-129 research. Myers had been a Rocketdyne Vice President before coming to nasa in 1970. (Text; Warden, C Trib, 8/27/71,22)
New world distance record in heavyweight turboprop class was claimed by usn for P—3C Orion aircraft piloted 11280 km (7010 mi) by Cmdr. Donald H. Lilienthal in nonstop flight from Atsugi Naval Air Station, Japan, to Patuxent Naval Air Station, Md., in 15 hrs 21 min. Previous record of 7662 km (4761 mi) had been set by Soviet 11-18 aircraft in 1967. (dod Newsfilm Release 60-71)
White House announced appointment of William M. Magruder, former Director of sst Development for dot, as special consultant to President Nixon. (PD, 9/13/71,1260) Stratoscope II, reused with modifications for each flight, weighed 3800 kg (8400 lbs) and had optical system with 91-cm (36-in) aperture and photographic resolution of 0.1 arc sec—equal to ability to distinguish two objects 76 cm (30 in) apart at distance of 1600 km (1000 mi). Photographs would be made in visible region of spectrum (4000-6000 A). Balloon-borne telescope, 198 m (650 ft) long, reached operating altitude at 25 200 m (82 800 ft) and performed flawlessly during night-long flight. Stratoscope drifted westward at 32 to 40 km per hr (20 to 25 mph) and returned to earth 96.6 km (60 mi) northeast of Little Rock, Ark., Sept. 10. Mission objectives were accomplished and scientific results were being evaluated. Instrument package was damaged during landing, apparently striking top of oak tree, but film was reported intact. (msfc Releases 71-53, 71—141; Huntsville Times, 9/10/71, 9; 9/11/71)
usaf F—111 on test flight from Edward afb, Calif., crashed on gunnery range near Barstow, Calif., killing pilot and copilot, who had ejected. (upi, W Post, 4/25/71, A2)
faa—dot program to lower base of positive control airspace to 5486 m (18 000 ft) over entire U.S. by end of 1971 was announced by faa Administrator John H. Shaffer. Purpose was to reduce potential for midair collisions. Current positive control base was between 5486 and 18 288 m (18 000 and 60 000 ft) over northeastern and north central U.S. and between 7315 and 18 288 m (24 000 and 60 000 ft) over remainder of conterminous 48 states, (faa Release 71—50)
Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins assumed duties as Director of Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. He had served as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs after leaving NASA. (Smithsonian Ann; Smithsonian Pio)
Lenc had turned over to St. Vincent Charity Hospital in Cleveland, Ohio, small analog computer designed by LeRC scientists Vernon D. Gebben and John A. Webb, Jr., at cost of $1500, NASA announced. Computer measured increase or decrease of stroke volume of heart, or changes in length of time heart valves remained open, to detect certain abnormalities early in development. Hospital planned to use computer experimentally before application to human patients recovering from open heart surgery, (nasa Release 71-69)
Scientists at msc, after studying Apollo 14 photos and questioning crew, reported Astronauts Mitchell and Shepard had turned back within 25-50 m (80-165 ft) of Cone Crater during second eva period. Crew was apparently misled by slight downhill slope around top of Cone Crater which led them to believe it was not part of crater. Ridge astronauts were struggling to reach appeared to have been southeast of Cone. (AP, B Sun, 2/17/71, Al)
Completion of dot study of general-aviation safety was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. General-aviation industry consisted of 133 814 single-engine aircraft, 16 000 multi-engine aircraft, 2229 jet aircraft, 33 992 flight instructors, 2170 FAA-approved flight and ground schools, and 732 729 pilots, including 195 861 students. In 1970 general aviation had accounted for more than 25 million flight hours and nearly 6 billion km (nearly 4 billion mi) flown. Of 621 fatal general-aviation accidents in 1970, 201 had been identified as weather-caused. Study recommended biennial flight review of pilot competency, priority support of FAA General Aviation Accident Prevention Program, tightening of certification requirements for flight instructors and pilots, modernization of faa flight service stations, improvement of faa reporting of real-time weather data, review of faa general-aviation structure, clarification by faa of regulations covering general operating and flight rules, publication of faa regulations in separate parts rather than in current volume format, and adoption of standard traffic pattern for uncontrolled airports, (dot Release 20271)
nasa’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by nasa test pilot William H. Dana, successfully completed its 11th flight from frc. Objectives were to check out fuel jettison system and newly installed engine chamber purge system, (nasa Proj Off)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nominations of Robert M. White as Administrator of noaa, Howard W. Pollock as Deputy Administrator, and John W. Townsend, Jr., as Associate Administrator. White had served as Acting Administrator of noaa since his appointment as Acting Deputy Administrator Oct. 9, 1970. Before establishment of noaa, he was Administrator of essa. (PD, 2/1/71, 127, 141)
Appointment of Dr. Marshall E. Alper, Manager of JPl’s Applied Mechanics Section since 1964, to succeed Howard H. Haglund as Manager of jpl’s Civil Systems Project Office was announced by Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director. Haglund had been appointed Project Manager of dot’s automated transit system, jpl’s principal civil systems project, (jpl Release 571) through rehearsal of manual loading and preparation of LRV equipment, and reverification of relationships between stowed components and LRV. (msfc Release 71-33)
Bipartisan 115-member congressional group—Members of Congress for Peace Through Law—issued report criticizing proposed B-l bomber aircraft as unnecessary, ineffective, and obsolete in nuclear age. Report was prepared by Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S.D.) and Rep. John F. Seiberling (D—Ohio). (CR, 5/5/71, H3558-63)
Formation of new Military Aircraft Programs Office within oart and appointment of Albert J. Evans, Director of Aerodynamics and Vehicles Systems Div. in oart, as its Director were announced by NASA. Office would direct ongoing support to usaf on F-15 and B-l programs and to usn on F—14 program; usaf/nasa Transonic Aircraft Technology (tact) Program in which nasa supercritical wing would be flight-tested on modified F-lll aircraft; usa/nasa Tilt Rotor Research Aircraft Technology Program; and other possible joint research, experimental, and prototype aircraft programs. William S. Aiken, Jr., Deputy Director of Aerodynamics and Vehicle Systems Div., would succeed Evans in former post, (nasa Release 71—186)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 14 lunar landing: “. . . no one who sat entranced before the picture of yesterday’s historic events can have doubted that Antares has scored a major triumph in the effort to advance lunar exploration. Today Shepard and Mitchell will face new problems and grasp new opportunities as they lope their way toward Cone Crater and its geological riches. These two brave and highly skilled men—along with their partner, astronaut Roosa, in lunar-orbiting Kitty Hawk—are writing another brilliant and memorable chapter in man’s still-infant probing of earth’s nearest neighbor in the vast reaches of space.” (NYT, 2/6/71, 28)
Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., dod Director of Research and Engineering, and team of dod scientists testified before congressional Joint Committee on Atomic Energy during hearings to determine whether treaty could safely be negotiated to ban underground tests without inspection. Dr. Foster and Dr. Stephen J. Lukasic, Director of dod Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa), said that, while advances had been made in detecting underground tests, it was still impossible to spot some detonations of up to 100 kt. (Lyons, NYT, 10/28/71, 1)
Daniel Guggenheim Medal was presented to Dr. Archibald E. Russell, Chief Designer for Bristol Aircraft Corp., during Washington, D.C., ceremonies marking first William Littlewood Memorial Lecture sponsored by nac and Washington sections of aiaa and sae. Award was for “personal devotion to aircraft engineering and design and particularly for his leadership of the Bristol team in development of the Concorde SST.” Peter G. Masefield, Chairman of British Airports Authority, delivered first Littlewood lecture, “Aviation and the Environment.” nac Man of Distinction Award was given posthumously to William Littlewood, former American Airlines Vice President and aviation engineering consultant, (nac Release)
Appointment of James T. Murphy as Director of faa Office of Air Transportation Security was announced by faa Administrator John H. Shaffer. Murphy, former fbi special agent, had been serving on acting basis since May 1971. (faa Release 71-153) September 24^-25: Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden were honored by usaf Academy at Colorado Springs, Colo., with parade and special civic day. They received usaf Distinguished Service Medals from Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force. (NASA Activities, 10/15/71, 172)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nominations of representatives and alternates to 26th session of U.N. General Assembly. They included Apollo 14 Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Chief of msc Astronaut Office, as alternate. {PD, 9/13/71,1257, 1261) C.	Jones presented papers on space vehicle docking mechanisms. (nasa Release 71—169; arc Astrogram, 9/16/71, 1)
NASA announced prime and backup crews for Apollo 16 mission, scheduled - for launch in March 1972. Prime crewmen were John W. Young (commander), Thomas K. Mattingly II (cm pilot), and Charles M. Duke, Jr. (lm pilot). Backup crewmen were Fred W. Haise, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar D. Mitchell. Mission would last about 12 days, with lunar surface stay time of about 67 hrs—including three eva periods totaling about 20 hrs. Site for lunar landing had not yet been selected. (nasa Release 71-31)
Retirement of Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., from NASA and usn, effective Jan. 1, 1972, was announced by nasa. Gordon, pilot of Gemini II (Sept. 12-15, 1966) and cm pilot for Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969), would join John W. Mecom, Jr., organization in New Orleans, La. Retirement would reduce number of astronauts to 46. (nasa Release 71—243)
Apollo 14 Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., was awarded honorary Doctor of Science degree by Univ. of Miami in Oxford, Ohio. (NASA Activities, 9/15/71, 155)
Age of Apollo 15 “Genesis rock” was approximately 4.15 billion years, Dr. Liaquat Husain and Dr. John F. Sutter, State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook scientists, announced at press conference. Anorthosite sample brought hack by Astronauts David R. Scott and James B. Irwin during July 26-Aug. 7 mission was 150 million yrs older than oldest Apollo 12 rock, Husain said. “This is the oldest lunar rock found on any of the missions so far.” (Fine grains of soil from earlier missions had been found to be nearly 4.5 billion yrs old and one Apollo 12 rock had contained some fragments that had crystallized 4.5	billion yrs ago but rock itself was thought to have solidified 4 billion yrs ago.) Although rock’s age was not the hoped 4.6 billion yrs—estimated age of solar system—it supported theory that moon was once molten mass. Scientists said precise age of rock could range from 3.95 to 4.35 billion yrs. Further tests had been scheduled to narrow margin. Age had been determined by measuring relationship of radioactive potassium and argon in rock samples using rare-gas mass spectrometer and nuclear reactor. Cal Tech geologist Dr. Leon T. Silver said,
KSC launch complex where Apollo 15 spacecraft and Saturn V booster stood ready for liftoff had been struck by lightning 11 times during past six weeks, Washington Post reported. First strike, June 14, had been equivalent to 98 000 amps—almost three times as powerful as average lightning strike and two thirds as strong as biggest lightning strike ever recorded in Florida. Two more strikes had followed within 15 min of each other and a 31 000-amp strike had hit launch pad one day later. On July 20 five separate lightning bolts with total amperage July 26-August 7: ApoJlo 15 carried three astronauts on the fourth successful lunar landing mission, returning them with 77 kilograms {170 pounds) of samples after 66 hours 55 minutes on. the moon’s surface. During prelaunch activities in Firing Room 1 of the Kennedy Space Center's Launch Control Center, Dr. James C. Fletcher, Nisi. Administrator {right), spoke utith nasc Executive Secretary William A. Anders; i/c Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), former Apollo Program Director; and Dr. Wernher tton Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning (left to right). of almost 100 000 amps had been recorded. Ninth strike of 22000 amps had occurred June 25, and last—weakest to date at 6600 amps— had occurred July 19, Neither spacecraft nor launch vehicle had been damaged. Apollo 15 was first spacecraft to have even a near miss from lightning strikes while being prepared for launch. [W Post, 7/25/71, A16) July 26—August 7: nasa’b Apollo J5 (AS—510) carried three-man crew on fourth successful lunar landing mission. LM-10 Falcon landed on moon’s Hadley-Apennine region and two astronauts conducted experiments, rode first manned lunar roving vehicle (lrv) on moon, and explored lunar surface. After 66 hrs 55 min on surface, Falcon rejoined orbiting CSM-112 Endeavor and astronauts transfered for safe return to earth with lunar samples, Spacecraft and S-1VB combination entered parking orbit with 171.4-km (106.5-mi) apogee and 169.4-km (105.3-mi) perigee. Translunar injection (tu) was achieved at 2:56 get and csm separated from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:22 get. Docking of csm with lm at 3:34 get was shown clearly by onboard color TV. S-IVB aps burns were conducted at 5:48 get and 10:00 get to send stage toward moon. Separated S-IVB/iU impacted lunar surface at 79:25 get (4:59 pm edt July 29) at 1° south latitude and 11.9° west longitude, 188 km (117 mi) northeast of Apollo 14 landing site and 355 km (221 mi) northeast of Apollo .12 landing site. Impact was detected by Apollo 14 seismometer 37 sec after impact and by Apollo 12 seismometer 55 sec after impact. . First midcourse correction (MCC-1) was canceled because spacecraft trajectory was near nominal. Shortly after csm-lm docking, telemetry data indicated electrical short in service propulsion system (sps). Troubleshooting isolated problem and MCC—2 at 28:41 get used sps bank A to analyze apparent intermittent short. Data indicated bank A could be safely operated manually. Modified procedures were developed for using bank B alone for remaining midcourse corrections except lunar orbit and transearth insertions, which would be dual bank burns. Scott and Irwin entered lm at 33:56 get, 50 min earlier than planned, to check out LM communications and other systems. TV pictures of csm and lm interiors were shown between 34:55 and 35:46 get. During checkout crew discovered range/range-rate exterior glass cover had broken, removing helium barrier. Crew began lm housekeeping V/2 hrs earlier than scheduled and vacuumed broken glass. At 61:13 Get, during preparations for water chlorination, water leak developed in cm chlorination septum gland but was stopped by crew, following repair instructions from ground, and water was absorbed with towels. Door of scientific instrument module (sim) was jettisoned at 74:06 get. July 29—August 4: Apollo 15 entered lunar orbit with 314.8-km (195.6-mi) apolune and 107.5-km (66.8-mi) perilune after LOI burn at 78:32 get (4:06 pm edt July 29). “This is really profound . . . it’s fantastic,” Scott said of view from moon. Apennine Mountains looked unreal. “They stand out in tremendous relief. They appear to be smooth or rounded. But they are cratered and in many places rough in texture. We don’t see any jagged peaks. They don’t look like . . . any other mountains we’ve seen on earth.” csm-lm undocking and separation maneuver was initiated during 12th lunar revolution, on far side of moon at 100:14 get, but spacecraft did not undock. Worden entered tunnel to inspect csm—LM umbilical and found plug was loose. After he reconnected plug and adjusted spacecraft attitude, undocking and separation were achieved at 100:39 get—about 25 min later than planned. lm Falcon touched down in moon’s Hadley-Apennine region near Salyut Crater at 104:42 get (6:16 pm edt July 30) about 600 m (656 yds) north-northwest of planned target. “OK Houston,” Scott said after touchdown, “the Falcon is on the plain at Hadley.” He said LM’s engine had stirred up so much dust that landing site had been completely obscured from 15-m (50-ft) altitude to touchdown: “We flew ifr from then on down.”	> Stand-up extravehicular activity (seva) to observe and photograph landing site and surrounding area began after cabin depressurization at 106:43 get. Scott put his head out of upper hatch and described and photographed area for 33 min. Scott said he could describe site July 29-August 4; Apollo IS entered lunar orbit July 29 and the lm Falcon touched down in the moon’s Hadley-Apennine region July SO for three eva periods of exploration. The lunar room# vehicle Rover, deployed during the first EVA July 31, was photographed by Astronaut James B. Irwin near Hadley RiUe (right center above), with the Hadley Delta in the background and St. George Crater partially visible at the upper right edge. Astronaut David R. Scott was working at the Rover. In the photo at right Irwin scooped a trench, with Mount Hadley in the background. A gnomon indicated the local vertical and the sun angle. Meanwhile CM pilot Alfred M. Worden, orbiting Hie moon in Endeavor, completed lunar and astronomic photography. for hours. Area was covered with craters, but strewn with very few large boulders; it was hilly, hut not rocky or rugged. First EVA began July 31 at 9:04 am EDT. Scott climbed down ladder, deployed mesa containing camera which recorded his descent, and stepped on lunar surface. Irwin followed and, while Scott removed TV camera from mesa and deployed it on tripod, Irwin collected contingency sample. Crew had difficulty deploying lev Rover; during checkout they found that front steering mechanism was inoperative and that there were no readouts on lev battery No. 2 amp-volt meter. Battery was found to be operating satisfactorily and decision was made to perform EVA-1 without LEV front-wheel steering. Crew mounted LEV and proceeded on EVA-1 traverse at 121:45 CET. Crew described EVA as “exploration at its greatest," and repeatedly used words “fantastic,” “breathtaking,” and “spectacular” to describe features as they rode Lrv at about eight km per hr {five mph). Scott said Rover handled quite well: “It negotiates small craters quite well, although there is a lot of roll. The steering is quite responsive . . . and 1 can maneuver pretty well. . . . There is no accumulation of dirt in the wire wheels.” Stops at stations where crew collected lunar samples and took photos were broadcast on TV with excellent transmission. At end of traverse alsef was deployed. Scott and Irwin reentered LM after 6 hrs 33 min exploring surface, 28 min sooner than planned because Scott used up more oxygen than anticipated.	' After resting inside LM, recharging and repairing portable life support system (plss), and reviewing plans for second EVA, astronauts left LM at 142:15 get (7:49 am Edt Aug. 1). Lrv was powered up, circuit breakers were cycled, and lrv front steering was found to be completely operational. EVA—2 traverse included stops at Spur Crater, Dune Crater, Hadley Plains, and area between Spur and Window craters. Numerous samples and photos were obtained and TV transmission was good. Crew completed heat Sow experiment initiated during EVA—1, collected core sample, and deployed U.S. flag. After stowing sample container and him in LM, astronauts reentered LM at 149:27 GET, after 7 hrs 12 min on surface during EVA-2. Third eva began at 163:18 get (4:52 am edt Aug. 2), 1 hr 45 min later than planned because of cumulative changes in surface activities timeline. Late start and requirement to protect nominal liftoff time required shortening EVA. Alternate EVA plan was devised with traverse west from lm to Hadley Rifle. Astronauts traveled to Scarp Crater, “The Terrace” near Rim Crater, and Rim Crater, collecting samples and photographing lunar surface features. Scott tripped over a rock July 29-August 4: The command and service modules were photographed in lunar orbit from the lunar module, giving a view of the scientific instrument module (sim) bay, housing cameras and sensors to record data from the moon’s surface and atmosphere. and fell, but experienced no difficulty in getting up. Astronauts retrieved drill-core-stern sections and samples near ALSEP, returned to LM, off-loaded LRV and stationed it for TV coverage of lm liftoff, and reentered lm at 168:08 get, after 4 hrs 50 min—bringing total EVA time to 18 hrs 35 min. While lm was on moon Worden, orbiting moon in Endeavor, completed lunar and astronomic photography and prepared for rendezvous. His observations included discovery of fields of cinder cones made by volcanic eruptions, delineation of landslide or rock glacier on northwest rim of crater on lunar farside, interpretation of ray-excluded 2one around crater P roc ulus as result of fault system, and discovery of layers on interior walls of several craters, suggesting volcanic collapse craters of calderas in maria. Scott and Irwin depressurized LM, discarded excess equipment, repressurized LM, and lifted off lunar surface with 77 kg (170 lbs) of lunar samples at 171:34' get (1:11 pm edt Aug. 2)—66 hrs 55 min after landing on moon. Liftoff, accompanied by usaf anthem “Off We Go Into The Wild Blue Yonder” taped and broadcast by astronauts from LM, was photographed in color by camera on LRV left on moon and was seen by millions of TV viewers. Spacecraft docked successfully at 173:36 GET, as TV viewers watched. Scott and Irwin transferred from LM to csm with samples, equipment, and film, csm-lm separation and LM jettison were delayed one revolution to verify that CSM and LM hatches were completely sealed, LM ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 26° 22' north latitude and 15' east longitude at 181:30 get, 93 km (59 mi) west of Apollo 15 alsep site. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12, Apollo 14, and Apollo 15 seismometers. Orbit-shaping maneuver was performed during 73rd lunar revolution in preparation for subsatellite launch. Scientific subsatellite was launched at 222:39 get (4:13 pm edt Aug. 4) into lunar orbit with 141.3-km (87.8-mi) apolune and 102.0-km (63.4-mi) perilune. Hexagonal, 36-kg (80-lb) satellite 79 cm (31 in) long and 36 cm (14 in) in diameter carried three experiments and was housed in SIM bay with seven other new experiments. Satellite extended three l^-m (5-ft) booms, one with magnetometer to measure interplanetary and earth magnetic fields near moon and two for stabilization. Satellite also carried charged-particle sensors and equipment to detect variations in lunar gravity caused by mascons. Transearth injection maneuver at 223:49 get put CSM on trajectory for home after 85 hrs 18 min (74 revolutions) in lunar orbit. cm Endeavour separated from sm at 294:44 get. Drogue and main parachutes deployed but one of three main parachutes partially closed during descent, causing harder landing than expected. CM splashed down in mid-Pacific about 10.1 km (5.5 nm) from recovery ship U.S.S. Okinawa at 295:12 get (4:47 pm edt Aug. 7)-—12 days 7 hrs 12 min after liftoff. Astronauts, wearing fresh flight suits, were carried by helicopter to biomed area* on recovery ship for post-flight examinations. After being declared in very good shape, astronauts were flown on following day to Hickam afb, Hawaii, and to Ellington afb, Tex. CM was retrieved and placed on board recovery ship. Lunar samples, data, and equipment were flown to Ellington afb, and cm was off-loaded at San Diego. Mission achieved primary Apollo 15 objectives: to make seleno-logical survey and sampling of materials in preselected area of Hadley-Apennine region; emplace and activate surface experiments; evaluate capability of Apollo equipment to provide extended lunar surface stay time, increased eva operations, and surface mobility; and conduct inflight experiments and photographic tasks from lunar orbit. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance were near nominal except for intermittent short circuit in Delta V thrust switch A, CSM—LM failure to undock properly, and increase in CM tunnel pressure preceding lm jettison. Flight crew performance was excellent. Accomplishments included first use of Lrv, lunar surface navigation device, direct lunar communications without lm relay, and ground-controlled remotely operated TV camera on moon; largest payload in earth orbit (140 310 kg; 309 330 lbs) and largest payload in lunar orbit (33 803 kg; 74 522 lbs); longest lunar surface stay time, lunar surface eva, distance traversed on lunar surface (28 km; 17.4 mi), and lunar orbit time (74 orbits); first subsatellite launched in lunar orbit; and largest amount of lunar samples brought to earth. Apollo 15 was 12th Apollo mission to date, 9th manned Apollo mission, and 4th successful lunar landing mission. Apollo 14 mission had been conducted Jan. 31—Feb. 3. Apollo program was directed by OMSf; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by CSFC under overall direction of otda. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 71-245; NYT, 7/26-8/7/71; W Post, 7/27-8/8/71; gsfc SSR, 7/31/71; nasa Special Release; NASA Release 71-119K; Lannan, W Star, 7/30/71, A1; AP, W Star, 8/1/71, A10)
Thirtieth anniversary of opening of Washington National Airport. Number of passengers using facility annually had grown from fewer than 400 000 in 1941 to nearly 10 million in 1970. At commemorative ceremonies faa award for extraordinary service was presented to Edward V. Rickenbacker, veteran pilot and retired Eastern Airlines Chairman. Airport received commemorative plaque from Arlington County (Va.) Board, (faa Release 71-89; Bernstein, W News, 6/16/71, 35; Eisen, W Post, 6/17/71, D3)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa held press conference at msc. Astronauts described plans for Jan. 31 lunar landing mission and said they were eager to fly on what Mitchell called “a more mature spacecraft” in which “residual risks go down.” (Lannan, W Star, 1/11/71, A4)
Election of Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins to International Aerospace Hall of Fame was announced by Hall of Fame President Martin R. Engler, Jr. Awards for 1971 would be presented to astronauts in San Diego, Calif., Oct. 23. Astronauts had been nominated “in view of their epic flight and its representation as one of the greatest single scientific achievements in the history of man.” (Letter to nasa Historian)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) introduced S. 302 to authorize National Park Service acquisition of historic site in Auburn, Mass., where first liquid-fuel rocket flight was launched by Robert H. Goddard in 1926. Bill was referred to Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs. (CR, 1/26/71, S222)
Leaders of aerospace industry, professional societies, and academic community met with President Nixon; Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Science Adviser to President; and James D. Hodgson, Secretary of Labor. Meeting discussed Technology Mobilization and Reemployment Program to alleviate unemployment in aerospace industry. {PD, 4/5/71, 592)
White House announced that Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., President’s Science Adviser, had chaired working conference with industry, education, and Government representatives on employment problems of scientists and engineers in aerospace and defense industries. Meeting had been called at President Nixon’s request. (PD, 3/8/71, 436)
Philadelphia Inquirer editorial praised Apollo 15 crew: “Their workmanlike approach to arduous tasks, combined with fascinating descriptive commentary, gave Scott and Irwin good credits for showmanship as well as technical expertise. And the superb orchestration from mission control in Houston with Joseph Allen directing the score with the precision of a maestro on the podium, added an esthetic touch to a performance that should win raves from drama critics as well as space buffs. All concerned with Apollo 15 rate the nation’s applause for an almost flawless performance thus far.” (P Inq, 8/7/7\)
nasa held Mariner 9 pre-encounter news briefing at nasa Hq. Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, and Robert H. Steinbacher, Mariner Project scientist at jpl, described mysterious yellow dust storm—greatest observed since 1956—that had developed on Mars Sept. 23 and 24 and was first detected through telescopes Sept. 26. Steinbacher said, “The question as Mariner goes into orbit ... is, will we be doing mapping or covering some dynamic atmospheric phenomenon. . . .” It would be fortuitous “if, with the cameras and other instruments of Mariner 9, we catch the most dramatic event on Mars.” (nasa Release, 10/20/71; Haughland, W Post, 10/30/71, A3; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/30/71, A3)
Tenth anniversary of first U.S. manned space flight. Freedom 7—Mercury spacecraft launched May 5, 1961—had achieved objective of putting man into suborbital flight when Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., went to 185-km (115-mi) altitude during 15-min flight. Anniversary was observed at KSC with exhibition of Mercury spacecraft and Redstone launch vehicle in main auditorium, motion pictures on Freedom 7 and Apollo 14, and guided tours. Following commemorative ceremony, Shepard visited Freedom 7 Elementary School in Cocoa Beach, Fla., where he told students he had made his last venture into space and would step aside to give younger astronauts a chance, (msc Release 71-28; msc pao; W Star, 5/6/71)
Plans to store lunar rocks in vault-like facility at msc to retain their original condition for future researchers were described by NASA officials in AP interview published by New York Times, lrl curatorial and research projects would be consolidated in specially air-conditioned facility covering 465 sq m (5000 sq ft) of existing laboratory space scheduled for completion in time for March 1972 Apollo 16 mission. Dr. John H. Pomeroy, nasa’s Assistant Director for Lunar Sample program, said project had been “a very important aim since the very beginning, because we realize these are unique and irreplaceable samples and it may be years before we go back to these places.” (NYT, 9/7/71)
President Nixon presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa at White House dinner. President recalled briefing of President Eisenhower after Soviet launch of Sputnik 1: “And the briefing was a very exciting one by one of the scientific advisers to the President. . . . But then I shall never forget that at the conclusion . . . the one who was briefing the President . . . turned to him and said, ‘Mr. President, members of the Cabinet, I simply want to say that probably the most important discovery we will make in our exploration of space is not on this chart.’ And that was a lesson for me. It was a great lesson for the American people. Exploration . . . involves going into the unknown.” In space, “we think we know what we want to find and what we may find, but the more we explore we break into new vistas of knowledge. . . . America must continue to be a great nation. We must explore the unknown, not because of what we are going to find or think we are going to find, not because of the uses that we expect to get from space, but because there is something there, something there that we must explore. It’s there to find. . . . this Nation with all of its capability and with all of its promise is first in space today and America, as a great nation, must set as its goal remaining first in space, because that’s the way to continue to be a great nation. This is a goal that we must set for ourselves. “Now, to do this requires thousands of men and women on the ground, devoted and dedicated men in the scientific field, in the engineering field and other areas. It requires very brave men going on these journeys into outer space with all of the uncertainties that we saw on Apollo 13 and very brave women waiting at home with their children, their fathers, and their mothers.” (PD, 3/8/71, 407—11)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., received rear admiral stars from Secretary of the Navy John H. Chaffee during Pentagon ceremonies. Shepard was first astronaut to achieve rear admiral rank. (W Post, 8/27/71, Al)
Mrs. Irene Bolam, named in book Amelia Earhart Lives as being missing aviatrix Amelia Earhart, filed $1.5-million libel suit against authors Joseph Klass and Joseph Gervais. Mrs. Bolam claimed book damaged her reputation by depicting her as bigamist, spy, and traitor. Book claimed Amelia Earhart had disappeared in 1937 while flying U.S. spy mission, was captured by Japanese, and might have been World War II Japanese propagandist Tokyo Rose, (upi, W Post, 9/1/71, D5)
Appointment of Richard P. Skully, Manager of faa’s Miami Area Office, as Director of faa Office of Environmental Quality was announced by faa Administrator John H. Shaffer, (faa Release 71-134)
NASA announced appointment of John W. King, KSC Chief of Public Information, as msc Public Affairs Officer. Appointment would be effective in late January 1972. King had participated in more than 200 launches; voice of “Jack King” was well known to Apollo launch viewers, (nasa Release 71-250)
Apollo 15 Astronauts Alfred M. Worden, David R. Scott, and James B. Irwin rode in motorcade to City Hall in New York, where they received gold medals from Mayor John V. Lindsay. Astronauts presented Mayor Lindsay with flag carried on Apollo 15 mission. Later astronauts were welcomed to U.N. by Secretary General U Thant, to whom they presented replica of plaque they had placed on moon to commemorate astronauts and cosmonauts who had died in performance of duties. (NASA Activities, 9/15/71, 147-8; Kaufman, NYT, 8/25/71,1)
Senate adopted S.R. 15, modifying Senate rules on total number of Senators assigned to certain standing committees. Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences was set at 11 members. Senate also adopted S.R. 16, electing majority members of Senate Committees. Members elected to Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences were Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman; Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) ; Sen. Stuart Symington (D-Mo.); Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.); and Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.). (CR, 1/28/71, S406)
Magellanic Premium of American Philosophical Society was presented to jpl mathematicians Paul M. Muller and William L. Sjogren at Society’s Annual General Meeting in Philadelphia. Muller and Sjogren were cited for “their discovery of lunar mascons leading to the first detailed gravimetric map of the moon.” Magellanic gold medal had been presented only 22 times since inception in 1790. Most recent recipient had been Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, in 1966. (jpl Release 604)
Apollo 14 astronauts and families visited both houses of Congress. Astronauts reported to Senate and House on mission. Commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., told Senate they had “a totally successful mission, not only from the areas of scientific and technical endeavors achieved, but also in the areas of international prestige and the tremendous posture of this country.” (CR, 3/2/7\, S2306-7)
Rep. Leonor K. Sullivan (D-Mo.), Chairman of Consumer Affairs Subcommittee of House Banking and Currency Committee, sent to ftc material on Franklin Mint, private corporation that produced silver medallions carried on Apollo 14 mission Jan. 31—Feb. 9. She suggested ftc investigate promotional use by Franklin of medallions, which had been melted down into ‘minimoons’—coins advertised as containing silver that had been to the moon. Washington Daily News said Rep. Sullivan’s action had been prompted by order issued by Apollo 14 commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Chief of Astronaut Office, that no more Franklin Mint medals be carried on NASA missions. Shepard had noted, News said, that Apollo 14 crew had carried 200 Franklin medallions in CM (which never left lunar orbit), had distributed 150 to friends and relatives on mission’s completion, and had returned 50 to Franklin with understanding they would be made into coins for members of Franklin Mint Collectors Society, but not used to promote sales. (Thomasson, Scripps-Howard, W News, 9/2/71, 24)
Lunar landing trainer crashed and exploded at Ellington AFB, Tex. NASA pilot Stuart M. Present parachuted to safety. Trainer was one of two 81.9-million craft used by Apollo 14 commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., in training. Preliminary investigation indicated cause of crash was loss of electrical power. MSC Deputy Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., later said accident should not affect Apollo 14 mission since lltv electrical system was “totally different from the one in the lunar module.” (msc Release 71-05)
U.S. and Soviet scientists met in Moscow to recommend joint projects and exchanges in near-earth space research, investigations of moon and planets, development of space meteorology, and space applications related to natural environment. Recommendations of three working groups representing NASA, and Soviet Academy of Sciences would be forwarded to Academy President Mstislav V. Keldysh and to Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, for consideration. U.S. participants were led by Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; Deputy Associate Administrator (Science) Leonard Jaffe; and noaa’s Director of National Environmental Satellite Services David S. Johnson. U.S.S.R. participants were headed by Dr. Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of Council for International Cooperation in Space Research of Soviet Academy of Sciences; Vice President Aleksander P. Vinogradov of Soviet Academy; and Deputy Chief L. A. Aleksandrov, Deputy Chief for Technology, Main Administration of Hydrometeorology Services, U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers, (nasa Release 71-147; NASA Int Aff)
President Nixon announced appointment of Coleman duPont Donaldson as member of Air Quality Advisory Board to succeed William O. Doub, who was appointed aec member Aug. 10. Donaldson, President of Aeronautical Research Assn, of Princeton, Inc., had been head of aerophysics section of naca Gas Dynamics Laboratory. He had worked recently on development of techniques for computing dispersal of chemically reacting pollutants in atmosphere and generation of turbulence. Work had been supported by NASA and Environmental Protection Agency. (PD, 10/25/71, 1426)
faa plan to create v/stol Special Projects Office to formulate and maintain development plan for v/stol program, provide executive management of faa v/stol r&d, and make economic studies and market analyses of v/stol sales and service potential was announced by John H. Shaffer, faa Administrator. Jerold M. Chavkin, Special Assistant to Associate Administrator for Engineering and Development, would be acting Director (faa Release 71—24)
Apollo 15 Astronauts James B. Irwin, Alfred M. Worden, and David R. Scott addressed National Press Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., before flying to New York for official welcome by city and appearance at U.N. Scott called for greater cooperation in space and said he looked forward to flight with Soviet cosmonaut. “I know six cosmonauts personally, and I would be glad to fly with any one of them any day. And I hope we get that chance.” Scott said core sample 3 m (8^ ft) long he had brought from moon contained 55 separate layers of soil that illustrated last 2.4 billion yrs of lunar history. Layers, discovered through x-ray examination, would show changes occurring over billions of years in sun’s radiation as it hit lunar surface. Later, in telephone interview with Washington Post, lrl scientist Dr. John F. Lindsay said layers ranged in thickness from 12.7 mm (1/2 in) to 127 mm (5 in) with each stratum probably representing different meteorite impact on lunar surface. While no analysis of core could be made until it was opened by geologists in January, Dr. Lindsay said x-rays had indicated that Scott had not drilled through solid rock, (upi, NYT, 8/24/71, 25; Auerbach, W Post, 8/24/71, A3)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) introduced amendment to S. 32, Conversion Research, Education and Assistance Act of 1971, to establish New Cities Research and Experimentation Administration. Agency would employ defense and aerospace personnel. (CR, 10/13/71, S16259-63)
Langley Visitor Information Center was dedicated in formal ceremonies at LaRC. Dr. James C. Fletcher attended, in first official visit of new NASA Administrator to any NASA center. Rep. Thomas N. Downing (D-Va.) said in dedication speech: “Space flight has opened up new vistas of flight and of the mind to understand the universe and our place in it. Our technology has become the world’s best and has brought us prosperity in a highly competitive environment.” Dr. Fletcher said center would give public broad understanding of what was happening in aerospace technology. Science was “part of our everyday life.” Technological society would continue “for the next 100 or perhaps 1,000 years.” Center displayed model aircraft, model spacecraft, lunar sample, and suit used by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., while training for Apollo 14 mission. (Langley Researcher, 5/28/71, 1; 6/11/71, 1: Text)
Tenth anniversary of President Kennedy’s message to a joint session oj Congress urging that the United States “commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth.” The goat was achieved when Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, on the Apollo 11 mission, became the first man to set a foot on the lunar surface, at 10:56 pm edt, July 20, 1969. mary aim of passive seismic experiment was to discover where moon-quakes occurred. “So far we have identified 11 zones in which moon-quakes occur, hut one of these is particularly active, accounting for about 80 percent of the energy we record.” Source might be “an isolated pocket of magma under pressure at depths between 30 and 400 miles [50 and 600 km],” Third seismometer, to be placed on moon by Apollo 15, was expected to provide data as to whether all 11 zones corresponded to same source mechanism; i.e., small magma reservoirs. Active zone fell on line that bisected Apodo 12 and 14 seismometer stations, “so that makes 15 an exceedingly vital station to us. If we just get one perigee passage and a couple of these moonquakes before station 12 or 14 ceases to function, we’ll have taken quite a step forward.” Apollo 15 would be at edge of prominent mascon basins, Serenatatis and Imbrium. “We expect ... to impact an S-IVB smack in the middle of one of them, probably Serenatatis. So this will he the first time we get seismic waves propagating through one of these mascon features, and, hopefully, we will be able to say something about how its structures differ from the other mare we have been able to record seismic waves through.” Edward M. Davin, Program Scientist, Lunar Surface Experiments, said Apollo 12 magnetometer had been “very successfully recording a surprising magnetic field. . . . we now have a general model of the moon based upon three layers ... a crust, an inner layer, and a core.” Apollo 15 lunar surface magnetometer could determine “if there is any asymmetry in the magnetic field” and provide additional information on electrical conductivity that indicated thermal distribution of lunar interior. jpl scientist Dr. Conway W. Snyder said solar wind spectrometer experiment would he “measuring the weather in space. The solar wind which is a plasma—this is an ionized gas—is quite analogous to weather on earth. ... it is the phenomenon that determines what magnetic fields are in space, affects cosmic rays, and generally is the fundamental entity in space once you stop considering the planets themselves.” With addition of second spectrometer on moon “we hope to be able to start making some definite interpretations of the very complicated kind of plasma effects that go on the moon.” Suprathermal ion detector experiment was described by Rice Univ. scientist Dr. Kent Hills. Apollo 12 and 14 ion detectors had revealed ion clouds that were not lunar-oriented hut had been formed elsewhere “from an expanding neutral gas cloud.” With Apollo 15 experiment, third station north of other two would give “extended distance with which to investigate these things and ... a different direction.” Cold cathode gauge experiment would indicate amount of gas on moon, Dr. Francis S. Johnson of Univ. of Texas at Dallas said. Ion detector already on moon had detected gas clouds in which concentration sometimes increased 100 times. With second gauge “we hope that there will be the prospect of seeing the same event on two gauges, and then we will be able to tell quite a lot more about where these gas sources would be and also learn something about how they propagate across the lunar surface.” Heat flow experiment, with 3-m (10-ft) drill, was to measure amount of heat coming from interior of moon, Columbia Univ. astronomer Dr. Marcus E. Langseth said. Measurement would be made by monitoring heat budget in near-surface material (lunar regolith) over one year with thermometers on probes about 2 m (6 ft) below lunar surface. Measurements could be useful in resolving contradictory data from magnetometer experiments on Apollo 12 and 14. Experiments outside Apollo 15 alsep package—laser ranging retro-flector, lunar field geology, and lunar soil mechanics—were discussed by Wesleyan Univ. astronomer Dr. James E. Faller; Donald A. Beattie, Program Manager, Lunar Surface Experiments; and Dr. James K. Mitchell of Univ. of California at Berkeley. Laser array would provide third leg of triangle formed by laser retroflectors on Apollos 12 and 14, improve ranging reliability from current stations, and “provide for greater efficiencies in telescope use time.” Geology experiment objectives were to sample Apennine Mountain front, study Hadley Rifle, examine mare, sample volcanic complex to north of landing site, and study cluster of craters southeast of landing site. Soil mechanics experiment would measure density, strength, compressibility and adhesive and cohesive characteristics of material on lunar surface. “The thing that is going to be of considerable interest is the lunar roving vehicle because if we can calibrate this vehicle ... a knowledge of vehicle tracks and power consumptions should provide . . . continuous record of the soil conditions as the crew moved from point to point.” (Transcript)	'
Collapsed craters formed in terrestrial basalt flows near Grants, N. Mex., exhibited size-frequency distributions similar to those for craters in terraces on inner walls of lunar crater Copernicus, arc scientists Ronald Greeley and Donald E. Gault reported in Science. Similarities suggested Copernicus craters had origin similar to basalt collapse craters. Scientists suggested that interior terraces of Copernicus were lava flows through fractures during postimpact adjustments after formation of Copernicus. (Science, 2/5/71, 477-9)
Sen. Edward W. Brooke (R-Mass.) introduced S. 1805, “to provide relocation assistance, training assistance, and interest supplements to adversely affected workers separated from their employment because of the termination of defense and space contracts.” (CR, 5/6/71, S6341)
Marine* 9, launched, from the Eastern Test Range on a 398-million-fdlometer (247-million-mile) direct-ascent trajectory, headed toward the planet Mars. Encountering Mars Nov. 13, the spacecraft would be the first to orbit a planet other than earth. Mariner 9—weighing 1000 kilograms (2200 pounds) and spanning almost 7 meters {22% feet) with its solar panels extended—would orbit Mars 90 days to study the atmosphere and surface in detail and map 70 percent of the surface. during 1971 opportunity; Mariner 8 (Mariner-H) launch attempt May 8 had failed because of malfunction in Centaur stage of booster. Scheduled for arrival at Mars on Nov. 14, Mariner 9 would make detailed study of Martian surface and atmosphere and map 7G^o of surface during planned 90-day orbit of planet. Launch vehicle performance and spacecraft injection were nominal. Spacecraft separated from Centaur, deployed four solar panels at 6:40 pm, and locked sensors on sun at 7:16 pm, soon after leaving earth’s shadow. About four hours into flight Canopus sensor was energized and spacecraft rolled 55° and locked onto star Achernar. Canopus acquisition was achieved at 10:26 pm and spacecraft would remain in sun-Canopus orientation for mission except during maneuvers. All spacecraft systems were operating normally. Mariner 9 weighed 1000 kg (2200 lb) at launch and carried six scientific experiments: infrared radiometer to measure surface temperature; uv spectrometer to investigate composition and structure of atmosphere; infrared interferometer spectrometer to measure surface and atmospheric radiation; S-band occultation experiment to study pressure and structure of atmosphere; TV cameras to transmit low-and high-resolution photographs of surface; and experiment to investigate Martian gravity field. Orbit of spacecraft was designed to guarantee it would not hit Mars for at least 17 yrs, to avoid contamination of planet before studies on surface were made by landing spacecraft. ossa assigned project responsibility to Jpl, including mission operations and tracking and data acquisition. Launch vehicle was responsibility of Lenc, with contractor General Dynamics Corp. Convair Division, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 71—75) May 30-June 6: Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa during visit to France attended Paris Air Show; inspected aerospace facilities at Bretigny, Toulouse, and Salon-de-Provence, and attended reception by Mayor of Dijon, (nasa Release 71-84; msc pio)
Washington Post editorial commented on plans for new Air and Space Museum: “We are glad that skyrocketing costs have brought the proposed National Air and Space Museum down to earth. The trouble with the design architect Gyo Obata prepared several years ago was not only that it would now cost $70 million to build. It was also far too grandiose, bold and ambitious.” U.S. air and space accomplishments “have a very prominent place in the hearts of the American people . . . they should also have a prominent place in the nation’s capital. But that is not to say that we need or want a monumental aircraft hangar.” Museum Director, Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins, had described new museum as “national center for education about the science and technology of flight and its economic, social, cultural and political meaning.” New model, Post said, “shows a pleasing and interesting structure that is well behaved. ... If it lacks architectural excitement, that is not what we want on the Mall.” Post also published letter from Gilmore D. Clarke, former Chairman of Commission of Fine Arts, protesting construction of Air and Space Museum on Mall, “on a site of restricted size whereon the structure cannot be enlarged in the course of years as the science of aviation and outer space technology advances. Whatever is built will, within a decade or two, prove to be too small,” (W Post, 11/23/71, A18, A19)
Dr. Donald L. Holmquest, scientist-astronaut selected in August 1967, had been granted one-year leave from NASA for teaching and medical research at Baylor Univ. School of Medicine in Houston, NASA announced. Dr. Holmquest would pursue “sub-specialty studies in the field of nuclear medicine in addition to general medical research and research related to NASA programs, such as a more convenient method of measuring changes in body calcium.” He would return to astronaut program May 15, 1972. (msc Release 71—73)
USAF had ordered new flying procedures to reduce structural wear and tear on C—5A cargo aircraft, New York Times reported. “Highly unusual program for extending a plane’s useful life” was additional to “more routine work of beefing up the wings in areas that show signs of being the least durable.” There were indications that C—5A’s structural needs could grow beyond usual level for new aircraft. “If so, huge new outlays could be added to the already massive costs that have made the aircraft a focus of debate.” C-5A had already overrun initial total cost estimates by $1.2 billion. Latest figure of $4.6 billion was for diminished fleet of 81 instead of 120 aircraft, which were to have cost $3.4 billion. (Witkin, NYT, 12/26/71, 46) Symposium on “Astronomy from a Space Platform” held Dec. 27—28 included papers by astronomers, space program planners, electronics specialists, optical designers, and researchers. NASA Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider, presented plans for Skylab solar astronomy experiments. Dr. George H. Ludwig, Chief of gsfc Information Processing Div., analyzed tradeoff between earth-based and space-based data processing in astronomy missions. Dr. William F. Hoffman of nasa Institute for Space Studies discussed next-generation infrared space astronomical instruments and discoveries already made in infrared region. Panel chaired by Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, reviewed symposium on Dec. 28. Panel also included Dr. Karl Henize, astronaut-astronomer. (Program; Science, 10/15/71, 11/19/71; 1/7/72; NYT, 1/2/72, 3:9; NASA Hist Off)
Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb (left), developer of nasa’j supercritical wing, congratulated test pilot Thomas C. McMurtry after the successful first flight of the wtng on the TFSA jet aircraft. Program Manager John G. McTigue looked on. The new airfoil shape, undergoing tests at the Flight Research Center, was designed to reduce buffeting at high subsonic speeds and permit increased aircraft performance. dling qualities. Aircraft reached 3000-m (10 000-ft) altitude at 220 and 300 knots, (nasa Proj Off)
Tenth anniversary of the first manned space flight, made by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin in the Vostok 1. In the April 14, 1961, photo Gagarin and US.SJl. Premier Nikita Khrushchev, standing atop the Lenin-SlaUn Mausoleum, responded to a welcome by crowds during a ceremony in Moscotc’s Red Square, (Photo by courtesy of the National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution.) In letter to Pravda, group of Soviet cosmonauts said “it is our opinion that businesslike cooperation of space researchers of different countries, including the U.S.S.R. and the United States, should develop and grow stronger in the interests of peace and friendship among the peoples of our planet.” Soviet Academician Boris N. Petrov said in article reprinted in a number of Soviet journals that “main trend of the next development of cosmonautics and space exploration . . . will probably be as follows: Further investigation of near-Earth space, studying the Earth from space for purposes of space meteorology, geology, agriculture, oceanology, and marine and air navigation. The task of constructing space exploration facilities and the usage of outer space for peaceful purposes is the favorable basis for fruitful international cooperation wherein both big and small countries can effectively participate.” U.S.S.R. had “always directed its efforts into an arena of peace and international cooperation. . . . The time is not behind the mountains when the remarkable idea about construction of long-duration, piloted orbital stations will be implemented.” Soviet Military Review editorial said Soviet space program had demonstrated “the benefiting the whole of mankind and the contribution to worldwide progress. The Gagarin flight, as all subsequent achievements of Soviet space exploration, demonstrated the organizing and guiding role of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and the inexhaustible potentialities of the socialist social system and of the Soviet economy, science, and technology. Consistency and purposefulness are a feature of the Soviet program of exploration in outer space, on the Moon and on the planets of the solar system.” (Yuenger, C Trib, 4/13/71; Shabad, NYT, 4/13/71; upi, W News, 4/12/71; upi, LA Her-Exam, 4/12/71; SBD, 4/12/71, 263)
faa—dot program to lower base of positive control airspace to 5486 m (18 000 ft) over entire U.S. by end of 1971 was announced by faa Administrator John H. Shaffer. Purpose was to reduce potential for midair collisions. Current positive control base was between 5486 and 18 288 m (18 000 and 60 000 ft) over northeastern and north central U.S. and between 7315 and 18 288 m (24 000 and 60 000 ft) over remainder of conterminous 48 states, (faa Release 71-50)
New civilian program to “absorb the nation’s technical talent, respond to our unmet social needs, and enlist widespread enthusiasm and support” was proposed by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) in speech before National Society of Engineers meeting in Washington, D.C. “The development of new cities may be the important challenge we face, because it dramatizes the need for new research and engineering in the way the challenge of the Soviet Sputnik spurred the American space program in the late fifties and early sixties.” (Text)
Dr. Dudley G. McConnell, Assistant Executive Secretary in NASA Office of Administrator, became Director of Office of Scientific and Technical Information in NASA Office of Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization, (nasa Release 71-142) July 22; nasa and afcrl scientists would measure plume from Apollo 15 during launch July 26 in attempt to solve mystery of Apollo 12 lightning strike during Nov. 14, 1969, launch, afsc announced. Measurements were part of Lightning Strikes to In-Flight Missiles program to test conductivity and electrical field breakdown strength on Minute-man and Atlas missiles. Scientists theorized that exhaust plume acted as electrical conductor and might have influenced electrical fields in thunder clouds and provoked lightning stroke. afcrl project scientist John L. Heckscher said usaf tests showed that “the rocket plume acts as a good conductor of electricity—like a wire . , . stretched from the rocket to the ground. And, should the rocket enter a thunder cloud, it would act like a lightning conductor. In the Apollo 15 launch we’re primarily interested in the effective length of the conducting plume. The rocket is 363 feet [110 m] long, and the visible portion of the plume, which contains incandescent carbon particles and other burning matter, is perhaps another 500 ft [152 m] of good conductor. However the trailing invisible portion may also be electrically conductive and that’s what we want to find out.” (afsc Release 180.71)
U.S. patent No. 3 608 844, for self-deploying arm to serve as spacecraft boom or antenna, was granted to GSFC engineers William T. Tumulty, Jr., and Wayne P. Sours. Called Minimech, device could also retrieve objects from burning building, serve as escape chute, or erect itself as instant tent pole or instant plumbing. It could be made from various materials depending on purpose. (NYT, 10/2/71; Pat Off pio) Tetr 3 (tetr-d) Test and Training Satellite, carried pickaback on Delta 2nd stage, was ejected into orbit with 571-km (354.8-mi) apogee, 391-km (243-mi) perigee, 94.3-min period, and 33.0° inclination. Primary objective of 45-lb (20.4-kg) secondary payload was to test Manned Space Flight Network and train msfn personnel. Second-stage anomaly of launch vehicle separated spacecraft at pitch angle outside normal sun acquisition limits. For eight hours following orbital insertion, ground controllers manually commanded spacecraft to despin. Pitch angle was then changed to place it within automatic acquisition range. Sail section was commanded to acquisition mode and sail acquired and locked onto sun at approximately 2:00 pin edt. Batteries were then charged. Orbit would permit observations for more than a year. Oso 7, improved over earlier osos, provided for increase in experiment size and weight and power and extended capability in pointed mode, including stability and pointing during night portion of orbit. It was spin-stabilized; weighed 636 kg (1403 lbs); carried six scientific experiments; and had two main sections—wheel (lower), which carried nondirectional scanning experiments and basic support equipment, and sail (upper), which carried pointed experiments. Experiments, designed to continue and extend work of preceding oso spacecraft, were provided by gsfc, nrl, mit, Univ. of New Hampshire, and Univ. of California (San Diego). Oso 7 was 8th in series of 11 OSO spacecraft designed to provide direct observations of sun during most of 11-yr solar cycle. Oso 1 (launched March 7, 1962) and Oso 2 (launched Feb. 3, 1965) had passed their six-month lifetimes and together provided more than 8600 hours of scientific information, oso-c (launched Aug. 25, 1968) had failed to reach orbit when booster malfunctioned. Oso 3 (launched Mar. 8, 1967) and Oso 4 (launched Oct. 18, 1967) transmitted on command only. Oso 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1969) had both tape recorders and seven of eight experiments operating satisfactorily after six months in orbit. Oso 6 (launched Aug. 9, 1969) was relaying information from all seven experiments. OSO program was managed by gsfc under ossa direction, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 71-163; Spacetvam, 10/5/71)
NASA, faa, and usaf began joint runway research program at Wallops Station to evaluate methods for measuring runway slipperiness at military and civil airports and improve techniques for estimating aircraft performance on runways that become slippery when wet. Tests would be followed by similar measurements at Houston Intercontinental Airport, Lubbock (Tex.) Regional Airport, Edwards afb (Calif.), Seattle-Tacoma International Airport, and John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York, faa Boeing 727 aircraft instrumented by LaRC would be used for flight portions of program, usaf C-141 aircraft would carry personnel and equipment. Runway surface measurements would be made by mu-meter—friction measuring device provided by usaf—and diagonally braked automobile developed by NASA at LaRC. (nasa Release 71—190)
Twenty-fifth anniversary of invention of computer by Dr. J. P. Eckert and Dr. John W. Mauchly of Univ. of Pennsylvania. New York Times editorial Aug. 9 commented on anniversary: “Man’s invasion of space, up to and including Apollo 15’s latest feats, would have been impossible without computers. So would much of the rest of modern science and technology.” (Smith, NYT, 8/4/71, 43: NYT, 8/9/71, 28)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.) resigned from House Committee on Science and Astronautics to take seat on House Ways and Means Committee. (Off of Rep Karth)
William M. Allen, Boeing Co. Chairman, received 1970 Robert J. Collier Trophy during Washington, D.C., ceremonies. Citation was to “the Boeing Company as leader of the Industry-Airline-Government team which successfully introduced the 747 into commercial service with particular recognition to Pratt & Whitney division of the United Aircraft Corporation and to Pan American World Airways.” (naa Release)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) issued statement that C-5A program was expected to cost $4.9 billion, increase of $300 million over 1970 figures: “Taking into account that the program has been reduced from 120 planes to 81, we find an overrun of $2.2 billion. On a unit basis, the costs have risen from $28 million originally estimated for each C-5A to $60 million, an increase of over 100%.” (Text)
Boeing Co. Chairman William M. Allen received National Transportation Award of silver bowl from Vice President Spiro T. Agnew during Washington, D.C., ceremonies. Award was for Boeing’s construction of 747 jumbo jet aircraft. (AP, B Sun, 5/22/71)
Tenth flight of M2—F3 lifting body, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, was prematurely terminated when ignition malfunction in two of four rocket engines caused shutdown of remaining engines. Small fire that started in base area of vehicle during fuel jettison was extinguished when jettisoning was stopped. Vehicle made hard landing at emergency site on Rosamond Dry Lake. Purpose of flight was to evaluate stability and control at mach 1.0 and to evaluate reaction control augmentation system, (nasa Proj Off)
Senate confirmed nomination of Dr. James R. Schlesinger and William O. Doub as members of aec. (CR, 8/6/71, D845)
usaf’s X-24A lifting body, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 27th flight after air launch from B—52 aircraft over frc in joint nasa—usaf program. Objectives of powered flight were to determine lateral-directional derivatives with rudder bias at 2° toe out, evaluate handling qualities with y accelerometer feedback and power on, determine transonic pitch damping, and obtain upper-flap pressure with upper flaps at 13°. Although only three of four engine chambers ignited, most objectives were achieved, with vehicle reaching 19 500-m (64 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.1. (nasa Proj Off)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced faa was considering major policy change to permit establishment of FAA facilities and services at privately owned airports open to public. Such facilities and services were restricted to publicly owned airports. FAA Administrator John H. Shaffer said policy change would be “in accord with faa’s assigned mission and responsibility of assuring safety and efficiency of all civil aircraft operations and of promoting air commerce and civil aeronautics.” (faa Release 71—110)
Wapakoneta, Ohio, birthplace of Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, celebrated second anniversary of first moon walk by Armstrong with display of flags and model of lm on concrete blocks on street comer. For third anniversary, in 1972, Armstrong expected to return to home town for dedication of $l-million Armstrong Museum being constructed at edge of town. Daniel R. Porter, Director of Ohio Historical Society, had said museum would feature Ohio’s contributions to aerospace age from early balloon ascents through achievements of Wright brothers, who had lived in Ohio, to space exploits of Ohioan Astronaut John H. Glenn. Exhibits would include experimental aircraft flown by Armstrong as test pilot, gallery of flight artifacts, “nasa Room” containing space travel exhibits, and “infinity cube,” mirrored room with lighting to give effect of projection into infinity. (Wilford, NYT, 7/21/71, 22)
Delegation of congressmen watched Apollo splashdown from onboard recovery ship for first time. Congressmen—prevented from attending previous manned space splashdowns by limited space on ships and expense of flying them from Washington, D.C., to mid-Pacific—were flown to U.S.S. Okinawa from Hawaii by helicopter. Congress was not in session. Watching Apollo 15 splashdown were Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight; Rep. Edward P. Bolane (D-Mass.); Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.); Rep. Richard T. Hanna (D-Calif.); Rep. Joseph M. McDade (R-Pa.); and Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R-Ohio). (W Post, 8/8/71, A10)
European interest in U.S. space program had “with notable exceptions” dwindled since Apollo IPs first lunar landing and “trouble-fraught” Apollo 13, New York Times said. Despite extensive press and TV coverage, Europeans had taken Apollo 14 for granted. “In some countries local events overshadowed man’s third visit to the moon,” but in West Germany opinion poll had shown that 64% favored continuation of manned space flights. Frankfurter Rundschau editorial had said, “What Shepard and Mitchell carried off couldn’t have been done by a Lunokhod.” Polish newspapers had given equal prominence to Lunokhod 1 and Apollo 14, but stressed technological feat of unmanned vehicle. Soviet press had highlighted Apollo 14 difficulties to suggest superiority of unmanned vehicles. Soviet man in street “seemed bored with space exploration, although some Russians went out of their way to ask Westerners about the United States moonshot.” Komsomolskaya Pravda, Soviet youth daily, had praised astronauts’ “indisputable bravery.” In U.K. Apollo 14 had been overshadowed by unrest in Northern Ireland and collapse of Rolls-Royce Ltd. Live TV coverage of Apollo 14 had been less than of previous Apollo missions. Earthquake and civil disorders had crowded Apollo 14 from front page of Italian newspapers, and Feb. 7 power blackout in New York had received as much space as launch. Italian radio and TV coverage had been thorough but audiences seemed smaller than for previous Apollos. Pope Paul VI had praised Apollo 14 as advance for all mankind. In France interest had waned as mission progressed. Newspapers and TV offered comprehensive coverage but “excitement of two years ago” had vanished. Spaniards, too, were losing interest in space exploration and public interest had declined in Hungary and Yugoslavia. Communist student, leader in Zagreb had said, “If the Americans and Russians would cooperate in space instead of carrying their rivalries to the moon, maybe there could be some scientific progress on earth and maybe the smaller nations could be helped to contribute their knowledge instead of being shut out of science by the expense.” (NYT, 2/10/71, 24)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa held 25-min press conference, televised from spacecraft during transearth coast. Mitchell called mission “quite a success” in spite of failure to reach Cone crater during second EVA: “I think the majority of the type rocks we would find at the rim were in the boulder field that we were working, although it was a disappointment, just as a matter of challenge, not to get up there. I think we accomplished the scientific objectives that we went for.” Shepard explained major problem was “the undulating terrain where you simply couldn’t see more than 100 to 150 yards [90 to 140 meters] away from you. Consequently, you were never quite sure what landmark would appear when you topped the next ridge. We were very surprised when we . . . approached the ridge which we thought to be the rim of Cone Crater, to find there was another one behind it. And that was the beginning of the real problem. As far as we were concerned, our only problem was the amount of time allotted for the excursion. To us it was just a matter of working against the clock. I don’t believe that we were disoriented or lost any time. I think if we had wanted to reach the top of the crater and did nothing else, that we could have done that within the time period allotted. But I think the method to which we reverted ... of collecting rocks from a point not quite near the top of the crater provided a lot more geologically and gave us a better cross-section of the rocks in the area . . . than had we gone to the crater and back and not collected as many rocks.” (NYT, 2/9/71, 26)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) on Senate floor questioned need for space shuttle and space station: “I have written to NASA on a number of occasions to ask whether . . . there is a need for the space shuttle-space station. All nasa has told me in reply is that first, the shuttle would enable us to continue to have an active space program, and second, it would reduce the costs of the space program. But why do we actually need it? What would it help us to accomplish that we could not otherwise accomplish? NASA seemingly has no answer to these questions.” (CR, 5/26/71, S7811—2)
usn P—3C Orion turboprop antisubmarine aircraft established world record for nonrefueled, long-distance flight for heavyweight turboprop aircraft. P—3C Orion, piloted by Cdr. Donald H. Lilienthal (usn), attained speed of 808 km per hr (502 mph). Previous record of 727 km per hr (452 mph) had been established by Soviet 11-18 in May 1968.	(AF Mag, 4/71,15)
Lack of Government policy for engineering was scored by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) in speech telephoned to meeting of Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers in Boston, Mass. Sen. Kennedy cited communications engineer who had led team that designed antenna for Apollo 15 lrv. Engineer had received special commendation from nasa for his leadership. “He also received a layoff notice from his firm shortly before he watched his antenna in action on the surface of the moon.” Engineers possessed great potential to contribute to Nation’s needs. “Engineers who can produce patents for their former employers can provide ideas which will benefit society. Engineers who can transmit data from the moon can help meet the data processing needs of our technological economy. And engineers who could have taught at our leading universities must have some lessons to offer of benefit to us all.” (CR, 11/10/71, S18003—4; Off of Sen Kennedy)
Appointment of Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., NASA Assistant Administrator for Policy, as Assistant Director for Research Applications, nsf, was announced by Dr. William D. McElroy, nsf Director. Dr. Eggers would head major new organizational unit of nsf designed to support research applied to environmental and societal problems, (nsf Release 71-118)
White House announced President Nixon would accept resignation of Dr. William D. McElroy as Director of National Science Foundation. Dr. McElroy would remain in position until February 1972. (PD, 7/26/71, 1078)
Retired LaRC scientist William J. O’Sullivan, who had conceived and developed Echo / comsat (launched Aug. 12, 1960), died at Newport News, Va., at age 55. He had received NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Award in October 1961 and National Rocket Club award for conceiving use of lightweight inflatable satellites for communications relay and air density studies. (W Post, 6/8/71, C8)
NAE announced election of 29 U.S. engineers to NAE, bringing total membership to 356. New members included l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), Commander of samso; Joseph F. Shea, Senior Vice President and General Manager of Raytheon Co. Equipment Div.; and Ronald Smelt, Vice President and Chief Scientist, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. (nae Release)
usaf’s X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by nasa test pilot John A. Manke, successfully completed 23rd flight at frc. Objectives of powered flight were to expand flight envelope to mach 1.5, determine lateral-directional derivatives, and determine longitudinal trim and lift-to-drag ratio with 40° upper flap setting and 0° rudder bias. Pilot performed pushovers, pullups, and aileron doublets at a number of angles of attack, (nasa Proj Off)
nasa’s M2—F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by test pilot William H. Dana, completed sixth flight after air launch from B-52 aircraft over frc. Objectives were to obtain M2—F3 and B-52 adapter compatibility by captive flight at 9000-m (30 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.46 to 0.67, expand flight envelope to mach 0.85 by climbing to 13 700 m (45 000 ft) and releasing M2-F3, obtain stability and control data at mach 0.8, investigate lateral phugoid, and obtain performance data at mach 0.8. Alternate flight plan was flown after one of three engine chambers malfunctioned, but vehicle reached mach 0.8 and most objectives were achieved, (nasa Proj Off)
William A. Anders, nasc Executive Secretary and Apollo 8 Astronaut, and Astronauts John L. Swigert, Jr., William R. Pogue, and Jack R. Lousma met with President Nixon at White House to report on their visits to 17 college campuses from October to December 1970. At White House press conference later, Anders said meetings with students had been “very positive.” Students had been “very curious about the Space Program.” (PD, 3/15/71, 475; Transcript)
faa Administrator John H. Shaffer, in letter to Airline Pilots Assn. President John J. O’Donnell, rejected alpa’s Nov. 1 request for accelerated five-year plan to install landing aids at U.S. airports. Shaffer said faa was legally unable “to accede to one limited group’s requests to the prejudice of other legitimate demands.” (Text)
GSA had said it would take bids on towers and equipment from two Saturn launch complexes at icsc, AP reported. Equipment from Complexes 34 and 37, to be sold in one lot, included cranes, boom hoists, 298 km (185 mi) of copper and steel cable, and five towers weighing total of more than 8.2 million kg (9000 tons). NASA had said complexes, which cost $147 million to build, were obsolete. Complex 34 was scene of Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire that took the lives of Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Roger B. Chaffee, and Edward H. White II. It was also launch site of Apollo 7 (Oct. 11-22, 1968), first manned mission in Apollo program. Complex 37 had been used for pre-Apollo unmanned missions. NYT, 12/24/71, C7; icsc Hist Off)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced appointment of John E. Hirten, former President of Institute of Planners of California, as Deputy Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Environment and Urban Systems. Hirten would succeed Michael Cafferty, who had returned to private law practice, (dot Release R—24)
U.S.S.R.’s largest and most advanced space tracking ship, 40 800 000-kg (45 000-ton), 230-m (760-ft) Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, had been unveiled in Odessa Harbor, New York Times reported. Ship was equipped with 100 antennas, including four large parabolic antennas for deep space communications, and could operate at sea for up to one year. (Shabad, NYT, 12/14/71, 11)
Establishment of joint nasa-dot Office of Noise Abatement was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Office would provide overall leadership and focal point for national program to attack noise problems of current and planned transportation systems. Charles R. Foster, head of dot Office of Noise Abatement, would be Director of joint office. Walter F. Dankhoff, Chief of LeRc Office of Operations and Planning, would be Deputy Director. New office would be responsible to Robert H. Cannon, Jr., Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Systems Development and Technology, and to Roy P. Jackson, nasa Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. It would also integrate programs with other agencies through Interagency Aircraft Noise Abatement Program and was fulfillment of some of recommendations from Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) Policy Study, (nasa Release 71-213)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) released GAO report that showed official cost estimates for F—14 usn jet fighter aircraft had risen from $11.5 million to $16.7 million per aircraft since March 1971. Sen. Proxmire said he was “drafting amendments” to military authorization bill before Congress “which would terminate” $5-billion F—15 project. (W Post, 9/9/71,2)
Smithsonian Institution’s Langley Gold Medal for Aero-dromics was presented to l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), samso Commander and former NASA Apollo Program Director, at ceremonies commemorating Smithsonian’s 125th anniversary. Medal, presented periodically for “meritorious investigations in connection with the sciences of aeronautics and astronautics,” was established in memory of Dr. Samuel P. Langley, aviation pioneer. Among recipients had been Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., in 1964 and Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in 1967. (Smithsonian Release SI-131-71) Gold Space Medal, Federation’s highest award for space achievement, was presented to Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., for “his courageous achievements and leadership as the Commander of Apollo 13.” In recognition of achievements of entire Apollo 13 crew, Astronauts Lovell, Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr., received iaf’s V.	M. Komarov Diploma for 1970. Diploma had been created in memory of Cosmonaut Vladimir M. Komarov, killed during Soyuz 1 mission April 24, 1967. Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov were awarded Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for 1970 for achievements as crew of Soyuz 9, June 2—19,1970. Gold Air Medal, highest iaf award for aeronautics, was presented to Capt. Henry T. (Dick) Merrill for contributions to aviation over 50 yrs. Capt. Merrill, civilian pilot, had flown Atlantic in 1935 and 1937. Concorde technical team of bac and Aerospaciale employees received group diploma for “valuable example set by . . . effective collaboration developed since 1962 between the engineers of British Aircraft Corp., Aerospaciale, Rolls-Royce and Snecma, operating as a single industrial team.” During conference lrv was presented to Swiss Transport Museum. (Letter to NASA Administrator, 6/10/71; letter to NASA Historian, 9/29/71; W News, 9/30/71, 42; Av Wk, 10/18/71, 9; bac pio; NAA PIO )
Interpretation of Gum Nebula as fossil of super nova, or exploded star, was reported in Astrophysical Journal by gsfc astronomers Dr. John C. Brandt, Theodore P. Stecher, and Dr. Stephen P. Maran and Kitt Peak National Observatory astronomer David L. Crawford. Gum Nebula, largest known object within Milky Way Galaxy, extended 60° across southern sky. Light took some 3000 yrs to cross it at speed of 299 000 km (186 000 mi) per sec. Previous theory had been that nebula glowed visibly because it contained “hot” stars that ionized surrounding hydrogen gas cloud. New interpretation, based on more accurate information on nebula’s distance from earth, indicated Gum Nebula was produced with pulsar during supernova explosion some 11 000 yrs ago when burst of radiation ionized surrounding hydrogen. (Astro-physical Journal, 2/1/71, L99-104)
St. Louis Post-Dispatch editorial described plight of McDonnell Douglas Corp. in “aerospace depression”: Total employment was off almost a third from high of 43 500 in mid-1967 and layoffs were continuing though at declining rate. “The loss of these 14,100 jobs is equivalent to a loss of income for all the families in a city of 35,000 persons. . . .” In one 30-day period, 1600 McDonnell Douglas workers had been laid off. “That is equal to 20 per cent of the workforce from a city the size of Berkeley, where the corporation has its headquarters.” Hope for McDonnell Douglas “rests in large measure with the company’s plans to produce the F—15 fighter-bomber. Already Congress is looking at this program with a wary eye, and . . . there are indications that production may be slowed as part of an increasingly cautious congressional approach to military spending.” (St Louis P—D, 6/21/71) Delegates discussed possibility of joint test flights to test requirements being developed for docking systems. Experiments “might be conducted between spacecraft of the Apollo and Salyut station types and between spacecraft of the Soyuz and Skylab programs,” NASA statement said. Soviet visitors were escorted on tour of msc by Astronauts Fred W. Haise, Jr., Thomas K. Mattingly II, and John W. Young. Several “flew” computerized simulators used to train Apollo astronauts to dock cm and lm for lunar landing, (nasa Release 71—111; Transcript)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa completed final dress rehearsal for scheduled Jan. 31 launch toward moon. Countdown began at 9:23 am est, with simulated liftoff on time at 3:23 pm est. (P Inq, 1/20/71, 3)
National Capital Planning Commission approved plans for Smithsonian Institution’s new $40-million National Air and Space Museum after hearing testimony from Museum Director Michael Collins, Apollo 11 astronaut. During 90-min debate, Commission member Paul Thiry described museum building, designed by architect Gyo Obata, as “industrial type” from “elevator-air conditioner school of architecture” lacking “classic proportions.” Collins said museum would possess “flavor of air and space.” Commission stipulated that building’s roof remain clear of mechanical equipment and that use of granite and marble be considered for construction. Final approval of plans would be considered following Nov. 17 meeting of Fine Arts Commission. (Combes, W Post, 11/5/71, A14)
X-24A lifting body reached its maximum speed of 1687 km (1048 mph) and 21 300-m (70 000-ft) altitude during 25th flight from frc. usaf aircraft, launched from B-52 aircraft, was piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke on powered flight to expand flight envelope, determine lateral-directional derivative with rudder bias at 2° toe out, and check lateral-acceleration feedback to control system, (nasa Proj Off; Pres Rpt 72)
In cable to Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), Jean-Jacques ServanSchreiber, member of French National Assembly, said Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport “looks to us.. . like an industrial Vietnam.” Every Concorde cost analysis had proved to be wrong. Cost had “multiplied here, as it will everywhere, four times the initial evaluations.” Facts had not been available until recent months. “Now the public eye is on the project and what it sees is bankruptcy.” (Kenworthy, NYT, 3/14/71, 21)
AP quoted NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs John P. Donnelly as saying NASA was not releasing some information on Soviet space program received through official channels. Clampdown was being made at U.S.S.R’s request and through “bilateral agreement.” AP said Donnelly had forbidden NASA engineers who had returned from NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences meeting on compatible docking system Nov. 29—Dec. 7 in Moscow to talk to press. Text of message telexed by Soviet scientists to nasa at JPL during exchange of Mars 2 and 3 and Mariner 9 information would be withheld at Soviet request. Soviet scientists had sent three such messages. (NYT, 12/16/71, 27)
New York Assemblyman Andrew J. Stein told Washington, D.C., press conference he had 76 cosponsors for bill which would ban supersonic transports from operating at New York’s John F. Kennedy International Airport. Bill, if passed, would make it illegal to operate any aircraft producing noise at levels above that of existing subsonic jets. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 1/5/71, A6)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced appointment of John E. Hirten, former President of Institute of Planners of California, as Deputy Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Environment and Urban Systems. Hirten would succeed Michael Cafferty, who had returned to private law practice, (dot Release R—24)
nas and nae released Jamaica Bay and Kennedy Airport: A Multidisciplinary Environmental Study. Report, prepared at request of Port of New York Authority, recommended against expansion of John F. Kennedy International Airport. “Any runway construction will damage the natural environment of the Bay and reduce its potential use for conservation, recreation, and housing.” (nas-nae Release 2/17/71)
nasa and Stanford Univ. Biomedical Technology Transfer Team (bateam), fourth bateam to be established and first formed at leading medical school, would apply NASA-generated aerospace technology to problems in cardiology, NASA announced. Team of five medical consultants and five aerospace engineering consultants under Stanford Univ. cardiologist Dr. Donald C. Harrison would concentrate on cardiovascular medicine. NASA had eight special teams—four working on environmental problems and four on biomedical activities, (nasa Release 71—154)
arc researchers had used sensors on twin-engine Cessna 401 light aircraft to detect and measure oil spills in Pacific Ocean off California, nasa announced. Sensors had detected slicks from heavy and light crude oils and light diesel oil. arc researchers John P. Millard and John C. Arveson had said approach should be applicable to satellite-borne sensor system, (nasa Release 71-42)
Widow of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom, one of three astronauts killed in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo spacecraft fire, filed $10-million suit in Brevard County Circuit Court against North American Rockwell Corp. and subsidiaries North American Aviation, Inc., Rockwell Standard Corp., and Rockwell Standard Co. Mrs. Betty Grissom charged negligence in fire which killed her husband and Astronauts Roger B. Chaffee and Edward H. White II. Suit asserted spacecraft did not have proper fire extinguisher system, had no emergency egress, and was “defective” because electrical wiring permitted electrical arc to flash in cabin. (AP, W Star, 1/19/71, BIO)
usn P—3C Orion turboprop antisubmarine aircraft, piloted by Cdr. Donald H. Lilienthal (usn), broke four “time-to-climb” records by climbing from brake release to 3000 m (9843 ft) in 2 min 59 sec, to 6000 m (19 685 ft) in 5 min 48 sec; to 9000 m (29 528 ft) in 10 min 31 sec, and to 12 000 m (39 370 ft) in 19 min 53 sec. Aircraft also posted new maximum altitude record for its class of 14 050 m (46100 ft). (AF Mag, 7/71, 15)
President Nixon announced 25 appointments to new National Advisory Committee on Oceans and Atmosphere and designation of Dr. William A. Nierenberg, Director of Scripps Institution of Oceanography, and Dr. William J. Hargis, Jr., Director of Virginia Institute of Marine Science, as Chairman and Vice Chairman. {PD, 10/25/71, 1429)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried gsfc payload to 115.9-km (72-mi) altitude to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in upper atmosphere by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, with all 19 grenades exploded and recorded as planned. Launch was part of series of similar experiments at three sites [see Jan. 7]. (nasa Rpt SRl) arc team of scientists headed by Dr. Charles P. Sonett announced that first measurements of moon’s interior indicated moon had basaltlike mantle 338 km (210 mi) deep surrounding “cool core of primordial olivine-like rock.” Measurements suggested moon’s outer layer was melted during first billion years of its 4.5-billion-yr history. Measurements had been made with arc magnetometer placed on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts and also made by Explorer 35 moon-orbiting satellite launched July 19, 1967. (arc Release 71—2) Cornell Univ. astrophysicist Dr. Thomas Gold said stratifications found in Apollo 12 lunar surface samples were caused by earth in same process that made near side of moon different from far side. Moon passed behind earth with face turned earthward for four days during regular monthly cycle and was bombarded by high-energy electrons in earth’s magnetic field. Dr. Gold said he and coworkers had reproduced lunar surface markings inside vacuum chamber by bombarding finely ground earth material and small amounts of lunar soil with high-energy electrons up to 800 ev. Dr. Gold’s theory of “electrostatic motion” was disputed at meeting by Univ. of California physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey. (Lannan, W Star, 1/12/71, Al) NASA announced plan to continue lunar exploration with unmanned robots after last Apollo manned lunar landing in 1972. Plan would cost minimum $1 billion. Robot vehicles would travel 965 km (600 mi) across lunar surface and return to earth with samples or would rendezvous with other robot spacecraft that could return samples to earth. NASA spokesman said, “We sincerely hope that collaboration with the Russians takes place in space. A common program to explore the moon with instrumented spacecraft remotely controlled from earth might be the best way to help that collaboration take place.” (O’Toole, W Post, 1/14/71, Al)	_	_ Dr. Gerald R. Taylor, msc scientist, described laboratory experiment in which three highly resistant strains of bacteria were killed within 10 hrs of contact with one core sample from a number of centimeters below surface of moon’s Sea of Tranquility. Micro-organisms in protein soup had been exposed to lunar soil. Dr. Narenda Bhandari of Tata Institute of Fundamental Research in Bombay, India, reported that analysis of cosmic ray tracks on moon had provided “conclusive proof” of existence in lunar soil of fossils from chemical elements far heavier than any previously discovered in nature or in laboratory. If verified, discovery would greatly extend periodic table of elements. (Wilford, NYT, 1/14/71, 9) Dr. P. Buford Price of Univ. of California at Berkeley, said during interview that Apollo 12 lunar samples might contain first real evidence of “magnetic monopoles,” basic force units that were to magnetism what electrons were to electricity. If their existence could be confirmed, it would mean rewriting books on magnetism and electrodynamics. Dr. Price’s group of scientists appeared to have found two fossil tracks of nuclear type of particles which, theoretically, could have been made by monopoles in two lunar cysts. (Lannan, W Star, 1/14/71, A3) Dr. Aleksander P. Vinogradov, Soviet academician and Director of Vernadsky Institute for Analytical Chemistry in Moscow, told conference U.S.S.R. would continue to explore moon with unmanned spacecraft and would attempt bolder missions in future. He believed U.S.S.R. would exchange lunar samples with U.S. beginning with samples of Sea of Fertility returned by Soviet Luna 16. He said main task for Lunokhod 1, Soviet moonwalker still on moon, was to determine how eight-wheeled vehicle could best move about moon and how it could best be used in future. “We discovered that the moonwalker can move in very large angles and can go down into craters at angles of 20 degrees. The mechanical qualities of this car are very good.” Dr. Vinogradov said Lunokhod 1 carried instrument to analyze soil, but device had not done so thus far. He described Luna l6 samples as bearing no evidence of water or life on moon. Drill used to dig samples had been stopped at 330 mm (13 in) below lunar surface because it hit rock. “We were afraid to send it any deeper.” Dr. Vinogradov described Sea of Fertility as “blackish powder” sprinkled with “cosmic beads.” Luna 16 sample was similar to soil brought back by Apollo 12 from Ocean of Storms and not very different from samples returned by Apollo 11 from Sea of Tranquility. Age of Sea of Fertility had been calculated at 4.6 billion yrs, older than some rocks returned by Apollo missions. (O’Toole, W Post, 1/15/71, Al) Dr. Paul W. Gast, chief of msc Earth and Lunar Sciences Div., reported discovery by msc scientists of “exotic components” in lunar soil believed to be fragments from primitive crust that covered moon 4.5	billion yrs ago. Fragments differed from other Apollo lunar samples and were thought to be pieces of crustal bedrock scattered by impact of meteorites pounding more ancient lunar highlands. Discovery, through chemical analysis, supported theory that moon once had hot, molten surface and that crust had hardened as it began cooling off. Discovery also helped explain why lunar soil was mostly one billion years older than lunar rocks. Dr. John A. Wood of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory described norite found in chemical analysis of five soil samples. Norite was lighter in color than most Apollo samples and did not appear to be chemically native to landing sites. Most norite represented “nearsurface material in an ancient lunar crust.” Coarser grained relative of norite might have come from “somewhat deeper in the moon— perhaps several miles.” If discovery proved true, samples would go back in age to beginnings of solar system. Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg—Cal Tech physicist who had dated Apollo 12 Sample 13, oldest rock yet found, at 4.5 billion yrs (other Apollo 12 rocks were about 3.4 billion yrs old)—said Sample 13’s oldest parts were granite that crystallized early in lunar history and could fie some of original crustal material and some of “magic component” that accounted for difference in ages of lunar rocks and soil. Dr. Wasserburg believed that fact there was always some missing ingredients in lunar soil meant soil contained debris from granites and other materials originating elsewhere on moon. Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo program chief seismic investigator, reported Apollo 12 seismometer was recording weak but frequent moon-quakes along rilles near landing site. He suggested rilles might be “fault zones,” where slight movements in lunar surface were occurring. (Wilford, NYT, 1/17/71, 4:7; Gast, msc)
Smithsonian Institution’s revived plans for construction of $40-million Air and Space Museum on south side of Mall in Washington, D.C., were described by Museum Director Michael Collins, Apollo 11 Astronaut, in interview published by Washington Post. Plans for building, to contain exhibit areas and galleries with displays on history of aviation and science and technology of flight, would be presented to National Capital Planning Commission in November. Collins said only best items in Smithsonian’s collection would be exhibited in new museum, designed by architect Gyo Obata, who had designed previous building that would now cost $70 million to construct. Collins said Smithsonian would ask Congress to appropriate funds for new building in FY 1972. (Scharfen-berg, W Post, 10/28/71, Bl)
Dr. Vasily V. Parin—Soviet physiologist, former President of Soviet Academy of Medical Sciences, and member of Soviet Academy of Sciences—died at age 68 of liver ailment. Dr. Parin had been known primarily for his work during 1960s on human physiological problems during space flight and had authored studies on effect of weightlessness on functioning of heart and circulatory system. He had received Order of Lenin, U.S.S.R’s highest award, in 1963 for his work in developing Soviet medical science. (AP, NYT, 5/Yl/ll, 42) Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, testified June 15 on nasa policy on backup spacecraft and Centaur reliability: “In the manned program, all possible steps are taken to assure the safety of the astronauts. Single point failures are reduced to an absolute minimum. Missions are planned to build upon the previous missions so as to reduce the number of unknowns.” Within missions, “plateaus are established so that all systems can be checked out in real time prior to committing to the next plateau. Vigorous testing procedures coupled with redundancy and in many cases dual redundancy are adopted before a system is ‘man-rated.’ ” In Skylab “we are building a back-up workshop which will be brought right up to the point of actual checkout. This will permit us to proceed with the program even in the event that the first workshop would not be successfully launched. Similarly, we will have a single back-up Command and Service Module-Saturn IB capability for the three manned visits to the workshop.” Capability was built into program and was “key to the plan for a rescue capability in Skylab which we recently adopted.” In earth-orbital automated programs “we generally plan a series of related missions, using identical or similar hardware. If we have a mission failure, decisions will then be made, based on all available factors, whether we will (1) prepare and fly a specific back-up to the mission which failed, (2) modify succeeding flights ... to achieve the objectives, or (3) defer achieving the mission objectives to future years.” In planetary programs, with launch opportunities at only discrete intervals, NASA usually had provided for two identical launches. Each launch in dual mission was planned to complement its twin, while at same time serving as backup if twin were lost. This year Manner 9 was backup, flying hybrid mission. Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle had history of 3 failures out of 16 operational vehicles, without apparent relationship between failures, giving probability of success of 80% if based solely on past experience. Launch vehicles for automated missions—such as Scout, Delta, and Atlas-Centaur—were “complex systems without much redundancy, and cannot be expected to achieve reliabilities much greater than about 90% without very major and costly changes. They certainly cannot be considered ‘man-rated’ vehicles.” Addition of redundant systems would be investigated again but was not complete solution. Redundancy added weight, reduced payload capability, and was expensive. For launch vehicles of size of Titan-Centaur, which would carry Viking and Grand Tour payloads, additional redundancy might be practicable and desirable and would be actively studied. Major increase in reliability of achieving orbit would be one of important attributes of space shuttle. Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, on June 16 continued testimony on backup philosophy, expanding on application in ossa: “We do not schedule backup missions for observatory spacecraft. We always buy, and intend to fly, at least two flight units of a new series of observatory-class spacecraft. When we have a failure or a malfunction in a spacecraft or a launch vehicle we will always do everything possible to thoroughly understand and correct all other future missions which could conceivably be subject to a similar malfunction. When we have a failure we will always review the effect of the loss on the program, determine the alternative recovery plans by which we can attain the objectives of the lost mission, assess the cost and any other impact of those alternatives on the program and then decide which alternative to choose.” Vincent L. Johnson, Deputy Administrator for Space Science and Applications, testified June 17: “In the basic considerations which establish the philosophical approach to reliability of unmanned space vehicles, the over-riding necessity for protection of the lives of human passengers is absent. The result is an approach to reliability in which cost and simplicity play a much larger part. We have not imposed a requirement for total elimination of single point failure modes, but have concentrated upon reducing the probability of failure by careful design, parts application, major quality and reliability efforts, and, most importantly, tender loving care. Our launch vehicles . . . are characterized as simplex systems, implying lack of the complexity characteristic of redundancy.” (Testimony; Subcom Rpt, 10/71)
Appointment of John P. Donnelly, Vice President for Corporate Communications of Whittaker Corp., as nasa Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs effective Aug. 15, was announced by nasa. He would be responsible for development and direction of public affairs activities, including public information, public services, and educational programs. Acting Public Affairs chief since resignation of Julian W. Scheer March 22 had been Alfred P. Alibrando, Director, Public Affairs Div. (nasa Release 71-137; nasa Ann, 2/23/71)
Vanguard satellite whose launch had been attempted Dec. 6, 1957, was presented to National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution, by Dr. John P. Hagen, former director of U.S. igy satellite program. Spherical payload of Test Vehicle 3 (TV—3), first complete Vanguard launch vehicle with three live stages, had been thrown clear when vehicle exploded on pad. (nasa Hist Off; Vanguard—A History, SP-4202, 1970)
Lunar roving vehicle (lrv) which would transport astronauts John W. Young and Charles M. Duke, Jr., on moon during Apollo 16 mission had successfully completed prelaunch checks and been installed on lunar module for flight, KSC announced. Astronauts Young and Duke would make three excursions on LRV in Descartes area of moon during mission, scheduled for March 1972. Final approval of LRV flight readiness was given by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, after installation review. LRV was managed by msfc and was built by Boeing Co. (ksc Release 259-71)
Letter by Dr. John M. Logsdon of George Washington Univ., responding to criticism of his book The Decision To Go to the Moon, was published in Science. Book had been reviewed by L. Vaughn Blankenship in Science July 23, Logsdon wrote: “Blankenship reports that I find the Apollo decision ‘a good one1 and ‘evidence of a political system operating at its best,’ I do no such thing. I do suggest . . . that ‘the decision to go to the moon was a representative American action,’ and was the product of a process ‘typical of the way many major decisions are reached.’ ” (Science, 9/17/71, 1079-80)
President Nixon issued Proclamation 4060 Commemorating World Law Day. He said: “We can see many heartening evidences that law is becoming stronger and more just around the world under the pressures which reason and necessity exert. Within the nations, human rights and ecological wisdom continue to gain stature in the law. Among the nations, security and cooperation—on every front from space to the seabeds—are being enhanced through negotiations, treaties, and conventions. The United Nations is entering its second quarter of a century, and many other international organizations are working effectively through and for world law.” {PD, 6/21/71, 942) June 17—July 2: Fourteenth Plenary Meeting of Committee on Space Research (cospar) was held in Seattle, Wash. International meeting of scientists hosted by NAS included symposia and working groups on 1970 total solar eclipse, astronomical observations from space, use of stratospheric balloons in space research, and lunar lasers. Grumman Aerospace Corp. scientist Dr. Henry C. Courten, professor of astronomy at Dowling College, said mysterious tracks on photographic plates he made during 1966 and 1970 solar eclipses appeared to be of small planet or asteroid belt inside Mercury’s orbit. Cal Tech scientist and lunar expert Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg told cospar meeting four rocks gathered by Apollo 14 astronauts had ages ranging from 3.85 billion to 3.95 billion yrs. Ages were surprising “since it was anticipated that Fra Mauro would yield rocks of greater antiquity.” Discovery suggested that volcanism was active on moon far longer than had been thought and was still forming lunar crust more than 600 million yrs after moon came into being. It also suggested that Sea of Rains had been carved by collision 600 million yrs after moon’s formation, or 100 million to 150 million yrs later than lunar experts had originally believed. Soviet scientists Yuri G. Nefyuduv, L. I. Kakurin, and A. D. Yegorov said Soyuz 9 Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov “found it difficult to keep the upright posture and had to be assisted while walking” during first three hours after return from June 2-19, 1970, mission. “Next day . . . their walk was still inadequate and erect positions were maintained with great efforts.” When cosmonauts returned to physical activity, few days after flight, effects of prolonged weightlessness had proved temporary. Astronaut John W. Young represented U.S. astronaut corps at ceremony to honor 10th anniversary of first space flight by Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin. He asked, “What better tribute to the memory of Yuri Gagarin can we offer than the hope that the growing unity of efforts in space—which this cospar meeting so well exemplifies— may one day extend to all the Earth? (nas Release, 4/21/71; AP, W Post, 6/13/71, A7; O’Toole, W Post, 6/21/71, Al; upi, W Post, 6/28/71, A7; NASA Activities, 7/15/71,107) nas and nrc submitted to cospar United States Space Science Program, comprehensive summary of scientific research in space science in U.S. during 1970. Report included summaries of observations from spacecraft, sounding rockets, high-altitude balloons, and aircraft made or reported during 1970 and discussed flights planned for 1971. (Text)
Rep. William R. Cotter (D-Conn.) said in release to press that preliminary Gao audit of NR Rocketdyne Div. $24-million Saturn contract had shown “as much as $5 million . . . was diverted to underwrite crucial research on Rocketdyne’s winning design in the $500 million space shuttle main engine contract [awarded Sept. 1].” Cotter said audit, performed at his request, showed “that work performed under the Saturn contract influenced NASA’s Source Selection Board, the group which evaluated the space shuttle designs submitted by Rocketdyne, Pratt & Whitney and Aerojet General.” NASA Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization Daniel J. Harnett later told press NASA audit of space shuttle engine contract had shown “no unfair competition advantage was given to Rocketdyne.” (Text; AP, W Star, 12/19/71, E3)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar IT. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa held news briefing in Washington, D.C. Crew showed film and slides and described mission and preliminary results. To question on future of manned space flight Shepard said: “The relative comparison of the efficiency of the manned versus the unmanned systems, I think we tried over the years to show where we feel that man has his point, has his place in space . . . and with 14, certainly, there were several instances where basic reflexes, basic judgment, and human instincts made it a successful flight where it would not have been successful otherwise. “Obviously, we brought back a lot more rocks than the Lunokhod has brought back. But I don’t think that is the point. I think the point is that we have chosen to exercise part of the expenditures of our money along the areas that we have found to be successful; that is, manned flight. I think we have shown on the 14 . . . that manned space flight can contribute on a scientific basis and contribute efficiently when it comes to assessing the dollar value put on it.” (Transcript)
U.S. technological society was product of past r&d efforts, President. Charles A. Anderson of Stanford Research Institute said in Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial. Current assault on U.S. leadership in science and technology was “both external and internal.” Western Europe, Japan, and U.S.S.R. were progressing in areas traditionally controlled by U.S. “In radio astronomy, high energy physics and conventional energy research we have already been surpassed. Internally, a new national distaste for science and technology is undermining the national research and development effort.” {Av Wk, 10/18/71, 7) Dr. John W. Freeman, Jr., of Rice Univ. referred to results of Apollo 12 and 14 suprathermal ion detector experiments that had discovered water vapor on moon [see Oct. 15]. Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo program chief seismic investigator, said neither he nor Dr. Freeman could locate source of tiny moonquakes that released gas from beneath lunar surface, including water vapor seen March 7. Dr. Latham described sudden and large surge from lunar surface detected by seismometer in April during series of moonquake swarms. Though he knew of no volcano on moon, he compared event—largest moonquake yet recorded—to volcanic activity on earth, (msc Release 72-77; Maloney, H Post, 10/19/71; Brett, W Post, 10/21/71, F2)
LRL geologists Dr. William C. Phinney and Dr. Paul W. Gast described anorthosite rock from Apollo 15 sample bag No. 196 to press at msc lunar sample briefing. Dr. Phinney, praising crew’s descriptions of samples, said “as in all cases so far where we’ve looked at what the rocks are, it matches exactly what the astronauts said it was. It’s about fist size, 269 grams—%-lb—anorthosite . . . essentially pure plagioclase.” Grain was quite coarse, 1-cm (0.4-in) grains, “about the coarsest grain size of any lunar rocks that we’ve seen so far.” Its milky-white color suggested “that it has probably undergone a fair amount of stress, maybe a shock type of deformation.” Rock, popularly called “Genesis rock,” was significant because it supported hypothesis that moon had been extensively molten with anorthosite crystallizing from liquid, floating to top, and producing anorthositic crust. Although discovery did not prove hypothesis, Dr. Gast explained, it was “a long step in the direction” of determining moon’s origin. “If results on the dating of this anorthosite and some of the chemistry on it . . . turn out that all point to the fact that it is essentially 4.6 or 4.7 billion years old, which is the time that we think the moon formed, ... it gets to be rather difficult to argue with the hypothesis.” (Transcript)
Izvestia published Apollo 14 story filed by its New York correspondent claiming that cane presented as joke to Alan B. Shepard, Jr., before launch had become “symbolic” of entire mission. Report emphasized mission’s technical difficulties. (AP, W Post, 2/2/71, A6)
Tenth anniversary of U.S.S.R.’s Vostok 1, first manned space flight, piloted by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin. Anniversary was celebrated in Moscow with 6000 guests attending memorial meeting in Kremlin’s Palace of Congresses and with Soviet newspapers filled with articles commemorating Sight. At Moscow ceremony Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said U.S.S.R. was looking forward to time “when man will make interplanetary flights. Tremendous potentialities in the study of the earth’s natural satellite were uncovered by the flights of American astronauts to the moon and the development in our own country of new types of automatic lunar stations.” Successful operation of U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover represented start of new era envisioned by Soviet scientists, Keldysh said. U.S.S.R. would emphasize unmanned flights with particular stress on long-term orbiting space stations. Cosmonaut Andrian G. Nikolayev told meeting U.S.S.R.’s 1971-1975 economic plans called for 1‘fundamental development of scientific research, with a significant role foT lunar and solar investigation.”
msfc announced appointment of Dr. William R. Lucas, Director of msfc’s Program Development Directorate, as msfc Deputy Director, Technical, effective Feb. 15. Dr. Lucas’ position would be assumed by James T. Murphy in acting capacity, (msfc Release 71-25)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D-Ind.) introduced H.R. 9379, “bill to establish an Office of Technology Transfer.” He said: “As a nation we have enjoyed many valuable side-effects, spin-offs or ‘fallouts’ from [Federal] research. Many of the examples of the miracles of modern science, of technology transfer, the path from ‘science to sales’ come from the annals of NASA, largely because NASA has made a concerted effort to accomplish the transfer of their space technology to everyday usage and have publicized that effort especially well.” (CR, 6/23/71, H5825-6)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., received Golf Magazine's All-America Award for making first golf shot on moon during Apollo 14 mission (Jan. 31-Feb. 9). (AIT, 4/21/71, 57)	'
Development of surgical implement to simplify cataract removal with high-frequency vibration and pump to liquify and remove cataract and lens material was announced by LeRC. Hand-held instrument— developed by four-man LeRC team in cooperative program with Dr. William J. McGannon, prominent Cleveland eye surgeon—had been successfully tested on animals. NASA was seeking patent on instrument, which would reduce cataract operation time and patient’s convalescent period by minimizing stitching problem in most cases. Instrument made only small puncture, (nasa Release 71-203)
ComSatCorp announced election of John L. Martin, Jr., as Assistant Vice President for Domestic and Aeronautical Satellite Systems. (ComSat Corp Release 71-11)
Permanent appointment of Gustav E. Lundquist as Associate Administrator for Engineering and Development was announced by John H. Shaffer, FAA Administrator. Lundquist had been in acting capacity since January 1970. David R. Israel, former Deputy Director of Defense Communications Planning Group in DOD, had been named Director of newly created Office of Systems Engineering Management and Spencer S. Hunn had been named Director of National Airspace System Program Office in faa. (faa Release 71-2)
Foreign sources interested in buying sst development package had contacted dot, William, M. Magruder, Director of dot’s sst pro- ' gram, told press in Washington, D.C. Inquiries had come from Japanese trading firm Ataka, from Middle East source, and from West German source. Magruder said congressional leaders “have made no attempt to discourage” plan to seek package to recoup termination costs of sst program, estimated at between $97 million and $157 million, depending on whether airlines got back sst purchase deposits. (AP, B Sun, 3/29/71, A3)
Delivery of first operational automated radar terminal system (arts hi) to new control tower at Chicago’s O’Hare International Airport was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Computer-based system would be operational by mid-1971. Components, when added to existing airport surveillance radars, would permit display of vital flight information on radar scopes used by air traffic controllers. Alpha-numeric data tags would be attached to related aircraft target or “blip.” (faa Release 71—5)
Patent No. 3 603 433 was granted to msc technicians William H. Keathley and Clarence J. Wesselski for spacecraft emergency shock absorbers that might also be used in automobile bumpers. Disaster-avoidance device backed up cyclic deformation system in struts of Apollo CM couches. System, installed in spacecraft since Apollo 11 to absorb energy from over-propulsion at launch or unusually hard landing, consisted of tightly fitted washers on rod. Pressure against end washer pushed one after another along line as force decelerated. (Jones, NYT, 9/11/71, 33; Patent Off pio)
Regional conference at ARC explored application of aerospace technology to community and public problems. Procedures for locating and obtaining technological developments were outlined to potential manufacturers and users. Dr. Joel A. Snow, nsf Deputy Assistant Director for Science and Technology, discussed technology in changing society and application of research to national needs. NASA Technology Utilization Program was described by Jeffrey T. Hamilton, Director of Technology Utilization Office. Dr. Donald C. Harrison, Chief of Stanford Univ. Medical Center Cardiology Dept., discussed NASA-Stanford biomedical technology transfer project. Conference officials noted that of 1200 problems submitted to NASA biomedical and technology application teams to date, 200 had been brought to satisfactory solution through aerospace technology. (nasa Release 71-216; arc pio)
NAS held meeting on molecular constitutions of interstellar space. Dr. William J. Welch, Univ. of California at Berkeley astronomer, said 23 different molecules had been detected in interstellar space. Dr. Arno A. Penzias of Bell Telephone Laboratories said new radiotelescope at Kitt Peak, Ariz., had detected amount of carbon monoxide that “covers vast regions of space.” Detected carbon seemed “to play a disproportionately large role.” Dr. Benjamin M. Zuckerman of Univ. of Maryland said it might be possible that carbon monoxide was formed in shells around very young and very old stars from which it was ejected into space. (Lyons, NYT, 10/27/71, 51)
Sen. Robert P. Griffin (R-Mich.) introduced for Sen. Edward J. Gurney (R-Fla.) S.R. 101, “to authorize and request the President to issue a proclamation designating July 20, 1971, as ‘National Moon Walk Day.’ ” (CR, 5/18/71, S7165)
usaf X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke in joint program, completed 21st flight from frc. Objectives of powered flight were to expand flight envelope to mach 1.5, determine lateral-directional derivatives, and obtain longitudinal trim and, lift-to-drag data with 40° upper flap at 0° rudder bias. Two of four engines were shut down because of sticky angle-of-attack indicator; alternate two-engine flight plan was followed and completed successfully. (NASA Proj Off)
President Nixon accepted resignation of Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs effective April 11. Collins would become Director of Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. {PD, 3/1/71, 384)
After meeting with President Nixon at White House, Secretary of the Treasury John B. Connally, Jr., announced President’s intention to send to Congress request for legislation providing $250 million in loan guarantees for Lockheed Aircraft Corp. {PD, 5/10/71, 738)
House Committee on Armed Services’ subcommittee investigating Dec. 30, 1970,	crash of usn F—14 Tomcat fighter aircraft during test flight at Grumman facility in Calverton, N.Y., received communication from identified source containing 13 allegations of defects and deficiencies in F—14A design, manufacture, testing, and administrative controls. Rep. F. Edward Hebert (D-La.), as Chairman of investigation subcommittee, ordered full inquiry into charges. (Subcom Rpt, 12/20/71)
Visit to U.S. by Soviet Americanologist Georgy Arbatov reflected continuing tension between U.S. and U.S.S.R., Joseph Kraft said in Baltimore Sun. While Arbatov had been received cordially “in very high places,” difficulties arose “whenever conversations came round to specifics.” Subject of strategic arms had been particularly thorny, “for the Russians appear to be forcing the pace in the arms race with the new holes apparently set out for deployment of an improved SS-9 or some other monster weapon.” (B Sun, 5/11/71, 17)
Rep. F. Edward Hebert, Chairman of House Armed Services Committee, announced that he would move to block $806-million procurement funds for usn F-14 jet fighter aircraft until usn solved overcost problems. Funds were included in $21.9-billion military weapons authorization bill before House. (AP, W Post, 6/16/71, A2) Grumman Aerospace Corp. released statement saying it would be “very appropriate” for Congress to stop funding usn’s F-14 jet fighter aircraft until cost-overrun problems were settled. (W Star, 6/16/71, A4)
William M. Magruder, Director of sst Development for dot, told press in Washington, D.C., that Ataka and Co. of Japan had suggested it could obtain financing of $500 million or more from major Japanese industrial concerns to resurrect SST program. In return Ataka would become 50% partner in enterprise. On May 23, however, Ataru Takizawa, Vice President of Ataka and Co., said in Tokyo there was no truth to report that his firm made exploratory proposal to revive U.S. sst program. (Aug, W Star, 5/22/11% AP, W Post, 5/23/71)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for 1970 to Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Other recipients were RAF Squadron Leaders Graham Williams and Leslie Lecky-Thompson, first to cross Atlantic nonstop in vtol aircraft, and Turi Wideroe of Norway, first female airline pilot. (W Post, 5/20/71, A28)
U.S. would resurrect sst program and have “production model by 1982,” fa A Administrator John H. Shaffer predicted in Washington, D.C. Shaffer, who had recently returned from world tour of faa installations, said France expected to sell three Concordes to Chinese Communists and Romania was expected to attempt purchase of several used U.S. jetliners, (upi, W Post, 11/27/71, A9)
Secretary of State William P. Rogers and Soviet Foreign Minister Andrey A. Gromyko signed two nuclear control agreements in formal ceremony at State Dept. Agreements called for improved “hotline” communication between Washington and Moscow via comsats and immediate notification of any unexplained incident involving possible detonation of nuclear weapon which could cause outbreak of nuclear war. (Smith, NYT, 10/1/71, 1) During September: Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, said in interview published by Air Force Magazine that nasa planned to let hardware contracts for space shuttle by spring 1972, contingent on White House approval. NASA had decided in summer to extend preliminary design contracts by four months to “look more intensively at alternative configurations,” examining phased approach for building reusable upper stage first and testing and using it with interim expendable booster, instead of developing reusable booster at same time. Reevaluation of design concepts was stirred by need for additional analyses and research and by need to trim expenditures “in a given year.” nasa’s viewpoint on space in this decade was “to bring the program down to earth, both figuratively and literally. We must ask ourselves the question: Is what we are doing useful in alleviating our problems on the ground?” Crucial criteria of each prospective space program were “whether it will pay for itself by doing useful work; whether it can be expected to produce valuable scientific knowledge that can only be obtained from space; whether it is important to national security; and whether it will catalyze valuable new technologies or lead' to other practical results.” For shuttle “answers to all these questions is 100 percent affirmative.” (AF Mag, 9/71, 53-61)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached 20 400-m (67 000-ft altitude) and mach I.	05 during ninth flight from frc. Objectives were to determine aileron effectiveness at speed greater than mach 0.9, obtain stability and control data at mach 0.95 and 0.90, expand flight envelope, and evaluate speed brake. (NASA Proj Off)
Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, announced appointment of Dr. Aaron Firierman of State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook to manage JPL’s newly established Office of Computing and Information Systems. (jpl Release 583)
Determination of crystallization ages for six Apollo 14 lunar rocks was described in Science by Dr. Liaquat Husain, Dr. John F. Sutter, and Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer, State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook scientists. Rocks, from Fra Mauro region, had been dated by measuring argon ratios in mass spectrometer. All six rocks gave age of 3.62 to 3.92 billion yrs, same as that of fragmental rocks from Fra Mauro. Scientists had concluded that Imbrium impact-—one of last major events in evolution of pre-mare lunar surface—and crystallization of significant portion of pre-Imbrian basalts were “essentially contemporaneous.” (Science, 9/24/71, 1235-6)
Grumman Aerospace Corp. pilots Robert K. Smyth and William H. Miller conducted successful 58-min flight of usn F-14 from Grumman facility at Calverton, N.Y. Same pilots had flown first usn F—14 on second flight, on Dec. 30, 1970, when it crashed into woods near Grumman facility seconds after they successfully ejected. Aircraft was kept at speeds below 467 km per hr (290 mph) during maneuvers to familiarize pilots with handling characteristics. (Witkin, NYT, 5/25/71)
Boeing Co. was reactivating 767 project that was “simmering on a back burner” while sst was alive, William Hines said in Washington Sunday Star. Project “borrows liberally” from NASA aircraft development work. Boeing 767 subsonic jet would be about same size as Boeing 707, with same passenger capacity, but would be more than 160 km per hr (100 mph) faster. Cruising speed would be 1167 km per hr (725 mph) or mach 0.98, “about the greatest achievable without generation of a sonic boom.” LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright had said aircraft’s speed was attributable to its supercritical wing that could operate at speeds near mach 1 in shockproof condition. Boeing spokesman had said aircraft could be in service by end of decade. Hines said Boeing also was considering production of stretched version of 727. (W Star, 7/11/71, D4)
Aero bee 350 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. experiment to study airglow. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list) *	Appointment of l/g Charles H. Terhune, Jr., (USAF, Ret.), as Deputy Director of JPL wa3 announced by Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director. Gen. Terhune would assume duties July 9, succeeding A dm. John E. Clark (usn), who had announced his retirement. (jPL Release 571)
Dedication ceremonies for (Ac historic launch site at Kennedy Space Center marked the 10th anniversary of the first U.S. manned space flight, fiotun on the Freedom 7 Mercury spacecraft. The first American to go into space, Astronaut Alan B, Shepard, }r.—who also was commander of the Apollo 14 lunar landing mission fan. 31—Feb. 9 this year—stood by the plague marking the site at AauncA Complex 5/6 during ceremonies attended by 3000 guests. The site had been restored to its original condition. DOT, and FAA, with assistance from dod, cab, and eight other Federal agencies. Report concluded that aircraft noise abatement deserved highest priority because of widespread concern for environment and because noise abatement program’s success would affect solution to other aviation problems. Study recommended reductions of at least 10 decibels every 10 yrs until aircraft noise was suppressed into community background noise. Continued Federal support at high level of aeronautical K&D was necessary to ensure strong technical base. Continued R&d was essential if current and future problems of civil aviation were to be solved and if civil aviation was to contribute to such future areas as regional development. Study recommended Government evaluate its regulatory role to be certain that policies were not inhibiting innovations by industry and that NASC develop permanent mechanism to review and recommend policies affecting civil aviation that embraced several agencies. Study called for exchange of middle management personnel between aviation-related agencies like NASA, DOT, DOD, and CAB. (NASA Release 71-82; Text; Av Wk, 5/10/71, 20-1)
Following Apollo 14 splashdown, President Nixon telephoned Apollo 14 astronauts aboard recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans to express personal congratulations on successful completion of mission. He released statement comparing Apollo 14 with May 5, 1961, Freedom 7 mission flown by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr.: “The difference between that first flight and this latest is a measure of how far we have progressed in space in the short span of 10 years. But two things have not changed: the courage and determination of the men who fly these missions, and the skill and dedication of the thousands here on earth who make their flights possible.” (PD, 2/15/71, 205)
John R. Schaibley, Executive Assistant to Apollo Program Director, omsf, died in Virginia after extended illness. He had been with NASA since 1959 and had received NASA Exceptional Service Medal. (NASA Ann)
Approval by NASA Project Designation Committee of designation questol for quiet, experimental, STOL transport research aircraft was announced by NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs John P, Donnelly in memorandum to NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Roy P. Jackson. (Text)
nasa’s M2—F3 lifting body, piloted by test pilot William H. Dana, reached mach 0.8 and 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude during 13th flight, air-launched from B-52 from frc. Objectives of powered flight were to obtain stability and control data at speeds above mach 1.0, expand flight envelope, and evaluate reaction control system. Evaluation of reaction control system was only objective achieved because engine shut down prematurely. (NASA Proj Off)
Senate confirmed nominations of Apollo 14 commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., as Alternate U.S. Representative to 26th session of U.N. General Assembly and of Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, former aec Chairman, and Dr. T. Keith Glennan, former nasa Administrator, as U.S. Representative and Alternate to 15th session of General Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency at Geneva. (CR, 9/16/71, S14433)
Lowell Observatory astronomers had made first accurate mapping of weather of Mars as result of worldwide cooperation of observatories in NASA-funded ground-based planetary patrol program centered at Lowell, Christian Science Monitor said. Principal investigator Dr. William A. Baum had said object of program, begun in 1969, was to “maintain nearly continuous photographic surveillance of Mars, Jupiter, and Venus during favorable periods.” Mars weather seemed analogous to weather in arid regions of earth. (CSM, 6/24/71)
President Nixon telephoned msc Director of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton and asked him to send President’s congratulations to Apollo 14 astronauts and ground crew. Later President issued statement: “Apollo 14’s successful landing on the moon was a thrilling event for humanity. I congratulate the astronauts and also the thousands of other dedicated people who helped make this awesome achievement possible.” (PD, 2/8/71, 173)
Award by dot of $3.5-million contract to Grumman Aerospace Corp. for construction of tracked air cushion research vehicle was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Vehicle, 15.5 m (51 ft) long and weighing nearly 27 000 kg (60 000 lbs), would accommodate four persons including operator and test engineer. DOT would test vehicle at its High Speed Test Center in Pueblo, Colo., on its completion, scheduled for March 1972. (dot Release fra 971)
Award of $23 800 contract to American Airlines to determine feasibility of using stol aircraft for short-haul runs was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. Six-month study would cover certification and safety, avionics, stol service categories, system development requirements, user and community acceptance criteria, metro-flight feasibility demonstration, New York area STOLport sites, and STOLport acceptance, (dot Release 1771)
John P. Donnelly, former Vice President for Corporate Communications for Whittaker Corp., became NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs. Appointment had been announced July 23. (NASA Activities, 8/15/71, 135)
List of Federal agencies using mtf for scientific activities was inserted in Congressional Record by Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.). Agencies included Environmental Protection Agericy, U.S. Geological Survey and other Interior Dept, activities, USA Corps of Engineers, noaa and nasa. Mississippi State Univ. and Louisiana State Univ. had programs at mtf; state governments of Mississippi, Louisiana, and Arkansas had established full-time liaison with mtf; and Dept, of Agriculture and other Federal agencies were investigating possible use of facility. (CR, 12/15/71)
faa Administrator John H. Shaffer, in speech before Aviation/Space Writers Assn, in Washington, D.C., said Anglo-French Concorde supersonic jet transport would be quiet enough to land at U.S. airports. Concorde would be used over North Atlantic and would not cause potentially destructive sonic booms over U.S. Shaffer predicted U.S. would build sst eventually. (Reuters, W Post 12/15/71, E10)
Smithsonian Institution commissioned at Fort Pierce, Fla., the JohnsonSea-Link, five-man submersible research vessel designed to operate in water to depth of 900 m (3000 ft). First of its kind, 8-m (25-ft) vessel could remain under water for up to 48 hrs. (AP, W Star, 1/30/71, A9) January 31-February 9: nasa’s Apollo 14 (AS-509) carried three-man crew on successful lunar landing mission. LM-8 Antares landed on moon’s Fra Mauro and two astronauts conducted experiments and explored lunar surface for 9 hrs 24 min before rejoining orbiting CSM—110 and returning safely to earth with lunar samples in CM Kitty Hawk. January 31~February 3: Spacecraft, carrying Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr. (commander), Stuart A. Roosa (cm pilot), and Edgar D. Mitchell (lm pilot), was launched from ksc Launch Complex 39, Pad A, at 4:03 pm est Jan. 31 by Saturn V booster. Launch was 40 min 3 sec later than planned because of high overcast clouds and rain. Delay caused revision of flight azimuth from 72° to 75.6°. Launch was watched by about 2500 invited guests, including Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, Prince Juan Carlos and Princess Sophia of Spain, and Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, Jr. Spacecraft and S—IVB combination entered parking orbit with 188.9-km (117.4-mi) apogee and 183.1-km (113.8-mi) perigee. Midcourse correction (MCC—1) modified trajectory so spacecraft arrival time at moon would be same as if launch had been on time. CSM separated from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:02 get. Onboard TV was initiated to cover CSM docking with LM, but difficulty in docking was encountered. First five docking attempts by cm pilot Roosa were unsuccessful. Mission Control in Houston, watching on TV, studied problem that could prevent extraction of LM and make lunar landing impossible. Alternate missions also were under study. Astronauts noted catches seemed properly cocked but did not release. Sixth try however, was successful; docking was achieved at 4:57 get, 1 hr 54 min later than planned. Separated S-IVB/iu impacted lunar surface at 83:18 get (2:41 am est Feb. 4) at 7°49' south latitude and 26° west longitude 174 km (108 mi) southeast of planned impact point. Apollo 12 seismometer detected impact and showed vibrations for about 2 hrs. Unscheduled 2-hr 22-min TV transmission from spacecraft was initiated at 10:00 get to troubleshoot probe and drogue of docking mechanism. Crew removed probe and drogue but found no foreign material or abnormal damage. Capture latch assembly was actuated and system performed nominally. Crew and ground were unable to determine why CSM and LM had failed to dock properly, but they found no indication that systems would not work normally again. Officials decided mission would continue as planned [see Feb. 1]. Second midcourse correction, with 10.1-sec sps burn at 30:36 get, increased velocity by 21.7 m per sec (71.1 fps). Following maneuver, crew completed about nine frames of dim-light photography on earth’s dark side and continued to check out systems, get update was performed at 55:40 GET to add the 40 min 3 sec lost by launch delay. MCC—3, scheduled for 60:38 get, was not necessary. Third TV transmission, for 42 min beginning at 60:40 get, showed Shepard and Mitchell transferring into LM and checking out LM systems. MCC—4, at 77:38 get with 0.6-sec sps burn, changed velocity 1.1 m per sec (3.5 fps). Shepard and Mitchell reentered LM and checked out systems before firing rcs thrusters at 104:28 get to separate CSM and lm. Spurious bit in lm guidance computer was corrected to preclude inadvertent January 31-February 9: Propelled into space by the Saturn V, Apollo 14 carried Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar D. Mitchell to the moon on the third .successful United States lunar landing mission. After Feb. 5 touchdown, Shepard and Mitchell explored the Fra Mmtro area for 9 hours 24 minutes in two extravehicular periods before the LM Aniares lifted them off to rejoin Roosa in the orbiting cm Kitty Hawk for the return to earth. Prelaunch activities were monitored by Dr. George M. Low (at left below), Acting nasa Administrator, and Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in Firing Room 2 at ksc. abort during powered descent, and Shepard controlled descent manually. LM Antares landed on moon’s Fra Mauro at 108:54 get (4:17 am est Feb. 5) on 8° slope 9—18 m (30-60 ft) short of planned landing point. “We seem to be sitting in a bowl,” Mitchell said. “It’s choppy, undulating. There is a large depression to our right to the north of us, which forms another bowl. And I can see several ridges and rolling hills of perhaps 35 to 40 feet (10 to 12 meters) in height.” First eva began 49 min later than planned because of intermittent plss communications. Shepard started down ladder, deployed mesa containing camera which recorded descent, and stepped on lunar surface at 114:30 get (9:53 am est Feb. 5). Mitchell stepped down six minutes later. “Not bad for an old man,” Mission Control told Shepard as he touched surface. “You’re right,” Shepard replied “I’m on the surface. It’s been a long way and I’m here. The surface on which the forward footpad landed is extremely soft. . . . it’s in a small depression. The soil is so soft that it comes all the way to the top of the footpads, it even folded over the sides to some degree. ... we can see the boulders on the rim. It looks as though we have a good traverse route up to the top of the Cone.” Crew collected 19.5-kg (43-lb) contingency sample; deployed TV, S-band antenna, American flag, and solar wind composition experiment; and photographed lm, lunar surface, and experiments, alsep was deployed about 152 m (500 ft) west of lm and laser-ranging retrorefiector was deployed about 30 m (100 ft) west of alsep. Mitchell conducted active seismic experiment, firing 13 thumper shots into lunar surface. Signals were recorded by geophones and transmitted to earth. Eight of the 21 cartridges misfired, but the 13 fired sent vibrations 18-21 m (60-70 ft) into moon. Crew was granted 30-min extension on EVA and reentered LM after 4 hrs 49 min. After resting inside lm and checking plans for second eva period, astronauts left lm at 131:48 get (3:11 am est Feb. 6)—2 hrs 27 min earlier than planned. Astronauts loaded met with photographic equipment and lunar portable magnetometer (lpm) and proceeded toward Cone Crater, met bounced slightly during traverse but appeared stable. Astronauts’ main problem was lunar dust which stuck to their space suits up to their knees. “We’re filthy as pigs,” Mitchell said. “Everything’s going to be covered with dust before long.” lpm site measurement was made at first stop and lpm traverse measurement was later made near Cone Crater. Geological features were described and materials collected. Crew was unable to reach rim of Cone Crater because slopes were steeper than expected and climb would have required running behind time line by about 30 min. Samples were collected in blocky field near rim. On return leg of traverse crew dug 0.5-m (1.5-ft) trench and collected samples. Unsuccessful triple-core-tube attempt was made and other containerized samples were collected. Alignment adjustment was made to alsep central station’s antenna to improve signal strength being received at msfn ground stations. Crew was unable to perform a number of secondary tasks because of timeline and minor problems. Just before reentering LM Shepard made surprise announcement: “You might recognize what I have in my hand as the handle for the February 4-6; Tracks of the modularized equipment transporter, used for the first time on the Apollo 14 mission, were photographed, (at top left) leading across the lunar surface from the LM Antares. The inverted umbrella of the S-band antenna was positioned by the astronauts to the left of the lm. Lunar dust clung to the legs of Astronaut Edgar D. Mitchell (above) as he moved across the surface during extravehicular activity. Meanwhile, in the Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston, Texas, a seismic reading of the Feb. 4 impact on the moon of the Saturn launch vehicle’s S-IVB stage was examined by Dr. Maurice Ewing (bottom left), Director of Columbia University’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, and Columbia graduate student David Lammlein. The impact released energy comparable to M tons of tht. contingency sample return and it just so happens to have a genuine six iron on the bottom of it.” Shepard dropped golf ball on lunar surface and on third attempt drove ball about 366 m (400 yds). Astronauts reentered LM at 136:26 GET, after 4 hrs 35 min, bringing total eva time to 9 hrs 24 min. While LM was on moon, Roosa, orbiting moon in csm, completed bootstrap photography of Descartes landing site and astronomic photography, including Gegenschein experiment, and prepared for shortened rendezvous technique. Shepard and Mitchell depressurized lm, discarded excess equipment, repressurized lm, and lifted off lunar surface with 43 kg (94.8 Ihs) of samples at 142:25 get—33 hrs 31 min after landing on moon. During braking phase for docking, telemetry indicated that abort guidance system had failed, but no caution and warning signals were on. Docking was accomplished successfully at 144:13 get (3:36 pm Feb. 6) with no probe-drogue problems. Probe was returned to earth for postflight analysis. Excellent TV during rendezvous and docking showed docking maneuver clearly. Crew transferred from LM to CSM with samples, equipment, and film. LM ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 148:22 GET (7:05 pm est Feb. 6) at 3° 35' south latitude and 19° 40' west longitude. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12 and Apollo 14 alseps. Transearth injection maneuver, on schedule at 149:16 get, injected CSM into transearth trajectory after 66 hrs 40 min (34 revolutions) in lunar orbit. cm Kitty Hawk separated from sm at 216:12 get. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned and Kitty Hawk splashed down in mid-Pacific about 7 km (4 nm) from recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans at 216:42 get (4.05 pm est Feb. 9). Astronauts, wearing flight suits and masks, were carried by helicopter from CM to recovery ship, where they entered mobile quarantine facility with recovery physicians and technician. Crew, physicians, and technician would remain inside MQF until ship neared Samoa and would then be transferred to another MQF for flight to LRL quarantine in Houston. CM was retrieved and mated to MQF transfer tunnel on board recovery ship. From inside MQF-CM containment envelope, MQF engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and CM was sealed until delivery to LRL. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown via Pago Pago to Houston for lrl. Primary Apollo 14 objectives—to make selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of materials in preselected region of Fra Mauro; deploy and activate alsep; develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment; and photograph candidate exploration sites—were achieved. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance was near nominal except for docking problems, spurious signals, and an occasional loss of communications. Flight crew performance was excellent. Crew exhibited exceptional poise during CSm/lm docking attempts and while troubleshooting AG computer. Accomplishments included first use of met, largest payload—32 500 kg (71 650 lbs)—placed in lunar orbit, longest distance traversed on lunar surface, largest payload returned from lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time, longest total EVA, first use of shortened rendezvous technique, first active seismic experiment, and first inflight technology demonstrations. Apollo 14 was 11th Apollo mission to date, 8th manned Apollo mission, and 3rd successful lunar landing mission. Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969) and Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) had proved capability to land men on moon and retrieve lunar samples for study on earth. Apollo 13 (April 11—17, 1970), aborted by sm tank explosion, had demonstrated capability to perform under emergency situation and return crew safely to earth under alternate plan. Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 71-245; NYT, 2/1-10/71; W Post, 2/1-10/71; Av Wk, 2/15/71, 19)
Apollo 14 astronauts were presented Distinguished Service Medals at dod ceremonies. Secretary of the Navy John H. Chaffee presented usn dsm to Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., and Edgar D. Mitchell. Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented usaf dsm and Command Pilot Astronaut Badge to Astronaut Stuart A. Roosa. (NASA Activities 4/15/71, 61; dod Release 218-71; msc Hist Off)
Portrait of Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, third nasa Administrator (1969-1970) was unveiled in nasa Hq. ceremony attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Dr. Paine; and Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Portrait, by artist William Draper, would hang at NASA Hq. (Transcript)
usaf X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by nasa test pilot John A. Manke, completed 28th flight from frc in joint nasa-usaf test program. Objectives were to obtain lateral directional derivatives with rudder bias at 2° toe out, evaluate handling qualities with power and yaw accelerometer feedback system on, and determine supersonic lift-to-drag ratio data and longitudinal trim. Flight was intended to reach maximum mach number, but only two of four chambers ignited. Pilot immediately switched to two-chamber profile and mission plan. (NASA Proj Off)
Sen. Joseph M. Montoya (D-N. Mex.) introduced S. 1184, “to establish a Department of Science and Technology, and to transfer certain agencies and functions to such Department.” Bill provided that NASA, nsf, and aec be transferred to new department. Sen. Montoya had introduced similar legislation on Oct. 12, 1970. (CR, 3/10/71, S2800-12; nasa LAR, X/22)
Donald K. Slayton, msc Director of Flight Crew Operations, sent cable on behalf of U.S. astronauts to Soviet Academy of Sciences: “We share with the world community deep sorrow for the loss of Cosmonauts Georgy Dobrovolsky, Vladislav Volkov and Viktor Patsayev, and we mourn with all the Russian people the deaths of three brave countrymen.” (Reuters, B Sun, 7/1/71, A2; msc pio)
m/g John B. Medaris (usa, Ret.)—first Commanding General of Army Ballistics Missile Agency (abma) at Redstone Arsenal, Huntsville, Ala., in 1955 and head of team that launched Explorer 1 Jan. 31, 1958 —had become an Episcopal priest, National Enquirer reported. He was curate of Church of Good Shepherd in Maitland, Fla. (Natl Enq, 1/10/71)
John C. Lindsay Memorial Award for 1971 was presented to Harry E. Peters of gsfc Laser Data Systems Branch during gsfc Scientific Colloquium. Award, given annually to gsfc employee who had made outstanding contribution to science or technology, was presented for individual contributions to the advancement of hydrogen maser frequency standards resulting in most stable frequency standards known and making possible dramatic improvement in space tracking and system precision. (Goddard News, 6/14/71, 1) Orbital parameters for Soyuz 11 were apogee, 237 km (147.3 mi); perigee, 163 km (101.3 mi); period, 88.4 min; and inclination, 51.5°. Spacecraft docked with Salyut 1 at 10:45 am Moscow time (3:45 am edt) June 7. Tass announcement said: “In accordance with the Soviet programme of creating long-term orbital stations, the ‘Salyut’ orbital scientific station has started to function as the first piloted scientific station. . . . After successfully docking the Soyuz-11 transport spaceship with the scientific station . . . the crew of Soyuz-11 entered the scientific station. Solved for the first time was the engineering and technical task of delivering a crew to an orbiting scientific station by a transport ship.” Tass said Salyut-Soyuz space system was 20 m (66 ft) long, weighed more than 25 tons, and consisted of compartments containing equipment for scientific and technical experiments, for spacecraft control, and for crew work and rest. Cosmonauts would check out spacecraft subsystems; test orientation and navigation equipment; study geological-geographical objects on earth’s surface, atmospheric formations, and snow and ice cover; study physical characteristics, processes, and phenomena in atmosphere and outer space; and study medico-biological influence of space flight factors on human organism. Cosmonauts checked out systems, conducted experiments, and sent messages of thanks to scientists, engineers, and workers who took part in creation of space station system. TV transmissions showed crew performing duties in spacecraft. After one week in orbit, crew was in good health and had completed first phase of experiments with all systems functioning normally. Crew was allowed one-day rest before continuing experiments. By 1:00 pm Moscow time (6:00 am edt) June 13 Salyut-Soyuz station had completed 100 orbits of earth. Cosmonauts continued to follow preplanned program of work, rest, and two hours of exercise per day and reported they were in good health. Experiments included communications with ground via orbiting Molniya I comsat, astronomical observations, medical experiments, observation of cyclone in Pacific near Japan, and experiments with plants in hothouse on board. They reared tadpoles into frogs and grew cabbages and onions. By 12:00 noon Moscow time (5:00 am edt) June 22 station had completed 245 orbits of earth. Station completed 18th day in orbit June 24, surpassing 17-day 17-hr endurance record set by Soyuz 9 June 2—19,1970. On June 29 cosmonauts completed flight program and prepared for reentry. Crew transferred equipment to Soyuz 11 and undocked from Salyut 1 at 9:28 pm Moscow time (2:28 pm edt). Crew reported successful undocking and said all systems were functioning normally. At 1:35 am Moscow time June 30 (6:35 pm edt June 29) spacecraft’s braking engine was fired for prescheduled period. At end of engine firing communication with Soyuz 11 crew ceased. Tass said: “According to the program, after aerodynamic braking in the atmosphere the parachute system was put into action and before landing—the soft-landing engines were fired. The flight of the descending apparatus ended in a smooth landing in the pre-set area. Landing simultaneously with the ship, a helicopter-borne recovery group, upon opening .the hatch, found the crew ... in their seats, without any signs of life. The causes of the crew’s death are being investigated.” (gsfc SSR, 6/30/71; fbis-Sov-71-109-126, 6/7-30/71; Newsweek, 7/12/71)
nasa Contractor Equal Employment Opportunity Program activities were transferred from Procurement Office to Industrial Relations Office. Joseph M. Hogan would continue to direct group and would report to Robert E. King, Director of Industrial Relations. Personnel and functions concerned with participation of minority-owned business in NASA procurements would remain in Procurement Office, (nasa Special Ann)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of Stanford Univ. chemist John D. Baldeschwieler to be Deputy Director of ost. He would succeed Dr. Hubert Heffner, who had resigned to return to duties at Stanford. {PD, 7/26/71, 1066, 1080)
NASA announced establishment of Delta Launch Vehicle System Review Board to investigate and recommend corrective action for failure of Thor-Delta 85 to place Oso 7 in planned orbit Sept. 29 and failure of Thor-Delta 86 to orbit itos-b Oct. 21. Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, had appointed Dr. William R. Lucas, msfc Deputy Director, as Board Chairman. (nasa Release 71-217)
Multipurpose system of three large in-orbit satellites and network of 132 earth stations to provide nationwide communication services to various customers was proposed by ComSatCorp President Joseph V. Charyk in letter to fcc Chairman Dean Burch. Proposal would require initial investment of $250 million. (Text)
At Paris Air Show Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa met in Soviet Pavilion with Vostok 4 Cosmonaut Pavel R. Popovich and Soyuz 9 Cosmonauts Vitaly I. Sevastyanov and Andrian G. Nikolayev. Astronauts saw models of Baykonur launch complex, Vostok 1, and Soyuz spacecraft; examined display devoted to 10th anniversary of first space flight by Yuri A. Gagarin on April 12, 1961; ascended to Soyuz cm; and admired Lunokhod 1 lunar vehicle and Luna 16 unmanned spacecraft that had returned lunar samples to earth. Later astronauts and cosmonauts went to U.S. Pavilion where cosmonauts were shown Apollo 12 spacecraft and other exhibits. Cosmonauts presented astronauts with model of Soyuz spacecraft; astronauts reciprocated with small Soviet flag they had carried to moon aboard Apollo 14 and NASA astronaut badges. (fbis-Sov-7 1-108, 6/4/71, FI; NYT, 6/3/71, 41)
Return of Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., to active service with usaf in July 1971 was announced by Gen. John D. Ryan, usaf Chief of Staff. Col. Aldrin would assume command of AFSc’s Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards AFB, Calif. He had joined NASA in January 1964 as astronaut trainee after serving with usaf in Germany and Korea. He held B.S. degree from U.S. Military Academy and Sc.D. degree from mit. (nasa Special Release; dod Release 45-71)
Library of Congress Congressional Research Service released report, The Soviet SST. Report by John D. Holmfeld summarized progress of Tu-144 from press reports and U.S. and U.K. technical journals. Tu-144 was “clearly an aircraft which is competitive with the Concorde.” It had 27.1-m (89-ft) wing span and Concorde’s was 25.6 m (84 ft); it was 56 m (184 ft) long and Concorde was 62.1 m (204 ft). Tu-144 weighed 149 700 kg (330 000 lbs); Concorde weighed 174 600 kg (385 000 lbs). Tu-144 would cruise at 2490 km per hr (1550 mph) at 19 800-m (65 000-ft) altitude; Concorde cruised at 2170 km per hr (1350 mph) at altitude of 18 000 m (60 000 ft). On New York-London route, Concorde flight time was estimated at 3 hrs and 30 min; Tu-144 probably would require 3 hrs and 10 min. Tu-144 maximum range was estimated to be 6400 km (4000 mi). Tu-144 was powered by four Kuznetsov NK—144 turbofan engines with 127 480-newton (28 660-lb) thrust. Concorde’s four Rolls-Royce Olympus engines had 146 000-newton (32 825-lb) thrust. (Text) “These benefits are worth a substantial investment of the Nation’s resources, not to the neglect of other needs of our Nation and humanity, but as part of our investment in the continuing future and strength of our Nation.” (Text)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by test pilot William H. Dana, reached mach 1.22 and 21 300-m (70 000-ft) altitude during 12th flight, launched from B-52 from frc. Objectives of powered flight—acquisition of stability and control data above mach 1.0, expansion of flight envelope, and evaluation of reaction control system— were achieved. (NASA Proj Off)
NASA announced it had issued Management Study of NASA Acquisition Processes, report of team established in September 1970 to review NASA project and program planning for R&D and activities and procedures for acquiring goods and services from definition of requirements through contract award. Report covered processes used for acquisitions leading to use of formal source evaluation boards for agency-level and field center-level source selections. Study group had concluded that basic framework of NASA acquisition process was sound, but it recommended some improvements in project planning, source solicitation, and source selection, (nasa Release 71—118; Text) jpl astronomer Dr. Donald G. Rea said Jupiter was biggest enigma and challenge to most space scientists. It “emits about three times as much energy as it receives from the Sun. It has a magnetic field 20 times that of Earth, intense radiation belts, and apparently rotates at three different speeds. An important characteristic for flight projects is its gravity which will allow us to send a spacecraft to study Jupiter and then continue on” to investigate outermost planets of solar system. JPL scientist James E. Long recommended spacecraft be launched in 1981 for insertion into Jupiter orbit early in 1984 after 750-day trip from earth. “Depending on Jupiter’s radiation hazard, the spacecraft will have an active life in orbit of six months to a year.” It was “imperative that we get direct measurements well into Jupiter’s atmosphere over long periods . . . to determine the dynamic processes involved.” Technology for Thermoelectric Outer Planet Spacecraft (tops), sustained by self-repairing computers and capable of 10-yr scientific missions to outer planets, was described by jpl engineers Carl C. Wertz, Paul 0. Chelson, and Richard A. Easton, JPL computers being developed and tested were star (self-testing and repairing) and CATS (computer-aided telemetry system). Both had built-in redundancy, with backup parts for each unit that might fail. Easton said star computer was spacecraft’s brain and cats computer its nervous system. Selfrepairing computers were needed for outer planetary mission because “potentially hazardous environments, such as the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter, or radiation from Jupiter itself, require that Grand Tour spacecraft subsystems be self-adaptive to either transient or permanent failures. Another consideration is the eight-hour roundtrip communications delay from Neptune or Pluto.” Leonard Jaffe, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications, received Lloyd V. Berkner Award, presented annually by aas to persons making significant contributions to commercial space utilization. aas Flight Achievement Award was presented to Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., for Apollo 13 crew. LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright received aas 1970 Space Flight Award “in recognition of his contribution to space flight through early planning for the organization of NASA, his direction of the Lunar and Planetary Program, his influence while Deputy Associate Administrator of the Oflice of Space Science and Applications, and later the Office of Manned Space Flight and his current position as Director of nasa Langley Research Center.” In speech on technology crisis Cortright said: “It is ironic that after 10 years of ‘delivering the goods’ in an unparalleled manner, culminating in manned exploration of the Moon, the space program is fighting for its life with a host of other priority programs. Already the national team of Government, industry, and university scientists, engineers, and technicians has been reduced to about Yi of its peak of over 400 000. If we are not to see the progress of a decade of dedicated national effort squandered away, we had better make our case for space loud and clear. I think we have a compelling case—even in these days of relevancy.” (jpl Releases 577, 578, 579; NASA Activities, 7/15/71, 117; 8/15/71, 129-34; Langley Researcher, 7/19/71, 1; Boeing Release S-0826)
faa Administrator John H. Shaffer announced faa was installing new computer-assisted weapon detection system at one gate of Dulles International Airport in Virginia to keep potential hijackers from boarding commercial flights. System automatically screened passengers at rate of 20 per min as they passed through electro-magnetic fields that detected metal. Information was evaluated by computer that could discriminate between different metal objects on basis of weight. Alarm sounded when excess metal or gun was detected. (faa Release 71—126)
New York Times editorial commented on Pioneer F: “The mission of Pioneer F—the spacecraft that will be launched next year to visit giant Jupiter and send back photographs and scientific data—opens some of the most exciting vistas yet in the entire space program. If accomplished ... this mission would mark a major advance in man’s understanding of a hitherto unpenetrated section of the solar system.” (NYT, 3/15/71, 38) altitudes with rockets and instruments functioning satisfactorily. Launches were second and third in four-launch series; first had been conducted March 5. (nasa Rpts SRL) Col. John G. Albert, usaf Director of Space Operations, said dod was “putting its faith in the shuttle and as a result we are not developing any other space rocket beyond the present Titan 3. We intend to use the shuttle for all military space operations.” Use would include communications, navigation, weather-watching, and surveillance. Shuttle would place military satellites in orbit and perform specialized missions in orbit for periods up to seven days. Col. Albert told news conference later that dod would “certainly make a sizable funding contribution at the proper time” to assist NASA in shuttle development. To be useful to the military, shuttle must be able to operate like jet transport with quick turnaround on runway after conventional landing. (AP, B Sun, 3/16/71) Jean Bernard LaGarde, liaison officer for European Space Conference and French representative to esc, said Europe would contribute $1 billion to U.S. manned space programs in future if U.S. lifted ban on launching comsats for European nations. LaGarde said U.S. would have to give positive answer by late April or early May. (LA Times, 3/17/71) aiaa President Martin Goland at banquet March 16 presented Haley Astronautical Award of $500, medal, and certificate, to Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., Fred W. Haise, Jr., and John L. Swigert for “exceptional manner in which the Apollo 13 crew conducted themselves and their spacecraft under extraordinary circumstances of extreme stress.” Octave Chanute Award of' $500 and certificate was presented to William M. Magruder, Director of ssx Development for dot, for “outstanding contributions by a pilot to the development of safer, more efficient air transportation.” aiaa History Manuscript Award for “best historical manuscript dealing with the science, technology, and impact of aeronautics and astronautics on society” went to Constance McLaughlin Green and Milton Lomask for “A History of Project Vanguard” [published in nasa Historical Series in March as Vanguard—A History, SP—4202]. (aiaa Release; AIAA Bull, 3/71; nasa Hist Off)
House adopted resolution setting number of members of Committee on Science and Astronautics at 30 and resolution providing for assignment of majority and minority members of Committee. Majority (Democratic) members were: George P. Miller, Calif., Chairman; Olin E. Teague, Tex.; Joseph E. Karth, Minn.; Ken Hechler, W. Va.; John W. Davis, Ga.; Thomas N. Downing, Va.; Don Fuqua, Fla.; Earle Cabell, Tex.; James W. Symington, Mo.; Richard T. Hanna, Calif.; Walter Flowers, Ala.; Robert A. Roe, N.J.; John F. Seiberling, Jr., Ohio; William R. Cotter, Conn.; Charles B. Rangel, N.Y.; Morgan F. Murphy, 111.; Mike McCormack, Wash. Minority (Republican) members were: James G. Fulton, Pa.; Charles A. Mosher, Ohio; Alphonzo Bell, Calif.; Thomas M. Pelly, Wash.; John W. Wydler, N.Y.; Larry Wynn, Jr., Kans.; Robert D. Price, Tex.; Louis Frey, Jr., Fla.; Barry M. Goldwater, Jr., Calif.; Marvin L. Esch, Mich.; R. Lawrence Coughlin, Pa.; John N. Happy Camp, Okla. (CR, 2/4/71, H428, H434)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, reached mach 0.93 during eighth flight from frc in joint nasa-usaf program. Purposes of flight were to evaluate effects of moving center of gravity slightly forward and of decreasing launch mach number by launching at 12 200-m (40 000-ft) altitude instead of 13 700 m (45 000 ft). (NASA Proj Off)
President Nixon sent individual messages from Caneel Ray, Virgin Islands, wishing success to Apollo 14 astronauts Alan R. Shepard, Jr., Edgar D. Mitchell, and Stuart A. Roosa on eve of launch. Message to Shepard said: “The courage and determination you have displayed in coming back against such great odds to fly again have earned our unanimous admiration at home and abroad. That this important mission should be entrusted to our Nation’s first man in space makes us especially proud and confident in its success.” (PD, 2/8/71, 151)
Rep. Joel T. Broyhill (R-Va.) introduced H.R. 10065 “to redesignate the Washington National Airport as ‘Neil Armstrong Airport.’ ” Bill was referred to House Committee on Interstate and Foreign Commerce. (CR, 7/26/71, H7164)
Physicist Dr. Edward Teller criticized DOD secrecy in speech at PMR Hq. at Point Mugu, Calif. He said Soviet development of SS—9 icbm and expanded ABM system posed threat to U.S. deterrent capability but DOD secrecy made it impossible to reveal details of threat. As result, many in Congress and Nation doubted threat’s reality, (pmk Missile, 6/3/71, 1)
Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.), on behalf of himself, Sen. Clifford P. Case (R-NJ.), Sen. Jacob K. Javits (R-N.Y.), and Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), called up his amendment to H.R. 7109, FY 1972 NASA authorization bill, which would delete from bill $138 million for space shuttle development. (CR, 6/28/71, S10061-80; 10084-112)
NASA released 9 color photos, 14 black-and-white photos, and segment of 16-mm film taken during Apollo 14 mission. Pictures showed lm, footprints, tire tracks, Astronauts Shepard and Mitchell during eva, American flag on surface, and large boulders. (AP, W Star, 2/14/71, A3)
nasa announced assignments within msc Flight Crew Operations Directorate: Apollo 10 Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford had been named Deputy Director and Apollo 14 Commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., would resume duties as Chief of Astronaut Office. Stafford also would assist Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations, in technical matters related to flight crew activities. Post of Deputy Director had previously been vacant, (nasa Release 71—116)
NASA’s M2—F3 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot William H. Dana, successfully completed seventh flight from frc, reaching 18 300-m (60 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.83. Objectives were to expand flight envelope to mach 0.85, obtain stability and control data at mach 0.8, and evaluate reaction control system. (NASA Proj Off)
