Apollo 17 experiments were discussed by Apollo Lunar Exploration Director William T. O’Bryant at NASA Hq. press briefing. Mission astronauts would perform “more scientific investigation than on any other Apollo mission.” Experiments originally planned for Apollo 18, 19, and 20 would be aboard Apollo 17, last mission in Apollo series. (McGehan, B Sun, 11/21/72, A8)
Envelopes carried to moon aboard Apollo 15 and later sold to stamp dealers had been ordered by Harold G. Collins, Chief of Kennedy Space Center Mission Support Office, Manager John H. Jacobs of Brevard Printing Co. told press. Collins had asked that bill be sent to Hughes Enterprises in Las Vegas, Nev. Associated Press said Collins and NASA officials and astronauts at Manned Spacecraft Center had declined to comment on Jacobs’ statement because matter was under investigation by Dept, of Justice. (AP, W Post, 9/19/72, A3)
Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects was signed simultaneously in Washington, Moscow, and London. In statement following signing, Secretary of State William P. Rogers said convention had been formulated to compensate, fairly and promptly, if space object of one party caused injury or damage to citizen of another party. “I believe that the convention which we have signed today will accomplish that purpose. I concur in Admiral Alan Shepard’s statement in the U.N. General Assembly last year that it is a ‘sound treaty based on realistic perceptions of mutual interest and mutual benefit.’ Like its predecessor, this treaty is the result of intensive work in the United Nations Outer Space Committee and represents both a practical and an imaginative step in developing just international rules governing man’s activities in space. Many countries have had an active part in its formulation during years of intensive negotiations. The conclusion of the agreement has again demonstrated what noteworthy results a cooperative approach to international negotiations can achieve.” (Tass, fbis-Sov, 3/29/72, Al; Rogers Text)
British Airways Board had decided to order six Lockheed L-1011 TriStar jet airliners and to place options on another six, Wall Street Journal reported. British Aerospace Minister Michael Heseltine had told House of Commons that British government would aid Rolls-Royce (1971) Ltd. to develop more powerful version of aircraft’s RB-211 jet engine. Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Chairman Daniel J. Haughton had said later that order was “single most significant overseas order in Lockheed’s commercial aircraft programs during the past 25 years.” Lockheed estimated value of order at $150 million including spares. (WSJ, 8/8/71, 7)
Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Paul J. Weitz, and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin —prime crew for first Skylab mission—checked out Skylab airlock module (am) and multiple docking adapter (mda) in vacuum chamber at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co.’s St. Louis, Mo., facility. Crew, wearing pressurized spacesuits, entered chamber and took positions in AM and mda. One hour after pumpdown began, chamber pressure was less than 138 newtons per sq m (0.02 psi)—equal to that at 45 700-m (150 000-ft) altitude. Pressure inside am and mda was held at 34500 newtons per sq m (5 psi), high enough for crew to remove spacesuits and work in constant-wear garments. Crew connected biomedical equipment and sensors for repressurization but did not put on suits, (msc Release 72-176)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by William H. Dana, completed 16th flight from Flight Research Center. Objectives—to expand flight envelope and to obtain stability and control data at mach 0.95—were achieved. M2-F3 reached mach 1.3 and 20 400-m (67 000-ft) altitude, (nasa proj off)
Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., passed final physical examination at Kennedy Space Center. Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, said results showed astronauts “in good shape and ready to fly.” (AP, W Star, 4/11/72, A3)
NASA announced immediate changes in key personnel. Director Joseph F. Malaga of Resources Analysis Div. became Assistant Administrator for Institutional Management. Assistant Administrator for Administration William E. Lilly became NASA Comptroller. Malaga had received William A. Jump Memorial Foundation Meritorious Award for exemplary achievement in public administration and NASA Exceptional Service Award in 1966. Lilly, former Director of Program Control in Office of Manned Space Flight, had received NASA Exceptional Service Award in 1965 and 1969. (nasa Ann)
Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., successfully completed countdown demonstration test at KSC on board unfueled spacecraft. Final countdown would begin April 10 in preparation for April 16 launch to moon, (ksc Release 55-72)
First fighter squadrons of Navy F-14 jet fighters would be formed “sometime this fall,” Grumman Corp. Vice President Michael Pelehach said at meeting of Long Island Assn, of Commerce and Industry in Woodbury, N.Y. Eleven test F-14 prototypes had logged 400 flights and nearly 1000 hrs. (NYT, 6/7/72, 11)
Press commented on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation agreement. U.S. would “be doing virtually all of the cooperating” in joint space mission called for under new U.S.-U.S.S.R. space agreement, William Hines said in Washington Sunday Star. “While negotiations were underway ... it was assumed that the 1975 joint manned space flight envisioned . . . would be a 50-50 proposition. The Americans would build the hardware . . . and the Russians would provide a small space station in which experiments could be carried out.” Instead, U.S.S.R. had “pulled back their item—the Salyut station— and changed the nature of the mission.” This had relieved U.S.S.R. of considerable expense and “left Uncle Sam holding a $250 million bag, this sum being the estimated cost of the hardware our side will have to build anyway.” (W Star, 5/28/72, A6) St. Louis Post-Dispatch: “An agreement between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. . . . ought to be just the first step toward full international co-operation in space. Countries which lack space programs of their own should be encouraged to participate in space ventures as limited partners.” Other countries had scientific expertise to contribute. “Beyond this they ought to receive the full benefits of whatever information is gained through space research. Historically, science never has been the exclusive domain of a single nation or even a small group of nations. It has served all mankind and this is the way it should be in space.” (St. Louis P—D, 5/28/72)
Impact of computers on society was discussed in Science by Massachusetts Institute of Technology computer scientist Joseph Weizenbaum. Computer had “very considerably less societal impact than the mass media would lead us to believe.” Space travel could not have been undertaken without computers; computer and computer education industries had “grown to enormous proportions.” But “much of the industry is self-serving . . . like an island economy in which the natives make a living by taking in each other’s laundry.” Part that was not self-serving was supported largely by Government agencies and other gigantic enterprises that knew “short-range utility of computer systems but have no idea of their ultimate social cost.” Airline reservation systems and computerized hospitals “serve only a tiny, largely the most affluent, fraction of society. Such things cannot he said to have an impact on society generally.” (Science, 5/12/72, 609-14)
Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering in Dept, of Defense, testified on early warning satellite system before Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Defense during hearings on FY 1973 dod appropriations: “We now have a satellite that is capable of immediately reporting icbm launches from the Sino-Soviet area. Additional satellites will be deployed to give us effective warning. This year, our early warning system will provide coverage of the entire threat area by at least two unique types of sensor.” (Testimony)
One consequence of President Nixon’s Feb. 17-28 state visit to People’s Republic of China could be indefinite ban on overflights of mainland China by reconnaissance drones and high-altitude U-2 aircraft engaged in intelligence-collecting missions, Aviation Week & Space Technology article said. “If the anticipated decision is made, it presumably would end any consideration of flying Boeing’s upcoming long-endurance Compass Cope drone on proposed 24-hr missions over Communist China.” (Av Wk, 2/28/72, 11) February 28-March 24: City of Memphis and Shelby County, Tenn., conducted “Space and Science Awareness Month” to inform citizens about national space program. Project—sponsored by greater Memphis area school systems and supported by NASA Hq. and Marshall Space Flight Center—was opened £y Astronaut Russell L. Schweickart and NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs John P. Donnelly. Program exhibited space-related displays—including moon rock, lunar roving vehicle mockup, and models and displays on several NASA programs—at Pink Palace Museum. Also included were displays of educational literature on space technology in 250 school libraries; lectures at 65 schools and at various club meetings by NASA officials; 14 seminars and workshops for teachers; showing of 25 films at elementary schools, on Memphis educational TV station, and to adult groups; and presentation of series of programs on etv station. Memphis awareness month was largest space information program ever held by U.S. city, (msfc Release 72-16)
NASA had spent $800 000 on North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. study and design of system to permit rendezvous and docking of U.S. and Soviet spacecraft in orbit, Associated Press reported. Study envisioned 14-day mission with Apollo command and service module linking special docking module with Salyut orbiting laboratory and Soyuz command spacecraft. NR had received $300 000 for method study and $500 000 for hardware design. No contract had been issued for hardware. (CSM, 2/19/72) February 20:	Tenth anniversary of Friendship 7 mission, first U.S. manned orbital space flight. Piloted by Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., Friendship 7 had circled earth three times during 4-hr 55-min mission. Since Glenn’s flight—which was third U.S. manned space flight and sixth flight in Project Mercury—30 U.S. astronauts had flown in space total of 7700 hrs, 51 min—nearly 46 wks. Anniversary was observed at Kennedy Space Center Feb. 22, with 3000 guests and dignitaries invited to attend ceremony at Launch Complex 14, where commemorative plaque was unveiled. Glenn said space flight was “not a pleasure cruise for an individual. It’s research at the highest level and it is difficult to tell where it will go from here.” (ksc Release 37—72; B Sun, 2/23/72)
Chronology of H.R. 10243, bill to establish Office of Technology Assessment for Congress (signed by President Nixon Oct. 13), was traced in Washington Post article. Bill was result of six-year effort begun by Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), who had since left Congress. House had passed earlier version Feb. 8; Senate had approved its version Sept. 14; and conference report worked out Sept. 21 had been approved by both houses. Bill had been supported in House by members of Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development and by Rep. Jack Brooks (D-Tex.) and in Senate by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), Sen. B. Everett Jordan (D-N.C.), and Sen. Gordon Allott (R-Colo.). Post quoted Senate aide as saying recent renewed interest in bill had been prompted by debates over supersonic transport (sst) program and antiballistic missile systems. In both, Congress had had “no really authoritative expertise of its own.” New Office of Technology Assessment would have authority and independence of General Accounting Office and was expected to depend mainly on contracts with outside study groups. (Cohn, W Post, 10/26/72, G3)
Plans for 1976 private space probe “Mankind 1” were described by spokesmen of Committee for the Future at Beverly Hills, Calif., press conference. Committee of private citizens proposed to buy U.S. or Soviet spacecraft and launch system for one of three proposed missions: orbiting laboratory, 14-day mission to place giant illuminator with one sixth moon’s reflective capacity in orbit 650 km (400 mi) above earth, or combination of both missions. Mankind 1 was successor to Project Harvest Moon which Committee had hoped to finance by selling moon rocks. Committee Chairman John J. Whiteside said first project had been scrapped after July 18 meeting with NASA officials who were skeptical about possibility of flying lunar mission after Apollo 17. (Sweeney, LA Times, 9/21/72)
Progress made in 1971 strategic nuclear arms talks with U.S.S.R., and on many subjects from scientific cooperation to trade, indicated that “1972 will be a year of substantial developments in bilateral cooperation,” Secretary of State William P. Rogers said in Washington, D.C., news conference. (Marder, W Post, 3/8/72, A2)
Federal Aviation Administration had approved airport planning project funding of $9 061 104 for 181 projects in 39 states under its Planning Grant Program for FY 1971, Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced. FY 1971 funding had been $3 636 035 for 42 projects in 27 states, (faa Release 72-147)
U.S. Postal Service officials had been “somewhat upset” by reports that Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden had taken 400 unauthorized covers—stamped envelopes with postal markings—to moon, Washington Sunday Star reported. German philatelic magazines had reported that Herman E. Sieger, German stamp dealer, had sold 100 Apollo 15 covers at 4850 German marks each for total $150 350 at official exchange rate. Under NASA regulations, astronauts had been permitted to carry on mission small mementos of flight for friends and relatives but not for sale. Official “moon mail” covers were distributed to purchasers by U.S. Postal Service. Specially struck medals had been carried on several Apollo missions and later sold to public through Government channels. NASA officials had identified unidentified “friend of crew now in Germany” as link between Apollo 15 astronauts and German dealer. Friend had told dealer that 20 covers had gone to astronauts’ friends and relatives; remaining covers had been turned over to NASA management. Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations at Manned Spacecraft Center, said that no member of crew had profited directly or indirectly from covers sold. (Faries, W Star, 6/18/72, 1)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by William H. Dana, completed 100th flight of lifting-body program and 19th flight of M2-F3 from Flight Research Center. Objectives—to obtain stability and control data at mach 0.95 and to check out pitch-reaction augmentation system—were achieved during “outstanding flight.” M2-F3 reached mach 1.4 and 20 000-m (65 000-ft) altitude. First manned lifting-body flight had been made July 12, 1966, in M-2 piloted by Milton O. Thompson. (nasa proj off; frc Release 17-72)
Unidentified Administration officials told New York Times there was evidence that People’s Republic of China had deployed strategic missiles capable of reaching Moscow. Missiles were said to have 5600-km (3500-mi) range, carry 3-megaton warheads* and be installed in well protected launching sites. Times said officials had declined to reveal source of evidence but paper surmised source to be reconnaissance satellite. (Beecher, NYT, 11/8/72, 67) November 7-8:	Goddard Space Flight Center sponsored symposium “Significant Accomplishments in Technology” at Greenbelt, Md. Fifty-two papers covered spacecraft and vehicle technology, sensor technology, ground operations, and communications and navigation. Robert J. Goss of gsfc reported design changes had increased Thor-Delta launch vehicle performance while maintaining reliability and low cost. Payload that could be placed in synchronous transfer orbit would have increased from 45 kg (100 lbs) in 1960 to 680 kg (1500 lbs) when H-l booster was operational in 1974. Joseph Arlauskas of gsfc described multispectral scanner in orbit on Erts 1, launched July 23, that permitted simultaneous imaging in three visible bands and one nearinfrared, to provide data for management of environmental resources. gsfc also sponsored symposium “Significant Accomplishments in Science” on high-energy and solar astronomy; optical and ultraviolet astronomy; planetary, lunar, and cometary studies; earth observations; and earth physics. Dr. John A. Philpotts of gsfc reported that three years study of lunar samples from Apollo and U.S.S.R. Luna missions showed essentially three kinds of rocks: iron-rich basalts in mare basins, KREEP basalts in Mare Imbrium and Oceanus Procellarum, and anorthosites in highlands. He thought there was enough material in hand “to work out the origin of these . . . rocks, and from that, the evolution of the moon and its relation to other solar system materials.” (Proceedings, NASA SP-326, SP-331) November 8:	Operational control of Noaa 2 Improved Tiros operational weather satellite, launched by NASA Oct. 15, was officially transferred to National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Environmental Satellite Service, (nasa Release 72-221)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. signed two agreements during Moscow summit meetings. Agreement on Cooperation in the Field of Environmental Protection, signed by President Nixon and Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny, called for cooperation to prevent pollution, to study pollution and its effect on environment, and to develop basis for controlling “impact of human activities on nature.” Agreement established Joint Committee on Cooperation in the Field of Environmental Protection to meet each year alternately in Washington and Moscow. Agreement on Cooperation in the Field of Medical Science and Public Health was signed by Secretary of State William P. Rogers and Soviet Minister of Health Boris V. Petrovsky. Parties agreed on joint efforts to combat most widespread and serious diseases, solve problems of effect of environment on man’s health, and resolve other important health problems. Agreement would be implemented by coordinated research, exchange of specialists and delegations, organization of colloquia, scientific conferences and lectures, exchange of information, and familiarization with technical aids and equipment. {PD, 6/5/72, 97-20)
Third anniversary of first manned landing on moon. NASA’s Apollo 11 mission had proved that man could carry out scientific and technological work on another planet and had fulfilled U.S. goal established in 1961 of developing technology to transport man to moon and return him safely to earth within 1960s. Since Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., spent 2 hrs 31 min on moon’s Sea of Tranquility July 20, 1969, NASA had launched five more Apollo missions. Eight men had explored moon at four different sites for 55 hrs 34 min. Four geophysical stations placed on moon were transmitting scientific data, 272 kg (600 lbs) of lunar samples had been brought to earth, 16 different scientific experiments had been conducted on lunar surface 48 times, and 17 different experiments had been conducted in lunar orbit 41 times. Apollo 17, last mission in program, was scheduled for launch Dec. 6. Manned Spacecraft Center expanded regular public open house activities with special Mission Control Center program re-creating radio transmissions between Apollo 11 crew and Mission Control Center during lunar landing, duplicating flight controller displays, and showing motion pictures taken during mission. Neil Armstrong Air and Space Museum in Wapakoneta, Ohio, home of Apollo 11 astronaut who was first man on moon, held informal opening to mark anniversary. President Nixon’s daughter, Tricia N. Cox, presented moon rocks to museum, which would be formally dedicated in early autumn when all exhibits had been completed. (nasa Release 72-144; msc Release 72-151; Wapakoneta Daily News, 6/16/72; H Post, 7/21/72)
U.S.S.R. celebrated Cosmonauts Day with annual memorial meeting on 11th anniversary of Vostok 1, first manned space flight, piloted by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin. Soviet Academy of Sciences president Mstislav V. Keldysh summarized Soviet space achievements and described Soviet space programs. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 4/18/72, LI)
Edward P. Andrews, Manager of Skylab Spacecraft and Sky lab Launch Vehicles at NASA Hq., became Director of Systems Operation in Space Shuttle Program. (NASA Activities, 5/15/72, 105)
Former NASA Administrator James E. Webb was appointed by Speaker of House to succeed Joseph M. Barr on Commission on Government Procurement. Barr had resigned. (CR, 3/6/72, H1752)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, told press in Washington, D.C., he believed U.S. and U.S.S.R. would sign agreement during 1972 for joint mission in which Apollo spacecraft would dock with Soviet Salyut orbiting laboratory in 1975. At dinner party for seven newsmen Dr. Fletcher said: “We certainly don’t believe that the first mission of American and Soviet astronauts together will be the last.” Mission would “take a lot of planning and some hardware changes. ... I also think the crews will need time to train together for the first flight.” Crews would be bilingual and familiar with each other’s spacecraft. Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John L. Swigert, Jr., and Donald K. Slayton were already studying Russian. First joint docking mission would cost U.S. as much as $300 million, most of it to keep manned flight facilities intact after conclusion of 1973 Skylab mission. Dr. Fletcher foresaw series of joint U.S. and U.S.S.R. missions, each longer and more ambitious. U.S.S.R. was emphasizing space station while U.S. emphasized shuttle. “I think it only logical that the two hook up together, especially since the shuttle will have rescue capability.” U.S.S.R. was expected to continue Lunokhod lunar rover and lunar sample return programs and “probably marry the two some time in the next two years. I also think they will attempt a manned lunar landing, but not until late in the ’70s, perhaps 1977.” (O’Toole, W Post, 4/6/72, A2)
Dr. Wernher von Braun’s resignation from NASA May 26 was “reminder of how many others who forged the American space effort in the last 15 years have left the scene,” New York Times commented. Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was “Ohio businessman with political ambitions”; Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman was Eastern Airlines Vice President; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong was Univ. of Cincinnatti professor; former NASA Administrator James E. Webb, “who built the Apollo team,” was lawyer-consultant in Washington, D.C.; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, “administrator in charge at the time of the moon landing,” was General Electric Co. Vice President. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, “who gathered the manned space flight team while Dr. von Braun was building the rockets,” had “recently stepped down as director of the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston.” Others of “space’s first generation have scattered to industry or are close to retirement.” Of original 118 German-born engineers who came to U.S. with Dr. von Braun, only 35 remained at Marshall Space Flight Center. Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, “another of the Peenemuende V-2 rocket Germans,” was msfc director. Six of original team—including Dr. Kurt H. Debus, director of Kennedy Space Center—were still with NASA at other Centers. Of others of team, 22 were in industry, 12 were deceased, 16 had returned to Europe, and 26 had retired. (Wilford, NYT, 5/27/72)
Personal telephone call from Mrs. Rose P. Kennedy, mother of late President John F. Kennedy, to Rep. Thomas P. O’Neill, Jr. (D-Mass.), had helped kill bill to change name of Cape Kennedy back to Cape Canaveral, Miami Herald reported. Paper said Rep. O’Neill had asked Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, to block bill. O’Neill aide had admitted congressman had asked Miller to block bill, but had denied that O’Neill had acted on Mrs. Kennedy’s behalf. (M Her, 10/4/72)
Retirement ceremony at Andrews Air Force Base, Md., honored l/g John W. O’Neill, Vice Commander of Air Force Systems Command. Gen. O’Neill, who was succeeded by l/g Edmund F. O’Connor, received Oak Leaf Cluster to Air Force Distinguished Service Medal from AFSC Commander, Gen. George S. Brown, (afsc Newsreview, 10/72, 4) During August: House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on International Cooperation in Science and Space published U.S.—U.S.S.R. Cooperative Agreements. Report of June hearings to explore scope of scientific and technical agreements signed during May 22-30 summit meeting in Moscow included texts of agreements and comments of experts. Dr. Philip Handler, National Academy of Sciences President, had said of space cooperation agreement: “The symbolism of the proposed link-up in space may prove to be the most significant aspect of the venture.” Agreement was “symbolic of a mutual awareness that the planet earth is a small and fragile spaceship, that all men are its fellow passengers, and that the fate of the people of all nations is essentially a common fate.” Subcommittee had concluded: “While a gradual amelioration of fundamental political conflicts and disagreements is the most that can be reasonably hoped for, the genuine cooperative spirit that has made these agreements possible opens the door to more effective communication and deeper understanding between the world’s two predominant powers that could have the most profound effect on the future of mankind.” (Committee Print)
Newspapers commented on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation agreement. Wall Street Journal: “Whereas past space efforts have been an extension and symbol of Soviet-American competition, the proposed new effort will attempt to extend and symbolize cooperation.” Question was “whether this change is contrived and doomed to fail as an expression of national needs and attitudes or whether it signifies the dawning of a new era in the progress of man. A case may be made either way. . . .” {WSJ, 5/26/72) Christian Science Monitor saw agreement as “commitment to peace, to friendly relations in the years ahead on the part of the world’s two superpowers.” Agreement meant extension of Apollo program to bridge gap between last Skylab mission in 1973 and 1978 space shuttle flights. “It will mean an estimated 4,400 more jobs in the aerospace industry. It will mean that Soviet space crews will come to the United States for training and vice versa. And once the rendezvous is made televiewers in both countries will be able to watch their astronauts moving from one spacecraft to another and conducting joint scientific experiments.” (CSM, 5/25/72) Miami Herald: “Both sides may learn a bit from each other .... What most people will learn is likely to be more meaningful because emotions are the mainspring of human attitudes and actions. National prestige has been a foremost consideration in space for more than 15 years. Preparation for the joint flight promises to remold the effort into a symbol of international cooperation.” (M Her, 5/26/72) Washington Post: “The promise is that this first docking and the steps that lead to it may be the key to a new coordinated joint effort to explore and exploit those parts of the universe within man’s reach.” If mission was successful, “it ought to be possible for [U.S. and U.S.S.R.] to cooperate on most other aspects of space operations. The benefits to each country from such an arrangement would be great. By curtailing both competition and duplication in space activities, scientists on both sides would be able to do in good time the things that ought to be done without straining the financial resources of their governments nearly as much in the process.” (W Post, 5/26/72) May 27:	Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations at Manned Spacecraft Center, said in telephone interview with New York Times that NASA astronaut corps would be cut because it had “three times as many people as are needed.” If all astronauts had stayed in program, many “would just be on dead-end streets. There have been retirements right along, and there will be further reductions. . . . It’s just a fact of life that we have only one Apollo, three Skylab and one ‘ren-dock’ flights ahead of us, and our manpower is over our known requirements by a factor of three.” Of 27 astronauts who had flown on Apollo missions, 12 had already left flying status. As many as 10 astronauts reportedly already had been asked to find other employment as soon as possible, Washington Post said astronaut corps had confirmed. Two had recently resigned— Edgar A. Mitchell and James B. Irwin—and many more of the 43 astronauts remaining were planning resignations. Philip K. Chapman would join staff of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Anthony W. England would join Science and Applications Directorate at msc. Donald L. Holmquest and John S. Bull, both on temporary leave to universities for past year, were also expected to resign. According to one unidentified astronaut, “Slayton really feels that he doesn’t need any more than 15 men” for shuttle and joint Soviet missions. In 1967 and 1968, astronaut total had reached peak of 63 men. (Lyons, NYT, 5/28/72, 1; O’Toole, W Post, 5/28/72, A14)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Sciences, reviewed space science program before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1973 authorization hearings: Major accomplishment in astronomy in 1971 had been mapping of universe at x-ray wavelengths with first x-ray astronomy satellite, Explorer 42 (Vhuru, launched Dec. 12, 1970). Two dozen scientific articles had been published on observations by satellite; 116 objects emitting x-rays had been studied and positions accurately determined. Analysis of rocket data on one object indicated diameter was less than 20 km (13 mi), yet it emitted much larger amount of x-radiation than did sun. “The discovery of such X-ray sources is of fundamental importance because matter in ordinary states . . . cannot account for such intense radiation.” In 1971 NASA had launched eight missions in physics and astronomy program. Most important was Orbiting Solar Observatory Oso 7 (launched Sept. 29, 1971), “which carried into orbit a set of solar telescopes more powerful than any launched before. One instrument— a coronagraph—revealed visible evidence of three luminous jets of intensely hot solar plasma being hurled out into space at a speed of more than two million miles per hour [some 3 million km per hr]. These luminous jets were 20 times the size of the earth, and represented the energy of 100 million atomic bombs. A peak temperature of 30 million degrees must have been attained in this event. Again . . . matter must have been produced on a scale man cannot produce on earth.” International cooperation continued major role in space science program; five of eight 1971 missions had had significant international participation. During year experiments and prime contractor, TRW Inc., had been selected for “newest and most significant program in astronomy”—High Energy Astronomy Observatory, designed to “unlock some of the most profound and puzzling secrets of modern physics.” Pulsars and quasars had given evidence of new concept of energy generation that produced power at levels unexplainable by modern nuclear physics. (Transcript)
Pravda published description by correspondent Pavel Barashev of his flight aboard first serial Tu-144 Soviet supersonic transport aircraft. Aircraft had reached speed of nearly 2500 km per hr (1500 mph). “When the engine started I expected a roar but even when all four of them were working it was unusually quiet in the cabin even for a jet plane.” (Tass, fbis-Sov, 8/7/72, LI) August 8:	Skylab medical experiments altitude test (smeat) crew press conference was held at Manned Spacecraft Center. Astronauts Robert L. Crippen, Dr. William E. Thornton, and Karol J. Bobko answered press questions from inside chamber they had entered July 26. Chamber had atmosphere of 70% oxygen and 30% nitrogen and pressure of 34 500 newtons per sq m (5 psi). Astronauts said they missed wives, families, and variety of outside life most. They had not experienced any stress from close confinement and had no trouble sleeping, but had recommended minor changes in food, waste collection system, and some medical equipment. Dr. Thornton said he was surprised at crew’s physiological condition: “There has been literally no change worth mentioning during this period, either physiological or psychological.” One ot two items “might have even shown a little improvement. There was a sniffle or two when we came in, and this atmosphere seems to have . . . cleared it up.” Dr. Thornton said $3-million cost of test was justified and was “a very, very small part of what could be considered insurance and success of the Skylab program.” Money being spent on Skylab medical research could build a number of medical institutions with “a great deal of short-term benefits, properly utilized. But . . . what we’re seeing in Skylab, from a medical viewpoint, is the first opportunity to medically study man in space. If the medical scientists that are assigned to Skylab obtain the data that they need and do their job properly, this is literally a building block for space medicine .... Regardless of what happens in the short run . . . the human race is going to be in space more and more as time goes on.” (Transcript)
Astronauts Robert L. Crippen, Dr. William E. Thornton, and Karol J. Bobko emerged from Skylab simulator at Manned Spacecraft Center, where they had been isolated since July 26. They had conducted Skylab medical experiments altitude test (smeat) to gather medical data to compare with data from actual missions. Astronauts said that, although they were very glad to be out, confinement had not been as difficult as expected. Astronauts were slightly weaker and their muscles were slightly smaller, but they had experienced no changes that would affect Skylab plans. Crew had been on space food diet during test and would remain on same diet for two weeks while doctors evaluated effects of diet. (AP, B Sun, 9/21/72, A3; AP, C Trib, 9/21/72,1)
NASA announced publication of The Experiments of Biosatellite II (NASA SP-204), edited by Joseph F. Sanders. Book described first successfully completed Biosatellite mission, which carried plants, frog eggs, amoeba, and seeds on earth orbital mission Sept. 7-9, 1967, to determine effect of space flight on living organisms, (nasa WR, 5/1/72, 5; A&A 1967) May 1—4:	Fourth meeting of Joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. Editorial Board for preparation and publication of space biology and medicine review convened in Washington, D.C. Cochairmen were Dr. Melvin Calvin of Univ. of California at Berkeley and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Ministry of Health. Under Oct. 8, 1965, Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, Board reviewed research from the two countries for publication, (nasa Release 72-89) May 2:	Apollo 16 rock and photography briefing was held at Manned ' Spacecraft Center. Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of MSC Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said first few weeks of preliminary examination of Apollo 16 samples would be occupied with opening bags and weighing, dusting, photographing, and examining rocks. Catalog, including photos, of all samples should be completed by end of May. Rocks examined to date appeared to be breccias. One rock—collected during third extravehicular activity and described on moon by Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., as “an honest to goodness igneous rock”—was different in texture and appearance from other typical breccias, but had not yet been precisely classified. “Zap pits” on the surface indicated rock had been lying on one side. It was flattish with very fine, silverish crystals in finer grain matrix with no vesicules. Dr. Gast said rock could be rapidly crystallized igneous rock, very-high-grade metamorphic rock, or metamorphic rock that had been at temperatures of 1000°C (1300 K) long enough to be completely recrystallized. Dr. William R. Muehlberger of Univ. of Texas and U.S. Geological Survey expressed surprise at “the tremendous number of clasts [rock fragments]” within rocks. Clasts represented “crustal material hauled in from somewhere and that’s a tremendous plus beyond what we had originally conceived of as getting. ... So whether it’s volcanic in origin and therefore . . . this is crust from straight under somewhere or whether it’s impact origin and therefore crustal material thrown in from some distance doesn’t matter.” By selecting Descartes as landing site, NASA*had obtained extra sampling, “maybe even a better sampling,” than in other highlands missions. “And we may even have sampled another quadrant of the Moon that we wouldn’t have gotten in any other way. ... we may have a good deal more than the 15 percent or so of the highlands represented in these rocks and we may have a much older segment of the time scale represented.” (Transcript)
Boeing Co. Board made executive changes: President T. A. Wilson was elected Board Chairman, succeeding William A. Allen, whose retirement would become effective Sept. 30. Senior Vice President Malcolm T.	Stamper was elected President and member of Board. Wilson would retain responsibilities of Chief Executive. Charles M. Pigott was elected to Board. (WSJ, 10/3/72, 13)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body completed 21st flight from Flight Research Center after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Flight objectives were to check out pilot, John A. Manke, and to obtain stability and control data at mach 1.1 and mach 0.9 for stability augmentation systems only. Flight objectives were achieved. Vehicle reached 21 600-m (71 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.24. (nasa proj off)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by William H. Dana, completed 18th flight after air-launch from B-52 aircraft over Flight Research Center. Objectives—to expand flight envelope, obtain stability and control data at mach 0.95, and check out pitch reaction control— were achieved. M2-F3 reached 21 000-m (68 000-ft) altitude and exceeded planned mach 1.34 speed, (nasa proj off)
Federal District in Washington, D.C., issued temporary order restraining NASA from reducing staff at Marshall Space Flight Center on petition of American Federation of Government Employees, msfc reduction in force had been scheduled for June 29. Judge Joseph C. Waddy scheduled hearing for July 10 to determine if restraining order would become permanent injunction, (msfc Release 72-80)
Proposal for domestic communications satellite system was reviewed by John J. .O’Connor in New York Times. Federal Communications Commission was considering several possible structures for system: completely open entry for applicants, with restrictions limited to antitrust considerations; approval of one applicant or consortium of applicants, subject to restrictions; or plan between these two. Spokesman for one independent group, Network Project, had testified in May congressional hearings protesting that ownership and management by private industry would make granting access for either educational institution or individual “the prerogative of a specialized interest which has historically subordinated public service to private gain.” Network Project viewed “public access to, and control of, satellite facilities as a fundamental right,” particularly since “American people have already invested more than $20-billion in the space program through their taxes.” Question should be opened to debate, including public. O’Connor asked: “Do we need a domestic satellite system? Do we want a ‘wired nation’? Who precisely is articulating these needs? And why?” Satellite research “dominated by the Defense Department” had “involved lasers, computers, sensors and a wide variety of surveillance technology. Cameras on helicopters have already been used to record unaware citizens. Will these techniques become a standard element in a domestic satellite system? And, if so, will the public have access similar to that of a local government or police department?” Questions accumulated. “The answers are, or should be, of public interest.” (O’Connor, NYT, 5/21/72, 21)
NASA U-2 reconnaissance aircraft on loan to Virginia Institute of Marine Science would begin 45-day study of Chesapeake Bay area within two weeks to seek photographic evidence of path of Hurricane Agnes, vims Director, Dr. William J. Hargis, announced. Aircraft cameras, with high-resolution lenses, would photograph bay and adjacent continental shelf from 18 000-m (60 000-ft) altitude to trace flow of fresh water dumped over Chesapeake basin by storm, which Dr. Hargis described as “a once-in-200-years phenomenon.” (Nunes, W Post, 7/6/72, B2)
r/a William M. Harnish (usn) assumed command of Pacific Missile Range in ceremony at Pt. Mugu, Calif, (pmr Missile, 8/11/72, 1) August 12-13: Chicago Daily News editorial said there appeared to be “conspiracy” to keep details of Apollo 15 commercialism from public. “Not only were public and press barred from the five-hour committee hearing [see Aug. 3]; a curtain of silence was imposed after the session.” Paper reminded “both NASA and the committee that they work for the public. Let’s quit playing cozy and bring the facts into the open so the public can make its own judgment.” {C Daily News, 8/12-13/72) Primary objective was to evaluate effectiveness of bumper-protected multisheet spacecraft structure for protection against meteoroid penetration in first inflight test. Data would be compared with data from single-sheet structures launched previously. Secondary objectives were to obtain data on meteoroid impact velocity and measure impact flux of small mass meteoroids. Satellite had been designed, fabricated, and tested by Langley Research Center. It carried three experiments: bumper penetration experiment with 12 panels, each 48 cm wide and 3 m long (19 in x 10Y2 ft), containing 8 pressurized cells; impact flux experiment containing 65 thin-film capacitance penetration sensors arranged in groups of 3 and 5 on various parts of spacecraft; and meteoroid-velocity experiment consisting of 2 plates of sensors and timer to measure time meteoroid traveled distance between plates. By Aug. 22 spacecraft experiments and telemetry systems were operating and good data were being obtained, but half of panels in bumper experiment apparently had not deployed. Spacecraft was spinning at 3 rpm as planned, but because of panel deployment anomaly and resulting spin axis 90° to that planned, spacecraft battery temperature had risen from 299 K (79°F) past 308 K (95°F) design temperature to 337 K (147°F) Aug. 22. Battery was still providing voltage and all experiments were functioning satisfactorily. During spacecraft’s second pass Aug. 22, telemeter A, powered by battery, came on as commanded but telemeter B, backup system operated by solar-cell power, went off unexpectedly. Officials decided to discontinue interrogation of telemeter A so that data from telemeter B would not be jeopardized. As a result, no data were being received from secondary experiments and no housekeeping data were received. About 2000 impacts by submicrometer particles had been detected during telemeter A operation, providing sufficient data for impact experiment. No data had been obtained from meteoroid-velocity experiment. By Aug. 28, 3 of 48 pressurized detector cells successfully deployed had been punctured and primary experiment was continuing to provide good data, (nasa proj off)
Senate received President Nixon’s nominations of Apollo 16 Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., for promotion from lieutenant colonel to full colonel in Air Force and of Apollo 16 Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II for promotion from lieutenant commander in Navy to permanent grade of commander. Senate confirmed both nominations May 16. (CR, 5/2/72, S7135; 5/16/72, S7969) May 3:	Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., held press conference at Manned Spacecraft Center and showed films and still photos taken during April 16-27 mission. Crew’s physical condition was already back to normal. Mattingly’s exercise-response tests had been normal one day after landing, and Young’s and Duke’s had been normal two days after landing. Tests to determine potassium levels were still under way. Young said engine problem that had delayed lunar landing six hours had made Apollo 16 “a cliff-hanger of a mission from where we were sitting in the cockpit; but the ground came through . . . with a couple of clutch hits and put us right back in the ball game. I know there was a lot of work being done on the ground and, speaking for the flight crew, we certainly appreciate it.” Young also praised lunar roving vehicle which carried him and Duke over lunar surface. “The suspension system on the Rover is absolutely remarkable. We never had the feeling of spinning out or anything, but sometimes we went in some deep holes and sometimes the vehicle bounced up in the air and came down on a rock . . . [but] it didn’t seem to affect the performance of the machine.” Duke said lunar surface was so clear that “features look almost like you’re right next door to them,” like a clear day in western U.S. desert. “Some mountains you think are right next to you and [they] end up 20 miles [32 km] away. You have the same feeling on the lunar surface. Looking out the window from the lunar module . . . South Ray Crater . . . looks like it’s just right next to you, but it was 6 kilometers [3% miles] away.” (Transcript)
Federal Aviation Administrator John H. Shaffer received 1972 Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy at annual Wright Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C. Citation was for “outstanding leadership of the worldwide operations of the Federal Aviation Administration which has greatly enhanced all aspects of U.S. aviation to the benefit and safety of the general public and all who fly.” (naa Release, 9/22/72; FAA PIO)
Establishment of Office of Supply and Equipment Management under Assistant Administrator for Administration was announced by NASA. Office was responsible for receipt, use, and disposal of all NASA personal property, in-house and contractor held. It absorbed Property and Supply Div. and related functions of offices of Facilities and Procurement. William P. Risso, Director of Resources Management in Office of Applications, had been designated Director of new office, whose top priority was to ensure optimum use, reuse, and disposition of equipment throughout NASA, (nasa Ann)
San Jose [Calif.] Mercury editorial, commenting that Apollo 16 astronauts were safely on their way home “after a hugely successful exploration of the highlands of the moon,” said: “Space exploration should continue to command a relatively high place in the nation’s list of priorities; five trips to the moon have only served to whet the appetite for more and better knowledge of the earth’s nearest neighbor.” (San Jose Mercury, 4/26/72) April 27:	President Nixon telephoned Apollo 16 astronauts aboard U.S.S. Ticonderoga following splashdown, to offer congratulations on successful completion of mission. He invited astronauts to be special guests at state dinner for Mexican President Luis Echeverria Alvarez in June and said he would nominate L/Cdr Thomas K. Mattingly II (usn) for rank of commander and l/c Charles M. Duke, Jr. (usaf), for rank of colonel. President then issued statement from Key Biscayne, Fla.: “The journey of Apollo 16 has ended, but the contributions of this mission to scientific progress have only begun. Rarely if ever has so much new information been made available to science in such a brief period. As the work of evaluation and analysis goes forward, the impact of Apollo 16 will be felt for many years to come. “On behalf of all Americans, I am pleased to welcome Astronauts Young, Duke, and Mattingly back to earth and to salute them for a job well done. Their skill, their courage, and their enthusiasm have written another proud chapter in the stirring story of mankind’s struggle to unlock the mysteries of the unknown.” White House press officer later said President had asked possibility of promoting Capt. John W. Young to admiral. He was told Capt. Young had received two recent promotions and Navy would not permit third at this time. {PD, 5/1/72, 796; NYT, 4/28/72, 22)
Cuban Premier Fidel Castro and Soviet Communist Party Leader Leonid I.	Brezhnev visited Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center near Moscow during state visit of Castro to U.S.S.R. Castro placed flowers on monument to Gagarin, first man in space (April 12, 1961). Visitors were shown automatic linking of model spacecraft, Salyut space station, and spacecraft that had returned from space. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 6/30/72, Gl)
Twenty-fifth anniversary of transistor—invented Dec. 23, 1947, by Dr. John Bardeen, Dr. Walter H. Brattain, and Dr. William Shockley at American Telephone & Telegraph Co.’s Bell Telephone Laboratories. Invention had introduced age of electronic miniaturization, advanced computer development, and simplified communications. New York Times said that, “without the tiny transistor, it is highly unlikely that man would yet have walked on the moon.” (Smith, NYT, 12/22/72, 45)
White House announced that Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser, would lead scientific delegation to Moscow July 12 for formal discussions on implementation of Moscow summit agreement on cooperation in science and technology [see May 24]. Dr. David met at White House later with 21 scientific advisers who would accompany him to U.S.S.R. He told press following meeting that, instead of previous exchange of small numbers of scientists and engineers, there now would be “joint programs and common operations” in U.S. and U.S.S.R. Specific areas had not yet been selected, but Dr. David saw among possibilities joint research on electrical power, solar power, and exploitation of geothermal energy (heat inside earth) and magnetohydrodynamics (mhd). mhd generators burned fuel and directed resulting hot gas through magnetic field to produce electricity. Other areas of joint research might be crop genetics, atmospheric sciences, earthquake prediction, fisheries management and production, metallurgy, forestry, urban planning, computer sciences, and weather manipulation. (PD, 6/26/72, 1087; Cohn, W Post, 6/22/72, A2)
Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering in Dept, of Defense, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on dod coordination with NASA on space shuttle development during hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization: “I firmly believe that the U.S. must retain a strong national commitment to scientific and technological progress. The NASA space program is a vital element of this overall effort.” In space area, DOD was “becoming increasingly dependent on space systems, particularly in . . . communications. Other agencies and the public are becoming increasingly dependent on the use of space for communications, weather forecasting, and natural resource exploration. The Department of Defense supports the NASA space shuttle as an important part of the President’s program, which will lead to a greater and more effective use of the space environment in the future.” Dr. Foster discussed Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs) for military needs not satisfied economically and reliably by more traditional communications systems. First dscs, currently operational, employed “simple, low-power satellites and ground terminals originally designed for experimental and test programs. To replace the existing satellites ... we are deploying new DSCS satellites that have roughly 10 times the communications capability. . . . We are also developing improved terminals which will supplement the existing dscs terminal complex.” (Transcript)
Swiss Transport Museum in Lucerne had record 608 000 visitors— increase of about one third over 1971. Museum was considered most active museum in Switzerland and Europe’s most popular transport museum. Planetarium rated second to New York’s American Museum-Hayden Planetarium in number of annual visitors. Swiss Transport Museum’s Air and Space Wing was dedicated July 1. Dedication ceremonies were attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A Armstrong; and Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn. During year, James E. Webb, former NASA Administrator, officially presented model of Goddard Space Flight Center’s computer facility to Museum. (Dir Swiss Trans Museum letter to nasa Hist Off, 2/19/72; A&A 1972)
Syndicated columnist William Hines criticized NASA earth resources survey program in Chicago Sun-Times. Program’s rationale “leaps from an insupportable assumption (namely, that everything can be viewed better from space than close up) to an unjustifiable conclusion (that even if this is true the multi-purpose, multi-disciplinary satellite is the best way to do it).” (C Sun-Times, 7/20/72)
Roll-out ceremony for multinational European airbus and France’s second Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport was held in Toulouse, France. Aircraft were scheduled for maiden flights in few weeks. Concorde 2, similar to three service models entering production, was said to have eliminated smoke and noise that made Concorde 1 unwelcome in U.S. Airbus was standard preproduction model of 330-passenger, short- to medium-haul transport for 1975 operation. During ceremony British Aerospace Minister Michael Heseltine said British government was ready to confer with other European governments on possibility of integrated European aviation industry. (Lewis, NYT, 9/29/72, 8)
Dept, of Transportation award of $1.3-million grant to Atomic Energy Commission’s Lawrence Livermore Laboratory to assess effects of proposed 1985-1990 high-altitude aircraft on environment was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Yolpe. Project was part of dot’s Climatic Impact Assessment Program (ciap). Laboratory would construct sophisticated computer models to predict effect of subsonic and supersonic aircraft on temperature, cloud formation, and stratospheric shielding of potentially hazardous ultraviolet radiation from sun. (dot Release 38-72)
Atomic scientist Dr. Edward Teller urged legislation to make public Government’s scientific findings within year after they were classified. In speech before Florida Presbyterian College in St. Petersburg he said, “I am convinced we must do something about secrecy if democracy can function.” (AP, W Post, 1/15/72, All) January 14:	NASA’s Office of Advanced Research and Technology (oart) was renamed Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (oast). Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said NASA was steadily increasing its aeronautical activity and said name change “highlights the importance we attach to aeronautics.” (NASA Release 72-10)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) sent letter to NASA Hq. requesting NASA comments on General Accounting Office report that recommended Manned Spacecraft Center contracting officer “devote more attention” to performance of NASA contractor Service Technology Corp. Firm, subsidiary of Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., had received average annual income of $12 million from extensions to $16-million contract signed with NASA in 1967. STC work included building and ground maintenance, engineering design and construction of hardware, technical writing and editing, and publications distribution service. GAO had found stc practices “doubtful.” (H Post, 5/14/72)
Dr. John Teegan, Chief of Launch Site Medical Operations at Kennedy Space Center, announced his resignation to press at Cape Kennedy. Dr. Teegan, who would return to private practice, said he had resigned because his patients—astronauts-—were too healthy. Astronauts were unusually healthy because they were in excellent physical condition when they were chosen and made it a point to stay that way. “I was educated to care for people who were ill and I want to get my feet wet again in clinical medicine. This chapter in space history was a very valuable experience that few people have had the opportunity to experience.” (Reuters, B Sun, 2/13/72; ksc pao) February 14^-25: U.S.S.R. launched Luna 20 unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur at 8:28 am local time (10:28 pm est Feb. 13). Tass said objective of mission was “further exploration of the moon and near lunar space.” On Feb. 18 Luna 20 entered near-circular lunar orbit with 100-km (62-mi) altitude, 1-hr 58-min period, and 65° inclination. Engine firing on Feb. 19 placed spacecraft in elliptical orbit with 100-km (62-mi) apolune and 21-km (13-mi) perilune. Main retroengine burn for 267 sec on Feb. 21 thrust spacecraft toward moon and Luna 20 free-fell to 760-m (2490-ft) altitude. Spacecraft was then guided by braking rocket to softlanding northeast of moon’s Sea of Fertility at 12:19 am Bay-konur time Feb. 22 (2:19 pm est Feb. 21). Landing coordinates were 3° 32' north latitude and 56° 33' east longitude. Spacecraft began transmitting radio signals and conducting experiments. After drilling lunar rock, collecting lunar samples, photographing lunar surface, and performing other undisclosed experiments, Luna 20 lifted off moon at 3:58 am Baykonur time Feb. 23 ( 5:58 pm est Feb. 22), after 27 hrs 39 min on lunar surface. Tass said samples had been obtained with earth-operated, percussion-rotary drill designed to handle hard and loose rock samples simultaneously. Luna 20 reentered atmosphere Feb. 25 and parachuted to landing at 12:12 am Feb. 25 Baykonur time (2:12 pm est Feb. 24) 40 km (24 mi) northwest of Djezkazgan, Kazakhstan, after 11-day 16-hr mission. Capsule containing lunar samples was recovered despite “extremely unfavorable weather conditions—strong wind, blizzard, and low clouds.” Luna 20 was second unmanned spacecraft to land on moon and return to earth with lunar samples. First had been U.S.S.R.’s Luna 16 (Sept. 12-24, 1970). Luna 17 had landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970, and had released Lunokhod 1 lunar rover. Luna 18 (launched Sept. 2, 1971) had crashlanded on moon Sept. 11, 1971, and Luna 19 (launched Sept. 28, 1971) was still in lunar orbit on photography and mapping mission. (Tass, FBis-Sov, 2/14/72, LI; 2/22-24/72, LI; 2/28/72, LI; SBD, 2/15/72, 226)
Families of Astronauts Edward H. White II and Roger B. Chaffee—who lost lives in Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire—received awards totaling $300 000 from spacecraft manufacturers. North American Rockwell Corp. and former North American Aviation, Inc., Rockwell-Standard Corp., and Rockwell Standard Co. had been charged with negligence in suits filed by Chaffee’s widow Nov. 6 and White’s widow Nov. 7. In out-of-court settlement, Mrs. Patricia White Davis would receive $50 000 for herself and $50 000 for each of two children; Mrs. Martha Chaffee Canfield would receive $70 000 and $40 000 for each of two children. Widow of Virgil I. Grissom, third astronaut killed in fire, had won $350 000 settlement from NR March 8. (W Star & News, 11/8/72, A4; AP, NYT, 11/11/72, 7)
M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by William H. Dana, completed 14th flight from Flight Research Center after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Objective of powered flight was to check out command augmentation system and engine accumulator modification. M2-F3 reached 17 300-m (57 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.86. Flight was first for M2-F3 since its removal from flight status in January for installation of command augmentation fly-by-wire system. (NASA proj off)
Apollo 16 Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II received Distinguished Service Medal and astronaut wings from Secretary of the Navy John W. Warner in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Mattingly was Navy commander, (dod Release 526-72)
Communications Commission of United Nations Educational, Cultural and Scientific Organization (unesco) voted 47 to 9 with 13 abstentions to approve declaration favoring ban of direct satellite broadcasting to other nations without their permission. U.S. Deputy Secretary of State for Educational and Cultural Affairs William B. Jones said that ban was “in direct opposition to our own national traditions, and to the basic principles of the United Nations.” (Randal, W Post, 11/5/72, A14)
First laboratory demonstration of controlled fusion—peaceful use of hydrogen-bomb reaction to make electricity—could occur within three years, Washington Post reported. Intensely concentrated laser light beam would be used to trigger fusing of atoms. Fusion would produce energy sufficient for conversion into plentiful electric power with potentially unlimited fuel, a form of hydrogen from sea. Physicist Edward Teller had said there was “outside chance” that laser-fusion would carry men to Mars and back by end of century. U.S.S.R. was believed to be two to three years ahead of rest of world in both laser-fusion and other fusion research. (Cohn, W Post, 8/11/72, A3)
Use of remote TV to monitor weather conditions in mountain pass used by general-aviation pilots operating under visual flight rules (vfr) would be evaluated by Federal Aviation Administration, faa Director John H. Shaffer announced. Program would be conducted for faa by National Weather Service of National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration under $108 000 interagency agreement, (faa Release 72-38)
New satellite Hot Line between White House and Kremlin was targeted to begin operation in 1973, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. President Nixon’s approval had been announced Sept. 24, 1971, of U.S.—U.S.S.R. agreement on direct communication link using two satellite circuits, one established by each country. Agreement had been signed Sept. 30, 1971. (Av Wk, 1/17/72, 9; A&A 1971) January 17-19:	American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) held 10th Aerospace Sciences Meeting in San Diego, Calif. Apollo 15 Astronaut James B. Irwin and Nobel Prize-winning physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey reviewed space activities for local high school students. Dr. John C. Houbolt, Executive Vice President of Aeronautical Research Associates, delivered Dryden Research Lecture “Atmospheric Turbulence.” Lecture had been named in honor of late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, first NASA Deputy Administrator, in 1967. It succeeded Research Award established by aiaa in 1960. Dryden Lecture award, sponsored by General Electric Co., carried $1000 honorarium and $1500 travel allowance for repetition of lecture before selected aiaa sections. Dr. Houbolt reviewed latest data on atmospheric turbulence and its influence on aircraft design and flight. Dr. Allen E. Puckett, Executive Vice President and General Manager of Hughes Aircraft Co., was installed as 1972 aiaa President at Jan. 19 Honors Banquet. aiaa presented Goddard Award to Gary A. Plourde, project engineer at United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div., and Squadron Leader Brian Brimelow (raf) and Howard E. Schumacher, both of Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory. Trio was honored as team for original research leading to first understanding of gas-turbine compressor stalls induced by turbulent inlet flow conditions. Sylvanus Albert Reed Award was presented to Dr. Max M. Munk, retired engineer, for “enduring contributions to the science of aerodynamics.” Robert M. Losey Award was given to Dr. David Q. Wark, Senior Scientist with National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, “in recognition of outstanding contributions to the science of meteorology as applied to aeronautics.” Edward W. Price, Head of Naval Weapons Center Aerothermochem-istry Div., received G. Edward Pendray Award for “continued outstanding contributions to the literature of solid rocket internal ballistics and combustion, particularly for his contributions on combustion instability and ignition.” Space Science Award was presented to Dr. Norman F. Ness, Chief of Goddard Space Flight Center Laboratory for Extraterrestrial Physics, for “significant contributions to the description and understanding of the interplanetary medium and the interactions of this medium with the earth and other large bodies.” (aiaa Releases 1/10/72, 1/13/72; A1AA Bull, 1/72, 2/72, 67) January 17-21:	Fourth Annual Earth Resources Program Review was held by NASA at Manned Spacecraft Center. Scientists from foreign nations and organizations, Government, universities, and private institutions attended. Reports were presented on 1971 research and analysis of aircraft and spacecraft remote sensing data. In Jan. 18 press briefing NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews said pollution monitoring was natural activity for global surveillance capability because atmospheric pollution was potentially global problem. Not well understood were manner in which pollutants were dispersed throughout globe or manner in which earth corrected itself. “There’s a lot of work to be done in this area.” In Jan. 21 briefing Dr. John M. DeNoyer, NASA Director of Earth Observations, said program was moving from exploratory to flight phase, from learning to applying techniques. Among applications was spring Arctic ice survey, in which some 80 scientists would be on ice measuring strain rates, meteorological conditions, and ice types, supported by Convair 990 aircraft from Ames Research Center. Also microwave techniques in remote sensing could identify ice-free lanes in Great Lakes region, making possible efficient shipping much earlier in spring than at present. Soo Canal into Lake Superior, which carried more tons of freight than any other canal in world, was now open only one half of year. Weather and cloud cover made aircraft surveillance inefficient; microwave techniques from satellite altitude was more practical in this instance. Another important program would be thermal mapping by remote sensing to permit better industrial planning from knowledge of how development would actually affect environment. Land-use planning also would be greatly aided by remote sensing data processed by computerized inventory system being developed at msc. (msc Release 72—11; MSC PAO; Transcript) January 18—20:	Opening hearings on aeronautical research and development, Chairman Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.) of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology announced Subcommittee name had been changed to Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Change followed receipt of Jan. 14 letter from Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announcing change in NASA office name from OABT to OAST. On first day of hearings Dr. Fletcher testified on “steady increase” in NASA funding for aeronautics: Funding had grown from $42 million in FY 1966 to $110 million in FY 1972, “a doubling in terms of constant dollars. When you add the funding for salaries and other in-house costs related to supporting the aeronautics programs, the total . . . has grown from 1.6% of the total NASA budget in fiscal year 1966 to 7.1% in fiscal year 1972.” Number of NASA personnel members working in aeronautics research and technology had grown from 2600 in 1966 to 5300. Increase had occurred while NASA staff had been reduced from 34 000 to 27 500. Dr. Fletcher said joint Dept, of Transportation and NASA Study on Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) had “forced the establishment of new and more effective coordination mechanisms between NASA and DOT.” Mechanisms were being used “to develop a formal card Policy Implementation Plan to specify clear goals, responsibilities, planned achievement milestones, and projected resource requirements for dot and NASA jointly.” card policy study had caused “better focus on the priority problem areas of aircraft noise . . . and terminal congestion” and directed more specific attention to role R&D might play in developing better total operating system for low-density aviation market so that civil aviation might be used more economically as tool for regional development. Focus did not compromise “ability to continue a comprehensive research and technology program in all the aeronautical disciplines to provide a technology base for the future.” Deputy Director Clarence A. Syvertson of Ames Research Center outlined general recommendations of CARD study: scope of civil-aviation R&D programs should be expanded to emphasize nontechnological factors; economists and social scientists should be assigned to NASA and dot staffs, r&d staffs of Dept, of Defense, NASA, dot, and Civil Aeronautics Board should be interchanged to provide broad systems background for more effective Government action in civil aviation programs. cab should explore policy of allowing intermodal mergers of airlines for expanded use of air cargo to encourage innovative industry R&D in this area. Dept, of Commerce should refine and monitor measurable indicators of U.S. progress in civil aviation industry. National Aeronautics and Space Council should review and recommend national policies guiding civil aviation that embraced several agencies. George W. Cherry, Deputy Administrator for Programs in oast, reported “considerable ongoing activity abroad in designing, building and selling new, small economical aircraft for the world’s low-density short-haul market. This raises the questions: Where will replacement aircraft come from? Can the U.S. industry compete with the foreign manufacturers to fill the market?” Answers required “fundamental policy decisions by the United States with regard to the desirability of providing continuing or expanded public-need air service, and also . . . to whether Government support can or should be given to the manufacturer.” U.S. needed to know more about market and economics of operating in low-density area to write specifications for aircraft and operating system. “If industry designs fall short of meeting the economic specifications, there should be enough information available to determine if Government assistance . . . could result in the operator providing viable service. If subsidy is necessary, subsidizing the nonrecurring costs of manufacture, rather than the recurring costs of operation, might make good sense.” NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson described questol project plans for two quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (stol) transport research aircraft: “The experimental airplanes will function as a versatile facility for NASA flight research programs developed in cooperation with other Government agencies and interested industry groups, including the airlines. The information provided will reduce the technical risk associated with development, by industry, of both civil and military STOL transports” and “provide a comprehensive technical foundation on which Government regulatory agencies can establish realistic criteria for certification of commercial subsonic stol transport aircraft and for en route and terminal area operations.” (Transcript) January 19:	NASA announced selection of flight crews for Skylab missions. Prime crewmen for first, 28-day flight were Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin (science pilot), and Paul J. Weitz (pilot). Backup crewmen were Russel L. Schweickart, Dr. Story Mus-grave, and Bruce McCandless II. Crewmen for second, 56-day mission were Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. Third mission, for 56 days, would be flown by Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue. Backup crew for second and third missions was Vance D. Brand, Dr. William B. Lenoir, and Dr. Don L. Lind, (nasa Release 72-12)
Flight Safety Foundation, Inc., presented 1972 Admiral Luis de Florez Flight Safety Award to Dr. John T. Dailey of Federal Aviation Administration on final day of three-day seminar. Recognition was for “outstanding individual contribution through his development of a behavioral profile designed to identify potential hijackers.” (Flight Safety Foundation; Av Wk, 10/23/72, 13)
New York Times science reporter John Nobel Wilford toured Zvezdny Gorodok (Star City), near Moscow, as first Western correspondent to be invited to center of U.S.S.R. cosmonaut activities. Guide for visit arranged by Soviet Novosti News Agency was Soyuz Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training. Shatalov said U.S.S.R. did not announce space mission dates “because we don’t want to bind the people who are preparing the flight.” Cosmonaut flight training areas were closed to most visitors “because we just don’t want journalists to interfere with the working atmosphere of the cosmonauts.” Area contained medical center with centrifuge that cosmonauts called “Devil’s merry-go-round.” From size and number of apartment buildings, Wilford estimated Star City population at 1500 to 2000, City was “smaller than Houston space center because it does not also serve as the mission control complex and apparently has no primary responsibility for the management of spacecraft design and development.” Like NASA Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston, Star City contained facilities for premission training of cosmonauts and postmission physical examinations and recreation. Like U.S. astronauts, Soviet cosmonauts were trained in aircraft “that make deep dives to simulate weightlessness.” Parachuting tested ability to handle high-stress situations. First simulator for Salyut orbiting laboratory was being installed in new building to be completed at year’s end. Wilford said that “this could mean that no major advance beyond the present version of Salyut should be expected until well after the simulator is ready.” Of about 50 cosmonauts in Soviet space program, one third were civil engineers living in Moscow, Shatalov said; remainder were Soviet air force pilots who lived in Star City. No women were preparing for space missions but U.S.S.R. had “many women who specialize in meteorology and medicine, which are professions necessary on the orbital stations.” From descriptions by Shatalov and Cosmonaut-engineer Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, Wilford had constructed outline of preparations for Soviet space mission: Cosmonauts were assigned to mission one year in advance of launch date by commission of medical and engineering experts and Shatalov. There were two backup crews. After learning spacecraft mechanics and electronics and practicing in spacecraft simulator at Star City, crew went to Baykonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan three weeks before launch. There they completed training in actual spacecraft, checked instruments, stocked food, adjusted couches, and recommended minor changes in housekeeping. “Unlike Cape Kennedy,” Baykonur had no simulators for last-minute practice. For two days before launch, “after the state commission approves the spaceship’s readiness,” crew relaxed. On launch morning cosmonauts were examined physically and biomedical sensors were attached to their bodies before they donned spacesuits. Traditionally, cosmonauts then gathered in quarters for few moments of silence broken by shouts of “off we go!” They signed their names on door before leaving for launch pad. Between missions, cosmonauts were expected to devote time each month to “social work”—visits to schools, collective farms, and factories. Shatalov had suggested that new Soviet manned missions were possible within months and that U.S.S.R. was studying mission longevity in preparation for earth-orbiting laboratories. Of next Salyut mission, Shatalov said: “We are going to make it better .... We will prolong the visits of men, and the number of expeditions will grow. This is the difference now between our program and yours.” Yeliseyev had said his countrymen would “probably” be on the moon by 1975. At tour’s completion, Shatalov had offered toast: “To cooperation between our peoples, to working together in space, which is our future and the future of the world.” (Wilford, NYT, 3/22/72, 30 ; 3/26/72, 7; Huntsville Times, 4/2/72, 17)
Communications Satellite Corp. released At the 10th Anniversary of the Communications Satellite Act of 1962: Comsat Report to the President and the Congress. Transmittal message dated Aug. 27—10th anniversary of Senate passage of Act—by ComSatCorp President Joseph V. Charyk and Board Chairman Joseph H. McConnell said 83-member International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (intelsat) was operating successfully under ComSatCorp management. Satellite services had been provided to developing and developed countries, efficient and economical use was being made of electromagnetic frequency spectrum, and improved communications services were being provided at reduced charges. ComSatCorp believed “it is fulfilling its mandate successfully, and . . . progress is beyond what many expected 10 years ago.” Report said regular full-time commercial satellite services were being provided globally by four satellites of Intelsat IV series and by network of 71 earth stations administered by 44 countries. Some 80 countries, territories, and possessions were being served directly, full time. Service was provided via more than 200 communications paths. (Text)
Formation of General Aviation Accident Prevention Industry Advisory Committee to work with Federal Aviation Administration in developing techniques for preventing general-aviation accidents was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. (faa Release 72—96)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) conveyed to Senate report by General Accounting Office on C-5A aircraft program that showed Air Force was continuing to accept delivery of defective C-5A aircraft. From February through September 1971 Air Force had accepted 15 C-5As with average of 251 deficiencies per aircraft. Most serious defects were in wings, landing gear, and radar. (CR, 4/6/72, S5510-7) April 6-7:	Outstanding Handicapped Federal Employee of the Year Award—given annually by Civil Service Commission—was presented in Washington, D.C., to Shirley Price, armless 1.2-m-tall (4-ft-tall) administrative aid at Manned Spacecraft Center. Miss Price had graduated from Texas Southern Univ. with honors and had attended graduate school at Univ. of Wisconsin. At msc she controlled 10 000-event data library, used and interpreted univac 1108 computer runs, filed, answered telephones, and typed 45 to 50 words per minute. Her hobbies included drawing, embroidering, crocheting, and knitting, all of which she did with her toes. Mayor Walter E. Washington presented keys to city of Washington, D.C., to Miss Price on April 7. (W Star, 4/8/72; NASA Activities, 5/15/72, 95-6)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by William H. Dana, completed 15th flight from Flight Research Center. Objective—to investigate stability and control at mach 0.95—was achieved, (nasa proj off)
Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II underwent detailed medical examination and began technical debriefing at Manned Spacecraft Center. Dr. Willard Hawkins of msc said astronauts looked good, were “in good physical shape,” and had normal responses. (AP, B Sun, 5/1/72, A3) During April: Soviet Space Program, 1971 was released by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences as supplement to Senate Document 92-51 [see Jan. 6 and 22], Report—prepared by Library of Congress under direction of Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.—said 1971 had been peak year in Soviet space activity, with 83 successful launches against 31 for U.S. Soviet successes had included “remarkable performance of the roving lunar vehicle, Lunokhod 1, the versatile manned space station Salyut in which a manned world duration record was set, the arrival in Mars orbit of two very heavy payloads, Mars 2 and 3, and the placing in lunar orbit of the heavy automated laboratory Luna 19.” On negative side had been inability to develop large G booster, death of Soyuz cosmonauts, crash of Luna 18 on moon, failure of first Mars probe, and failure of Mars 2 and 3 landers to carry out planned experiments. U.S.S.R. in 1971 had flown manned-precursor spacecraft “with greater maneuverability than' the present ones, quite possibly testing the advanced propulsion needed for manned lunar flight.” Soviet spokesmen had reiterated commitment to manned space stations, applications satellites, and unmanned planetary exploration throughout solar system. Manned lunar and planetary flights “continued to get mention as a later goal.” U.S.S.R. was expected to launch another Salyut to be visited by Soyuz 12 and 13 for long stay. Thus far U.S.S.R. had given space program “continued verbal support” and had demonstrated “commitment of hardware which has been rising for the 15 years flights have been undertaken.” (Committee Print)
NASA’s M2—F3 lifting body, piloted by John A. Manke, completed 27th and last flight after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Flight objective was to evaluate reaction augmentation system during boost. M2-F3 reached 19 800-m (65 000-ft) altitude and roach 1.4. (NASA proj off)
Nearly half billion dollars worth of equipment, mostly junk, had been left on lunar surface during six Apollo landings, Chicago Tribune reported. List included rocket engines, electronic devices, golf ball driven by Apollo 14 commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., feather left by Apollo 15 commander David R. Scott (who had dropped feather and hammer simultaneously during televised extravehicular activity to show that they both fell at same rate in vacuum), and 12 prs of hoots costing $4000 a pair. Boots included those that Apollo 11 Commander Neil A. Armstrong had used to make first footprints on moon. Technological items left on moon included 5 S—IVB rocket engines costing $20 million each, 6 $40-million lunar modules, 3 lunar rovers at $2 million each, TV and photography equipment costing $5 million, 12 backpacks costing $3.6 million, and assorted tools valued at $600 000. Still operative on moon were five nuclear-powered scientific stations costing $25 million each and three laser reflectors costing total $2 million. (Kotulak, C Trib News Service, C Trib, 12/16/72) December 17: Apollo 17 orbital science briefing was held at Manned Spacecraft Center while astronauts continued flight homeward from moon. Data from laser altimeter and S-band gravity experiments were described by Dr. Wilbur R. Wollenhaupt, Chief of msc Experiments Support Section and S-band transponder coinvestigator. Profiles of near-side lunar basins appeared to be flat and depressed with surrounding terrain. Far side appeared mountainous. Copernicus Crater was deficiency region; Sinus Aestuum, Mare Serenitatis, and Mare Crisium were high regions; and Littrow landing site was low. Harold Masursky of U.S. Geological Survey, member of Apollo Orbital Science Photographic Team, said panoramic camera aboard Apollo 17 had “acted better than on the two previous flights [Apollo 15 and 16], and we essentially accomplished the tasks assigned to it.” During Apollo 17 mission “we saw the successful rectification of the 15 and 16 panoramic photographs, and they looked very good indeed. So, hopefully, we will have the rectification of 17 done shortly and put out a series of photomosaics, putting the high-resolution panoramic frames together into what we think will be the best series of maps that we have developed for the Moon.” Correlation of photography with gravity tracking and laser altimetry had produced “a great deal of data” to confirm earlier interpretations from Apollo 15 that lunar front side was low and that “largest area of mare material on the front side is an ocean basin floor, . . . not a result of the impact as the large gravity anomalies indicate in the impact basin.” Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientist Walter E. Brown reported lunar sounder experiment had “behaved about as we expected except that there were a couple of surprises.” Experimenters had expected that “over the Mare, the smooth areas, . . . we’d have a reasonably smooth, well-behaved echo, and over the mountainous area it might bounce around a little bit.” Sounder data had shown “it was fairly smooth over the mountains and it bounced around over the Mare.” Until mission film was returned, “we won’t know . . . just exactly what is going on, but it’s . . . extremely interesting.” Dr. Frank J. Low of Univ. of Arizona and Rice Univ. said scanning radiometer experiment performance “was essentially perfect.” It produced coverage of about one third of the surface area of the moon and made some 100 million independent temperature measurements. With “beautiful Atlas of thermal measurements generated by this magnificent flight,” scientists had “foundation of a new technique for exploration of planetary surfaces without atmospheres.” Johns Hopkins Univ. scientist William E. Fastie said far-ultraviolet spectrometer had “performed perfectly . . . and all of the observations that were intended were accomplished.” Experiment had detected neither major nor minor constituents of atmosphere. “And, pending further analysis, we have . . . identified only one trace constituent of the lunar atmosphere. The immediate conclusion ... is, that the Moon is not outgassing, because the only other possible gases that could be in the lunar atmosphere are neon and argon, and neither of them are the primordial atmosphere of the Moon.” Mood of briefing was conveyed by Apollo orbital science program scientist Floyd I. Roberson: “I think we’ve got a lot of tools in our hands now and we sit up here and we’re all tired and we talk about the results of our experiments and maybe we don’t convey the excitement that’s upon us. But, we really feel that this is a beginning as far as lunar science is concerned, as far as the Apollo data is concerned, and we’re really going to get there now.” (Transcript)
Bellcomm, Inc., scientist Dr. Farouk El-Baz had suggested that water vapor detected on moon March 7, 1971, could have come from water and urine dumped into lunar orbit from Apollo 14 spacecraft, Reuters reported. He had shown particles of waste water could have combined, orbited moon for several weeks at gradually decreasing altitudes, and finally descended to lunar surface, where they were detected as water vapor. Bellcomm’s findings were rejected by Dr. H. Kent Hills of Rice Univ., who said waste discharge would have spread out in orbit and would not have produced as high a reading on two suprathermal ion detectors as he and codiscoverer Dr. John W. Freeman had found. Discovery of water vapor had been announced Oct. 15, 1971 [see also March 3], (NYT, 3/3/72, 22; Bellcomm pio; NASA proj off)
National Science Foundation announced issuance of Solar Energy in Developing Countries: Perspectives and Prospects. Report of NAS Board on Science and Technology for International Development said solar energy had “capability to meet energy needs substantially beyond the applications now being made.” But best course was to study general energy needs of developing nations and methods of satisfying these needs without placing excessive hope in promising but unproved applications of sun’s energy. Report recommended establishment of regional centers in developing nations to evaluate supplies and uses of all kinds of energy and to begin research and development efforts on applications suitable to local conditions, (nas Release) April 13:	Soviet and NASA scientists exchanged lunar soil samples in ceremony at Soviet Academy of Sciences in Moscow. NASA representatives Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of Manned Spacecraft Center Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., and Dr. Michael B. Duke, Lunar Sample Curator at msc, presented Soviet scientists with 1 g (0.04 oz) of soil brought to earth by Apollo 15 astronauts. Exchange brought total weight of Apollo 15 lunar material given to Soviet scientists to 3 g. Soviet scientists gave NASA representatives 2 g (0.07 oz) of soil brought to earth by Luna 20, several photos of Luna 20 landing site, and pictures of separate rock fragments, (nasa Release 72—77; fbis—Sov, 4/13/72, L4; nasa omsf)
Apollo 15 astronauts had been “disciplined out of the astronaut corps” for ignoring warning by Chief of Flight Crew Operations Donald K. Slayton not to carry items to moon for commercial gain, Washington Post said. Slayton’s warnings had been in personal briefings to crew and memorandum to all astronauts. Warnings had been inspired by discovery that Franklin Mint had profited from melting down coins taken to moon by Apollo 14 astronauts during Jan. 31-Feb. 9, 1971, mission, mixing their molten silver with other metals, and producing 130 000 coins for sale. (O’Toole, W Post, 8/1/72, A8)
Pan American World Airways’ waiting list for reservations on first commercial flight to moon contained names of Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong—first man to walk on moon during July 16-24, 1969, mission—Edwin A. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. List had been closed after 90 000 reservations had been accepted. Pan Am spokesman had said flight would not be possible before 21st century, but most applicants had paid $10 or $25 as reservation fee. (M Her, 11/30/72)
Agreement on Cooperation in the Fields of Science and Technology was signed in Moscow by U.S. Secretary of State William P. Rogers and U.S.S.R. State Committee for Science and Technology Chairman Vladimir A. Kirillin. Main objective was to “provide broad opportunities for both Parties to combine the efforts of their scientists and specialists in working on major problems, whose solution will promote the progress of science and technology for the benefit of both countries and of mankind.” Cooperation might include exchange of scientists and specialists; exchange of scientific and technical information; joint development and implementation of programs and projects in basic and applied sciences; joint research, development, and testing, and exchange of research results and experience between scientific research institutions and organizations; organization of joint courses, conferences, and symposia; and help in establishing contacts and arrangements between U.S. firms and Soviet enterprises. Agreement would establish U.S.-U.S.S.R. Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation to meet at least annually, in Washington and Moscow alternately. Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser, said at Washington, D.C., press conference following Moscow signing that Agreement would “enable Soviet and American specialists to solve some major common problems.” Cooperation would produce “more vigorous activities here ... on research, management and systems science, wide use of natural resources, weather modification, superconductivity, high energy physics and basic science.” U.S. and U.S.S.R. had already derived major benefits from cooperation in fusion technology and “in the magneto hydrodynamic area, the breeder reactor area and in the solar energy area, we are doing things . . . that are of interest to the Soviet Union.” (PD, 6/5/72, 921-2; Transcript)
President Nixon submitted to Senate nomination of members to National Science Board: Dr. Wesley G. Campbell, Director of Hoover Institute on War, Revolution and Peace; Dr. T. Marshall Hahn, Jr., President of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univ.; Dr. Anna J. Harrison, Mt. Holyoke College chemist; Dr. Hubert Heffner, Stanford Univ. physicist; Dr. William H. Meckling, Univ. of Rochester economist; Dr. William A. Nierenberg, Director of Scripps Institute of Oceanography; Dr. Russell D. O’Neal, Executive Vice President for Aerospace with Bendix Corp.; and Dr. Joseph M. Reynolds, Louisiana State Univ. physicist (reappointment). Terms would expire May 10, 1978. (PD, 8/7/72,1198, 1205) August 3:	NASA’s Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched
Congress received Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas Mattingly II. In welcoming speech Sen. Strom Thurmond (R-S.C.) said, “The trail they took into space has further inspired all of us to reach for greater accomplishments.” Astronauts urged continued support of space program. Astronauts earlier in morning reported preliminary results from April 16-27 lunar landing mission to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Slides shown included first photo showing intensity of ultraviolet light around earth and also aurora belts, including magnetosphere on equator never seen before [see May 12]. They also showed photo of geocorona protecting earth from uv rays from sun. Mattingly said of lunar exploration. “I think as we go further . . . into our exploration of the moon, we’ll find it more and more complex than we suspected it would ever be. In our fondest dreams, I believe we never suspected the hidden treasures that are buried underneath the lunar soil.” (CR, 5/16/72, S7839-40; W Post, 5/17/72, Al; Hearing transcript)
Administration had summoned 400 leading U.S. scientists and engineers to series of White House meetings on nation’s domestic and economic problems, Washington Post reported. Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., had exchanged ideas with physicists, engineers, chemists, and aerospace officials on urgent situations in meetings intended “to rally the country’s science-engineering community behind other goals than weapon-making.” (Cohn, W Post, 2/18/72, Al)
John Stack, engineer who had helped develop first high-speed wind tunnel in 1930s, died at age 65 after fall from horse. Stack had joined Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory (predecessor of Langley Research Center) in 1928 and had been head of high-velocity airflow research at Laboratory in 1939, NASA Director of Aeronautical Research from 1961 to 1962, and Vice President for Engineering at Fairchild Industries until his retirement in 1971. He had received numerous awards for his work in supersonic technology, including Robert J. Collier trophy in 1947 for work with X—1 rocket aircraft. (AP, NYT, 6/20/72, 38; frc X-Press, 7/21/72, 2) June 18-July 30: Exhibit of kinetic art of Dr. Frank J. Malina—artist, astronautical engineer, and past Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory (1944^1946)—was held at Univ. of Texas Institute of Texan Cultures in San Antonio. Catalog noted Dr. Malina was “pioneering on the new frontier of man’s adjustment to the explosive impact of science, technology and the exploration of space on the world.” Artist believed “man must understand this world in order to survive in it, and that this understanding must be both intellectual and emotional.” Paintings included impressions of space phenomena. (Catalog)
Award of two research contracts to reduce aircraft noise were announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. General Electric Co. had received $789 000 and Lockheed-Georgia Co., $77 042. Contractors would analyze and experiment with core engine noise control for propulsion systems of future aircraft, (faa Release 72-131)
Five Soviet aviation officials toured Kennedy Space Center and were briefed on current and future NASA programs. They were among first Soviet citizens to visit ksc. Poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko had visited ksc and witnessed Apollo 16 launch as NASA guest April 16. (ksc pao) November 17:	Successful radio tracking of solar energetic particles through interplanetary space was reported in Science by Goddard Space Flight Center scientists Dr. Joseph Fainberg, Larry G. Evans, and Robert G. Stone. Satellite observations by Explorer 6 (launched Aug. 7, 1959) of ejection of energetic sun particles at long radio wavelengths had provided means of investigating gross magnetic field configuration over distances of one astronomical unit. (Science, 11/17/72, 743-5)
International Aerospace Hall of Fame announced 1972 selection of members: Gen. Henry H. Arnold, wartime commander of U.S. Army Air Forces; John K. Northrop, president and cofounder of Northrop Aircraft, Inc.; Sir Geoffrey de Havilland, British aircraft designer and founder of de Havilland Aircraft Co.; and Otto Lilienthal, German glider aircraft pioneer. Investiture ceremony would be held Oct. 14 in San Diego, (nasa Hist Off)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by John A. Manke, completed 23rd flight from Flight Research Center after air-launch from B-52 aircraft to evaluate command augmentation system. Additional flight objectives were to obtain stability and control data at mach 1.1, mach 0.8, and mach 0.7 and to check out pitch-reaction augmentation system. M2—F3 reached 19 800-m (65 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.3. All objectives were achieved, (nasa proj off)
Col. Thomas G. Lamphier (usa, Ret.), veteran pilot and former Deputy Administrator of Veterans Administration, died in San Diego, Calif., at 82. He had helped Charles A. Lindbergh plan routes for first U.S. passenger airline in 1928 and had served as Vice President of first airline—Transcontinental Air Transport—after retirement from Army in 1929. Col. Lamphier had testified in defense of Gen. William (Billy) Mitchell at general’s court martial for insubordination in 1925. (AP, NYT, 10/12/72, 46) October 9—15:	International Astronautical Federation held 23rd Congress in Vienna. Dr. H. Guyford Stever, Director, of National Science Foundation, stressed Congress theme “Space for World Development” in opening address: “This is the year of ever-increasing cooperative interests in space ventures, including the joint, manned space effort by the Soviet Union and the United States. Thanks to the genius of our early pioneers, . . . results of an era of experimentation now show us clearly the promise which the orderly and determined use of space and space vehicles has to offer.” (Text; Congress Release, 10/9/72) Soviet attendance at Congress was limited to 21 including Cosmonauts Anatoly V. Filipchenko and Valery N. Kubasov. More than half of scheduled Soviet participants failed to arrive or to send papers. Proxy readings of Soviet papers that were included eliminated most opportunities for clarification and discussion by panelists. Lack of Soviet participation had been attributed by Western scientists to U.S.S.R.’s downgrading of iaf in wake of increased space cooperation with U.S. and France and to Soviet budgetary hold-down. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 16) Dr. George E. Mueller, President of System Development Corp. and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in interview following opening session that it would be technically feasible to put crews of mixed nationalities on Mars within 20 to 30 yrs. “Even the money is there. It’s getting it allocated for the project that’s difficult.” He envisioned crew of 12 or more in giant spacecraft possibly powered by nuclear energy taking 12 to 18 mos to reach Mars. Special shuttle would be needed to carry supplies. “Such an expedition will require lots of resources . . . best . . . supplied by the world as a whole.” (Reuters, B Sun, 10/10/72) Dr. James H. Bredt of Advanced Missions Program Office in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight described new space processing experiments for Skylab missions in 1973. Experiments would broaden scope of experiments to correspond to program’s increased area of interest, to gain experience with new techniques in order to develop advanced equipment for future missions, and to enable materials scientists and engineers to demonstrate value of space laboratories for applied materials research. Apparatus and experimental samples would be delivered to Kennedy Space Center for installation in spacecraft during first week of December. Experiments were to be performed by third and final Skylab crew in November and December 1973. Analysis of samples would begin immediately after their return to earth, and principal investigators probably would present preliminary reports of results at 25th iaf Congress. (Text) Frank J. Malina, Chairman of International Academy of Astronautics’ Manned Research on Celestial Bodies (marecebo) Committee, told 5th Lunar International Laboratory Symposium Oct. 10 that 1964 estimate of 1975-1985 decade for initiation of permanent lunar laboratory might have been “too optimistic.” Men and machines had provided “great deal of hard working knowledge on the Moon and on men working there,” but people and governments needed to be convinced that necessary funding should be provided. (Text) Manned Spacecraft Center Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht discussed mission’s rescue capability during 5th International Space Rescue Symposium. Special kit to be installed in Skylab command and service module (csm) would permit CSM to rendezvous and dock with orbital workshop, using two-man crew. CSM then would be able to accept three stranded astronauts from workshop, undock, and reorbit with five persons on board. Rescue could be effected 48 days after alarm early in mission and as quickly as 10 days late in mission. Reason for variation in time required was that 22 days were needed to refurbish launch umbilical tower after previous launch. (Text) Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp)—joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975—was discussed at Oct. 10 press conference. Participants were Cosmonauts Filipchenko and Kubasov; Soviet academician Dr. Leonid I. Sedov; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning; and Dr. Krafft A. Ehricke, North American Rockwell Corp. scientist. Dr. von Braun said transition from lower pressured Apollo spacecraft to higher pressured Soyuz would be easy for astronauts, while Soviet cosmonauts would have to spend about two hours in airlock to adjust to Apollo system. Dr. Sedov said U.S.S.R. had not accepted invitation from U.S. for joint mission when first proposed because of sensitive political situation. With successful Moscow summit meetings in May, situation had become “favorable.” (iaf Release, 10/10/72) Scout launch vehicle system was discussed in paper at Congress prepared by R. D. English of Langley Research Center and M. Green of LTV Aerospace Corp., presented by Green. Since inception of program in 1959, Scout vehicle had successfully launched 67 payloads. Studies had been made to ensure that system would provide flexibility for “unique missions to supplement the space shuttle.” (Pamphlet reprint of Text) Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) studies of space tug had been discontinued but NASA studies were continuing. “Our present belief is that the required technical advances combined with the budgetary demands that the space shuttle will make . . . will make it impossible to develop within this decade the ‘full capability’ that we feel will eventually be necessary.” NASA was investigating alternate approaches “to providing a Space Shuttle third stage which will give us a reduced but acceptable capability for the delivery of payloads during the early years of shuttle operation.” Alternatives being considered were: to modify existing stage for use as expendable third stage; to make major modifications to existing cryogenic- or storable-propellant stage to enable it to carry payload to geosynchronous orbit and return to shuttle orbit for reuse; or to build new vehicle with less capability than needed, as part of evolutionary program leading to vehicle with required capability. Studies of first alternative were under way; contracted studies within next year were expected to examine latter two alternatives. (Text) Sixth International History of Astronautics Symposium, held Oct. 13, was chaired by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian. In introduction Dr. Emme pointed out that 57 men had flown in space since October 1957, 10 had walked on lunar surface, 22 had flown around moon, and 2 (Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John W. Young) had traveled to moon twice and made two earth-orbiting flights. Papers presented included “Hungarian Rocketry in the 19th Century” by Istvan G. Nagy, “Origins of Astronautics in Switzerland” by A. Waldis of Swiss Transport Museum, and “Development of the Technology of Rocketry and Space Research in Poland” by M. Subotowicz. Papers read in absentia were “Astronautic Pioneers” (analysis of rocket achievements of F. A. Tsander) by L. S. Dushkin and Ye. K. Moshkin and “Basic Stages of the Development of the Theory of Ramjet Engines” by I. A. Merkulov of Soviet Academy of Sciences. Memoir papers presented included “From galcit to Explorer 1, 1944-57” by Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory; “From Wallops Island to Mercury, 1945-58” by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director; and “The Viking Rocket” by Milton W. Rosen, Senior Scientist in NASA Office of Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs. (Program; iaf Release) Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award for 1972 was presented to Dr. Reimar Luest, Director of Max Planck Institute and astrophysicist known for work on solar winds and interplanetary matter. (Program; iaa Annual Rpt, 8/31/72) tunities. Atmospheric pressures of cabins would be adjusted while spacecraft were docked, to avoid necessity of prebreathing pure oxygen before transfer of crewmen from Soyuz to Apollo cabins. Soyuz pressure would be lowered from its normal 101 kilonewtons per sq m to 69 (from 14.7 psi to 10); Apollo pressure would remain at 35 kilonewtons per sq m (5 psi). First joint crew training session was scheduled for summer of 1973, with cosmonauts visiting U.S. for several weeks. Astronauts would train equal time in U.S.S.R. in fall of 1973. Soviet two-fifths scale model of docking mechanism would be tested with U.S. model during Moscow meeting in December 1972. Further consideration of extravehicular crew transfer would be deleted; if any emergency prevented return of crewmen to their own ships, they would land in spacecraft they were visiting. Sufficient propellant would be budgeted for Apollo spacecraft to allow it to maintain attitude control while docked. Exchange of working groups would be more frequent, with meetings at msc in November, in Moscow in December, and at msc in March 1973. U.S. delegation included representatives of prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. and three of five working groups established in July 6-18 meetings at msc to define mission elements. Working group members included Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford. NASA delegation was headed by astp Director Glynn S. Lunney. Senior member of Soviet delegation was Prof. Konstantin D. Bushuyev, U.S.S.R.’s astp Director, (nasa Releases 72-198, 72—207, 72-211; AP, C Trib, 10/20/72) October 10:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by Titan HID booster at 11:03 am pdt (2:03 pm edt). Satellite entered orbit with 268-km (167-mi) apogee, 159-km (99-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, 96.4° inclination and reentered Jan. 8, 1973. (Pres Rpt 73; Av Wk, 10/16/72, 19; gsfc SSR, 1/31/73)
Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced formation of new flight project office for unmanned mission to Jupiter and Saturn in 1977. Mariner Jupiter/Saturn 1977 project would be managed by Harris M. Schurmeier, with Dr. Edward J. Smith as acting project scientist, Raymond L. Heacock as spacecraft system manager, and Dr. Ralph F. Mills as mission analysis and engineering manager, (jpl Release 621)
Astronauts Edgar D. Mitchell and James B. Irwin announced plans to resign from NASA and military. Mitchell, Navy captain, had been lunar module (lm) pilot on Apollo 14 (Jan. 31—Feb. 9, 1971). Irwin, Air Force colonel, had been lm pilot on Apollo 15 (July 26-Aug. 7, 1971) and was backup pilot for Apollo 17, scheduled for launch in December. Because of Irwin’s plans to retire, new backup crew for Apollo 17 had been named, effective July 1: John W. Young, Stuart A. Roosa, and Charles M. Duke, Jr. Original Apollo 17 backup crew was David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and Irwin. Scott, Worden, and Thomas K. Mattingly II had been assigned to Space Shuttle Program in Manned Spacecraft Center Astronaut Office. Mattingly, who recently had become a father, had requested' assignment which would allow him more time with his family during next six months, (nasa Release 72-110)
Sen. John G. Tower (R-Tex.) introduced S.J.R. 238 requesting President Nixon to designate July 20, 1972, as “National Moon Walk Day.” Resolution was referred to Senate Committee on the Judiciary. {CR, 6/2/72, S8712) June 3:	Lewis Research Center announced award of four fixed-price contracts for four-month studies of methods to measure pollution due to aircraft emissions in upper atmosphere. American Airlines would receive $11 697, Trans World Airlines $14 177, and United Air Lines $19 699 to study costs of installing and servicing pollutionmeasuring instruments on. commercial aircraft. Boeing Co. would receive $31 350 to determine aircraft modifications needed to install instruments, data recorders, and support systems. Studies were in support of Global Air Sampling Program (gasp), managed by LeRC. (LeRC Release 72-39)	,
Patent No. 3 667 358 for cold camera for photographing stars was awarded to William D. Williams, Jr., 19-yr-old Univ. of Michigan student, and Scott Usher, packaging engineer for Lehn & Fink Products Co. Camera, mounted on telescope and loaded with film supersensitized after chilling with dry ice, permitted deep sky photography in very dim light with brief exposure time. Camera was simpler and less expensive than other cold-emulsion cameras and was expected to appeal to schools and clubs. (Jones, NYT, 6/10/72, 37; Pat Off pio) June 7:	Congressional resolutions were introduced to honor Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Assistant Administrator for Planning, on his retirement from NASA. Sen. Hugh Scott (R-Pa„) submitted S.R. 84 expressing “gratitude and appreciation” to Dr. von Braun for “Outstanding contributions to and achievements in the space program” and “recognition of the benefits which his contributions and achievements have conferred and will continue to confer upon mankind.” Rep. J. Irving Whalley (R-Pa.) introduced H.R. 628, “expressing the Nation’s gratitude and appreciation.” (CR, 6/7/72, S8885; H5391)
Richard Witkin commented on clarity of Apollo 16 TV pictures in New York Times article: “The space agency has a $46,008 contract with a three-month-old California company to process signals from the moon and improve the quality of Apollo television reception. The verdict so far from Apollo 16 scientists, the primary beneficiaries, is that the money is being well spent. And there appears to be no quarrel from the viewing public.” What company, Image Transforms, Inc., had been doing to signals from Apollo 16 was being kept confidential—even from NASA—to protect seven existing and two pending patents. Signals were sent from Apollo 16 to Houston and were immediately sent to Image Transform’s North Hollywood, Calif., plant and back before being displayed on NASA screens and being sent to networks. Extra delay was only one fifth second. NASA had arranged image processing so geologists could give astronauts better input on which rocks to collect on moon. Better reception for home TV viewers was side benefit. Process had been developed by Canadian John Lowry, coowner of company. (NYT, 4/22/72, 16; LA Times, 4/23/72)
Scientist-Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt was calmest of Apollo 17 astronauts at launch time, United Press International reported. His heartbeat at liftoff was 115 beats per minute, with 130 for Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Ronald E. Evans. Apollo 16 rates had been 108 for Astronaut John W. Young, 115 for Astronaut Thomas K. Mattingly II, and 130 for Astronaut Charles M. Duke. Launch Director Walter J. Kapryan had said Apollo 17 crew was more tense because of liftoff delay. (C Trib, 12/8/72)
Crew compartment fit and function test of Skylab airlock module (am) and multiple docking adaptor (mda) was completed at McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. in St. Louis, Mo. Astronauts had activated am and mda to demonstrate that modules would support all activities planned for Skylab mission in 1973. They worked with experiments, installed and Stowed hardware to verify mechanical and electrical functions, and verified on-orbit operations. Skylab crew members participating in test included Charles Conrad, Jr., Paul J. Weitz, Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, Russell L. Schweickart, Dr. Story Musgrave, Bruce McCandless II, and Dr. William B. Lenoir, (msfc Release 72—72; msfc, Skylab ,Chron, 83)
Boeing Co. Chairman William M. Allen announced his retirement, effective in September. He would remain consultant to company. (NYT, 6/2/72, 48)
National Aeronautic Assn, named Federal Aviation Administrator John H. Shaffer to receive Wright Brothers Trophy. Shaffer was cited for “outstanding leadership of the worldwide operations of the faa, which has greatly enhanced all aspects of U.S. aviation to the benefit and safety of the general public and of all who fly.” (AP, W Post, 9/23/72, A22)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced new air transport security program to protect air passengers against hijackers. Program was being implemented at President Nixon’s direction. Security procedures required stationing armed local law enforcement officers at airport passenger check points during boarding periods, electronic screening of all passengers by airlines before boarding, and inspection by airlines of all carry-on items accessible to passengers during flight. (dot Release 103-72)
Swedish Royal Academy of Sciences announced award of 1972 Nobel Prizes in chemistry and physics to six U.S. citizens. Chemistry prize of more than $100 000 would he shared by National Institutes of Health scientist. Dr. Christian B. Anfinsen and Rockefeller Univ. scientists Dr. Stanford Moore and Dr. William H. Stein for “pioneering studies” in enzyme ribonuclease. Dr. Anfinsen’s investigations had “provided the answer to an important question concerning the way in which the active enzyme is formed in living cells; Moore and Stein have elucidated important principles related to the biological activity of the enzyme. These properties we generally associate with the concept of life and with living organisms.” Physics prize was awarded for theory of superconductivity developed jointly by Dr. John Bardeen of Univ. of Illinois at Urbana, Dr. Leon N. Cooper of Brown Univ., and Dr. John R. Schrieffer of Univ. of Pennsylvania. Superconductivity was phenomenon in which electrical resistance in certain metals vanished when metals were cooled to temperatures near absolute zero (0 kelvins; —459.7°F). (Weinraub, NYT, 10/21/72, 1)
Dr. William W. Duke, twin brother of Apollo 16 Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., replied in letter published by Washington Post to April 26 article by Post columnist Nicholas von Hoffman that criticized astronauts and Apollo 16 mission. “My brother stated publicly that he would go to the moon anonymously. He sought no personal gain. No one will recall the names of these space explorers, but each time one mission is completed, the next is easier. I am sure the second, third, or one hundredth man to sail around the world found it easier than the one preceding. Who is to judge what is to be gained now or one hundred years hence in and from space?” (W Post, 5/10/72, A15) May 10—24:	Committee on Space Research (cospar) held 15th meeting in Madrid. First firm indication of water ice on Mars from photos returned by Mariner 9 (launched by NASA May 30, 1971) was announced by Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientist Dr. James A. Cutts. He and team had noted that residual south polar cap 320 km (200 mi) wide was unchanged throughout southern summer but was hidden by thin carbon dioxide frost that covered region 3200 km (2000 mi) in diameter during winter. In spring, it appeared that dry ice again evaporated and cap shrank to 320-km zone of water ice. Working sessions on terrestrial planets and outer planets were held by NASA and Soviet scientists to discuss programs for exploration of Venus, Mars, Saturn, and Jupiter. Discussions fulfilled recommendation of August 1971 nasa-U.S.S.R. Working Group that planetary exploration be discussed jointly at international colloquia. Space Science Board of National Academy of Sciences and National Research Council submitted United States Space Science Program: Report to COSPAR. Report, covering 1971, summarized analyses and observations from experiments on board spacecraft, sounding rockets, balloons, and aircraft. (Miles, LA Times, 5/11/72; Text; NASA Int Aff; NASA Release 72—106; W Post, 5/23/72, A10)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) said in letter to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, that NASA should cut costs to take advantage of U.S.-U.S.S.R. space treaty signed May 24. Sen. Proxmire asked for estimates of savings possible through space cooperation and suggested that proposed joint space mission “would make it possible for us to postpone development of certain aspects of our manned space program.” (upi, NYT, 6/2/72)
Chemical & Engineering News published views and plans of presidential candidates for science and technology beyond general pledges in Democratic and Republican Party platforms. Same set of questions had been submitted to campaign organizations of Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S.D.) and of President Nixon. President Nixon said he would continue general pattern of previous years on Federal research and development funding; its division among defense, space, and civilian sectors; its possible link to gross national product (gnp) ; and appropriate balance for basic research, applied research, and development. Pattern would include increasingly effective program in civilian sector R&D, “prudent space program, and a sufficient defense R&D budget.” Administration believed r&d funding should be based on opportunities for effective programs and necessity for creating new opportunities through fundamental studies and that R&D resources, excepting basic research, should be allocated to areas that provided “greatest opportunity for leverage or that satisfy an immediate future need.” Sen. McGovern recommended increased Federal R&D funding. Principal problem was “government spending that has masqueraded as R&D, yet has little technical content. For example, when an Apollo is launched ... all of the kerosene and liquid oxygen that it uses comes out of the federal R&D budget. Only a very small percentage of the federal R&D budget actually represents laboratory investigations, instrument design, feasibility studies, and other technical efforts that involve scientists and engineers.” Sen. McGovern would emphasize civilian sector R&D and strong military R&D program as “good investment for long-term national security. My space program would emphasize unmanned planetary exploration and scientific satellites and also earth resource and communications satellites.” Nixon Administration would continue to maintain “strong and up-to-date defense force” and to capitalize upon past space investments. Both candidates recommended increased priority on developments of new energy sources. Nixon Administration was opposed to S. 32, reconversion bill introduced by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy to amend National Science Foundation Act of 1950 to establish framework of national science policy. Bill would focus policy and U.S. scientific talent and resources on Nation’s priority problems. Administration believed segment of S. 32 that would establish independent agency within nsf was “particularly unwise” because it would “divorce the R&D from the departments of Government responsible for using its results” and “would divert attention from the primary mission of nsf—to support fundamental and basic research.” Sen. McGovern would continue to support S. 32. “In its original form, before compromise to get Republican support, it would have provided $1.2 billion for a new NASA-type Civil Science Systems Administration that would fund genuine r&d across a broad range of civilian technology needs.” Administration did not believe in Cabinet-level science department or “supra” agency, nor that “existing science apparatus is totally adequate. As with all human and governmental institutions, it too should be dynamic and subject to change as conditions and events dictate.” Sen. McGovern felt “more centralized federal science management and funding apparatus might be useful, but the key need is not to change the institutions but rather to give them more power in the Federal Government.” He favored establishment of Office of Technology Assessment [see October 13] which would “assess each new technical program with an eye toward cost efficiency and effectiveness, and domestic betterment.” Asked if federally owned laboratories should be expanded to deal with problems of health and environment, Nixon Administration pointed out that NASA Centers were “closely involved with the R&D components of other federal agencies in an effort to solve pressing national problems.” Sen. McGovern believed Federal laboratories and research facilities had “plenty of problems in their immediate areas” with which to cope. “I have no intention of taking the easy route and putting them on safe subjects.” (Chemical & Engineering News, 10/23/72, 14-19) October 23-27:	Conference on high-energy astrophysics was held at Cal Tech by division of American Astronomical Society. Dr. Kenneth I. Kellerman of National Radio Astronomy Observatory said most baffling phenomenon observed by radiotelescopes was speed at which objects seemed to be moving. If measurements taken in past two years were accepted at face value, objects associated with quasars were speeding away from each other faster than speed of light. Such speed had been considered impossible. Cal Tech astronomer Dr. W. L. W. Sargent said strange blue objects sighted in sky by Hale Observatory astronomers might be newly formed galaxies “about 100 million years old, and they seem to be made up of very young stars.” Discovery indicated that galaxies might still be forming. Dr. Herbert Gursky of American Science and Engineering, Inc., said astronomers using Uhuru (Explorer 42 Small Astronomy Satellite launched by NASA Dec. 12, 1970) had spotted several x-ray objects that could not be detected by wavelengths other than x-ray. Impact of x-ray astronomy might be that “this new wavelength range may show some different aspects of stars and galaxies.” Through x-ray astronomy scientists “hope to . . . learn something about these objects that radio and optical observations can’t tell us.” Evidence of black hole—star whose gravity field was so strong that light could not escape from it—in constellation Cygnus was reported by Dr. Kip Thorne of Cal Tech, Dr. J. P. Ostriker of Princeton Univ., and Dr. Riccardo Giacconi of American Science and Engineering. Evidence had come from photos taken at Hale Observatory that showed bright blue line near source Cygnus X-l and from data gathered by XJhuru (see also Sept. 2). Scientists thought line in photos might be result of superhot gas being drawn from neighboring star in black hole. If finding was accurate, Cygnus X—1 would be first black hole discovered. Existence of black holes had been predicted by Einstein as part of his theory of relativity. (Cooke, Pasadena Star-News, 10/24/72; West, LA Times, 10/27/72; O’Toole, W Post, 10/28/72, A3; W Star & News, 10/28/72) October 24:	Soviet news agency Tass announced opening of Soviet National Conference on Space Biology and Medicine at Kaluga, U.S.S.R. Conference would hear papers on use of “terrestrial” atmosphere in spacecraft cabins, food and water regeneration, and establishment of bacterial medium in which future cosmonauts could live and work on extended space missions. Conference also would discuss weightlessness, crew selection and training, radiobiological aspects of flight, and psychophysiology of space crew work. Soviet Academician Oleg Gazenko had presented paper on topical problems of space biology and medicine at opening session. (fbis-Sov, 10/25/72, LI)
Any future development program for U.S. supersonic transport was expected to be given to NASA rather than Federal Aviation Administration, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported, faa, under retiring Dept, of Transportation Secretary John A. Volpe, had “lost so much of its authority” that “it no longer asserts itself” within Dept, of Transportation. {Av Wk, 12/11/72, 11)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), critic of aerospace spending, was named Chairman of Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Development, Space, Science, Veterans. Appointment followed death of Subcommittee Chairman, Sen. Allen J. Ellender (D-La.). {LA Times, 8/17/72; W Post, 8/18/72, A3)
Institute of Navigation presented Thomas L. Thurlow Award to John P.	Mayer, Chief of Manned Space Center’s Mission Planning and Analysis Div., in recognition of his outstanding and continuing efforts in all facets of navigation from NASA Mercury missions through Apollo manned lunar landings. (Av Wk, 7/10/72, 9; Inst of Nav pio)
Award of $ 46-million contract to North American Rockwell Corp. for vertical or short takeoff and landing aircraft prototype was announced by Secretary of the Navy John W. Warner. Aircraft would use components of existing aircraft to reduce time and expense before first flight. If prototype was successful, Navy might develop operational v/stol aircraft, (dod Release 723-72)
John N. Wilford contrasted U.S. and U.S.S.R. space programs in New York Times article: “As American astronauts prepare for another Apollo voyage to the moon . . . their counterparts in the Soviet Union are training for long-duration flights in earth-orbiting laboratories, leaving their own lunar exploration to automatic probes. As the American Pioneer 10 heads for Jupiter, a Soviet spacecraft, Venus 8 is traveling toward a planned softlanding on Venus. As American engineers design a reusable shuttle for ferrying men and satellites into space, the Russians apparently are still trying to develop a giant rocket to give them lifting power as great or greater than the Saturn V. As American launchings run about 30 a year and the space budget is under public attack, the Russians are launching nearly three times as many spacecraft and, if anything, are expanding their space program.” Contrasts had been highlighted in interviews with space officials during Wilford’s month-long visit to U.S.S.R. during March. According to Dr. Boris N. Petrov, director of Soviet Academy of Sciences Intercosmos Branch, “the priorities of the Soviet space program will remain the systematic research of near-earth space with the help of automatic stations, manned spaceships and orbital stations. For the moon and the nearest planets, the priority will continue to be research with the help of automated means.” (NYT, 4/14/72, 10)
Officials of NASA Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (oast) testified during House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology’s final hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization. William H. Woodward, Director of Space Propulsion and Power, cited importance of isotope power systems to NASA planetary program: “The ability of nuclear electric power systems to operate for long periods . . . without consideration to distance from the sun is the primary feature which makes nuclear systems mandatory for outer planet missions. This self-contained energy input characteristic also provides a relative insensitivity to the operating environments encountered and this capability may be important on many missions, e.g., lander missions on planetary surfaces or missions which encounter high natural radiation fields.” Power requirements of most missions could be satisfied with low-level isotope power systems using radioisotope thermoelectric generators (rtgs). “Currently, rtg’s are scheduled for flight on the Pioneer Jupiter Flyby and the Mars Viking Lander missions and in addition, are planned for use in future outer planet programs.” Associate Administrator for oast Roy P. Jackson testified that solar energy could prove important energy resource. National Science Foundation’s rann (Research Applicable to National Needs) program had budgeted $4 million for solar energy investigations in FY 1973. Atomic Energy Commission, Dept, of Interior, and NASA were conducting inhouse studies. Solar Energy Subcommittee had been established by Federal Council on Science and Technology Committee on Energy Research and Development Goals to assess benefits to recommend r&d funds and programs. Subcommittee was first time solar energy had been considered at this level of national planning. NASA was evaluating concept for generating electric power from solar cells in space and transmitting power to earth via microwave beam, which would deliver more concentrated solar energy than naturally received on earth’s surface. Collecting in space also could be continuous, rather than having to stop at night or in cloudy weather. Edwin C. Kilgore, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management, described oast manpower problems and methods to alleviate them. Though oast manpower applied to aeronautics had increased 90% since 1966, manpower for all other efforts had decreased by 56%. Growth in aeronautics could not be provided continuously by transferring personnel from space projects. “In the short term we will continue to meet the increased need for aeronautics manpower by retraining and reassignment of personnel at the Research Centers. For the Ions: term we have initiated a program to encourage the training of students interested in aeronautical sciences. ... we are continuing the cooperative NASA/university graduate research and study program begun in FY 1971 where faculty and students are working with the Research Centers.” R.	D. Ginter, Director of Technology Applications, testified on NASA and National Science Foundation cooperation in applications: nsf’s rann program contained “two broad areas of mutual interest: Advanced Technology Applications and Environmental Systems Resources. One of our senior people has been assigned to focus this effort, coordinate task selection, and provide program management. During the next year we intend to expand our problem definition activity and prepare specific proposals for NSF consideration.” (Transcript)
Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum completed first year under new Director, former astronaut Michael Collins. Major emphasis was on preparation for new museum to be opened in U.S. Bicentennial year, 1976. Domed planetarium chamber 9 m (30 ft) high was being constructed as laboratory for experimentation and design of programs and equipment for Spacearium in new museum. Museum library was being reorganized to standards of other Smithsonian Institution libraries. Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (sao) progress and plans were being assessed against standards recommended by Astronomy Survey Committee of National Academy of Sciences and National Research Council [see June 1], (Smithsonian Year 1972, 61, 62)
Dr. Donald Blessing Rice, Assistant Director of White House Office of Management and Budget, was named President of rand Corp. (Belair, NYT, 3/30/72, 17)
Appointment of William H. Rock, Assistant Program Manager for Apollo-Skylab Programs, as Manager of new Sciences and Applications Office at Kennedy Space Center was announced by Ksc Director, Dr. Kurt H. Debus. New office would become KSC’s interface with NASA’s Office of Applications, (ksc Release 279-72)
Existence of 10th planet in solar system, three times as large as Saturn and twice as far as Neptune from sun, was suggested by scientists from Univ. of California’s Lawrence Livermore Laboratory. Mathematician Joseph L. Brady told press team had used computer to process mathematical observations on deviations in orbit of Halley’s Comet. Presence of 10th planet, far beyond Pluto, had been predicted from mathematical computations, (upi, W Post, 4/29/72, A3; Publications of the Astronautical Society of the Pacific, 5/72) April 29:	Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II were greeted by crowd of 2500 persons at Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii, and presented copper plaques bearing etching of Hawaii’s state capitol. Young said mission’s success “shows the real teamwork that’s going to keep this country great. We really enjoyed the trip . . . but we sure are glad to be back.” (AP, W Star, 4/30/72, A3)
Director Bruce T. Lundin of Lewis Research Center announced major organizational changes to strengthen and streamline LeRC for its assumption of greater leadership in aeronautics, space communications, and electrical power field. Changes—which had yet to be formally approved by NASA—included creation of new position of Deputy Director, Management, filled by Henry C. Barnett, and creation of two new directorates: Space Communications, headed by J. Howard Childs, and Launch Vehicles, headed by Edmund R. Jonash. Dr. John C. Evvard was named Chief Scientist to provide “greater organizational visibility” in basic research. Laser power group and applications group were established, strengthening of computer management was begun, several divisions were restructured, and new offices were established. Lundin said changes would strengthen LeRC coordination and parallel research organization at NASA Hq. (Lewis News, 3/24/72, 1; Lundin Off)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying American Science and Engineering, Inc., x-ray astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list) April 2:	Interview of Roris N. Petrov, Chairman of Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Council for International Cooperation in Investigation and Utilization of Outer Space, on U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint space mission was published in New York Times. Interview, described as “first full public discussion of the negotiations from the Soviet point of view,” had been obtained in Moscow by Times science writer John N. Wilford. Petrov had emphasized that “tangible progress” had been achieved and he was “optimistic” about prospects of joint space flight, technically feasible in “the middle of the nineteen-seventies.” Government approval would “depend much” on April meetings in Moscow between NASA and Soviet Academy officials and May meeting in Moscow of Working Groups on rendezvous and docking. Petrov said compatible docking system would allow “docking of spaceships of our countries with the humane aim of rendering help to crews of spaceships and space stations in distress. These systems would also allow joint experiments during the flights in space.” Petrov said negotiations had occurred in “atmosphere of mutual understanding and businesslike discussion” that “gives us the hope that all the difficulties connected with . . . such a sophisticated scientific and technological undertaking could be overcome.” (NYT, 4/2/72)
President Nixon signed S. 3244, bill increasing funds for international aeronautical exposition from $3 million to $5 million. Bill became P.L. 92-251. (CR, 3/21/72, D293) March 18:	NASA was being embarrassed by management, planning, and production problems incurred by Fairchild Industries (formerly Fairchild Hiller Corp.) in implementation of disputed Applications Technology Satellite F (ats—f) contract, Business Week reported. Contract had been awarded originally to General Electric Co. in 1970. Protest by Fairchild Hiller that its proposal was superior to GE’s had led to full-scale review of award by General Accounting Office. NASA had reawarded contract to Fairchild Hiller. Now, 18 mos after re-award, NASA had noted that cost of ats-f had increased from $50 million to $65 million “and is still climbing.” Satellite’s spring 1973 launch date was said to be slipping badly and NASA had moved new manager, John M.	Thole, into program “to see if he can get things back into line.” (Bus Wk, 3/18/72)
l/g John W. O’Neil, Vice Commander of Air Force Systems Command since 1969, would retire from Air Force Sept. 1, AFSC Newsreview reported. President Nixon had nominated as successor to Gen. O’Neil, m/g Edmund F. O’Connor, who had also been nominated for promotion to grade of lieutenant general, (afsc Newsreview, 7/72, 1) August 1:	Launch of first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, Erts 1, and selection of prime contractor—North American Rockwell Corp.— for space shuttle system demonstrated “how we have begun to turn the space program . . . around, how we are returning to the home seas of space after 12 years of strenuous and highly successful effort to explore the Moon,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in letter to NASA staff. NASA would continue new direction with 1973 Skylab launch, joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. mission in 1975, and first orbital flight of space shuttle in 1978. Additionally NASA would explore solar system with improved unmanned spacecraft, build and orbit improved unmanned observatories, and accelerate efforts to develop “basic new technology for the most promising space missions of the Eighties and Nineties. We will . . . maintain a balanced national space effort with our main area of concentration shifted from the Moon to Earth orbit.” (NASA Activities, 8/25/72, 160-1)
Two press briefings were held at nasa Hq., Apollo 16 Mission Director’s press briefing and press conference on medical aspects of Apollo 15 and 16. In first, press was told hypergolic loading of propellants had begun and countdown demonstration test with fueled spacecraft would begin March 29. msc was continuing simulations, and prime recovery ship would leave San Diego March 23 and Pearl Harbor April 8 to take position. Launch preparations were proceeding on schedule toward liftoff at 12:45 pm est April 16. Apollo Mission Director Chester M. Lee said one purpose of microbial ecology evaluation device (meed; experiment to carry fungi and bacteria) on Apollo 16 was to prepare for future Skylab missions. In Skylab “we are going to have some evas and some of these bacteria, fungi, are on the suit before they go out. So the idea is to find out is there anything when we bring those suits back in and stow them for long periods of time like we are going to have on Skylab, do we have anything that we should be considering or concerned about as far as mutants and so forth.” Lunar roving vehicle (lrv) Rover had been improved with new seatbelts that could be hung up out of way when not in use and with extra circuit breaker to permit deployment of TV after third extravehicular activity period, lrv would not cover as much distance on Apollo 16 as on Apollo 15. “We are planning 25.2 kilometers [15.7 miles] . . . because that gets us to our primary objectives,” not including 10% wander factor for missing craters. (Transcript) In second briefing, Dr. Charles A. Berry, NASA Director of Life Sciences, explained medical problems and procedures on Apollo 15 and changes for Apollo 16. Major concerns on Apollo 15 were cardiac arrhythmia—irregular heart rhythm—and fluid-electrolyte imbalance, with severe loss of potassium. Cardiac arrhythmia occurred occasionally in normal persons and frequently in college students, apparently as a result of fatigue from all-night studying, adrenalin increase from apprehension about grades, drug effect from drinking coffee to stay awake, and heavy workload. Fatigue, adrenalin increase, drug effect, and heavy workload also acted on astronauts. Fluid-electrolyte imbalance was dependent upon intake in food and drink and output in breath, sweat, and body wastes. In space, balance was affected by weightlessness, acceleration, 100%-oxygen atmosphere, abnormal work-rest cycle, and sustained work loads. Countermeasures that could be taken were better control of intake, supplementing electrolytes with intravenous fluids, coordinating exercise, providing lower body negative pressure, and optimizing work-rest cycles. Medical objectives for Apollo 16 were essentially same as for Apollo 15: to ensure crew safety medically, to improve probability of mission success by providing necessary medical information, and to detect and understand changes incident to space flight and learn more about effects of space flight on man. To improve medical wellbeing of Apollo 16 astronauts, 72-hr preflight controlled-diet period would determine amount of potassium needed by each crew member. Since potassium could not be preloaded, small amounts of extra potassium would be given in daily diet in flight to ensure adequacy. In addition to regular preflight cardiovascular examination, x-rays of astronauts’ hearts would be taken before and after mission to determine whether heart size decreased during flight. Skylab equipment would be used in flight for electroencephalogram, electrocardiogram, and electro-oculogram. Other inflight medical changes were daily sample of improved electrocardiogram data, option to alter bioharness wearing schedule, expansion of crew status report, high-potassium diets with potassium-enriched beverages and snack supplements, measurement of food and fluid intake and urine and fecal output, return to earth of urine and fecal samples for analysis, and provision of anti-arrhythmic drugs lidocaine, procainamide, and atropine. Dr. Berry also announced that Astronaut Donald K. Slayton, who had been removed from Aurora 7 mission (May 24, 1962) and NASA flight status 10 yrs ago because of possible heart malfunction, had been returned to NASA and Federal Aviation Administration flight status. Evidence of atrial fibrillation found in 1959 and treated until 1969 had disappeared and tests completed recently had shown “perfectly normal cardiac function and cardiac anatomy.” First space flight for which Slayton could be eligible would be proposed joint mission with U.S.S.R. (Transcript)
NASA held 14th Annual Awards Ceremony in Washington, D.C. Guest speaker Caspar W. Weinberger, Director of Office of Management and Budget, said: “A country needs—even a country as great as America— to be reminded of its greatness from time to time. And that is the thing of overwhelming importance that NASA has done .... They have reminded us, at a time when we desperately need it, of our greatness. They have taken us out of the aura of self-criticism and of doubt . . . and given us a set of accomplishments that will be not only very hard to match, but a set of accomplishments in which every one of us . . . should take enormous pride.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented Outstanding Leadership Medal to Leonard Jaffe, Acting Director of Earth Observation Programs, for management of Earth Resources Survey program. He presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Dr. William R. Lucas, Marshall Space Flight Center Deputy Director, for exceptional contributions to Apollo program; to Richard C. McCurdy, Associate Administrator for Organization and Management, and Dr. Hans Mark, Ames Research Center Director, for management achievements; and to Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of Manned Spacecraft Center’s Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., for Apollo science achievements. Secretary of the Interior Rogers C. B. Morton presented posthumous medal for Dr. William T. Pecora, late Under Secretary of the Interior, to Mrs. Pecora. Award was in recognition of work on Earth Resources Observation Systems (eros) program. Distinguished Public Service Medal was presented to Dr. Riccardo Giacconi of American Science and Engineering, Inc., for work on cosmic rays and to Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg, Cal Tech physicist, for work on lunar samples. Third awardee, Dr. Brian O’Brien, physicist on NASA Space Program Advisory Council, was unable to be present. Group Achievement Award was presented to Atlas Centaur Project Team, Hq., Lewis Research Center, and Kennedy Space Center; Deep Space Maser Development Group, Jet Propulsion Laboratory; Digital Fly-by-Wire Project Team, Flight Research Center; Earth Resources Technology Satellite Project Team, Goddard Space Flight Center; Oao 3 Project Team, arc, gsfc, ksc, and jpl; Pioneer 6-9 Project Team, Hq.; Quiet Engine Team, LeRC; and Space Shuttle Technology Project Team, Hq. Other awards included Exceptional Service Medal to 41 persons and Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 20. (Program; NASA Activities, 12/15/72, 245; NASA Hist Off; Huntsville Times, 11/9/72)
Dept, of Transportation would begin priority program to establish quiet, short-haul air transportation system to relieve airport congestion and noise, Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe said in speech before Air Line Pilots Assn, in Washington, D.C. Federal Aviation Administration would designate certain existing U.S. airports as short-haul airports and develop strict standards on noise and pollution compatible with the community, (dot Release 49-72)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of $12.1million contract to Boeing Co. to secure benefits from valuable work done in supersonic transport (sst) development program. Contract called for completion of seven advanced technological projects to enhance flight safety and efficiency and make aircraft more compatible with environment. Volpe said, by completing projects already begun, “funds already spent on them will not be wasted and the resulting technology will be available for advancement of aircraft design.” Congress had voted against further funding of SST program during 1971. (faA Release 72—88)
Huntsville (Ala.) Times editorial criticized attitude of Democratic presidential candidate Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S. Dak.) toward U.S. space program: “The McGovern space-budget figure of $2 billion may not seem a paltry sum to many taxpayers and voters. But it becomes a piddling figure . . . when compared Avith massive governmental outlays for farm price-supports and other questionable multibillion-dollar expenditures. And even in endorsing this minimal space effort, Senator McGovern stresses the negative aspect of not wanting to see additional thousands of aerospace employees thrown out of work, rather than emphasizing the positive contributions of space to the expansion of man’s scientific knowledge, to the strengthening of the technological know-how of American industry, and to the enhancement of the nation’s image throughout the world.” (Huntsville Times, 9/11/72) September 11—13:	American Society of Mechanical Engineers held annual Aerospace Div. Conference at Anaheim, Calif. Application of aerospace technology to societal problems and future of space exploration were discussed by officials of NASA; National Science Foundation; Depts. of Commerce, Transportation, and Interior; state and local governments; industry; and education. Aviation’s role in earth resources surveys was described in paper by Deputy Director Clarence A. Syvertson and Airborne Science Office Chief Donald R. Mulholland of Ames Research Center: “At the present time, 275 companies are engaged in aerial surveys, but less than 50 of these are equipped for nonphotographic remote sensing. New sensor technology growing from and stimulated by the space program has made it possible to obtain vastly improved data.” Federal Aviation Administration data showed that in 1971 “some 230 aircraft were used for aerial surveys and another 31 for patrolling.” ARC used general-aviation, high-altitude research, and four-engine jet transportation craft. Remote sensing from aircraft provided data to improve environment, conserve natural resources, and contribute to economic growth. “The sensors required . . . are evolving rapidly, in part from well-established aerial reconnaissance technology, and in part from technology developed for the space program.” asme Spirit of St. Louis Award was presented to Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, first man on moon, for “meritorious service in the advancement of aeronautics and astronautics.” (asme Release 7/18/72; NASA Activities, 10/15/72, 207-10) September 11-October 1:	Series of six stratospheric balloons were launched to altitudes from 58 000 to 41000 m (125 000 to 135 000 ft) from Cape Girardeau Municipal Airport, Mo., in project directed by Navy’s Office of Naval Research and Raven Industries, Inc., in cooperation with four universities and NASA. Balloons, with volumes from 310 000 to 937 000 cu m (11 000 000 to 33 100 000 cu ft), achieved all flight objectives. Sept. 11 flight carried instruments from Univ. of New Hampshire to study charge and isotopical composition of cosmic radiation particles and two ionization chambers from Atomic Energy Commission and Rice Univ. Sept. 14 flight carried Washington Univ., St. Louis, experiments, including one to measure isotopic abundances of silicon, sulfur, calcium, and iron nuclei. On Sept. 14 and 24, Enrico Fermi Institute, Chicago Univ., counter experiments were launched to measure nuclear composition of very-high-energy cosmic rays. Univ. of California, at Riverside experiment was launched Sept. 19 to measure albedo neutrons from earth and solar neutrons from solar flares and quiet sun. Sixth flight, Oct. 1, carried Goddard Space Flight Center experiment to measure flux of very-high-energy cosmic rays. (Navy, onr Field Representative [Navy Balloon Proj])
William P. Lear, Sr., pioneering designer of autopilots and executive jet aircraft, told press conference at transpo ’72 at Dulles Airport, Va., that he hoped to sell aircraft with supercritical wing that would increase speed capability from mach 0.80 to 0.92 without increasing fuel consumption. NASA engineers at Langley Research Center had developed original supercritical wing. (AP, LA Times, 6/27/72)
Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., completed 13 days of postflight debriefing at Manned Spacecraft Center and prepared to spend first weekend in seven weeks with their families. (Reuters, NYT, 5/13/72, 33)
Possible discovery of historical point of origin of life from study of rocks believed to be 3.4 billion yrs old was announced by Ames Research Center scientist Dr. Keith A. Kvenvolden. Dr. Kvenvolden had conducted research with Dr. J. William Schopf and Dorothy Oehler of Univ. of California at Los Angeles on rocks Dr. Kvenvolden brought back in 1968 from Onverwacht Strata in Barberton Mountain Land near South Africa’s border with Swaziland. Rocks showed fossil evidence of beginnings of photosynthesis—life process of plants. Ancient carbon found in rocks which could predate photosynthesis was similar to organic carbon in meteorites believed to have come from asteroid belt. Immediately above was layer of identical pre-Cambrian rock with evidence of carbon produced by early photosynthetic organisms. Lack of photosynthesis in lowest layers of rock fitted theory of chemical evolution of origin of life, (upi, W News, 4/25/72, 10; Time, 6/19/72)
Navy F—14 fighter aircraft crashed into Chesapeake Ray during test flight from Patuxent River Naval Air Station, Md. Cause was unknown. Pilot, listed as missing, was identified by Navy as William H. Miller, who had piloted first F—14 to crash, Dec. 30, 1970. (AP, NYT, 7/2/72, 10) During June:	Discovery of new energy source from data returned by Office of Naval Research’s ONR-001 ionospheric research experiment launched on Air Force Sesp 1971—2 satellite Oct. 17, 1971, was announced by onr. Experiment’s low-energy energetic-ion spectrometer had observed intense fluxes of heavy ions precipitating into atmosphere at low-altitude edge of auroral zone during Dec. 17, 1971, magnetic storm. Fluxes were observed over entire energy rate of spectrometer on 24 satellite passes in two days. New source could aid understanding of Van Allen Relts and ionospheric processes affecting radio and radar propagation. (Naval Research Reviews, 6-7/72, 32-33)
Apollo 16 Astronauts John W. Young, Thomas K. Mattingly II, and Charles M. Duke, Jr., were honored during Astronaut Day celebration in Chicago. They rode in tickertape parade, attended ceremonies at City Hall escorted by Chicago Mayor Richard J. Daley, and visited Michael Reese Hospital. At hospital they met Dr. Samuel Natelson who had invented instruments and techniques by which astronauts’ body fluids were monitored by Manned Spacecraft Center Mission Control. (C Daily News, 5/17/72)
President Nixon’s decision that proposed joint Federal Aviation Administration and European Space Research Organization aeronautical satellite program should be “substantially redirected” was conveyed to Secretary of State William P. Rogers and Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe in memo from Presidential Assistant, Dr. Henry A. Kissinger. Memo said joint program was “not in accord with Administration policy.” Every effort would be made to reassure esro governments that U.S. “fully supports international cooperation in space even though it cannot accept the specific proposals contained in the current draft faa/esro Memorandum of Understanding.” (Av Wk, 2/21/72, 17; Aug, W Star, 2/11/72)
Col. Daniel D. McKee (usaf, Ret.), manager of Bell Aerosystems in Houston and former Assistant Director of NASA Manned Satellite Programs in NASA Hq., died in Houston at age 53 after apparent heart attack. (msc Hist Off) January 17:	Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), in speech before National Press Club in Washington, D.C., asked, “Shall we spend our dollars on a space shuttle and an SST for the few to fly the heavens, when many here on earth have simple unmet needs like homes and schools and health?” (Text)
Lombardo Mint’s Apollo 16 medal was among “most exciting” commemorative issues on mission offered, Baltimore Sun reported. Obverse featured lunar roving vehicle (lrv) patrolling Descartes region of moon, with view of earth on moon’s horizon and portraits of Apollo 16 crew on lower portion. Legend read: “April 16, 1972—The Descartes Region Mission—Thomas K. Mattingly, John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr.” Reverse pictured official Apollo 16 shoulder patch superimposed over lunar surface. (Gould, B Sun, 7/18/72)
Lewis Research Center scientists Dr. John V. Dugan, Jr., and Dr. Herman Mark told meeting of Northeast Ohio Congressional Council in Cleveland that space scientists and engineers dismissed because of aerospace recession should be hired for expanded programs to solve environmental and other societal problems. The LeRC scientists were invited by Rep. John F. Seiberling, Jr. (D-Ohio), to testify before House Committee on Science and Astronautics. (McCann, Cl PD, 9/23/72)
President Nixon accepted resignation of John H. Chafee as Secretary of the Navy, effective at undetermined date. President also submitted to Congress nomination of r/a Allen L. Powell to succeed r/a Don A. Jones as Director of National Ocean Survey in National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in Dept, of Commerce, r/a Jones was retiring effective April 30. Senate confirmed nomination of Powell May 3. {PD, 4/10/72, 722, 725, 737; CR, 5/3/72, D484) April 4-6:	Moscow meeting of NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences delegations confirmed desirability of joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking test mission and established understanding on management and operation of mission to be conducted in 1975, subject to government approval. Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, led U.S. delegation. Soviet delegation was headed by Vladimir A. Kotelnikov, Acting President of Soviet Academy. Parties agreed to use of U.S. Apollo spacecraft and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft with systems developed by both sides, to specific documents for development of joint documentation, and to principles for preparatory and operational phases of mission. (Summary of results; NASA Release 5/24/72) April 5:	Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences continued hearings on NASA FY 1972 authorization. Roy P. Jackson, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, testified that LeRC quiet engine program was proceeding on schedule: “Tests of full-scale fans for the engine have revealed much new information on the interrelationships among noise, aerodynamic performance, and structural integrity. The complete experimental engine will be operated in about 6 months. Results . . . indicate that we may expect to better the original noise abatement goals. Program results are given to industry on a continuing hasis. . . . We can expect some of our improvements to be adopted by industry in new engine designs before completion of our program.” NASA—aec Spade Nuclear Systems Office Manager Milton Klein testified: “Reactor power sources will be required to provide power in amounts greater than a few kilowatts for many of the missions of the future. For unmanned military satellites, radiation hardening—mandatory for certain military missions—and low recurring costs for multiple missions are important advantages of small reactor systems. For unmanned NASA earth orbit missions, reactors become cost effective above a few kilowatts, a power range needed for such applications missions as communications satellites. In manned missions . . . overriding advantage of reactor systems is their ability to accommodate unforeseen large increases in power demand.” Advanced reactor systems were needed for electric propulsion systems capable of high energy missions to far planets. Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M.	Truszynski reported that satellite network included 10 electronic ground stations operated by NASA, supplemented by optical tracking network operated by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory. Electronic stations provided worldwide system that tracked each satellite, determined status of onboard systems, commanded satellite functions, and acquired data. Optical stations, which included laser capabilities at selected sites, provided specialized services in precision orbital tracking. (Transcript)
Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, Deputy Director of Flight Crew Operations at Manned Spacecraft Center, was promoted by Air Force to rank of brigadier general. At 42 he was youngest officer of flag rank in any U.S. service and third astronaut to attain flag rank. Alan B. Shepard, Jr., had been promoted to rear admiral by Navy in December 1971 and James A. McDivitt to brigadier general by Air Force in March. Stafford had been Apollo 10 commander and Gemini 6 pilot. (nasa Release 72-235)
NASA’s M2—F3 lifting body, piloted by William H. Dana, reached 14 300-m (47 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.8 during 17th flight from Flight Research Center. Objectives—to expand flight envelope and obtain stability and control data at mach 0.95—were not achieved because two of four chambers failed to ignite, (nasa proj off)
Sky lab medical experiments altitude test (smeat), begun July 26, was progressing satisfactorily. Richard S. Johnston, Director of Life Sciences at Manned Spacecraft Center, said astronauts Robert L. Crippen, Karol J. Bobko, and Dr. William E. Thornton were in good spirits and good physical condition after seven days inside msc chamber 6 m (20 ft) long. Minor equipment and procedural problems had been solved quickly without disrupting test timeline. Astronauts were scheduled to remain in chamber for up to 56 days, (msc Release 72-170)
Special awards ceremony marking outstanding success of NASA’s Mariner 9 Mars mission was held at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator—assisted by Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director, and Dr. Harold Brown, President of California Institute of Technology—presented 32 NASA medals. Dan Schneiderman, Manager of Mariner Project, was awarded NASA Distinguished Service Medal for “creative leadership in conception, organizational planning, and management of a highly efficient Mariner 9 team which . . . achieved all objectives of the most successfully productive mission to Mars.” (JPL Release 624)
Twenty-fifth anniversary of U.S. Air Force. First Secretary of the Air Force W. Stuart Symington had been sworn in Sept. 18, 1947, effective date of transfer of Army air activities to Dept, of the Air Force established by Armed Forces Unification Act of July 26, 1947. Publications during September commemorated Silver Anniversary. Airman editorial noted it has been more than 50 yrs since advent of military aviation “and it is virtually impossible to divide the technological achievements and amazing advances over that span of years into categories like ‘pre-autonomy’ or ‘post-autonomy.’ ” It was spirit that counted—“that indomitable, driving, probing, questioning, seeking perseverance, and sheer genius that has taken man from Kittyhawk to the moon in what is really an incredibly short period of time.” Air Force System Command’s Newsreview traced historical highlights of its bases and organizations. Arnold Engineering Development Center (aedc) near Tullahoma, Tenn., had been established in 1953 at recommendation of aeronautical scientist Dr. Theodore von Karman. Center currently consisted of 40 test units that provided “simulated flight-test capability ranging in speed to more than 20 times the speed of sound and to altitudes around 1,000 miles [1600 kilometers].” Center’s replacement value was $840 million. Patrick Air Force Base, Fla,, had grown with space program. Launch of V—2 from Eastern Test Range at Patrick in 1950 “was the first step to the moon. That goal, now accomplished five times, leaves the future of space exploration on the threshold of a dream.” Future of the Air Force was discussed by Gen. John D. Ryan (usaf) in Armed Forces Journal issue dedicated to Air Force Silver Anniversary. “It would be very easy ... to take off on rhetorical flights of overcoming the unlimited challenges of aerospace. The challenges do exist; and they could conceivably mean that the future of the Air Force will include the use of remotely piloted vehicles, hypersonic aircraft, and the laser. But if these, and anything else man can envision and produce, do exist in the future, they will only be the means for Air Force people to do their basic job of providing this country with the aerospace power required for defense and security. As in the past 25 years, success in the future depends heavily on the dedication and quality of Air Force people.” (Airman, 9/72, 25; AFSC Newsreview, 9/72, 6, 9; AFJ, 9/72; Dept of AF, A Chronology of American Air Space Events, 1/3/61)
Space shuttle’s “subtle costs” were discussed in New York Times article by John N. Wilford: “Because NASA must initiate shuttle development within its current $3.2-billion budget framework, other programs will presumably by sacrificed.” Possible “victim” was Grand Tour mission planned for late 1970s. “The choice is certain to be unpopular with much of the scientific community.” Scientists had criticized NASA’s emphasis on “big-money manned projects at the expense of the less expensive science-oriented unmanned missions.” Shuttle development also would “restrict the funds available for other scientific projects in NASA and elsewhere in Government.” (NYT, 1/9/72, 6)
NASA held separate Headquarters debriefings for three losing aerospace firms in $2.6-billion space shuttle contract competition. North American Rockwell had won contract July 26. Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., told press after Grumman debriefing that his firm was unsuccessful largely because its shuttle design was more “conservative” than that of NR. Gavin said NASA officials had considered “mission suitability” and not management problems as weakness in Grumman bid. Grumman design had more complex swing arms to hold shuttle stationary before launch and lacked “background with large cryogenic tanking” used in shuttle’s fuel supply. Grumman design had also been more expensive than NR version. Spokesmen for other losers, Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and McDonnell Douglas Corp., declined to comment after debriefings. [See also Oct. 4.] (Andelitnan, NYT, 8/8/72)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) released statement saying he would ask Dept, of Justice to investigate alleged overpayment for building Lockheed C-5 military transport aircraft, gao study made at' his request had found that Air Force paid some $400 million in excess progress payments to Lockheed because Lockheed overstated value of work in progress. (Text)
Naval Research Laboratory announced discovery of huge clouds of carbon monoxide in galaxy M-33 by nrl scientist Dr. Philip R. Schwartz and Aerospace Corp. scientists Dr. William J. Wilson and Dr. Eugene E. Epstein. Team had used National Radio Astronomy Observatory radiotelescope at Kitt Peak, Ariz., in first detection of extragalactic molecular emission line by radioastronomy. Finding indicated that presence of complex molecules in interstellar medium was not unique to earth’s galaxy. Galaxy M-33 was 1.5 million light-years from center of Milky Way galaxy, (nrl Release 60-72-10)
S.R. 193, joint resolution to redesignate Cape Kennedy as Cape Canaveral, was introduced by Sen. Edward J. Gurney (R-Fla.) and Sen. Lawton M. Childs, Jr. (D-Fla). Resolution would retain name John F. Kennedy Space Center for NASA facilities on Merritt Island. Sen. Gurney said it was from ksc, “and not from the Cape itself, that President Kennedy’s dream was realized.” Desire of Cape’s residents for restoration of 400-yr-old name Canaveral and “desire of a lasting memorial to the President” could be accomplished through adoption of resolution. “From a historical standpoint, no greater justice could be done.” (■CR, 2/1/72, S862^)	_
Smithsonian Institution opened exhibit “Ballooning: 1782-1972” at Arts and Industries Building in Washington, D.C. Exhibit, depicting ballooning and brave aeronauts, was described by New York Times as prototype show for National Air and Space Museum, “appropriately headed by Michael Collins, the ‘anchor astronaut’ for man’s first landing on the moon in 1969.” (Robertson, NYT, 2/29/72, 14) During February:	NASA selected three life scientists to receive first grants under NASA life scientist program. Dr. Roger P. Maickel, professor of pharmacology at Indiana Univ., would study effects of stressful or otherwise abnormal environment, such as space travel, on action of selected therapeutic drugs. Dr. Walther Stoeckenius of San Francisco Medical Center Cardiovascular Research Institute would conduct exobiology research to determine physiologic role of bacterial membrane dependent on high salt concentration. Dr. William A. Bonner, professor of chemistry at Stanford Univ., would conduct exobiology research to develop means for detecting measurable, optically active molecules in remote regions of space. Program had been established in July 1971 to increase cooperation among university and NASA life scientists in contributing to advancement of life sciences disciplines related to NASA mission. Scientists and their graduate students would spend one third of their time at a NASA center. (NASA Release V2—41)
President Nixon announced intention to nominate John A. Volpe to be U.S. Ambassador to Italy and Claude S. Brinegar to succeed Volpe as Secretary of Transportation. Nominations were sent to Senate Jan. 4. {PD, 12/11/72, 1735; 1/8/72, 12) December 8:	Soviet newspapers Pravda and Komsomolskaya carried detailed reports of Apollo 17 progress and photos of astronauts on second day of moon-landing mission. Pravda story ended: “We wish them success.” Komsomolskaya said mission was “one of the most daring measures ever carried out by mankind, and undoubtedly the most expensive experiment ever in the area of science and technology.” Washington Post Foreign Service said “new tone in newspaper coverage” reflected high-level decision to cover some U.S. news more sympathetically in “period of Soviet-American detente.” (Kaiser, W Post, 12/9/72, A3)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of $498 487 Federal Aviation Administration contract to Council for Airport Opportunity for training program to assist some 900 minority workers in New York area in qualifying for better jobs in aviation, (dot Release 80-72)
First successful experimental demonstration in U.S. of magnetic levitation system (maglev) was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. maglev—system for suspending vehicle above guideway with power supplied by supercooled magnets—would permit trains to travel at speeds up to 480 km per hr (300 mph) without physical contact with rails or guideway. Test was performed in Menlo Park, Calif., by Stanford Research Institute under contract to Dept, of Transportation, (dot Release 100-72) November 22:	Deputy Director James A. Lovell, Jr., of Manned Spacecraft Center’s Science and Applications Directorate announced intention to retire from space program to press at Msc. As astronaut he had spent more time in space than any other U.S. astronaut. Lovell had been Gemini 4 backup pilot, Gemini 7 pilot, Gemini 9 backup command pilot, Gemini 12 command pilot, Apollo 8 command module pilot, Apollo 11 backup command pilot, and Apollo 13 commander. Lovell told press he was examining offers from New York and Chicago business firms. “This is not something that I would choose to do under other circumstances but . . . there are not enough slots for us guys who want to remain in the operations end of space flight.” Lovell said he would remain with NASA until completion of Apollo 17 mission, (upi, W Post, 10/24/72, A5)
United Kingdom and West Germany agreed to abandon plans for European launcher and to buy U.S. launch vehicles instead. Decision was made at meeting in Bonn between U.K. Aerospace Minister Michael R. D. Heseltine and West German Aerospace Minister Klaus von Dohnanyi. (Reuters, NYT, 12/9/72, C7)
Mackay Trophy for 1971 was awarded to l/c Thomas B. Estes (usaf) and l/c Dewain C. Vick (usaf) by Air Force Chief of Staff, Gen. John D. Ryan, in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Award was for April 27,1971, 24 000-km (15 000-mi) nonstop flight at speeds over mach 3 in Lockheed SR—71 strategic reconnaissance aircraft, (naa News, 8/72, 1)
Soviet news agency Tass reported completion of Polar Morning—joint U.S.S.R. and France experiment at E. T. Krenkel Hydrometeorological Observatory in Arctic. During three-month expedition, series of meteorological rockets 'had carried Soviet and French payloads to altitudes between 90 and 180 km (56 and 112 mi) during period of transition from winter to summer and from polar night to polar day. Data were obtained on atmospheric temperature, wind speed and direction, cloud formations, corpuscular radiation, and solar activity. (FBIS-Sov, 6/16/72, LI) June 15:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, and Apollo 16 Astronauts Charles M. Duke, Jr., John W. Young, and Thomas K. Mattingly II met with President Nixon at White House to discuss April 16-27 Apollo 16 mission and joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975. Following discussion Dr. Fletcher and astronauts held press conference. Dr. Fletcher said President was “very pleased” with progress made toward joint mission. “The President particularly wanted to emphasize that . . . this is only the beginning of what he conceives as a long association with the Soviet Union in many other areas of space cooperation. ... we are busy working on other kinds of things that we can do together . . . perhaps through the turn of the century, doing things together for economic reasons and because he feels strongly that the international aspect of this is important in improving relationships. If we can do this together, we can do other things together.” President also emphasized worldwide space cooperation. As areas for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in future, Dr. Fletcher thought “the ones we can be sure of” were “the cooperative program on Mars [and] a new cooperative program on Venus, where we explore the upper atmosphere and the entire atmosphere and they explore the surface. We are going to be doing that together.” (Other nasa officials explained later these would be coordinated efforts rather than joint missions.) July meeting of principals at Manned Spacecraft Center would “iron out the management” of joint docking mission. Astronaut Young said that “real problem” was communication; “once we solve that problem we can prove that we can work together in a lot of other areas besides.” Dr. Fletcher said plans for joint astronaut and cosmonaut training had not been concluded, “but it is going to be absolutely essential that the cosmonauts come over here and train on our equipment and vice versa. That much has been agreed to.” Training program probably would start “within about a year.” Dr. Fletcher summed up progress made on joint mission since May 24 signing of cooperation agreement: “We have set up the agenda for the meeting which will primarily involve the management aspects. ... We also have, at home, worked out some of the details of the specifications . . . and now are waiting approval.” Perhaps most “spectacular” progress had been “great enthusiasm from Congress for the mission, particularly when we told them this was not going to cost any more money.” (Transcript; WSJ, 6/16/72)	.
Dr. John E. Condon, Director of Reliability and Quality Assurance and Acting Director of Safety, left nasa to enter private industry. (NASA Activities, 11/15/72, 236)
Marshall Space Flight Center engineers John R. Rasquin and M. F. Estes had received copies of patent issued to NASA for Rasquin-Estes invention—adaptation of magnetomotive hammer to diamond-making process —MSFC announced. Hammer, developed for Saturn V program, had been used to remove distortions from rocket tank sections misshapen by welding. In process developed by Rasquin and Estes, hammer was mounted on copper plate atop hardened steel horn. Hammer created shock wave in horn with sufficient energy to produce pressure and temperature necessary to change graphite to diamonds. (MSFC Release 72-1)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) said Dept, of Defense had suppressed secret report showing that cost of Navy F-14 jet fighter aircraft would rise to $20.8 million each—$4 million above published estimates. In statement to press, Sen. Proxmire said he was “shocked and dismayed” at DOD’s refusal to make report public. (Corddry, B Sun, 7/16/72, 17)
Data from 10-yr U.S. Supersonic Transport Development Program, terminated March 1971, had been cataloged and would be available for dissemination by National Technical Information Service of Dept, of Commerce, Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced. (dot Release 72—159)
Asteroid discovered in constellation Leo by Crimean Astrophysical Observatory scientists had been named after late Soviet Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin—first man in space, on Vostok 1 April 12, 1961— Spaceflight reported. (SF, 12/72, 457)
Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., said in interview that 1500 employees might lose jobs because of award of NASA space shuttle contract to competitor, North American Rockwell Corp. [see July 26]. First layoffs at Bethpage, N.Y., plant might come in three weeks, with 200 employees affected. Labor officials later noted that action could affect as many as 8000 workers, including fringe concerns. (Andelman, NYT, 7/28/72)
Fourteenth Israel Annual Conference on Aviation and Astronautics was held in Tel Aviv and Haifa. Fifth Theodore von Karman Memorial Lecture, “Perspectives in Aeroelasticity,” was delivered by Langley Research Center scientist I. Edward Garrick. (Off Naval Research London, European Scientific Notes, ESN-26-4, 4/28/72, 91) March 1—3:	NASA-wide conference on equal employment opportunity was held at Kennedy Space Center at request of Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. During conference chaired by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, Dr. Fletcher said: “Our successes in space exploration have been outstanding .... However, in spite of the efforts of many and a number of significant accomplishments, our achievements in equal employment in NASA, here on earth, do not match what we have done beyond our planet.” Dr. Fletcher said he would insist “that as fast as humanly possible, by transfer, training, promotion, and whatever other means are available, and appropriate, our offices move toward the goal of the balanced staffing that will achieve true equal employment opportunities.” NASA was planning to get members of minority groups into space. Space shuttle would be important factor in accomplishing this goal. NASA also would consider establishing annual awards for outstanding performance in Office of Equal Opportunity and would insist that “spirit as well as the letter” of contractors’ equal employment obligations be fulfilled. (Text) The 258-kg (569-lb), spin-stabilized spacecraft carried 11 scientific experiments to provide new knowledge about Jupiter, solar system, and Milky Way galaxy. It would return first closeup images of Jupiter and make first measurements of Jupiter’s twilight side, never seen from earth. Two additional experiments—celestial mechanics and S-band occultation—would use communication signal and earth-based equipment. Pioneer 10 would be first spacecraft to observe Asteroid Belt between orbits of Mars and Jupiter, first man-made object to escape solar system, first spacecraft to use orbital velocity and gravity of Jupiter for escape, and first NASA spacecraft powered entirely by nuclear energy— four radioisotope thermoelectric generators developed by Atomic Energy Commission. Pioneer 10 would make 20 kinds of measurements of Jupiter’s atmosphere, radiation belts, heat balance, magnetic field, moons, and other phenomena. It would also characterize solar atmosphere, interstellar gas, cosmic rays, asteroids, and meteoroids. Spacecraft also carried pictorial plaque designed to show scientifically educated inhabitants of another star system—who might intercept it millions of years later—-the time spacecraft was launched, from where, and by whom. Plaque design was etched into gold-anodized aluminum plate 15 by 23 cm (6 by 9 in) and 1.27 mm (0.05 in) thick attached to spacecraft’s antenna support struts. Radiating lines on left of plaque represented positions of 14 pulsars, with mathematical binary code “1-” symbols representing pulsars’ frequencies relative to hydrogen atom, which was used as “universal clock.” Hydrogen atom was also used as “universal yardstick” for sizing human figures and outline of spacecraft on right of plaque. Man’s hand was raised in good-will gesture. Across bottom of plaque were planets ranging outward from sun, with spacecraft’s trajectory arching away from earth, passing Mars, and swinging past Jupiter.	Initial orientation of Pioneer 10 was achieved six hours after launch so that communications high-gain antenna was directed toward earth. By March 3, four scientific instruments—magnetometer, charged particles experiment, geiger tube telescope, and meteoroid detector—had been turned on. First midcourse maneuver, March 7, increased velocity by 11 m per sec (45.9 fps), adjusted trajectory, and shortened flight time to Jupiter by nine hours. At 3:00 pm EST March 8, Pioneer 10 was 4 570 000 km (2 840 000 mi) from earth traveling at 32 800 km per hr (20 400 mph). Round-trip radio communication time was 31 sec. By March 10 trapped radiation detector and ultraviolet photometer had been turned on and meteoroid detector had recorded several hits. Second midcourse maneuver, with two brief thruster firings March 23 and 24, delayed arrival time by 2% hrs and moved arrival point at Jupiter about 6400 km (4000 mi) closer to planet. Maneuver was also attempt to fly Pioneer 10 behind Jupiter’s moon Io. Whether flight path behind Io had been achieved would not be known until spacecraft neared Jupiter. To go behind Io, spacecraft had to arrive within period of less then eight minutes. By March 24 remaining instruments—plasma analyzer, cosmic ray telescope, imaging photopolarimeter, infrared radiometer, and asteroid/meteoroid detector—had been turned on and all experiments were recording good data. Meteoroid detector had recorded 10 impacts, and asteroid/meteoroid telescope had seen one meteoroid. Spacecraft was expected to enter Asteroid Belt in early July and to reach Jupiter Dec. 3, 1973. Pioneer 10 was first spacecraft to attempt Jupiter probe. Pioneer 5 was launched March 11, 1960, to study heliocentric space environment inward toward sun. Pioneer 6 (launched Dec. 16, 1965) and Pioneer 7 (launched Aug. 17, 1966) were studying heliocentric space environment. Pioneer 8 (launched Dec. 13, 1967) and Pioneer 9 (launched Nov. 8, 1968) were studying interplanetary phenomena. Last four were still operating satisfactorily. (NASA proj off; NASA Releases 72-25, 72-32, 72-50, 72-68) March 2:	Isis 2 International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies (launched by NASA March 31, 1971, in joint U.S. and Canadian program) was adjudged successful by NASA. Spacecraft had exceeded mission objectives. All 12 scientific instruments were operational and were still acquiring detailed information on latitudinal and diurnal variations of ionosphere. Spacecraft was obtaining radio-sounder and correlative direct measurements to allow continuation and extension of ionospheric studies during period of declining solar activity, and long lifetime was anticipated. Isis 2 was fourth and final mission in U.S.-Canadian program to study ionosphere that began with launch of Alouette 1 Sept. 28, 1962. All four spacecraft were operational and were providing useful data. ISIS program had acquired wealth of knowledge on worldwide morphology of topside ionosphere, virtually unknown region before Alouette-isis program, and in discoveries in plasma physics and radio-wave propagation. (nasa proj off)
During five-day visit to Poland Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser, informed Polish government in Warsaw that U.S. would name oao-c Orbiting Astronomical Observatory for Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus. Launch of oao-c, scheduled for August, would inaugurate U.S. contribution to worldwide Copernican celebration feting 500th anniversary of Feb. 14, 1473, birth of Copernicus, oao-c would carry 81-cm (32-in) reflecting ultraviolet telescope developed by Princeton Univ. and battery of smaller x-ray telescope developed by Univ. College, Univ. of London, to study uv and x-ray emissions of celestial bodies, oao—c would weigh 2200 kg (4900 lbs) and would be launched into earth orbit with 740-km (460-mi) altitude by Atlas-Centaur booster, (nasa Release 72-141)
Reception in House Rayburn Building honored retiring Chairman George P. Miller of House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Rep. Miller (D-Calif.)—defeated June 6 in California primary for nomination for reelection to House—had presided over House Committee in overseeing and funding U.S. space program since 1961. House Speaker, Rep. Carl Albert (D-Okla.), said that “never had so much been accomplished in the national interest in so short a time” as by Committee. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., praised work of Committee in evolution of entire U.S. space effort. Rep. Miller responded that U.S. space achievements were “a beginning and not an end” of the national enterprise required to serve Nation and society in the future. National Space Club President Donald R. Rodgers presided over ceremony attended by 300 guests, including Congressmen, NASA and industry representatives, and Senate and House Space Committee staffs. (NASA Hist Off)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird announced appointment of l/c Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) as Director of National Security Agency, effective Aug. 1. Gen. Phillips, assigned to NASA in 1964, had been Apollo Program Director at NASA Hq. until Sept. 1, 1969, when he became Commander of Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization. He would replace Adm. Noel A. M. Gayler (usn), who would become U.S. commander in chief in Pacific area. (W Star, 4/27/72, A2) April 28:	Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny sent message congratulating President Nixon on successful completion of Apollo 16 mission and safe return of astronauts. He asked President to convey “best of wishes to the members of the spaceship crew, courageous cosmonauts John Young, Charles Duke and Thomas Mattingly.” (fbis-Sov, 4/28/72, G2)
nasa’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by John A. Manke, completed 20th flight from Flight Research Center. Objectives—to check out pilot and to obtain stability and control data at mach 0.70— were achieved. M2-F3 reached mach 0.70 and 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude, (nasa proj off)
United Kingdom Minister for Aerospace Michael R. D. Heseltine, at Paris meeting of science ministers of European Space Conference countries, urged creation of European space agency to achieve common policy as prerequisite for participation in post-Apollo space program. (■SF, 1/73, 1)	_
Science article commented on renaming of Jet Propulsion Laboratory in honor of retiring California Congressman: Rep. H. Allen Smith’s closest association with aerospace had come in late 1940s when he was security manager for Lockheed Aircraft Corp. “During his years in the House, Smith distinguished himself as a quiet, unwavering conservative dedicated to economy in government.” He had voted against supersonic transport “and on at least three occasions opposed the space authorization bill, the ultimate wellspring of JPL’s money.” No one had asked JPL, California Institute of Technology, or NASA what Ihey thought of redesignation. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) had approved but “was not in a position to object gracefully.” Rep. Miller, too, was retiring and House Committee on Public Works had decided to affix his name to Federal building in Oakland, Calif. Article suggested solution might be “for JPL to acknowledge its new name with a small sign behind a fast-growing evergreen and let time take its course.” (Gillette, Science, 12/15/72, 1178) December 16—January 22, 1973: West Germany’s Aeros Aeronomy Satellite was successfully launched by NASA from Western Test Range at 3:25 PST by four-stage, solid-fuel Scout D vehicle. Spacecraft was placed in planned orbit with apogee of 864.4 km (537.1 mi); perigee, 218.1 km (135.5 mi) • period, 95.47 min; and inclination, 96.95°. Primary objective was to place 127-kg (277-lb) payload in nearpolar orbit to measure main aeronomic parameters of upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation in wavelength band of main absorption. By Jan. 22, 1973, all five experiments were performing satisfactorily and spacecraft housekeeping operations were normal, except that problem with synchronization of data rate to spin rate might degrade data from NASA’s neutral atmosphere temperature experiment Satellite, cylinder 71 cm high and 91 cm in diameter (28 by 36 in) with four telemetry antennas, would contribute to understanding of thermal, chemical, and dynamic processes governing atmospheric behavior. Instruments included mass spectrometer, retarding potential analyzer, impedance probe, extreme-ultraviolet spectrometer, and NASA’s neutral atmosphere experiment. December 16:	Apollo 17 surface science press briefing was held at Manned Spacecraft Center as astronauts headed toward home from moon. Stanford Univ. seismologist Dr. Robert L. Kovach described results to date from lunar seismic profiling experiment. Experiment had recorded impact of lunar module (lm) on lunar surface 9 km (5.6 mi) southwest of landing site “right on target where we wanted it.” Kinetic energy at impact was comparable to “1 ton of tnt going off.” Signal was “very clearly recorded on the geophone array and we’ve acquired an extremely important data point; . . . we’re effectively getting a depth sample down to 3 to 4 kilometers [1.9 to 2.5 miles] in the Moon. And ... we should get some very important information about the underlying highland type materials.” Data point was “in critical distance range to answer one of the mysteries . . . of the shallow Lunar interior. We’ve been very much concerned about the enormous change in physical properties by terrestrial standards, . . . velocity changes by enormous percentage over a very small pressure range.” Data point should provide “answers as to just how these properties are changing.” First two explosive charges deployed had not shown significant differences in subsurface of Apollo 17 landing site and those of Apollo 15 and 16 but Apollo 17 site appeared to be “underlined by definitely more competent materials and they quite probably could be volcanic flows.” Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for passive seismic experiment, said Apollo 17 data, when compared with previous data, suggested possibility of new interpretation of lunar structure. “We do find evidence for lunar crust as we did in the past, but we may have to thin it considerably.” Velocity of seismic waves in crustal material and velocity of material underlying crust might also have to be lowered. “We’re not dealing with pure anorthosite anymore. We’re dealing perhaps with gabbros . . . and so we have ... to review all of the data and to reconsider our interpretations some, not just the seismologist, but the geochemist and geologist, as well.” Dr. Marcus E. Langseth of Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, principal investigator for heat flow experiment, said Apollo 17 experiment had “more than doubled” lunar heat flow data to date. “We’ve got a very successful emplacement in the operation of our instrument. It has been perfect.” Lunar surface temperature recorded Dec. 14 had been about 360 K (189°F). At about 15 cm (6 in), it had dropped to 280 K (45°F). At about 65 cm (26 in) temperature dropped to 254 K (—2°F). “Below that depth, the temperature begins to increase again. It’s about 257 degrees [3°F] at the bottom of the probes.” Data indicated that heat flow at Apollo 17 site would resemble that observed at 15 cm (6 in). If so, it would “give support to the kind of growing model of a warmer interior to the Moon” and “would require that there be a total gradient abundance of radioactive isotopes in the Moon as compared to Earth. So, there would be implication here for fundamental difference in composition, between the Moon and the Earth.” Dr. Langseth also reported data from traverse gravimeter experiment had supported thesis that “high gravity anomalies associated with the mare basin—the so called mascons”—probably had been created by slab of basalt or lavas which had flooded into previously excavated basins. Dr. William R. Muehlberger of Univ. of Texas, principal lunar geology investigator, said Apollo 17 had provided “most exciting few days of my scientific career. This mission is truly the fitting climax to the whole Apollo program. The landing site held great promise that we were going to get a good chance to unravel much of the earlier lunar history as well as the sample and study of what appeared to be very young vulcanism .... And I think this promise was fulfilled.” Orange materials at Shorty Crater had been “a spectacular plus.” Scientists hoped “returned material will tell us that that was young vulcanism in volcanic alteration of Shorty Crater. There’s still a possibility it could be an impact crater, however.” Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of MSC Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., discussed Dr. Latham’s suggestion that lunar crust might be thinner than originally expected: “I will certainly defend the proposition that the crust is made of a very aluminum plagioclase-rich rocks, . . . anorthosite gabbro or gabbroic anorthosite, . . . far from a basalt. I think that the chemistry of the surface rocks, . . . and the returned rocks bear this out and if the crust is thin, it reduces the likelihood that it is any different composition than what we see at the surface.” (Transcript)
New York Times editorial commented on March 19 visit of its science writer John N. Wilford to U.S.S.R.’s Star City, home of cosmonauts. Visit “implied a major change in Soviet policy toward space cooperation. No Western journalist had previously been permitted inside this key center of Soviet manned space activities.” Wilford’s report had suggested U.S.S.R. might be willing to explore moon jointly with U.S. “If so, the idea catches the United States at an embarrassing point in development of its space program. After the scheduled flights of Apollos 16 and 17 . . . this country plans to focus most of its future activity in space on earth-orbiting space stations and development of a space shuttle.” (NYT, 3/23/72) March 24:	Air Force launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 12:45 pm pst by Thor-Burner II booster. Orbital parameters: 884-km (549-mi) apogee, 802-km (498-mi) perigee, 101.7min period, and 98.7° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 3/29/72, 156)
Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., said he hoped to obtain SI billion worth of subcontracts in space shuttle program. New York Times said later that this was more than three times as much as North American Rockwell, winner of $2.6-billion prime contract, had tentatively allocated to all of New York State. (Witkin, NYT, 7/29/72)
President Lyndon B. Johnson had made “impulsive decision” in “intensity of emotion” when he changed name of Cape Canaveral to Cape Kennedy, Circuit Judge James R. Knott of West Palm Beach, Fla., said in testimony before Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs. Committee began hearings on S.R. 193, to redesignate Cape Kennedy as Cape Canaveral. Judge Knott testified that President Johnson had acted on request by widow of President John F. Kennedy following Kennedy assassination and said original name should be restored. {W Post, 3/9/72, A25; CR, 3/8/72, D224)
Soviet oceanologists had explored underwater volcanoes in Mediterranean using mobile Crab submarine apparatus similar to Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, Tass announced. Crab had TV system and system for transmitting control commands and was linked to control ship by cable for communications. Lowered 2000 m (6600 ft) below water from ship Academician Sergei Vavilov, Crab had examined underwater mountain north of Lipari Islands in Tyrrhenian Sea and collected samples of soil, algae, and marine animals. (fbis-Sov, 6/15/72, LI)
Prospects of U.S. astronauts and Soviet cosmonauts “chummily tooling around” in orbit had “hardly raised a ripple when it was announced at the Moscow Meetings,” author Robert Sherrod commented in New York Times article. But attempts of President John F. Kennedy to “cooperate with the Soviets in space nine years ago” had failed. Failure showed “differing methods of Kennedy the idealist and Nixon the pragmatist.” President Nixon had “smoothed the way” with seven meetings between U.S. and Soviet engineers, beginning with April 24, 1970, meeting between then NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas O. Paine, and Soviet Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov. President Kennedy’s attitude toward space program had been “ambivalent” until Sept. 20, 1963, when he proposed “joint expedition to the moon” in speech before United Nations. Proposal had come as surprise and had “staggered” anti-Soviet space supporters in Congress, who proceeded to pare NASA budget. House had voted 125 to 110 against using NASA funds for joint lunar landing with Communist country. Kennedy had “forgotten that politics is the art of the possible, forgotten that a leader should never surprise his own close support,” Sherrod said. “In the sunnier climate of 1972, Richard Nixon duly observed the axiom and the rule.” (NYT, 6/17/72)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified on planetary exploration program at opening session of FY 1973 nasa authorizatization hearings before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. Dr. Naugle presented plan under study for “much more modest outer planets exploration program” instead of originally proposed two-mission, four-spacecraft Grand Tour of all outer planets, canceled because of budgetary restrictions. Jupiter exploration would continue. “We are studying a mission for the initial exploration of Saturn. We would take advantage of the rare alinement of the planets to launch two Mariner-class spacecraft in 1977 on a trajectory which would carry them first past Jupiter and on to Saturn to investigate that strange planet. ... At present, this program appears to be an excellent outer planets mission within the current constraints. However, we are studying other options with our science advisory groups to determine the set of outer planets missions which provide the most significant scientific information.” Viking project to softland spacecraft on Mars in 1976 remained “most significant element of the ongoing planetary exploration program.” Mariner 9’s orbiting of Mars had been major highlight in 1971 planetary program. To date, “Mariner 9 . . . has been in orbit 96 days, is still healthy and operating nominally. ... it has transmitted back to Earth over 5700 pictures of Mars, a number of closeups of its two moons, and measurements of surface features and atmospheric properties by ultraviolet and infrared spectrometers.” NASA had mapped approximately 66% of Martian surface at resolution of 1 km (0.6 mi) or better. “To date we have visited Venus and Mars, and will soon reach Jupiter and Mercury. Within the next year we shall have studied Mars in detail from orbit and within 5 years shall have begun an intensive automated exploration of its surface. By the end of the decade we expect to know whether life exists, has existed, or could exist on Mars.” Three spacecraft to be launched in 1972 would open “brand new areas of research or application.” Pioneer-F would be launched in March to begin study of Jupiter. Next, Earth Resources Technology Satellite would open new field of earth study. In fall, astronomy Explorer satellite would begin to study gamma rays from stars. Major
Swing-wing Fitter-B fighter-bomber aircraft never before seen outside U.S.S.R. had been delivered to Egypt by U.S.S.R. shortly before Egyptian government ordered Soviet pilots and military advisers to leave Egypt in July, New York Times reported. Some U.S. Government analysts believed aircraft, version of fixed-wing Sukhoi aircraft which U.S.S.R. had supplied to Egypt for several years, had heightened Egyptian disillusionment with U.S.S.R. “The Egyptians wanted an advanced fighter-bomber and thought they had Russian promises to get some. But what was delivered is barely better than the Sukhoi-7, except that the swing-wings allow it to take off from a shorter field.” (Beecher, NYT, 9/29/72, 19) or structural problem with stand pipe in tank. Additional tests were September 28-29: Oxidizer tank of Apollo 17 command and service module (csm) reaction control system was overpressurized during test at Kennedy Space Center. Preliminary data indicated no bladder leak scheduled but problem was not expected to delay Apollo launch scheduled Dec. 6. (nasa pao; SBD, 10/2/72, 139) September 28—30:	Symposium on High Energy Phenomena on the Sun was held at Goddard Space Flight Center to present recent findings to scientists from U.S., Australia, U.K., France, and Japan. Detection of first direct evidence of nuclear reactions on solar surface, during Aug. 4 and 7 by NASA’s Oso 7 Orbiting Solar Observatory (launched Sept. 29, 1971), was reported by Univ. of New Hampshire physicist Dr. Edward L. Chupp and team. Evidence had been obtained from two gamma-ray emission lines—radiation indicators of nuclear processes—during first observation of these radiations from sun. Findings proved that nuclear reactions did occur in large solar flares, and might contribute to goal of generating pollution-free electrical power from sustained thermonuclear reactions in laboratory, (nasa Release 72-193) September 29: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 521 from Plesetsk into orbit with 1014-km (630.1-mi) apogee, 976-km (606.5-mi) perigee, 105.0min period, and 65.9° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/72; SF, 3/73, 114) • Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, spoke at dedication ceremony for Univ. of Kansas Space Technology Center and at joint University and Chamber of Commerce luncheon in Lawrence, Kan., celebrating dedication. At dedication he said ceremony marked final step in nasa-sponsored program to build space-oriented research facilities at U.S. universities under Sustaining University Program started in 1960s. Univ. of Kansas Center was 37th and last facility to be completed. Dr. Fletcher said program had accomplished its mission “extremely well. These splendid facilities give our Nation the means of performing research that would be virtually impossible without them.” Program’s projects had been “invaluable in the successful accomplishment of many of our greatest achievements in space.” NASA had found in universities “a concentrated source of one of the irreplaceable ingredients of advanced research programs—highly trained intellects. And now that they can work in facilities to match, we are expecting even more productive results.” Dr. Fletcher discussed universities’ role in NASA activities in luncheon speech: “We work with large and small universities in aeronautics and space programs supporting projects . . . relevant to NASA’s mission and . . . compatible with university interests and capabilities. We encourage the use of NASA laboratory facilities and the exchange of information between university faculty and nasa scientists.” More than 900 university experimenters had used space data, more than 300 investigators from 42 universities had analyzed lunar samples, 25 universities had conceived Apollo mission experiments, and 2500 active research grants and contracts had been issued to universities by NASA. “As we look beyond this decade we can be confident that we have a mechanism, through the space shuttle, to provide quick and easy access to space and at a cost that should encourage new opportunities and initiatives, particularly from the university community.” (Texts)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by William H. Dana, completed 26th flight from Flight Research Center after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Objectives were to evaluate reaction augmentation system and to obtain stability and control data at maximum mach number. To obtain maximum speed, M2-F3 was launched from 14 300 m (47 000 ft) rather than usual 13 700 m (45 000 ft). Landing rockets were used during climb. M2-F3 reached 19 800-m (65 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.5. (NASA proj off)
Skylab medical experiments altitude test (smeat) to collect medical data and evaluate medical equipment hegan at Manned Spacecraft Center. Astronauts Robert L. Crippen (commander), Karol J. Bobko (pilot), and Dr. William E. Thornton (science pilot) entered altitude chamber 6 m (20 ft) in diameter with atmosphere 70% oxygen and 30% nitrogen at 34 500 newtons per sq m (5 psi), where they would live and work for up to 56 days. Skylab, scheduled for launch in April 1973, would support three-man crews in earth orbit for total of 130 days. (nasa Release 72-131; upi, NYT, 7/27/72,18)
Protocol on U.S.—U.S.S.R. Joint Commission on Scientific and Technical Cooperation, established under May 26 agreement, was signed by Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser, at White House ceremony attended by President Nixon. Protocol was signed simultaneously in Moscow by Vladimir A. Kirillin, Deputy Chairman of U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers. (PD, 7/31/72, 1187; Tass, fbis-Sov, 7/31/72, Gl)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. were nearing “historic agreement to begin joint ventures in space,” Wall Street Journal reported. “For the first time, the Soviets are dropping their secrecy curtain enough to provide detailed engineering data on their spacecraft—a sign that Brezhnev, Kosygin & Co. really want to go ahead.” U.S. officials—including Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser—“are eagerly committing themselves to cooperation; American spacemen, feeling pinched for funds, now count on accord to keep them flying in the future.” Political decision on joint space mission “is in the hands of the Kremlin and the White House.” Some officials believed “announcement of this Soviet-American engagement could come before June—perhaps in Moscow if President Nixon goes ahead with his scheduled trip there this month.” (Spivak, WSJ, 5/16/72, 1)
William Hines commented on space shuttle decision in Chicago SunTimes: “What the President offered last week was not a completely reusable workhorse aerospace plane at all, but a scaled-down hodgepodge of obsolete, current and avant-garde technology that cannot possibly meet the stated goal of $100-a-pound payloads in 1980. The sad truth is that the original shuttle couldn’t, either, once it became apparent that development costs would approximate $13 billion rather than the $5.2 billion estimated in 1969. As backers of the defunct supersonic transport finally had to admit, when you markedly alter the development cost of a flight system, you alter its economics also.” (C Sun-Times, 1/12/72)
U.S. Patent No. 3 678 180 was issued to Donald S. Bond of Radio Corp. of America (rca) Electronics Div. for system to deliver third-class mail to multiple addresses on mailing lists via radio facsimiles relayed by satellite. {NYT, 7/22/72, 37; Pat Off pio)
Apollo 16 astronauts John W. Young, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Thomas K. Mattingly II began three-week preflight quarantine at Kennedy Space .Center to minimize exposure to disease or illness that could delay launch toward moon, scheduled for April 16. (AP, B Sun, 3/28/72, A6)
Grumman Aerospace Corp. had said it would assume major portion of work it had been subcontracting on its F—14A jet fighter aircraft for Navy, Wall Street Journal reported. Grumman President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr., had said plan to reduce subcontracting was necessary to “increase program efficiency and reduce costs.” First subcontractor to feel effect would be Republic Aviation Div. of Fairchild Industries Inc. (WSJ, 9/19/72, 13)
Swiss Transport Museum inaugurated its Air and Space Wing in Lucerne with ceremonies attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong; and Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn. (Swiss Transport Museum)
Claire Sterling commented in Washington Post article on progress of United Nations Conference on the Human Environment [see June 5-16]: At halfway point “nobody is signing anything. We may all be in favor of what the Chinese speak of here as ‘a beautiful environment for mankind,’ but neither China nor any other state is giving up a shred of sovereignty, or binding itself on a single proposition by treaty or covenant.” Conference was not discussing some of worst environmental problems—“worldwide population explosion, rapid depletion of the planet’s non-renewable resources, and an approaching global energy crisis”—except at counterconferences, “where nondelegates are talking their heads off.” Everyone was talking about money, “but nobody is . . . coming up with enough of it to matter.” (W Post, 6/13/72, A20) June 13—15:	National Symposium on Technology Transfer was sponsored in Washington, D.C., by American Chemical Society, American Institute of Chemical Engineers, American Society for Metals, American Society for Nondestructive Testing, American Society for Quality Control, and American Society for Testing and Materials. NASA officials led workshop on design techniques and reliability procedures on June 15. Cochairmen Howard M. Weiss, Deputy Director of Reliability and Quality Assurance Office, and Joseph H. Levine, Chief of Reliability Div. at Manned Spacecraft Center, discussed computer aids to structural design, principles of reliable design and systems safety, and role of testing in design process. (NASA Release 72-91)
President Nixon announced appointment of John S. D. Eisenhower as Chairman of new Classification Review Committee to implement security classification system established March 8. President also released text of National Security Council directive governing classification, downgrading, declassification, and safeguarding of national security information. Government departments were requested to establish computerized data index system for classified material. President said: “This application of computer technology across the board should lead to a much more manageable classification system and greatly enhance the flow of information to the public.” Executive Order 11652 of March 8 included NASA among agencies originating classified material. (PD, 5/22/72, 870-1) May 18:	House Committee on Appropriations favorably reported H.R. 15093, FY 1973 Dept, of Housing and Urban Development-space-science-veterans appropriations bill that included $3.349-billion NASA appropriation. Appropriation—$58 million less than budget estimate of $3,407 billion, but $39 million above FY 1972 appropriation of $3,310 billion—allocated $2.55 billion for research and development (r&d), down $50.9 million from budget request; $69.7 million for construction of facilities, $7.5 million below budget estimate; and $729.45 million for research and program management as requested. Committee did not distribute r&d funds but recommended balanced program to continue “useful and significant . . . projects in space science, exploration, practical applications of advanced technology, and aeronautics”; approved authorization bill’s levels for aviation safety and noise reduction program; and deferred request of $5.54 million for construction of facilities for manufacturing and final assembly of space shuttle at “various locations” until “such sites are decided upon and plans are developed.” (H Rpt 92-1071)
Federal Aviation Administration national plan for development of new microwave instrument landing system for common use by civil and military aircraft was announced by Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe. System covered broad area, would increase number of flight paths and airport acceptance rate, and would ease noise over surrounding communities. It would provide continuous distance information, eliminating need for marker beacons that gave limited progress information on final approach, (faa Release 72-12)
Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe announced award of two Federal Aviation Administration contracts for development of plans for quiet, short-haul air transportation system. Battelle Memorial Institute was awarded $243 600 for structured program planning based on wide range of viewpoints within public and private sectors. Urban Systems Research and Engineering, Inc., was awarded $202 400 to analyze strategies for development of vertical or short takeoff and landing (v/stol) aircraft system in terms of decision making under uncertain conditions, (faa Release 72—71)
Soviet tests of three-part warhead for giant SS—9 intercontinental ballistic missiles had failed to demonstrate sufficient accuracy to seek out and destroy three separate U.S. Minuteman missiles in their steel and concrete silos, Dr. John S. Foster, Director of Defense Research and Engineering in Dept, of Defense, said in testimony before Senate Committee on Armed Services. U.S. intelligence had concluded that U.S.S.R.’s projected ability to destroy large part of U.S. Minuteman force by mid-1970s might not materialize until 1980s. (Beecher, NYT, 3/22/72, 1)
New York Times editorial praised “encouraging response” of public and major corporations that would enable Science and Technology Div. of New York Public Library to reopen Jan. 17 after shutdown for lack of operating funds [see Jan. 3]. “But it is evident that the fate of the privately financed research divisions has merely been deferred— unless continuous and long-range efforts are made to put this vital facility on a sound financial footing.” (NYT, 1/10/72, 32) January 10—13:	Third Annual Lunar Science Conference held by NASA and Lunar Science Institute at Manned Spacecraft Center was attended by more than 600 researchers from U.S. and 16 foreign countries. Foreign visitors included Soviet scientists Y. I. Belyayev, M. S. Chupakhin, and K. P. Florenskiy, who participated in conference, consulted with U.S. scientists, looked at lunar samples stored at msc, and helped select samples to return to their colleagues in U.S.S.R. NASA provided three grams (one tenth ounce) of lunar material collected on Apollo 14 mission as part of U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements for exchange of samples. Samples included chip from widely studied crystalline rock, small piece of 9-kg (20-lb) boulder, and core samples soils, and polished thin sections. Conference papers dealt with scientific results of Apollo lunar landing missions, analysis of Soviet Luna 16 samples, and results of study of lunar surface by U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1. Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden discussed their observations of lunar surface made from lunar orbit during July 26-Aug. 7, 1971, mission. Dr. N. C. Costes, Marshall Space Flight Center representative of Apollo Soil Mechanics Investigation Science Team, discussed mechanical properties of lunar soil. Washington Post later compared conference with First Lunar Science Conference in 1970, when “there were few facts available and many theories.” At third conference, “situation seemed to have reversed.” Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of msc Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said, “You’re not throwing facts out into a vacuum any more.” Among facts stated at conference were: moon once had strong magnetic field, of which remnants remained to suggest moon once had metallic core up to 280 km (175 mi) thick; lunar crust was 65 km (40 mi) deep and layered; existence of extinct plutonium 244 in Apollo 14 samples indicated plutonium had been trapped when lunar crust solidified shortly after origin of solar system; and Copernicus Crater had been gouged 850 to 950 million yrs ago, making process one of more recent major lunar events. Dr. James R. Arnold of Univ. of California at San Diego reported that moon’s radioactive elements were concentrated in two broad plains, Ocean of Storms and Sea of Rains. “As we go away from this region ... we drop to quite low levels of radioactivity.” Scientists agreed that these radiation emissions should not prove hazardous to astronauts who might visit for short period. Dr. Isidore Adler, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, reported that map of lunar surface chemistry produced from Apollo 15 x-ray data indicated highlands of moon contained more aluminum than did plains. Finding supported hypothesis that moon’s early crust was rich in feldspar. Dr. Gary V. Latham of Columbia Univ., Apollo Program chief seismic investigator, debated presence of volcanoes on moon with Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold. Dr. Latham said that while main episode of lunar vulcanism seemed to have ceased 3 billion yrs ago, “it’s by no means certain that we do not have continuing vulcanism on a very minor scale on the moon.” Dr. Gold continued to support theory that moon was dead, rigid body with basins of compacted dust. Dr. Leon T. Silver of California Institute of Technology proposed theory of “parentless lead” on moon to explain presence in some lunar locations of more lead than could have been produced by decay of radioactive uranium. In moon’s extreme vacuum it was possible for vaporized lead to travel great distances from its parent, uranium. Dr. Silver said other materials could be distributed over lunar surface in same way, all of which could confuse analysis of moon’s age. Dr. John A. Wood of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory discussed tiny piece of green glass among Apollo 14 samples that scientists had nick-named “Genesis bean.” Bean and other glass fragments were almost identical chemically to rare meteorites, Howardites. Evidence suggested green glass had originated on moon and not from meteorite impacts on earth and thus might be some of earliest material of solar system. Consensus of conference on bulk composition of moon was summarized by Dr. Gast: feldspar-rich highland material with anorthosite as one prevalant component, basalts (solidified lava, low in radioactive elements and relatively young) in plains and basins, and KREEP (highly radioactive material rich in potassium, rare earth elements, and phosphorus). Conference closed with discussion of geologic setting of Apollo 16 Descartes landing site and plans for mission’s extravehicular activity. Soviet scientists returned to U.S.S.R. Jan. 23 with lunar samples for Soviet Academy of Sciences, (msc Release 72-06; NASA Release 72—18; Marshall Star, 1/12/72, 1; Wilford, NYT, 1/14/72, 22; NASA Trans Sect) January 11:	Apollo 16 lunar module pilot Charles M. Duke, Jr., was released from Patrick Air Force Base Hospital where he had been treated for bacterial pneumonia since Jan. 4. (AP, B Sun, 1/11/72)
