Capt. Edward V. Rickenbacker (U.S. Army Air Corps, Ret.), the most decorated U.S. pilot of World War I, died in Zurich, Switzerland, after a heart attack at age 82. One of the top automobile racing drivers in the U.S. by the age of 21, Rickenbacker enlisted in the Air Service at the start of World War I. He received the Croix de Guerre with four palms, Legion of Honor, Distinguished Service Cross with nine Oak Leaf Clusters, Medal of Merit, and the Congressional Medal of Honor for downing 26 German aircraft and at least 4 enemy balloons. He became General Manager of Eastern Airlines, Inc., in 1934, and the same year piloted a Douglas airliner from Los Angeles to Newark, N.J., in 12 hrs 3 min 50 sec for a coast-to-coast passenger aircraft record. He was President and General Manager of Eastern Airlines, from 1938 to 1953, when he became Chairman of the Board. He retired in 1963 and was elected to the Aviation Hall of Fame in 1965. Throughout his life Rickenbacker had advocated greater use of military aircraft. In 1922 he supported his friend Gen. Billy Mitchell in urging a separate U.S. Government department for aeronautics. Following Rickenbacker’s death, President Nixon issued a statement: “ ‘Captain Eddie’ Rickenbacker was an American original—a celebrated racing car driver in the early years of the 20th Century, the leading American fighter pilot in World War I, a pioneer of commercial aviation, and a generous, patriotic citizen in both war and peace.” (Hailey, W Past, 7/24/73, C4; PD, 7/30/73, 924)
NASA launched a Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flats, Alaska, carrying a Goddard Space Flight Center magnetospheric physics experiment to a 239.8-km (149-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) March 21-25:	Skylab mission simulation and flight-readiness tests were completed at Kennedy Space Center, including experiment hardware and the control system. The first Skylab crew—Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz—participated in the checkout. Decisions were made to replace three water accumulators and bladders in the airlock module and the multiple docking adapter coolant system. (nasa Release 73—55)
The National Academy of Sciences held its annual meeting and participated with the Smithsonian Institution in a joint program to honor the Copernican Quincentennial. Dr. Philip Handler, NAS President, announced that Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., retiring Secretary of the Air Force, would become president of the National Academy of Engineering in May and that the nae council had voted to sever NAe’s affiliation with NAS. NAS elected 95 new members. During the program devoted to cosmological questions and humanistic aspects of scientific research, Dr. Stephen Toulmin, Provost of the Univ. of California at Santa Cruz, said he had detected a lack of purpose among younger scientists that might be leading to the end of the intellectual era inaugurated by Copernicus. Dr. John A. Wheeler, Princeton Univ. physicist, said the collapse of the universe into a single, great “black hole” with the annihilation of all matter and all physical laws seemed inevitable. Black holes— superdense objects in space—had been predicted as end products of the collapse of large stars when they no longer produced sufficient heat to counter the weight of their own material. Black holes could serve as examples of what would happen if the universe ceased its expansion and began to fall back upon itself. Since its expansion did not have sufficient momentum to continue indefinitely, the universe could reach its maximum size in 40 billion yrs. Dr. Alan R. Sandage of the Hale Observatory said a five percent decrease in the brightness of galaxies for each billion years of their lifetime would alter the calculation and indicate indefinite expansion of the universe, (nas Memo to Press; Sullivan, NYT, 4/26/73; 4/28/73, 48; NYT, 4/26/73, 74; 4/29/73, 47) April 23—26:	The American Physical Society held its annual meeting in Washington, D.C. Dr. Edward H. Teller, Univ. of California physicist and atomic scientist, urged legislation to declassify all Government scientific secrets after one year. He predicted the action would force the U.S.S.R. to take similar action “in maybe 10 years,” because U.S. science and technology would advance faster without secrecy. Naval Research Laboratory scientist Dr. Herbert Friedman said most astronomers who believed that creation began with a “big bang” also believed that at least as much gas and dust had been left behind when the stars were formed as had been consumed in star formation. Recent findings had been that two clouds moved out in opposite directions from an exploding galaxy to form equally shaped spheres and that radio galaxies left wakes as they plowed through space. “In both cases you need great quantities of gas to put enough pressure on the clouds or the galaxies to slow them down. Galaxies moving through empty space leave no wakes or trains behind them.” (W Post, 4/25/73, A3; LA Times, 4/26/73) April 23—27:	A symposium at Lewis Research Center’s Plum Brook Station presented ideas of NASA engineers on new uses by business, industry, labor, other Government agencies, and universities of Plum Brook facilities available because of NASA’s imminent shutdown of the station for budgetary reasons [see March 6]. (lcrc Release 73-21; LeRC pio) April 24:	The first Skylab prime crew—Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz—and backup crewmen Russell L. Schweickart, Dr. F. Story Musgrave, and Bruce McCandless, II, began the 21-day preflight isolation period at 8:30 am est in preparation for May 15 launch. Isolation would continue for seven days following their return from Skylab. Crewmen would be restricted to specific areas and limited in the number of approved personal contacts allowed during the immediate preflight and postflight periods. During the isolation only Skylab food and water would be consumed by the crew members. This diet would also continue for 18 days following the return from the mission, to obtain baseline data for Skylab medical experiments in nutrition and musculoskeletal evaluation series. (NASA Releases 73-84 & unnumbered, 4/30/74)
The election of Dr. John V. Harrington, Director of the Center for Space Research at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as Vice President, Research and Engineering, with Communications Satellite Corp. was announced. He would join the corporation in October. (ComSatCorp Release 73-49)
A Wall Street Journal editorial commented on Comet Kohoutek: “The mind can only boggle at how little we still really know about the universe where comets like Kohoutek may number in the billions. Reflecting on this may not lead to any change in our conduct here on earth anymore than the appearance of Halley’s Comet in 1910 seems to have significantly improved earthly conduct. But the implications of Kohoutek, and of the scientific void into which it will soon return, are reminders of the cosmic scope of man’s environment.” (WSJ, 12/11/73) December 12:	NASA test pilot John A. Manke made the seventh flight and second powered flight of the X—24B lifting body, launched from a B—52 aircraft from Flight Research Center. Primary objectives of flight-envelope expansion to mach 0.95, stability and control at mach 0.9, and performance survey with aileron bias at 11° and secondary objectives of fin- and rudder-pressure survey and an acoustic noise and vibration experiment were met. (NASA prog off)
NASA held a Skylab earth resources experiment package press briefing at Johnson Space Center. Dr. Verl R. Wilmarth, erep project scientist at JSC, said that the Skylab 2 astronauts—Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz, launched May 25 to crew the Orbital Workshop—had completed their ninth erep pass. The sensors had been turned on over 190 areas designated by the principal investigators. A unique collection of laser propholometer data had been obtained over hurricane Ava. Data collected over Maryland and the Chesapeake Bay area would update topographic and geologic maps. (Transcript)
Establishment of the lunar data analysis and synthesis program was announced by NASA. Scientists throughout the world would be invited to propose investigations drawing on a variety of lunar data and cutting across a number of scientific disciplines to build a detailed picture of the moon’s origin, history, and characteristics. The knowledge would carry implications for other solar system planets, including the earth, and would provide the basis for future mission planning and broad dissemination of new knowledge to the public. The program would be conducted by the Lunar Programs Div., headed by William T. O’Bryant, in the Office of Space Science. (NASA Release 73-50)
Tenth anniversary of NASA’s July 26, 1963, launch of Syncorn 2, the first communications satellite to relay digital data, telephone conversations, picture facsimile, and TV programs from synchronous earth orbit. The first telephone conversations were between President John F. Kennedy and Nigerian Prime Minister Sir Abubaker Tafawa Balewa and other messages between U.S., Nigerian, and United Nations officials, Aug. 23, 1963. Transmission on Syncom 1 (launched Feb. 14, 1963) had failed on insertion into synchronous orbit. Syncom 3 was launched successfully Aug. 19, 1964. (nasa Release 73-140; A&A 1963)
Former Congressman Emilio Q. Daddario was named Executive Director of the new congressional Office of Technology Assessment for a six-year term by the 12-member joint Congressional Technology Assessment Board chaired by Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) (A&A, 12/73, 12; Off Tech Ass) November 2:	The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 606 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 39 708-km (24 673.4-mi) apogee, 635-km (394.6-mi) perigee, 717.5-min period, and 62.7° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 11/30/73; Sov Aero, 1/7/74, 4)
Alexander P. Butterfield was sworn in as Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration by Secretary of Transportation Claude S. Brinegar. Butterfield succeeded John H. Shaffer, who had returned to private life after four years as faa Administrator, (faa Release, 3/22/73)
The U.K. Trades Union Congress announced that it was asking its 9.5 million members to boycott French products for a week in protest against French nuclear testing in the South Pacific. (W Post, 6/28/73, B19) June 27-28:	Pioneer 11, launched by NASA April 5 toward a December 1974 rendezvous with the planet Jupiter, became the second spacecraft to cross the orbit of Mars. By June 28 the probe was 76 781 000 km (47 711 000 mi) from the earth, traveling at 108 000 km (67 110 mi) per hr. The earth had passed between the spacecraft and the sun, permitting scientists to look for the earth’s magnetic tail, the extension of the magnetic field blown away from the earth by the solar wind. Data had suggested a malfunction in the spacecraft radio transmitter but were insufficient to identify the problem. The backup traveling-wave tube was being used. Flight controllers had fired the thrusters on Pioneer 10—twin probe launched March 2, 1972, toward December 1973 meeting with Jupiter— on June 21 to trim its course slightly and ensure passage behind Jupiter’s 1 moon Io. Pioneer 10, traveling at 43 470 km (27 000 mi) per hr, was 533 540 000 km (331 542 000 mi) from the earth. It had crossed the orbit of Mars in 1972 and finished crossing the Asteroid Belt in February, (nasa Release 72-122) June 28:	NASA held three Skylab 1-2 postflight reviews at Johnson Space At a summary review of the May 14-June 22 mission, Skylab Program Office Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht said that Skylab 1—2 had accomplished the intent of its 48 experiments—6 earth resources, 15 medical, 5 astronomical, 17 scientific and technological, and 5 student-proposed. Space station operation experience had been gained and there were no constraints on continuing the Skylab program as originally planned. More data had been handled in real time than ever before and gave “no reason to believe that all of the things that we had previously said we accomplished in flight are not going to give us creditable scientific data for analysis by scientists.” Dr. Verl R. Wilmarth, earth resources experiment package project scientist, said during an erep review that the erep experiments had gathered good data for 145 principal investigators on 13 km (8 mi) of magnetic tape. Data were collected over six foreign countries—Mexico, Brazil, Colombia, Bolivia, Nicaragua, and Venezuela. There were 186 individual task sites covered, including the Puerto Rican trench, the Gulf of Mexico, the Wabash River area, and the Amazon River basin. During a review of the Skylab 2 crew health, Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said medical experiments on the Workshop had yielded very interesting results. All three crew members had stayed within their preflight baseline levels on the bicycle ergometer study. In the motion-sensitivity study—with two crew members participating—the preflight threshold level (the point at which motion sickness symptoms would begin) of science pilot Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin was 121/2 rpm in the rotating chair, at which speed he could perform 50 head movements. Pilot Paul J. Weitz had a preflight threshold of 15 rpm and 40 to 50 head movements. Both men could do 150 head movements in flight at preflight speeds without symptoms. During tests immediately following splashdown both men had experienced vestibular disturbances with even the slightest head movement. The symptoms had disappeared within two days and both crewmen had performed at preflight speeds on the third day following recovery, completing 150 head movements without symptoms. (Transcripts)
Federal Aviation Administrator Alexander P. Butterfield presented honorary faa Airframe and Powerplant Mechanic’s Certificates with an especially established “spacecraft rating” to Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz during Washington, D.C., ceremonies. Butterfield said: “The in-flight repair job you performed on the Skylab orbital workshop was one of the most spectacular achievements of the entire space program. It transformed a potentially disastrous mission into an outstanding success and demonstrated once again man’s ingenuity in the face of adversity. I’m sure every aviation mechanic in the country is proud to have you as honorary members of their select and highly skilled fraternity.” The awards were sponsored by the Aviation Maintenance Foundation in cooperation with faa and the aviation industry, (faa Release 73-173)
Soviet news agency Tass announced the Soviet crews for the July 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous and docking mission. The first crew would be Cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov, the first man to walk in space (during the March 18, 1965, Voskhod 2 mission), and Valery N. Kubasov, flight enginer on the Soyuz 6 mission (Oct. 11-18, 1969). The second crew would be Anatoly V. Filipchenko, pilot on Soyuz 7 (Oct. 12-17, 1969), and Nikolay N. Rukavishnikov, flight engineer on Soyuz 10 (April 23—25, 1971). Third crew would be Cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Boris Andreyev and fourth would be Yuri Romanenko and Aleksander Ivanchenko—none of whom had been in space before. (fbis-Sov, 5/25/73, LI)
NASA test pilot John A. Manke successfully piloted the X-24B lifting body on its first glide flight, launched at 12 000-m (40 000-ft) altitude from a B-52 aircraft from Flight Research Center. Manke maneuvered the X-24B to evaluate its flight characteristics and made a practice approach at 9000 m (30 000 ft) that ended successfully in a 320-km-per-hr (200 mph) unpowered landing on the dry lake bed near frc, after the four-minute flight. The first captive flight of the double-delta-shaped vehicle, in the joint NASA and Air Force research program studying possible hypersonic aircraft configurations, had been made July 19. (nasa prog off; NASA Release 73—147; LA Her-Exam, 8/2/73)
NASA launched two Aerohee 170 sounding rockets from Woomera, Australia. The first carried a California Institute of Technology astronomy experiment to a 169.0-km (105-mi) altitude. The second, launched 45 min later, carried a Massachusetts Institute of Technology astronomy experiment to a 174.6-km (108.5-mi) altitude. Both rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 11:	Four of eight damaged stabilizing fins discovered on the Skylab 4 Saturn IB launch vehicle Nov. 6 had been replaced hy Kennedy Space Center ground crews, Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said at a KSC press briefing. Despite rain and high wind the work was accelerating to meet the Nov. 15 launch date. (Transcript) November 12:	Kennedy Space Center ground crews working to replace eight damaged fins discovered on the Skylab 4 Saturn IB launch vehicle Nov. 6 discovered additional cracks in seven of eight structural beams in the aft intersection of the rocket. Because of the new discovery and the subsequent necessary examinations and evaluations of other susceptible sections of the rocket, Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider announced at a KSC press briefing a further postponement of the Nov. 15 launch. A new launch date would be set after the situation was assessed. Director of Launch Operations Walter J. Kapryan said that the newly discovered cracks might have been the “result of residual stresses left in the forgings from the fabrication process.” (Transcript)
U.S. Patent 3 715 962 was awarded to Dr. Edward F. Yost, Jr., Professor of Engineering at Long Island Univ., for a multispectral aerial photography system. The equipment, used on Apollo 9 and 12 (launched March 3, 1969, and Nov. 14, 1969) and on Erts 1 (launched July 23, 1972), was able to detect water, soil, and agricultural conditions with greater subtlety than previously possible. (Jones, NYT, 2/17/73, 41; Pat Off pio)
Maj. Michael Love (usaf) successfully completed the fifth captive flight of the X-24B lifting body attached to a B—52 aircraft from Flight Research Center. The flight checked out the pilot and evaluated handling qualities, forward and aft fuselage pressure, and acoustic noise and vibration, (nasa prog off)
NASA’s Lunar Exploration Office in the Apollo/ASTP Program Office was reassigned from the Office of Manned Space Flight (omsf) to the Office of Space Science (oss) under the title Lunar Programs Office. The office would be responsible for formulation of future lunar programs, continued operation of lunar science stations, and analysis and synthesis of lunar data. Capt. William T. O’Bryant would continue as Director and Dr. Noel W. Hinners as Deputy Director and Chief Scientist. (NASA Hq WB, 3/12/73)
Communications Satellite Corp. held its 10th Annual Meeting of Shareholders in Washington, D.C. Board Chairman Joseph H. McConnell reported that its global system, through the fourth generation of Intelsat satellites, provided more than 260 communications pathways among earth station facilities in 49 countries. “Along these pathways flows a major portion of all international long distance communications—telephone, television, teletype, high speed data, and facsimile. Almost 100 countries, territories, and possessions are leasing satellite services on a full-time basis. High-quality telephone calls can be made to more than 20 countries that cannot be reached by cable. . . . Over 900 million people on six continents can see an important event on TV as it happens.” Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp President, said, “At the end of 1965 ... we were leasing 66 voice grade half circuits on a full-time basis. Today we are leasing 3,146,” (ComSatCorp Rpt to Shareholders)
The Dept, of Defense and Grumman Aerospace Corp. had agreed on a new price for 50 F—14 jet fighter aircraft, nearly $10 million below that estimated earlier, the Washington Star-News quoted informed sources as saying. Deputy Secretary of Defense William P. Clements, Jr., had written Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.), Chairman of the Subcommittee on Tactical Air Power of the Senate Committee on Armed Services, that dod would need $693 million rather than the $703 million it had requested in its FY 1974 budget. (Kelly, W Star-News, 9/7/73, A12)
Selection of John E. O’Brien as Assistant General Counsel for Procurement Matters was announced by NASA. O’Brien, who had been Chief Counsel of Kennedy Space Center since December 1970, would replace John A. Whitney, who would return to private law practice. (NASA Release 73-19)
Deputy Secretary of Defense William P. Clements, Jr., directed the Navy to produce preliminary plans for a $250-million prototype development plan for a jet-fighter aircraft costing less than the controversial F—14 Tomcat missile-armed fighter. He also authorized the Navy to negotiate with Grumman Aerospace Corp. for an additional 50 F-14s armed with Phoenix missiles. The 50 aircraft would bring the F—14 total to 184 on order, with a possible 50 being ordered in FY 1974. The F—14 price was expected to average $25.8 million per aircraft. (Corddry, B Sun, 6/8/73, A8)
Life in weightlessness in the Skylab Workshop, orbited May 14, was described by a Wall Street Journal article as the Skylab 2 crew began its 15th day on board the space station. Commander Charles Conrad, Jr., had reported, after attempting to eat canned tomatoes, that he was “flinging tomatoes all over the place.” He had warned, “You’ve got to eat the whole tomato.” Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin had told Mission Control: “I don’t use the salt much. It tends to bounce off the food a lot.” Later he had reported a minor kitchen disaster with a bag of dehydrated corn. “The bag failed at its seam. . . . We’ve got corn powder all over everything.” Kerwin said taking a shower was pleasant, but the water didn’t “fly through the air, it sticks to whatever is there, mostly you and partly the walls. It takes forever to dry both one’s self and the walls . . . even using that inadequate little vacuum cleaner that we’ve got.” The crew recommended allotting an hour for taking a shower on future missions. The astronauts were being awakened by the noise of the suction fan when the toilet was used at night. They found themselves growing hoarse from shouting at each other across the roomy Workshop during the day. Kerwin had found himself unable to whistle in zero g, but Astronaut Paul J. Weitz had assured him he could learn after a few days’ practice. “You’ve got to hold your lips a little farther apart.” (Bishop, WSJ, 6/8/73, 1)
The American Museum-Hay den Planetarium in New York commemorated the fourth anniversary of the July 20, 1969, first manned lunar landing, by Apollo 11 (launched July 16, 1969). The Planetarium exhibited the Goddard Memorial Collection of autographed pencil portraits of outstanding contributors to the U.S. space effort by artist William J. Numeroff and showed “The Salvage of Skylab I,” films and narration of the Skylab 2 astronauts’ repair in space of Skylab 1 spacecraft anomalies [see May 14-June 23]. Participants in the program included Skylab 2 backup commander Astronaut Russell L. Schweickart; Mrs. Robert H. Goddard, widow of the U.S. rocket pioneer; and author Arthur C. Clarke. (American Museum Release; pio)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 553 from Plesetsk into orbit with a486-km (302.0-mi) apogee, 270-km (167.8-mi) perigee, 92-min period, and 70.9° inclination—on the 12th anniversary of Vostok 1, the first manned orbital space flight. The satellite reentered Nov. 11. National Cosmonaut Day honored the April 12, 1961, mission flown by Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin, the first man in space. Some observers had expected the announcement of a new manned Soviet mission, but in an interview published by Pravda Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov indicated there was sufficient time left for a crew to be placed aboard the Salyut 2 space station, launched April 3. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/73, 11/30/73; SBD, 4/16/73, 253; LA Times, 4/13/73; A&A 1972)
NASA launched a Javelin sounding rocket from Natal, Brazil, carrying a Univ. of California barium cloud experiment. The rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 18-Dec. 1: U.S. flight crews for the July 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission visited the U.S.S.k. for familiarization with the Soyuz spacecraft and discussions with Soviet counterparts on the flight plan. The discussions, held mostly at the Yuri A. Gagarin Center for Cosmonaut Training near Moscow, included joint crew activities and onboard documentation. Astronauts participating were Thomas P. Stafford, U.S. astp commander; Vance D. Brand, command module pilot; and Donald K. Slayton, docking module pilot; backup crew Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, and Jack R. Lousma; support crew Robert F. Overmyer and Karol J. Bobko; and Eugene A. Cernan, Special Assistant to the U.S. astp Technical Director. At a press conference following the Nov. 29 concluding meeting, Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, said the U.S.S.R. planned further manned space flights—individual Soyuz missions and linkups of Soyuz with .the Salyut orbital platform—before the joint U.S — U.S.S.R. mission. Stafford told newsmen he was completely satisfied that the Soyuz would be “a great ship to fly.” He said there would be two joint training sessions in 1974, in Moscow in July and at Johnson Space Center in September, (nasa Release 73-250; Smith, NYT, 11/30/73, 9)
President Nixon signed Executive Order 11748 establishing the Federal Energy Office in the Executive Office of the President. He announced the appointment of Deputy Secretary of the Treasury William E. Simon as Executive Director. The President said: “I have decided to bring together in one agency the major energy resource management functions of the Federal Government to provide the centralized authority we must have for dealing with the energy crisis.” He was assuming chairmanship of the Energy Emergency Action Group, “which will continue to oversee all major policy issues relating to energy.” He would ask Congress to create a Federal Energy Administration “and, in the Executive Office of the President, a Federal Energy Office to carry out all energy-related functions.” {PD, 12/10/73, 1388-92)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, presented 104 Skylab awards to employees from nasa Hq., Johnson Space Center, Kennedy Space Center, and Marshall Space Flight Center during an msfc ceremony attended by Skylab 2 crew Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz. Also participating were Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers, and Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider, (nasa Release 73—156; Marshall Star, 10/31/73, 1)
Grumman Corp. had submitted a proposal to the Navy for Dept, of Defense purchase of further lots of the F—14 jet fighter aircraft, Grumman Corp. President John C. Bierwirth told the annual shareholders meeting in Bethpage, N.Y. (Andelman, NYT, 5/18/73, 49)
President Nixon issued Executive Order 11726 from San Clemente, Calif., establishing a Federal Office of Energy Policy. He announced the appointment of Colorado Gov. John A. Love as its Director and released a statement outlining a $ 10-billion, five-year program for energy research and development. The President established a goal for the next 12 mos for energy consumption reduction of 5% nationwide, and 7% within the Federal Government. {PD, 6/7/73, 867—75) June 30:	A seven-minute, four-second, total solar eclipse, one of three seven-minute-plus total solar eclipses in the 20th century, began at sunrise in Brazil and crossed Guyana, Surinam, the Atlantic Ocean, the Cape Verde Islands, Mauretania, Mali, Algeria, Niger, Chad, the Central African Republic, Sudan, Uganda, Kenya, and the Somali Republic. It ended at sunset in the Indian Ocean between India and Madagascar. A partial eclipse was visible for 3200 km (2000 mi) on both sides of the totality track. Previous total solar eclipses had been June 8, 1937, for seven minutes four seconds, and June 20, 1955, for seven minutes eight seconds. The next solar eclipse in the current “saros,” or 18-yr period, would be July 11, 1991, for 6 minutes 54 seconds, but the June 30 eclipse’s duration would not be exceeded for 177 years, British astronomer Peter MacDonald said later in a New Scientist article. The African eclipse was witnessed by an estimated 5000 amateur astronomers and tourists and by 2500 international scientists on land, on sea, and aboard research aircraft. Concorde 001, the specially instrumented Anglo-French supersonic transport aircraft, carried seven U.S., U.K., and French scientists across North Africa in lunar shadow at altitudes to 17 000 m (56 000 ft) during a two-hour six-minute flight. They observed total eclipse conditions for 74 min. The Skylab 1 Workshop, unmanned since Skylab 2’s June 22 splashdown, saw only about 10% of the eclipse because its orbital position and telescope mechanisms were not suited for maximum effectiveness. Its cameras operated from 7 am edt until midnight, and eclipse films taken would be retrieved by Skylab 3 astronauts scheduled for July 27 launch. Other scientific observations of the eclipse by at least 28 nations included an instrumented U.S. Air Force aircraft and rockets fired from the Soviet research ship Professor Vize near the Cape Verde Islands [see May 29]. Univ. of Texas observations by telescopes in the Sahara desert tested Einstein’s theory of relativity by measuring the bend of the sun’s gravity. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/15/73, 6; 6/30/73, 32; 7/1/73, 1; New Scientist, IJYl/ll, 90-91; SF, 8/15/73, 321)
The Air Force announced issuance of a $1 358 695, firm-fixed-price contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. for special tooling for F-4 jet fighter aircraft, (dod Release 20-73) January 10—12:	The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held its 11th Aerospace Sciences Meeting in Washington, D.C. The Dry-den Research Award winner for 1973, Dr. Herbert Friedman of the Naval Research Laboratory Space Sciences Div., delivered the Dryden Lecture “High Energy Astronomy.” The lecture, which carried $1000 honorarium, had been named in 1967 in honor of the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, first nasa Deputy Administrator, who died in 1965. Dr. Friedman said high-energy astronomy was “almost exclusively the subject of space research.” X-ray astronomy to date had revealed about 125 discrete sources and a “diffuse background which spans the energy range from 100 ev to tens of Mev.” X-ray sources revealed included supernova remnants, pulsars, and binary systems in the galaxy. Extragalactic sources included radio galaxies, quasars, Seyfert galaxies, and clusters of galaxies. Gamma ray astronomy had shown “no evidence for antimatter within the universe.” (Program; Text) A committee established by aiaa to evaluate NASA’s space shuttle program reported its conclusion that a shuttle system, including both manned and unmanned flight, ought to be built. The committee recommended a research and applications module system with interchangeable modules that could be removed in space to become part of an orbiting laboratory. Other nations should be encouraged to participate in shuttle development, the committee said. (Tech Rev, 5/73, 55) Advanced applications of the shuttle were discussed by J. E. Blahnik of Science Applications, Inc., and D. R. Davis of ITT Research Institute. An exploratory study had concluded that use of the shuttle orbiter for advanced, manned, high-energy missions from low earth orbit should be competitive with other proposed concepts, if orbital and refueling requirements were satisfied by using normal shuttle missions to deliver propellant in addition to their payload. (Program) January 10—13:	The American Astronomical Society met in Las Cruces, N. Mex. Cal Tech astronomer Dr. Robert Howard said six-year observations through the 46-m (150-ft) solar telescope at Mt. Wilson Observatory had shown sections of the sun’s outer atmosphere to be in motion with respect to time. Movements had extended to 259 000 sq km (100 000 sq mi) of photosphere—the sun’s gassy surface—and had appeared to be east-west or west-east. Some motions had been calculated at 6257 km per hr (3888 mph) ; others, at 7300 km per hr (4536 mph). Cause and significance of the motion were unknown. At a press interview Dr. John C. Brandt, chief of the Goddard Space Flight Center Solar Physics Laboratory, said Indians in New Mexico, Arizona, and California nine centuries ago might have recorded a star explosion. Drawings on walls and ceilings of a cave at Chaco Canyon National Monument, N. Mex., closely resembled an explosion of July 4, 1054, as recorded by the Chinese. Similar drawings had been found in Arizona and California. (Alexander, LA Times, 1/11/73; AP, W Post, 1/14/73, A13) January 11:	Cosmos 543 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 309-km (192.0-mi) apogee, 202-km (125.5-mi) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 65.0° inclination. The satellite reentered Jan. 24. (gsfc SSR, 1/31/73; SBD, 1/12/73, 54)
Capt. John T. Geary (usn) became Director of the Naval Research Laboratory, succeeding Capt. Earle W.„Sapp who was reassigned. Capt. Geary had been Deputy Commander for Planning, Programming and Resources with the Naval Electronics System Command. (Naval Research Reviews, 8/73, 27; nrl pio) July 17:	Skylab Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz testified on the May 14-June 22 Skylab 1-2 mission in a joint hearing before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences and the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. Conrad said the mission had proved the feasibility of maintaining a large space station for manufacturing in space. “I think the data will show that you can do all the things up there that you can do down here and many of them perhaps better.” Skylab 1-2 earth resources and solar telescope data would show “that eventually space has a very definite role in helping mankind and in solving some of these problems that are in front of us. After all, the Sun is probably the most single efficient nuclear device that we know about. We do have an energy crisis. We need to better understand that. We just scratched the surface with our 30,000 photographs we brought back. I think you will find that the Earth resources data, when coupled with . . . erts [Earth Resources Technology Satellites] and those types of sensors will ... as an overall systems design, tie all of these things we talk about with different satellites into a big picture.” At the mission’s completion the Skylab 1—2 crew could hand over to the Skylab 3 crew a Workshop that could harbor “a 100-percent successful 56-day mission.” Dr. Kerwin said Skylab 1—2 medical experience enabled him to extrapolate a 56-day mission “without difficulty.” He felt the inflight portion would be “a piece of cake.” Postflight, the Skylab 3 astronauts might “feel a bit loggier than we did.” But Skylab 1—2 had demonstrated that this was a “minor illness . . . that you get from being 28 days in space and that you can return very rapidly to normal.” Weitz said Skylab’s earth resources survey equipment permitted a more selective data acquisition than that of unmanned erts. “I think we have shown in the past with unmanned satellites that part of the problem is that you have a continuous data flow, not all of which is usable, but all of which must be processed and reduced and analyzed in some form.” With Skylab equipment “we can track point sites” and “be selective . . . pick out specific sites, fields, or a bend in the river, if you want to study silting.” (Transcript)
Unusual pulsed-noise signals detected by Soviet scientists at Gorky Univ. [see Oct. 16] might be from experimental U.S. Air Force communications satellites in highly elliptical Molniya-like orbits, Aviation Week & Space Technology said. Possible sources were satellites orbited March 21, 1971, and Aug. 21, 1973—thought to be test vehicles for the Air Force’s planned Satellite Data System. (Av Wk, 11/5/73, 47) The primary objectives were to place the spacecraft in sun-synchronous orbit with a local equator crossing time of 8:30 am to permit the spacecraft to accomplish its operational mission requirements, make an in-orbit evaluation, and check out the spacecraft before turning operational control over to noaa’s National Environmental Satellite Service (ness) . Operational responsibility for the spacecraft was transferred to noaa Nov. 29. Excellent data were being returned. The orbit would permit regular, dependable daytime and nighttime meteorological observations in both direct-readout and stored modes of operation in support of the National Operational Meteorological Satellite System (nomss). Noaa 3 was the second operational spacecraft to provide temperature soundings of the earth’s atmosphere as well as direct-readout and globally recorded cloud-cover data. The three-axis-stabilized satellite carried redundant very-high-resolution radiometers, vertical-temperature-profile radiometers, and scanning radiometers. Noaa 3 was the fourth in the Improved tiros Operational Satellite series of second-generation meteorological satellites. The prototype had been Itos 1 (launched Jan. 23, 1970), and the first NOAA-funded spacecraft, Noaa 1, had been launched Dec. 11, 1970. Noaa 2 (launched Oct. 15, 1972) continued to provide meteorological data. The first series of spacecraft had included nine satellites—Essa 1 through Essa 9 (launched 1966-1969). The tos program was a joint NASA and Dept, of Commerce effort under a Jan. 30, 1964, agreement. Goddard Space Flight Center was responsible for the design and development of the spacecraft and ground systems, launch checkout and evaluation, tracking and data acquisition, and the Thor-Delta launch vehicle, ness was responsible for operating the spacecraft and processing the data, (nasa prog off; GSFC proj off) November 6:	Fourteen hairline cracks were found in the eight stabilizing fins of Skylab 4’s Saturn IB launch vehicle during a routine inspection at Kennedy Space Center. The cracks were discovered just after the Saturn rocket had been loaded with 157 cu m (41 500 gal) of fuel. Six of the fins had two cracks each, the two others one crack each, all at the juncture of the 5-m (16-ft) aluminum fins and the body of the launch vehicle. During rocket inspection, Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue practiced launch abort procedures in a simulator at Johnson Space Center. (O’Toole, W Post, 11/8/73, A3; AP, W Star-News, 11/7/73, B8)
Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) introduced S. 734 for himself and Sen. Edward J. Gurney (R-Fla.) and Sen. Lawton M. Chiles, Jr. (D-Fla.), “to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to establish a Man in Space National Historic Site at Cape Kennedy.” The bill would establish a site on the area comprising Launch Complexes 5 and 6, which had been used for the Redstone, Jupiter C, Juno I and II, and Mercury-Redstone launches, as well as Little Joe II in support of the Apollo program. (CR, 2/1/73, S1798; Draft icsc Hist Note, 2/72) February 2:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, discussed NASA’s outlook for the future in a letter to the NASA staff: “I regret that we have not been able to stabilize NASA’s budget at about the $3.4 billion level . . . and that our reduced program workload necessitates a further reduction in . . . NASA employees. I am pleased, though, that we can proceed with most of our mainline programs and schedules for this decade with little change.” With the May launch of Skylab “we should be able to give the world a very impressive demonstration of the tremendous new capabilities we now have for using manned and unmanned spacecraft in Earth orbit. I believe that Skylab will awaken public interest throughout the world in the usefulness of scientific and practical observations to be made from Earth orbit, and in the ‘space manufacturing’ experiments. I am also confident that the reports from Pioneer 10 as it swings past Jupiter in December will stimulate strong public interest in expanded programs to explore the planets. Our joint flight with the Russians in 1975 will stress the potential of large-scale international cooperation in space. The Viking Lander on Mars may produce the first evidence of life in the universe beyond the confines of our home planet Earth; and it may suggest to Americans the real potential of space exploration as a continuing and expanding activity during our third century as an independent and democratic nation.” Dr. Fletcher forecast a favorable NASA future: “With another year of excellent performance in 1973 like we had in 1972, and continued strong bi-partisan support in Congress, this forecast is bound to become a reality.” (NASA Activities, 2/15/73, 26-8)
U.S.-U.S.S.R. Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (salt) were held in Geneva. (fbis-Sov, 11/19/73, AA1) November 7:	A five-day delay in the launch of Skylab 4, third and final manned Skylab mission, was announced by Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider at a Kennedy Space Center press briefing. The delay was caused by the discovery of cracks in the Saturn IB launch vehicle fins [see Nov. 6], The earliest rescheduled launch time would be 9:27 am est Nov. 15. Director of Launch Operations at icsc Walter J.	Kapryan said the 3.8-cm-long (1.5-in-long) cracks probably were caused by stress erosion—exposure of the material to the elements combined with stress from the weight of the fueled vehicle—and would have caused the breakup of the vehicle at 12 000 m (40 000 ft), where the rocket underwent maximum aerodynamic stress. All eight fins would be replaced. New fins were being shipped from Michoud Assembly Facility for replacement on the launch pad. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 11/8/73, A3)
Twelfth anniversary of the May 5, 1961, launch of Freedom 7 by the Mercury-Redstone 3 launch vehicle, on the suborbital mission which carried Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., as the first U.S. man in space. {Marshall Star, 5/2/73, 1) May 6:	Langley Research Center Director Edgar M. Cortright received the degree of Doctor of Science honoris causa at the 152nd Annual Commencement of George Washington Univ. in Washington, D.C., and gave the commencement address to the University’s School of Engineering and Applied Science. He said it was perhaps “a blessing in disguise” that the U.S. was running out of fossil fuels. In seeking new energy sources, “you will develop clean energy. And you will develop it within our own resources, thus alleviating the balance of trade problem.” Three sources appeared particularly promising: nuclear fission, nuclear fusion, and solar energy. “In addition, you may even tap the heat of the Earth’s core.” (Newport News, Va., Daily Press, 5/10/73; Langley Researcher, 5/11/73, 1) _
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of Under Secretary and Acting Secretary of the Air Force John L. McLucas to be Secretary of the Air Force succeeding Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., who had resigned in May to become President of the National Academy of Engineering. McLucas had been Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering 1962-1964 and Executive Secretary General for Scientific Affairs of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (nato) in Paris 1964-1966. The President also submitted to the Senate the nomination of Gen. George S. Brown to be Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force, for four years beginning Aug. 1. Gen. Brown—to succeed Gen. John D. Ryan, who would retire July 31—had been Commander of the Air Force Systems Command since September 1970. Both nominations were confirmed July 14. {PD, 7/9/73,884; 7/16/73, 903; CR, 7/14/73, D831)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of John W. Barnum to be Under Secretary of Transportation succeeding Egil Krogh, Jr., who had resigned. Krogh, former assistant to President Nixon’s Chief Domestic Adviser John D. Ehrlichman, had resigned while under investigation for his role in the Watergate activities. (PD, 6/4/73, 717, 727; Time, 5/14/73, 22)
The Skylab 3 astronauts rested aboard recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans following their splashdown [see July 28—Sept. 25], Dr. James C. Fletcher, nasa Administrator, told the press at Johnson Space Center that their 59-day mission had proved man’s usefulness in earth orbit as the Apollo missions had proved his use of the moon. “In the 15 years since its founding, nasa has successfully placed more than 250 payloads in earth orbit. Of all these, the mission that we completed today will perhaps prove to be the most fruitful of all.” Skylab 3 had proved “how great an advantage it is to have the human mind on the scene to make judgments, to observe, to respond to unexpected developments, and to effect corrective measures. All these were demonstrated on Skylab.” Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said the Skylab 3 astronauts had surpassed their scientific objectives by 150%. “The mission can only be described in superlatives.” (O’Toole, W Post, 9/26/73, 1A; AP, B Sun, 9/26/75)
President Nixon accepted the resignation of John A. Love as Assistant to the President and Director of the Energy Policy Office. {PD, 12/10/73, 1448)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the statement given out at the nasa FY 1974 budget briefing held Jan. 27: “The budget the President has approved for NASA for FY 1974, like those of other agencies, has been reduced substantially below previous plans and expectations to hold total government spending to the targets set by the President. At the same time, the budget will permit NASA to carry forward a substantial and significant program in space and aeronautics.” The budget provided for continuing the major projects in the schedule announced Jan. 5 and for starting two new projects: Nimbus-G, “another in NASA’s series of experimental earth oriented satellites, which will be directed at environmental pollution and oceanographic measurements, and LAGEOS, a new geodetic satellite for extremely accurate measurements of movements of the earth’s surface.” In addition to reductions in programs announced Jan. 5, the budget required “that we stretch out schedules in a number of ongoing projects. The second Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts-b) will be delayed two years, until 1976. This will allow it to carry an additional sensor. Tiros-N, the prototype of a new series of operational meteorological satellites for the National Weather Service, will be delayed by about one year to 1977. “We will also undergo another belt-tightening in NASA. By the end of FY 1974 our civil service complement will be reduced 1880 positions below the FY 1973 end strength approved in the FY 1973 budget. This reduction includes the previously announced reductions related to the termination of our nuclear programs.” Despite a “sharp decrease from the level budget anticipated last year,” Dr. Fletcher was “very pleased with the program content we were able to retain. Clearly from what has been said today and on January 5, we will have to curtail several activities that are of major importance to the nation.” But “we have been able to keep NASA’s main line program essentially intact and each of the programs curtailed will still be done, either at a later date than anticipated or in an alternate way to that planned last year. Although I, personally, would like to see a higher NASA budget, I believe we can capitalize on the belt-tightening required to produce even greater yield for the tax dollar in future years.” NASA was “making substantial efforts to reduce future costs . . . while still giving the nation a strong program in space and aeronautics.” Additionally, a prime object of the space shuttle program was to reduce costs of operating in space. NASA intended to “develop and introduce new design concepts and management approaches which, together with the relaxed weight and size constraints of the Space Shuttle, will result in substantially lower development and operating costs.” NASA Comptroller William E. Lilly discussed personnel cutbacks necessitated by the new budgetary limitations. The total NASA Civil Service reduction of 1880 positions would include a Marshall Space Flight Center cut of 650; Goddard Space Flight Center, 158; Kennedy Space Center, 100; Manned Spacecraft Center, 75; Wallops Station, 17; Lewis Research Center, 660; nasa Hq., 150; and Ames, Langley, and Flight Research Centers, a total of 70. From a peak Civil Service complement of more than 34 000 in 1967, nasa would be reduced to under 25 000 employees by June 1974—a drop of 30%. Total employees from all sources—contract and in-house—would drop from the 1966 peak of 420 000 to about 100 000. (Text; Transcript)
Novelist Joseph McElroy described his personal impression of the Apollo 17 launch in a New York Times essay: “My main image was the Saturn rocket destroying itself stage by stage, separating behind the spacecraft, which was then alone, coasting a trajectory whose essence was to get away and not come back, escape the dialectical symmetries of up down, out hack, growth and decay—and instead burst through into speeds and distances not just greater but other; yet also, yes, to come back changed, to save the earth, prove to Earthling ecologues it had been worth all that liquid oxygen and hydrogen in a few minutes of early burn.” (NYT, Bk Rev, 1/28/73, 27)
The Senate confirmed the nominations of William P. Clements to be Deputy Secretary of Defense and of Dr. James R. Schlesinger, former Atomic Energy Commission Administrator, to be Director of Central Intelligence. (CR, 1/23/73, D60) January 24:	Cosmos 545 was launched by the U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with a 492-km (305.7-mi) apogee, 268-km (166.5-mi) perigee, 92.1-min period, and 71.0° inclination. The satellite reentered July 31. (gsfc SSR, 1/31/73; 7/31/73; SBD, 1/26/73, 124)
Rep. John W. McFall (D-Calif.) introduced H.Res. 158, providing for 30 members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman, succeeding Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), who had been defeated in a 1972 primary; Rep. Ken Hechler (D-W. Va.); Rep. John W. Davis (D-Ga.) ; Rep. Thomas N. Downing (D-Va.) ; Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) ; Rep. James W. Symington (D-Mo.) ; Rep. Richard T. Hanna (D-Calif.); Rep. Walter Flowers (D-Ala.); Rep. Robert A. Roe (D-N.J.) ; Rep. William R. Cotter (D—Conn.) ; Rep. Mike McCormack (D-Wash.) ; Rep. Bob S. Berg-land (D-Minn.) ; Rep. J. J. Pickle (D-Tex.) ; Rep. George E. Brown, Jr. (D—Calif.); Rep. Dale Milford (D-Tex.); Rep. Ray Thornton (D—Ark.) ; Rep. Bill Gunter (D-Fla.); Rep. Charles A. Mosher (R-Ohio) ; Rep. Alphonzo Bell (R-Calif.) ; Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) ; Rep. Larry Winn, Jr. (R-Kan.); Rep. Lou Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.) ; Rep. Barry M. Goldwater, Jr. (R-Calif.); Rep. Marvin L. Esch (R-Mich.); Rep. Lawrence Coughlin (R-Pa.); Rep. John N. Happy Camp (R-Okla.) ; Rep. John B. Conlan (R-Ariz.) ; Rep. Stanford E. Parris (R—Va.) ; Rep. Paul W. Cronin (R-Mass.) ; and Rep. James G. Martin (R-N.C.). {CR, 1/24/73, H442-H443; A&A 1972) January 24—25:	Symposium on recycling used glass containers was held in Albuquerque, N. Mex., by Univ. of New Mexico Technical Application Center (tac), Albuquerque Environmental Health Dept., and Glass Containers Manufacturers Institute. Representatives of NASA’s public technology program, glass researchers, and city and county officials discussed recycling glass into glassphalt road surfacing material, foams for building insulation, and other new products, tac operated one of NASA’s six Regional Dissemination Centers for space agency-developed technology. (nasa Release 73-7; nasa pao) January 25:	The Global Atmospheric Research Program (carp) Atlantic Tropical Experiment (gate), largest and most complex international scientific experiment, would observe one third of the earth’s tropical belt from June 15 to Sept. 30, 1974, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced. A network of satellites, ships, aircraft including NASA’s instrumented Convair 990, instrumented buoys, and land stations would collect meteorological data from the tropical Atlantic and adjacent land areas to improve forecast techniques for the equatorial belt. Brazil, Canada, France, Federal Republic of Germany, Mexico, Netherlands, Portugal, U.S.S.R., United Kingdom, and Venezuela, in addition to the U.S., would process data for compatibility. Data would be integrated by the gate data center and distributed in 1976. U.S. participation would be coordinated by NOAA. (noaa Release 73-5)
Grumman Aerospace Corp. would lay off 1000 employees to reduce operating expenses, the New York Times reported. The expense paring had been ordered by Deputy Secretary of Defense William P. Clements to increase operating efficiency after the controversy over increasing costs of the Crumman-produced F-14 fighter aircraft. (Andelman, NYT, 3/28/73, P28) March 28—29:	Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings: The Office of Space Science had assumed total responsibility for collecting, handling, and analyzing data from the Apollo program, and “we plan to devote the next several years to their detailed analysis and interpretation. Our objective is a better understanding of the origin, history and present environment of the Moon, and the definition of goals and objectives of possible future flight programs. These studies will also use the data from the still-continuing flight program of the Soviet Union.” The French-built laser reflector on the Soviet lunar roving vehicle Lunokhod 2 deposited on the moon by Luna 21 (launched Jan. 8), “in addition to the three carried by Apollos 11, 14, and 15, provides another control point for lunar mapping studies and other scientific objectives. The close cooperation between the French and Soviets in putting the device on the Moon and between the Americans and French in securing early observations is a striking example of the possibilities for effective scientific cooperation in space among the nations of the world.” Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972) was “very much a pathfinder as it goes to Jupiter. We know Jupiter has intense radiation fields. We plan for Pioneer 10 to pass by Jupiter about three-and-a-half Jupiter radii from the planet. We think that Pioneer 10 at that distance . . . will be able to survive as it goes through those radiation belts. If by chance it does not, then we would probably retarget Pioneer G so that it stayed farther out.” If Pioneer 10 survived the radiation belts, “we would probably target Pioneer G closer so that we could get a better look at Jupiter and get more information about the intensity of the radiation belts as we get closer to Jupiter.” (Transcript) March 28-30:	A symposium on federally sponsored university research in transportation noise was conducted at Stanford Univ. by the Dept, of Transportation in cooperation with NASA and the National Science Foundation. Papers presented by university researchers and representatives of Government agencies covered jet noise, combustion noise, noise from moving bodies, sound propagation through ducts, rotor noise, high-intensity sound, tire noise, and economic and community aspects of noise, (dot Release 15-73; dot pio) March 29:	usns Vanguard, 181-m (595-ft) nasa tracking ship, left Port Canaveral, Fla., for Mar Del Plata, Argentina, to support Skylab missions scheduled to begin in May. Vanguard would be a link in NASA’s worldwide tracking network relaying two-way information between a spacecraft and mission control at Johnson Space Center in Houston via Goddard Space Flight Center. En route Vanguard would record tracking data for the Pioneer G launch scheduled for April 5. (gfsc Release; Skylab prog off)
Radio glow, a new phenomenon observed by U.S.S.R. scientists, was described in Pravda by Soviet radioastronomer Vsevolod Troitsky. The phenomenon was caused by charged particle flux from radiation belts in the lower layers of the earth’s ionosphere and was thought to be generated at altitudes up to 100 km (60 mi) and related to changes in the area of solar spots and chromospheric flares. Observations had been made simultaneously in the far eastern, northern, and southern parts of the U.S.S.R. Irregular radiation on superhigh frequencies would permit study of dynamic processes in the ionomagnetic sphere of the earth. (Tass, fbis—Sov, 6/12/73, LI) June 13:	Deputy Secretary of Defense William P. Clements, Jr., told a Washington, D.C., press conference that the U.S.S.R. was pressing ahead with “new families of missiles” in a quest for military superiority over the U.S. “It is hard information. We know they are testing these missiles. We know what size they are. We know what their capabilities are.” (Corddry, B Sun, 6/14/73, Al)
President Nixon presented the Distinguished Service Medal to Gen. John D. Ryan, Air Force Chief of Staff, during a White House ceremony. Gen. Ryan was retiring after 35 yrs of service. {PD, 8/6/73, 955)
Establishment of task team to focus on space tug activities was announced by Marshall Space Flight Center. The team, under Manager William Teir and Deputy Manager William G. Huber, would direct early planning and design of the tug—a vehicle to supplement the space shuttle’s capabilities. The tug was to be shuttle payload and would become the shuttle 3rd stage after being deployed in earth orbit by the shuttle. Its rocket engine would propel payloads to different earth orbits or send payloads on planetary missions, (msfc Release 73-19)
NASA launched an Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Naval Research Laboratory astronomy experiment to a 197.8-km (122.9-mi) altitude. The rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) April 10:	Skylab Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz completed training at Marshall Space Flight Center for a three-hour extravehicular activity scheduled for the Skylab 1—2 mission, set for May 14 and 15 launches. Although Conrad and Kerwin were to perform the EVA, all three crew members trained so that any combination of two could accomplish the activity. The training—begun in February 1972—took place in msfc’s Neutral Buoyancy Simulator, which held a full-scale mockup of a major portion of the Skylab cluster in a simulated weightless environment, (msfc Release 73-55)
Exclusive astronaut writing contracts with Life magazine and other media had harmed the press, the public interest, the space program, and the astronauts themselves, Robert Sherrod said in a Columbia Journalism Review article released in advance of its May/June publication date. The contracts had brought relatively little money to all but a few astronauts and had distorted their individuality and diversity into a “deodorized, plasticized, and homogenized” image. Under the contract system, NASA could censor whatever the astronauts signed. “Even though this censorship was rarely invoked, it was inhibiting; so was the necessity of Life's making the astronauts look good, and vice versa." President Kennedy had originally opposed the contracts, but had been persuaded in their favor by Project Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn. Former President Johnson had supported the contracts in a letter Sherrod received a few months before Johnson’s Jan. 22 death. Sherrod said the contract system had had no adverse affects on the flow of space news. “Due in large part to the exclusion policy, many members of the working press deeply resented NASA.” (Text)
Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, President of Communications Satellite Corp., announced organizational changes to strengthen new roles in domestic and international satellite communications. Three new vice presidents were elected by ComSatCorp’s Board of Directors: David C. Acheson, Senior Vice President and General Counsel; John A. Johnson, Senior Vice President; and George P. Sampson, Senior Vice President in charge of International Systems Division. The subsidiary COMSAT General Corp. was formed to carry out ComSatCorp’s U.S. domestic programs. It would be headed by John A. Johnson, President; Joseph H. O’Connor, Vice President and Treasurer; John L. Martin, Jr., Vice President; and Jerome W. Breslow, Secretary. ComSatCorp had formed the International Systems Div. to consolidate all activities related to the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization’s Global Satellite System. The division would be headed by George P. Sampson, Senior Vice President in charge of International Systems Div.; Richard R. Colino, Assistant Vice President for Technical Development and Support; and H. William Wood, Assistant Vice President for International Systems Operations. (ComSatCorp Release 73-9)
France had begun work to hold future nuclear tests underground at two uninhabited atolls in the Pacific, French Adm. Christian Claverie said in Papeete, Tahiti. French nuclear tests previously had been conducted above the French-governed Tahitian atoll Mururoa, against international protests, (upi, NYT, 11/4/73, 77) November 5:	Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue completed ground practice of docking maneuvers at Johnson Space Center. The astronauts were scheduled for Nov. 10 launch on the third and final mission to man the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched May 14). (upi, NYT, 11/6/73, 25)
Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering in the Dept, of Defense, testified before the Senate Committee on Armed Services on the Soviet thrust for military and technological superiority: “The United States reacted to one Soviet technological advance—the Sputnik—with a successful ten-year effort to restore our technological superiority in space. Now we are lagging again in some technology areas and it may well require another decade after some new jolt before the United States regains an acceptable technological posture.” The U.S.S.R. was “at such levels of technical competence in broad areas of defense technology that technological breakthroughs of major significance are possible. They could seriously destabilize the balance of world power and weaken our strength for deterrence and negotiations. They could encourage military opportunism in any of a number of areas and raise the risk of war or armed confrontation.” (Testimony)
The Air Force Space and Missiles Organization (samso) Air Force Satellite Facility (afsf) received a Presidential Management Improvement Certificate for excellence in improving Government operations, from Secretary of Defense Elliot L. Richardson in Washington, D.C., ceremonies. The certificate was presented to Col. John J. Schmitt, Jr. (usaf), afsf Commander, (afsc Newsreview, 6/73, 4)
Experiments by international groups using the intersecting storage rings of the European Nuclear Research Center (cern) on the Swiss-French border had shown that protons grow when accelerated to great energy, the New York Times reported. New questions were raised as to what would happen within the nucleus of an atom that was packed with protons and neutrons and subjected to high-energy acceleration. Experiments had indicated that the proton—once thought a homogenous building block of the atomic nucleus—harbored processes and forces yet to be discovered. (Sullivan, NYT, 3/9/73, 1) March 11:	The U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 2 began its third working day on the moon. The roving vehicle was 400 m (1300 ft) above its landing site at the upper rim of the 3.5-billion-yr-old-crater. Lunokhod 2’s primary task during its third working day would be to study the crater thoroughly. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 3/13/83, LI) *	The book 13: The Flight That Failed—an account of the aborted Apollo 13 mission (launched April 11, 1970) by Henry S. F. Cooper, Jr.— was reviewed by Joseph McElroy in the New York Times Book Review: In a spacecraft so full of safety valves and designed redundancies “it had seemed incredible that two of three fuel cells from the two liquid oxygen tanks in the service module could go dead. . . . But to lose two fuel cells and then eventually two oxygen tanks? Not possible.” Command module pilot John L. Swigert, Jr., had said after the mission that if anyone had thrown at the crew a simulation of what actually happened “they’d have thought it unrealistic.” To have had less than this confidence, McElroy said, would have been unrealistic. The care and skill with which the many teams of NASA technicians work, plus the computers whose development may be “the main reason NASA could achieve a moon landing so soon” had created “an efficiency as unprecedented as the Apollo 13 disaster was implausible to the engineers at Houston Mission Control.” Cooper’s “plain, detailed picture of the teams at their consoles and in discussion and over the intercom ‘loop’ and under the adroit supervision of Eugene Krantz, a flight director who was unquestionably an executive hero of Apollo 13, gives their work a fascinating muscle and texture that might surprise those inclined to think this side of NASA boring.” (NYT Book Review, 3/11/73, 4-5) March 12:	Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified on the status of space science programs and plans during hearings on NASA’s FY 1974 authorization before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “The largest and most significant current project is Viking, a program to continue the exploration of Mars with two automated spacecraft during the 1975-76 opportunity.” A Mariner spacecraft would be launched in October or November toward Venus. “As the Mariner passes close to Venus its path will be bent and it will be accelerated toward . . . Mercury. If all goes well, we will make our deepest penetration toward the sun and get our first view of the sun-scorched Mercury. Pioneer G is ready for shipment to Cape Kennedy. It will be launched in April 1973 and will follow Pioneer 10 [launched March 2, 1972] through the asteroid belt to explore Jupiter. “We are proceeding with the development of the two Mariner spacecraft planned for launch to Jupiter and Saturn in 1977. The experiments and experiment teams have been selected. We are proceeding also with spacecraft design and will be purchasing some of the subsystems—those common to Viking—in Fiscal Year 1974. The use of common subsystems and leftover Viking hardware is helping us to minimize costs on this project. The major manned mission of 1973 is . . . Skylab, which will have many scientific experiments aboard. The most important and the largest ... is the Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), which contains five major experiments using eight scientific instruments, all devoted to observing and studying the sun. This complex assembly of solar instruments is designed to be man-operated in a manner similar to a ground-based observatory. The atm is now assembled as part of Skylab, awaiting launch in May 1973. An international campaign of solar observations in 15 countries . . . will be run simultaneously with ATM; a number of sounding-rocket payloads will be launched to help calibrate the instruments on atm and to make complementary observations.” Oso 7, in orbit, “made many unique observations during the August 1972 period of intense solar activity and made the first observations of gamma rays in solar flares, oso-i is planned to be launched late in 1974. It will carry several major experiments to make detailed measurements of the process that transports energy from the sun’s surface to its intensely hot corona. The broad international participation in oso-i is exemplified by a major French instrument and by a group of over 40 guest investigators from the U.S., France, Germany, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the U.S.S.R.” Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews testified on special applications programs: “The Earth and Ocean Physics Applications Program (eopap) is an interrelated series of projects directed to the solution of important problems in earth and ocean dynamics that can best be addressed by the application of space techniques. Major areas of eopap are (a) global monitoring, reporting and forecasting of ocean-surface conditions and (b) monitoring of motions of the whole earth and its crust to obtain a better understanding of the processes that produce earthquakes, with the expectation that this will lead to the development of techniques for predicting the occurrence, magnitude and location of earthquakes.” The second special program underway, the space-processing applications program, was “organized to exploit the unique environment of space flight, weightlessness and unlimited vacuum, for research and technological developments in material sciences and processing with the specific goal of inventing, developing and commercializing new products and manufacturing techniques for use on earth or in space.” NASA’s role was “that of an initiator of new technology and, following a suitable ‘incubation period,’ a supplier of supporting services to a developing area of commercial endeavor.” (Transcript)
Man’s ability to survive in space was discussed in New York Times and Washington Post articles. Of 33 astronauts who had made Apollo flights, 11 had suffered from motion sickness for the first few days in space. Apollo 13 (April 11—17, 1970), the aborted moon landing mission, had indicated that men in danger would have a tough time surviving in space. Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., had lost 6 kg (14 lbs) during the six-day mission. John L. Swigert, Jr., had been so overcome by fatigue near the end of the flight that he made several errors in checking reentry procedures. Fatigue might also have contributed to the deaths of the Soviet Soyuz 11 (June 6-30, 1971) cosmonauts. Calcium loss in weightlessness, the most serious of potential medical problems, could lead to thinning of the bones and subsequent bone breaks after long periods in space. Other health problems included increased heart rates, weight loss, decreased oxygen consumption, reduced blood pressure, and the reduced flow of blood to the brain and kidneys. Psychological effects, as well as these problems, would be studied on Skylab missions. Were windows necessary? Should doors be doorshaped or would circular holes be sufficient? Would the crew tolerate sleeping upright in sleeping bags attached to the walls? (Schmeck, NYT, 5/14/73, 24; O’Toole, W Post, 5/14/73, A12)
U.S. Patent No. 3 730 287 was granted to nasa and to aerospace designer Edward Hryniewiecki of Comprehensive Designers, Inc., a Jet Propulsion Laboratory subcontractor, for a vehicle designed to explore planets with difficult terrain. Each of four legs with triangular wheels would have its own motive power for movement by walking, by turning wheels, or on tires revolving around the wheels like endless tracks. The vehicle had been planned for unmanned, remotely controlled exploration of Mars, but NASA was willing to license manufacture for oil and mineral exploration and rescue operations. (Pat Off pio; Jones, NYT, 5/5/73, 45)
Gen. Bruce K. Holloway (usaf, Ret.), former Commander of the Air Force Strategic Air Command, joined nasa as a consultant to the Administrator. (nasa Ann, 9/10/73) August 14:	An Apollo command module atop its Saturn IB launch vehicle was rolled out from the Vehicle Assembly Building to Launch Complex 39, Pad B, at Kennedy Space Center. Vehicle readiness had been ordered by Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider for a possible rescue mission of Skylab 3 astronauts (launched July 28) when two of the four quadrants of the service module’s reaction control system, used for maneuvering the command and service module, failed and raised doubts about the ability of the CM to return safely to earth. If a rescue system were not ordered, the vehicle would carry Skylab 4 astronauts—Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue—to a Nov. 9 rendezvous with the Skylab Orbital Workshop. (Marshall Star, 8/15/73, 1; Thomas, Today, 8/14/73)
Flight tests of NASA’s supercritical wing, developed by Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb in Langley Research Center wind tunnels, were being completed at Flight /Research Center, NASA announced. Construction of the first wing for use on a commercial aircraft was planned for later in 1973 by LearAvia Corp. William P. Lear, developer of the Learjet executive transport aircraft, had said the wing could increase the Learjet’s cruising speed by almost 10% and its range by 20%, without an increase in power or gross weight. Other aircraft companies were interested in the new airfoil shape, which had demonstrated its ability to increase aircraft efficiency 15% during more than 75 successful flights at frc since 1971. (nasa Release 73-96)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released a statement on private communications of crews of the Skylab Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), after meeting with the Deputy Administrator, Dr. George M. Low; Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers; and Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs John P. Donnelly. A May 3 memorandum had authorized private communications for morale purposes (weekly calls from Skylab astronauts to their families), for “extreme” operational emergencies, and for medical reasons (to permit private doctor-patient relations). Following objections from some newsmen to the May 29 Charles Conrad, Jr., private conversation on operational matters, Dr. Fletcher had decided to instruct Mission Control’s Capsule Communicator to query the seriousness of a situation before permitting a private conversation from Skylab. Dr. Fletcher said in his new statement that he would rescind this instruction because “we believe it would be imprudent to discourage requests by the crew for private operational communications.” Paraphrases of the communications would he released to the press. “We will continue to leave it entirely up to the flight crew as to when to call for such a conversation, and will send no new instructions or clarification of instructions. This decision was reached so that we would in no conceivable way inhibit them from calling for a private conversation when they believe a need exists, and so that we will not jeopardize the safety of the mission.” (NASA Release 73—110)
Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz completed their last medical checkups at Johnson Space Center and were declared ready for the Skylab launch, as countdown proceeded for May 15. Data were also gathered for inflight comparison of the astronauts’ physical conditions. (Wilford, NYT, 5/12/73, 58)
The Mackay Trophy for 1972 was presented by the Air Force and the National Aeronautical Assn, to Air Force Vietnam war aces Capt. Richard S. Ritchie, Capt. Charles B. DeBellevue, and Capt. Jeffrey S. Feinstein at a Dept, of Defense ceremony. The citation was for disregarding their own personal safety in providing protection for allied forces attacking high-priority targets deep in hostile enemy territory. Also honored was Col. John A. Macready (usaf, Ret.), the only threetime winner of the Mackay Trophy, on the 50th anniversary of the first nonstop flight across the U.S., which he piloted with Lt. Oakley G. Kelly in a Fokker T-2 aircraft May 3, 1923. (naa News, 6/73, 1)
An era of global scarcity had begun, a Science editorial noted. “The advanced countries are vulnerable in one or more respects.” Japan had been enjoying a boom but needed to import raw materials, fossil fuels, and food. In Mexico people lived under conditions like those of 100 yrs ago, “with a disregard for sanitation,” but with “Coca Cola signs and transistor radios everywhere.” Much of the world was aware of U.S. living standard and gadgets. “They yearn for both, while the population explosion continues. We are soon going to witness dramatic and miserable confrontations of aspirations, expectations, and limitations.” (Abelson, Science, 7/27/73, 303) July 28-September 25:	The Skylab 3 Apollo spacecraft carrying a threeman crew was launched into near-earth orbit, rendezvoused with the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), and docked with the space laboratory for the second manned mission in the Skylab program. A series of problems threatened to disrupt the mission, but corrective actions and workarounds permitted it to proceed successfully, setting new manned flight records. The astronauts collected significant data in medical experiments, solar astronomy, and earth resources surveys for 59 days before undocking for a safe return to earth Sept. 25. The csm/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with 224-km (139.2-mi) apogee and 150-km (93.2-mi) perigee at 10 min 2 sec after launch. Eight minutes later the csm separated from the stage as planned. The galactic x-ray mapping experiment mounted in the instrument unit (iu) was deployed. At 5 hrs 19 min 53 sec after launch the S—IVB/iu deorbit maneuver was commanded, and the stage impacted the predicted Pacific Ocean area after planned maneuvers. During CSM maneuvers to rendezvous with the Workshop, a leak was detected in the CSM reaction control system (rcs) quad B thruster, one of four assemblies of rockets used to stabilize the spacecraft or to change its velocity and also used as a backup for bringing the CSM back from orbit. Analysis indicated the oxidizer valve was stuck open or partially open. Quad B was isolated; analysis showed that all deorbit mission rules could be satisfied. The CSM rendezvoused with the Workshop at 3:38 pm edt on the fifth orbit. Rendezvous, fly-around, and docking were covered by 23 min of TV. The crew entered the multiple docking adapter (mda) at 4:00 pm edt and began Workshop activation, but activation was curtailed because the crew quickly began to feel motion sickness. Lousma was experiencing nausea and Bean and Garriott were uncomfortable. Bean said he and Garriott tended “to be fairly careful of how we move. And since we are moving rather slowly, then it’s taking a little bit longer than we’d planned.” Motion sickness continued the second day, July 29, and the astronauts were taking scopolamine-dexedrine tablets. Bean communicated, “We feel okay, except in the stomach. . . . And our thinking is that we’re not going to be able to work much faster than we are right now. . . . There’s a desire to maybe take a break for an hour or two and get in the bunk and stay still for a while.” Flight Director Neil B. Hutchinson told the press at JSC that extravehicular activity (eva) to install a new sun shield and retrieve and install Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) film probably would be delayed from July 31 to Aug. 1 at the earliest. Four to five hours of work were carried over from July 28 and 29. Still suffering from motion sickness, the astronauts continued Workshop activation July 30 (Mission Day 3). The first EVA was delayed to Aug. 2 and later rescheduled to Aug. 4 to ensure the astronauts’ complete recovery. Activation was completed July 31 (MD-4) and research began as the crew improved slightly. Bean told ground control: “We’re getting better; it’s just taking a little longer than we thought. . . . Everybody feels pretty good between meals. Then mealtime comes, and we’re caught ... in the squeeze. We’re trying to decide whether we ought to eat all we have to ... to keep our strength up, or eat about what we want to, which isn’t very much.” A TV broadcast from the space station July 31 showed minnows for a biomedical experiment swimming in their plastic aquarium in tight spirals and sometimes apparently trying to swim toward the surface, but with their heads pointed straight down. Garriott said, “Apparently they can’t make up their minds which way is up and down, either.” He also turned a spider named Arabella loose in a plastic cage to observe her web-spinning abilities in zero-g conditions. Later in the mission Garriott reported baby minnows hatched in space performed in water “as if they’d already adapted while they were still in the egg.” They “felt right accustomed to zero-g.” August 1-September 24:	Bean told ground controllers after breakfast Aug. 1 (MD—5) : “This is the first morning we’ve been up here . . . that after a meal everybody felt good. Everybody feels real good right now. Best since we’ve been here.” During live TV the astronauts ate a hearty lunch to music. Bean demonstrated his proficiency in eating while hanging upside down. A medical briefing below at Johnson Space Center suggested that moving quickly from the confined cm to the large Workshop might have contributed to the motion sickness. The milder nausea experienced on the May 25—June 22 Skylab 2 mission could have been caused by a more gradual transition into the Workshop. “I think that it is merely a matter of room in which you can exercise your vestibular mechanisms, and that the workshop simply presents more of that space. . . . perhaps it was too much too soon.” On Aug. 2 a master alarm buzzer awakened the astronauts at 6:45 am EDT. Pressure and temperature were falling rapidly in the CSM reaction control system quad D because of an oxidizer leak. Because of quad B’s July 28 leak, only A and C of the four quads remained fully operational. The quad D leak lasted two hours, losing an estimated 5 kg (12 lbs) of nitrogen tetroxide oxidizer. Apollo Flight Director Glynn S. Lunney said at a morning press briefing that the spacecraft was flyable with the loss of the two quads but “it would be flown in a mode which is not entirely standard.” The main concern was “that we have had two problems which are related, at least they seem to be related.” A flaw common to the whole RCS could necessitate the crew’s immediate return to the earth or accelerated preparation of the Skylab 4 spacecraft to make it available as a rescue vehicle should the CSM become unusable. Full activation of Skylab-rescue-vehicle preparation was authorized. Launch and checkout crews began working a 24-hr-day, 7-day-week schedule, preparing two additional couches and other equipment for installation. Earliest possible date for a rescue mission was established as Sept. 5. The EVA rescheduled for Aug. 4 was again postponed, for 24 to 48 hours to free the crew for system checks, to free ground controllers to troubleshoot the problem, and to give time to work out EVA procedures for the new spacecraft configuration. While reentry procedures were being rewritten for the new configuration, the astronauts continued scientific experiments. By the afternoon of Aug. 2 Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., jsc Director, was able to tell the astronauts that troubleshooting the RCS had indicated no apparent generic problem, but two unique quad failures, and there was now confidence that the two remaining quads would ensure attitude control should immediate reentry become necessary. “We’re proceeding ... as if we’re going to have a normal mission.” Astronaut Bean replied: “Fine. You just said the right words. . . . we’re pretty happy with the way things are going, at the moment . . . and we agree 100 percent with what you just announced. . . . everybody’s happy up here.” On Aug. 3 Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said at a JSC press briefing that continuing investigation indicated the two quad failures were unrelated and reexamination of reentry capabilities showed three ways of returning to the earth: using the primary service propulsion system, using the RCS with the two operational quads, and using the hybrid RCS in the cm. “We’re feeling considerably better than . . . yesterday morning.” A slowdown was ordered in the emergency rescue preparations. The Apollo cm would be outfitted in a Skylab 4 configuration, with three astronaut couches rather than the five needed for a rescue mission. The slowdown would delay rescue readiness until Sept. 10. Astronauts Bean, Garriott, and Lousma conducted their first full day of experiments and prepared for an earth resources experiment package pass. Garriott held the TV camera at the window to telecast a good view of the U.S. from North Dakota to North Carolina. Later the first of 26 erep passes was made, to gather data for oil exploration, ocean temperatures, mapping, land use surveys, crop inventories, and pollution studies. A master alarm sounded in the CSM Aug. 4, later attributed to a short-circuit in Skylab’s solar telescope system. The short knocked out one of the two TV systems in the atm but did not afFect Skylab’s main power system. Ground crews investigated problems in the primary and secondary coolant systems Aug. 5. One had been slowly leaking since the Skylab 1 launch May 14 and was expected to become inoperative in 16 to 20 days. The secondary loop was thought to have a small leak, begun during the Skylab 2 mission and giving the loop a predicted 60-day lifetime. Possibly additional coolant would have to be carried up by the next manned mission, Skylab 4, but Program Director Schneider said there was “no immediate danger to the crew.” By Aug. 6 evaluations showed that only the primary loop was leaking; the second was sound and could operate for the rest of Skylab 3 as well as for Skylab 4. Flight surgeon Paul Buchanan’s nightly bulletin said Aug. 5 that the crew “continues to report good health and optimistic outlook” and had asked about an increase in their menus “to match their growing appetites.” Fluid intake and output was “optimal.” The first EVA was performed Aug. 6. Garriott and Lousma stepped outside the orbiting laboratory at 1:30 pm edt to install the 3.6- by 7.3-m (12- by 24-ft), paper-thin, aluminized Mylar awning over the Workshop to reflect the sun’s rays away from the spacecraft skin, damaged when the meteoroid shield was torn ofF during the May launch. Garriott, standing in the Skylab’s open hatch, pieced together the two 16.8-m (55-ft) poles from metal sections and handed them to Lousma. Lousma attached them to a bracket to form a “V” over the Workshop. The sunshade was slowly pulled up by a system of pulleys. One rope kept twisting around the poles and the sunshade folds did not straighten immediately, but after four hours—twice the time expected—the sunshade was successfully deployed. Workshop temperatures were lowered before the EVA ended. Astronaut Bean said Garriott and Lousma worked “at a slow and steady pace” and were not tired. Lousma retrieved and replaced film in four ATM experiments, installed two new cameras, removed a door latch from an atm experiment, and fixed the particle-collection experiment to the rim of the atm. Lousma also inspected the two leaking quads in the CSM RCS and looked for coolant leaks. He noted some evidence of micrometeorite pitting but no clues to causes of the malfunctions. The astronauts completed the eva at 8:01 pm edt, after 6 hrs 31 min, surpassing the 3-hr 30-min record set June 7 by Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin. Garriott, first solar physicist in space, focused the atm cameras on the sun Aug. 7 for the first time during the mission. TV audiences watched him work at the ATM panel. By Aug. 8 Dr. Lawrence F. Dietlein, jsc Deputy Director for Life Sciences, reported the astronauts were “in excellent spirits and have no health problems.” They had completely recovered from motion sickness. Their weights had stabilized after a loss of 1.8 to 2.3 kg (4 to 5 lbs) each. Data obtained on the rotating chair indicated their sensitivity to motion had lifted. Since deployment of the sunshade, temperatures in the Workshop had dropped to 296 K (74°F). The crew photographed a coronal transient with the ATM camera two hours Aug. 10. It was the first time a transient—protons and free electrons expelled violently from the sun’s limb at a speed of about 312 km (194 mi) per sec, a phenomenon that occurred two or three times a year—had been observed at that range and time resolution. Program Director Schneider announced Aug. 14 that Skylab 3 would continue its full 59-day mission. From analyses of the CSM and Workshop, he had “concluded that there is no imminent need for rescue, and ... we have made the decision to proceed with a normal test flow on an accelerated basis at Cape Kennedy.” Skylab 4 was being prepared for a normal mission but would be available for a rescue mission if necessary. The earliest launch date could be Sept. 25. Schneider said, “We’re reasonably confident that [csm] 117 is a good vehicle.” “Looks like they got a renewed burst of confidence down there,” Bean said when told of the decision. “We feel that way up here.” JSC announced Aug. 21 that the astronauts would install a new “six-pack” of gyroscopes during an Aug. 24 EVA, to replace faulty ones. The six-pack had been carried up on the Skylab 3 cm. Meanwhile the crew continued with experiments, requesting more work Aug. 14 because all had spare time and “you just can’t sleep 8 hours up here.” They photographed tropical storm Brenda Aug. 19 as it moved across theYucatan Peninsula toward the Gulf of Mexico. On Aug. 21 Astronaut Bean discovered and photographed through ATM telescopes what Skylab principal investigator Dr. Robert MacQueen called “certainly one of the biggest solar events” seen on the Skylab missions. Bean said the complex series of events on the solar limb looked “like a big bubble” sitting on the edge of the disc. He observed it with the white light coronagraph and x-ray instruments and reported it to be three fourths the size of the sun. NASA scientists alerted other facilities to make observations from ground instruments and other satellites. Dr. MacQueen said the event might have been caused by an explosion on the back side of the sun. “It was a beautiful event.” The crew “did a fine job.” Schneider announced Aug. 23 (MD—27) that the Skylab 3 crew had been given permission to continue the mission for another seven days. Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, told the press that he saw nothing in the medical data thus far “that would indicate that we could not press on with the mission, and ... we feel we can go the full 59 days as planned.” EVA—2 began at 12:24 pm edt Aug. 24 with am depressurization by Lousma and Garriott. Lousma completed installation of the six redesigned gyros mounted inside the spacecraft by connecting cables to a computer system outside, and the new gyro system was put into operation. The astronauts installed a sail sample on a hand rail to test durability, replaced ATM film, retrieved and stored cassettes from one experiment, and removed the aperture door ramp latch from two ATM experiments, concluding EVA-2 at 4:31 pm EDT, after 4 hrs 30 min. At 8:01 am edt Aug. 25 (MD—29) the Skylab 3 astronauts surpassed the single-mission endurance mark of 28 days 50 min set in June by Skylab 2. They had completed 404 earth orbits and had traveled 18.5 million km (11.5 million mi). And at 6:11 am edt Sept. 5 (MD-40) Astronaut Bean surpassed the space flight record for one man of 49 days 3 hrs 38 min 36 sec, set in June by Charles Conrad, Jr., on Skylab 2. EVA-3 began at 7:18 am edt Sept. 22. Bean and Garriott moved through space to retrieve and replace atm film and retrieve experiments and parasol samples. EVA operations ended at 9:59 am edt, after 2 hrs 41 min. During the mission, spiders Arabella and Anita first spun webs in corners of their cage, without the normal circular pattern. Each day, however, each improved web formation, adding more radials, adjusting to weightlessness. Garriott said of Arabella Aug. 9 that “she learned very rapidly in zero-g without the benefit of any previous experience.” She “figured out a very nice solution to the problems of zero gravity.” Later ground controllers told Garriott to share his filet mignon with the spiders to keep them alive for the entire mission. Anita, however, was found dead Sept. 16, possibly from inadequate diet. The astronauts righted the cm and remained inside until the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans maneuvered alongside and a crane lifted the cm aboard. Immediate medical examinations found the crew in excellent spirits and surprisingly good condition. Blood pressures and heart rates were within normal range. The astronauts would remain aboard ship in San Diego for physical checks and would fly to Houston Sept. 26. They would be quarantined for one week. The Skylab 3 mission achieved its primary objectives of performing unmanned Saturn Workshop operations, reactivating the Skylab orbital assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data for use in extending manned space flights, and performing inflight experiments. Despite mission problems, 150% of scheduled atm observing time was accomplished and erep sensors were operated on 39 Z-axis local vertical data runs and 5 solar inertial data runs, completing 218 of the 386 earth resources task sites. All medical experiments were successfully carried out. All but one of the corollary experiments achieved or exceeded objectives. Of 13 student experiments, 9 were completed. Added unscheduled tests and experiments had significantly increased the data yield above premission planning and Skylab was left in an excellent position to complete the final SL-4 mission. Skylab 3 was officially adjudged a success Oct. 11. Major records set by the mission included the longest-duration manned space flight to date, 59 days 11 hrs 9 min; the longest cumulative time in space for one man, 69 days for Bean (who had spent 10 days on the Nov. 14-24, 1969, Apollo 12 mission) ; the longest distance in orbit for a manned mission, 41 000 000 km (25 500 000 mi) ; the longest EVA, 6 hrs 31 min on Aug. 6; and the longest cumulative orbital EVA time, for one astronaut, 13 hrs 40 min for Garriott. In the first mission to man the Orbital Workshop May 15-June 22, Skylab 2 astronauts had conducted medical, solar, and earth resources experiments for 28 days, as well as repairing the Workshop to salvage the mission. The Workshop would be operated unmanned until the November Skylab 4 launch for a third and final mission. (NASA prog off; jsc pao press briefing transcripts, 7/28/73-9/25/73; NYT, 7/28/73-9/26/73; W Post, 7/28/73-9/26/73; W Star-News, 7/28/73-9/27/73; B Sun, 8/16/73, A5; 8/20/73, A3) July 28:	NASA launched a Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying a Univ. of Colorado aeronomy experiment to a 120.2-km (74.7-mi) altitude. The rocket performed successfully but the experiment data were saturated and not useful, (gsfc proj off) July 29:	Fifteenth anniversary of the signing of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 by President Dwight D. Eisenhower. The act provided for the establishment of NASA, which officially came into being Oct. 1, 1958. (nasa Release 73-134) July 30:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, praised NASA’s successful efforts to save the Skylab 1—2 mission during testimony before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Science hearing to review the Skylab Investigation Report [see July 13]: “We were able to save Skylab because of the tremendous depth and breadth of the NASA team and the dedication and skills of thousands of people on that team. There certainly isn’t another country that could have reacted as we did. I doubt whether there is another team within this country that could have reacted in this manner. Our team could do it because of years of training, working hard on highly exacting projects, and working as a team to drive toward a technical objective. The performance of the team on the ground, and of course the magnificent performance, skill and courage of the astronauts, saved Skylab. I would hope that this is remembered as the real story of Skylab, not the failure which caused it to happen.” NASA was “taking all the steps we know how to prevent a future failure due to similar causes in other programs.” Director Bruce T. Lundin of Lewis Research Center testified that, throughout six years of reviews and certifications, “the principal attention devoted to the meteoroid shield was that of achieving a satisfactory deployment. Never did the matter of aerodynamic loads on the shield or aeroelastic interactions between the shield and its external pressure environment during launch receive the attention and understanding during the design and review process which in retrospect it deserved.” The omission had not been surprising. “From the beginning, a basic design concept and requirement was that the shield be tight to the tank.” The question of whether the shield would remain tight against the tank under the dynamics of flight through the atmosphere “was simply not considered in any coordinated manner.” Possibly contributing to the oversight “was the basic view of the meteoroid shield as a piece of structure.” No full-time subsystem engineer had been assigned to the shield. “While it is recognized that one cannot have a full-time engineer on every piece of equipment, it is . . . possible that the complex interactions and integration of aerodynamics, structure, rigging procedures, ordnance, deployment mechanisms, and thermal requirements of the meteoroid shield would have been enhanced by such an arrangement,” (Testimony)
The countdown for the twice-delayed launch of the Skylab 4 mission [see Nov. 6, 12, and 13] proceeded smoothly toward Nov. 16 launch. The Apollo spacecraft’s electrical system was activated and the 1st stage of the Saturn IB launch vehicle was loaded with 157 cu m (41 500 gal) of fuel. Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue inspected the spacecraft and received final briefings on the Apollo systems and the solar telescopes in the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14). (icsc press briefing transcript, 11/14/73; Wilford, NYT, 11/15/73, 6)
Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., announced in Cleveland he would make a third bid for the Democratic nomination to the Senate from Ohio. He had lost the 1970 Democratic senatorial primary; a head injury had forced him to end his 1964 Senate campaign. Glenn, as pilot of Friendship 7 (launched Feb. 20, 1962), was the first American to make an orbital space flight. (CSM, 12/11/73; A&A 1962)
The first rocket-powered flight of the X-24B lifting body, to be piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, was aborted because of overcast conditions at the launch and recovery site. At B-52 takeoff the weather was clear, but it worsened steadily during the flight-to-Iaunch period. An igniter test was performed with satisfactory results. The flight was rescheduled tentatively for Nov. 14. (nasa prog off)
Award of a $20 543 500 fixed-price-incentive contract for equipping two Boeing 747-200B advanced airborne command post aircraft with electronic equipment was announced by the Air Force, (dod Release 240-73) May 12:	A press briefing on the earth resources experiment package (erep) to be launched on the Skylab Workshop May 14 was held at Kennedy Space Center. NASA Associate Administrator for Applications Charles W. Mathews said the 150 erep investigators included 50 from foreign countries, erep included six sensors, two camera systems, a spectrometer, a multispectral scanner, a radiometer, a scatterometer, an altimeter, and a thermal data channel: erep was similar in function to Erts 1 (launched July 23, 1972) and could discriminate colors more completely, compare electronically and photographically derived imagery, and put up microwave instruments to operate in the different regions of the frequency spectrum, which would allow a look through clouds and under the surface of the earth. Thomas L. Fischetti, erep Project Manager at nasa Hq., said that if erep failed the crew would have equipment to make corrections, modifications, or replacements. The flight plan could also be modified at the last moment for unfavorable weather conditions or new phenomena occurring on the earth. During the three missions erep would return 40 000 photos and 25 magnetic tapes of data. Dr. Verl R. Wilmarth, erep project scientist at Johnson Space Center, said erep had 9 major investigative areas with 47 subtasks, including stock and crop inventory, surveys of crop damage from insects, land-use classification, and water-resource and geologic mapping. A major effort would be made in sea state analysis. (Transcript) May 13:	NASA held a Skylab prelaunch press conference at Kennedy Space Center, nasa Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said that Skylab hardware was “in good shape and ready to go.” The countdowns for Skylab 1 and 2 launches were on schedule for May 14 and 15. The power transfer tests and fuel cell pressurization of Skylab 2 had been completed and the crew “is in good shape.” Schneider said that the network, operational, and recovery forces were “in place and ready to go” and the weather was satisfactory. Col. Alan R. Vette, U.S. Air Force recovery forces, said that the training of the recovery forces had been completed and they were “prepared for any type of landing.” (Transcript)
Cancellation of U.K.’s Hovertrain program was announced by Michael R. D. Heseltine, Minister of Aerospace and Shipping. The project was canceled after 41/) yrs and $12-million development cost because of the excessive expenditures necessary to bring the Hovertrain to a competitive status and because of a lack of a foreseeable market. (Arbose, NYT, 2/18/73, 76) February 15:	NASA’s Pioneer 10 probe, on its way to the planet Jupiter, safely completed its crossing of the Asteroid Belt, NASA announced at a Headquarters press conference. Launched March 2, 1972, the spacecraft had completed the 430-million-km (270-million-mi), seven-month trip through the belt with no damaging hits from asteroid particles. Dr. William H. Kinard, Langley Research Center scientist, said NASA was “firmly convinced that the Asteroid belt presents little hazard to future spacecraft going out to explore outer planets.” Pioneer 10 had encountered an average of one large particle of 0.1- to 1-mm (0.004- to 0.04-in) dia a day and had come within 1640 million km (400 million mi) of only one asteroid over 10 m (33 ft) in diameter. Particle encounters had been observed by measuring sunlight scatter of particles by telescopes and by pressurized cells that leaked when penetrated by a particle. Pioneer 10 project scientist Dr. John H. Wolfe of Ames Research Center said the asteroid distribution was fairly uniform. Pioneer 10 had made the most distant observations of solar atmosphere and solar wind to date and had found that the sun’s atmosphere expanded with distance while the solar wind slowed but heated up with distance. The spacecraft had covered 70% of its 1-billion-km (620-million-mi) flight and would reach Jupiter Dec. 3. After exploring Jupiter’s atmosphere it would escape the solar system. Pioneer-G, scheduled for April launch, would travel a similar course to Jupiter. (Transcript; nasa Release 73-27)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of Dr. Dixy Lee Ray, Atomic Energy Commission Chairman, to be U.S. Representative to the Sept. 18-24 International Atomic Energy Agency General Conference in Vienna. Among five alternate representatives nominated was Apollo 8 Astronaut and former National Space Council Chairman William A. Anders. {PD, 9/17/73, 1128, 1132)
The Florida Senate Natural Resources Committee had unanimously endorsed a proposal to restore the name “Cape Canaveral” to Cape Kennedy, Today reported. If the bill—sponsored by State Sen. Henry Sayler (R—St. Petersburg), State Sen. John Vogt (D-Merritt Island), and State Sen. Lori Wilson (I-Merritt Island)—became law, “Cape Canaveral” would appear on all official state maps and publications. (Today, 3/22/72, Bl)
Representatives of major U.S. automobile manufacturers began visiting Jet Propulsion Laboratory for demonstrations of a NASA-developed system to enable the automotive industry to meet legal limitations on automobile engine emissions [see above]. JPL engineers had had promising results in reducing pollution while increasing engine efficiency in laboratory tests of the system, but the work was in its early stages. Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, had said automotive company representatives had been invited “to assess the utility of the system with a view to the possibility that they might wish to work cooperatively with us.” (nasa Release 73-184; Witkin, NYT, 9/17/73, 1)
Secretary of the Navy John W. Warner and Grumman Corp. President John C. Bierwirth signed an agreement for the Grumman Aerospace Corp. to build 48 additional F—14 jet fighter aircraft at current contract prices. The Navy would not exercise further options under the current contract and would limit its purchases to 134 aircraft. Future purchases would be dependent upon congressional authorization and funding. (Text) March 9:	The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite by Titan IIID launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base into orbit with 263-km (163.4-mi) apogee, 152-km (94.5-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 95.7° inclination. The satellite reentered May 19. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/73; 5/31/73; NYT, 3/10/73, 31)
NASA test pilot John A. Manke flew the X—24R lifting body on a captive flight from Flight Research Center, attached under a B-52 aircraft wing. Flight objectives, to determine the pylon adapter’s dynamic response and pylon loads and to check out the propulsion system, were only partially obtained because failure of the cabin-pressure regulator valve limited the flight altitude to 8000 m (25 000 ft). Pylon damping tests and a modified engine test were completed, (nasa prog off)
The People’s Republic of China was preparing to deploy the first group of 10 nuclear missiles capable of reaching U.S.S.R. targets, Joseph Alsop reported in Washington Post. U.S. intelligence agencies had observed missile sites carved into mountain sides and believed the new intermediate range missile had already been successfully tested. (W Post, 1/17/73, January 17—19:	A Skylab simulation at Manned Spacecraft Center picked up the Skylab flight plan in the 10th day of the mission scheduled for April 30 launch. Flight controllers worked in shifts to tally the day’s activities, prepare a summary flight plan for the day following, and complete a detailed flight plan for use the next day. Activities included all elements of flight between 8 am and 5 pm each day but were oriented toward experiments rather than flight operations. Skylab astronauts manned crew simulators, principal investigators manned support stations, and the Marshall Space Flight Center Operations Support Center for Skylab provided support for the Orbital Workshop. Prime contractors North American Rockwell Corp. and Martin Marietta Corp. supported the simulation, msc controllers inserted simulated malfunctions to exercise procedures and mission rules for the flight and to observe the reaction of control teams, (msc Roundup, 1/19/73, 2) January 18:	The European Space Research Organization Council met in Paris and unanimously authorized establishment of a project to develop the sortie laboratory to fly with nasa’s space shuttle in the 1980s. Participating states would provide funding and would use esro facilities and assistance. The Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Belgium, and Spain would participate initially, with other esro member countries expected to join later. After definition studies of the research and applications module (ram), the sortie lab final design would be agreed on by NASA and ESRO. esro would proceed to development phase, with delivery of the sortie lab to NASA scheduled for 1979. The laboratory would consist of a pressurized manned module to house equipment, experiments, data-processing equipment, electrical power and environmental control systems, and a six-scientist crew. An external, unpressurized instrument platform would house experiments and large instruments controlled remotely from the laboratory. Project cost was estimated at $250 million to $300 million. Negotiations at agency and governmental levels would begin shortly, (esro Release, 1/19/73; NASA Release 73-12)
The skeleton crew at aec-nasa Space Nuclear Systems Office at Jackass Flats, Nev., would be disbanded by late June, snso Nevada Operations Chief John P. Jewett was quoted as saying. The facility would be shut down June 30 following termination of the nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program [see Jan. 5]. More than $1.2 billion had been spent on program since its inception in 1959. (upi, Orlando Sentinel, 1/7/73)	! January 8-23:	The U.S.S.R. launched its Luna 21 unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 11:55 am local time (1:55 am est). The “automatic station” was separated from the “satellite” in earth orbit and placed on a close to the planned trajectory for the moon. Tass said the purpose of the mission was to “further scientific studies of the moon and near-lunar space.” During the flight to the moon all systems were reported functioning normally. On Jan. 12 Luna 21 entered lunar orbit with 110-km (68.4-mi) apolune, 90-km (55.9-mi) perilune, 1-hr 58-min period, and 60° inclination. Orbital corrections were made Jan. 13 and 14 and on Jan. 14 the spacecraft was placed in an elliptical orbit with a low point of 16 km (10 mi) from the moon’s surface. Luna 21 softlanded on the eastern fringe of the Sea of Serenity Jan. 16 (Jan. 15 est) and released the 840-kg (1850-lb) self-propelled Lunokhod 2 vehicle to make scientific investigations of the moon’s surface. Lunokhod 2 resembled its predecessor, Lunokhod 1 (placed on the moon Nov. 17, 1970, by Luna 17). It carried flags, pennants with Lenin’s has relief, state coat of arms, and the inscription “50th Anniversary of the U.S.S.R.” and was equipped with a control system, radio and TV devices, and scientific instruments including a French-made laser reflector. The reflector was designed to measure the distance between the earth and the moon to within 20-30 cm (10-12 in). Between Jan. 16 and Jan. 23 Lunokhod 2, powered by solar batteries and controlled from the ground by a special crew, photographed the lunar soil, rocks, and panoramic moonscape; determined chemical composition of the surface layer; measured the glow of zodiacal light near sun; and looked for cosmic dust. A highly skilled ground crew maneuvered vehicle over the shortest and safest routes, orienting it to a complex relief map of route. Lunokhod 2 was turned to bypass obstacles without decreasing speed. On Jan. 23 Lunokhod 2 was commanded to terminate operations in preparation for lunar night. Luna 17 was the first unmanned spacecraft to land on the moon and deploy an automatic lunar explorer. The last mission in the series, the unmanned Luna 20 (launched Feb. 14, 1972), had landed on the moon and returned to earth with lunar samples, (gsfc SSR, 1/31/73; Tass fbis-Sov, 1/8/73, LI; 1/15-19/73, LI; 1/22-23/73, LI; 1/26/73, 4; SBD, 1/9/73, 38; Shabad, NYT, 1/17/73, C14) January 8:	Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, nasa Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) Program Director, was quoted by Aviation Week & Space Technology as saying U.S.S.R. would use a U.S.-supplied very-high-frequency (vhf) transceiver on Soyuz spacecraft during rendezvous and docking maneuvers with Apollo spacecraft in July 1975 mission. Transceivers had been used in lunar modules for Apollo rendezvous and docking in lunar orbit. The U.S. also would build a receiver for Apollo spacecraft that could operate on Soviet communication frequencies and might lend to the U.S.S.R. equipment for use by cosmonauts and astronauts during joint portions of mission. Dr. Petrone had said NASA engineers, in discussions with Soviet engineers, had noted that necessity of concentrating on interpreter for exchange of technical information had made them more aware of technical problems than they would have been in direct English conversation. March meeting of U.S. and Soviet ASTP planners would consider flammability problems. (Av Wk, 1/8/73,
A New York Times editorial commented on the cost-benefit ratio of the U.S. Skylab missions. “Is the advantage gained by putting men into space worth the high price that must be paid?” Although bold, imaginative, and potentially useful, Skylab came at a time when Americans were “oppressively aware of the limits of the nation’s resources and of the consequent restraints and constraints on national policy.” Skylab would be most important “in providing practical evidence in determining the relative value of manned activity in utilizing earth’s immediate neighborhood to meet man’s needs on this planet.” (NYT, 5/13/73, 4:14) May 14-Ju.ne 22: The Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop and—11 days later— the Skylab 2 Apollo spacecraft carrying a three-man crew were launched into near-earth orbit to establish the first U.S. manned orbital laboratory, in the four-mission Skylab program. Skylab i’s meteoroid shield was torn off and the solar array system damaged during launch, cutting power and raising temperature to threaten the mission, although the spacecraft achieved satisfactory orbit. Skylab 2, scheduled for May 15 launch, was delayed while damage was assessed and the flight plan modified. On May 25, Skylab 2 carried three astronauts to rendezvous and dock with the earth-orbiting Workshop. The crew boarded the Workshop, repaired spacecraft damage, and conducted medical experiments and studies in solar astronomy and earth resources for a record 28 days before undocking for a safe return to earth June 22. May 14-24:	Skylab 1 (SL-1) was launched on time at 1:30 pm edt from Kennedy Space Center’s Launch Complex 39, Pad A, by a two-stage Saturn V launch vehicle after a nominal countdown. Liftoff was witnessed by U.S. and foreign TV viewers and by an estimated 500 000 persons at ICSC, including U.S. and foreign dignitaries and 26 former prisoners of war invited by NASA. The Skylab 2 crew—Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr. (commander), Paul J. Weitz (pilot), and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin (science pilot)—watched the launch from quarantine. Skylab’s Saturn Workshop (sws) cluster launched toward earth orbit included the Orbital Workshop (ows) with its Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), airlock module (am), multiple docking adapter (mda), and instrument unit (iu). At 63 sec into the mission, indication was received that the meteoroid shield had deployed prematurely. The Workshop was placed in nominal, circular orbit with 438.2-km (272.2-mi) altitude, 93-min period, 50° inclination, and 7649.4-m-per-sec (25 096.6-fps) orbital velocity. The payload shroud was j ettisoned on time at 15 min and 25 sec after launch and the atm deployed at 21 min 34 sec with normal deployment of the ATM solar arrays at 26 min 38 sec, but ground controllers received no indication that the Workshop solar array system (sas), which was to have been released by an onboard computer, had been deployed. At 41 min, a ground command was sent to deploy the two SAS wings. They did not respond. The command was sent again 30 min later and a third time near the end of the first orbit, without result. During the first postlaunch press briefing, Director of Launch Operations Walter J. Kapryan said that if the arrays did not deploy “the mission will be seriously degraded.” The crew was not set up to perform a fix-it-yourself extravehicular activity (eva) and there were no controls for deployment inside the Workshop. Anxious officials and flight controllers began analyzing radioed launch data. Analysis and later inspection revealed that the meteoroid shield had been torn off by vibration of the vehicle just after passing through mach 1 speed, near the time of highest dynamic pressure. Some early measurements indicated that the shield separation straps were still satisfactory, but later measurements indicated failure. The failure had released the securing mechanism on SAS Wing 2 and the wing ripped off. A piece of shield had wrapped around SAS Wing 1 and kept it from deploying. Loss of the wings, which were to provide power to the Workshop, reduced power to 50% of its average 8000-w output; the remaining 50% would he supplied by the four atm solar panels. At 11:00 pm edt Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider announced the Skylab 2 launch had been rescheduled to May 20 to allow assessment of damage and development of a new flight plan to maximize scientific return from Skylab’s experiments with limited power. Fuel cells of the Skylab 2 command and service module (csm) would be used to produce electricity, after joining the Workshop, but the CSM oxygen and hydrogen for the cells would last only 16 to 21 days. It was too early to assess the effect on Skylab 3 and 4 missions, planned for 56 days each. On May 15 Skylab faced a new threat as temperatures inside the Workshop reached above 311 K (100°F). The lost meteoroid shield had also been designed to reflect sunlight and help cool the Workshop. “We think we can live with the electrical power shortage,” Schneider said, “but if we can’t solve this thermal problem we have a serious situation,” Schneider feared foods and film might be spoiled, plastic parts might begin to leak poisonous gases, and the laboratory might become uninhabitable. The entire Skylab team was mobilized—at Johnson Space Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Martin Marietta Corp., McDonnell Douglas Corp., trw Inc., and Garrett AiResearch Co.—in an all-out attempt to overcome the loss of the shield and solar arrays. Schneider said NASA was studying the possibility of the Skylab 2 astronauts’ putting “some kind of a thermal blanket around the spacecraft,” but that would require a delay of the Skylab 2 launch beyond May 20. Astronauts would also inspect the solar wings, but whether they could make repairs was uncertain. The Skylab 2 crew returned to JSC May 15 to help flight planners salvage the mission. Special attitude maneuvers were run to obtain temperature data on the Skylab cluster and to limit Workshop temperatures, as internal temperature soared as high as 325 K (125°F). Temperature was reduced by pitching the Workshop with the longitudinal axis pointed at the sun for one orbit and, on May 16, the Workshop was tilted 55° away from the sun, with sufficient sunlight on the working solar panels to charge the batteries but moving the space station out of the sun’s full glare. Teams continued to compute options to overcome the loss of the shield: astronauts could spray-paint Skylab Vs side to alter radiation properties of the gold foil coating the Workshop shell, could wallpaper the critical area, or could deploy a solar sunshade. Choice of the third option was announced May 16. The astronauts were trained in three possible methods of deploying the sunshade and in procedures to deploy the jammed solar panel. If they failed with the panel, a near-normal 16- to 21-day mission could still be realized by using the CSM power and curtailing some experiments. After that experiments would have to be severely cut back to reserve power for the CSm’s trip home. On May 17 NASA announced postponement of the Skylab 2 launch until May 25 to allow the astronauts to practice techniques for deploying the sunshade and mission engineers to design, fabricate, and test hardware. Astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz flew to msfc to practice installing the sun shield in the Neutral Buoyancy Simulator. On May 20 the Workshop was purged of any gases from the overheated insulation material and turned slightly to allow the sun to warm the airlock module and prevent water stored there from freezing and causing breakage. Components of the astronauts’ repair kit were shipped to MSFC for final testing before being installed in Skylab 2’s Apollo csm. On May 22 the Skylab 2 astronaut crew flew to KSC to prepare for the May 25 launch. Three thermal shields were decided on at a May 23 review: a parasol deployable from the Workshop through the solar scientific airlock, a backup twin-pole shield deployable by the crew during EVA, and a standup-EVA (seva) sail deployable by the crew from the CSM if both other methods failed. The Skylab 2 countdown resumed at 5:30 am edt May 23 at ksc. It had been halted eight hours after Skylab 1 liftoff May 14. On May 24 the three emergency sunshades and necessary tools were stored in the CM. Significant experiments—S015, effects of zero g on single human cells; S020, x-ray/solar photography; T025, coronagraph contamination measurements; M555, gallium arsenide crystal growth; equipment for S063, ultraviolet (uv) airglow horizon photography; and spare equipment for TV coverage of the ATM EVA—were removed to accommodate the additional 180 kg (400 lbs) of equipment. The crew would also carry an extra medical kit to replace medicines spoiled by high temperatures in Skylab 1. Lightning struck the Skylab 2 mobile service structure at 5:24 pm EDT May 24, but retests of the vehicle indicated no damage. At a May 24 press conference Program Director Schneider said there would be limited activity by the crew to deploy the partially opened solar panel. “We’re not too optimistic that we’ll be able to do too much, although we will give Capt. Conrad the option to try it if it looks like a reasonable job.” NASA was “very confident that ... we will be able to deploy a [thermal] shield, we will get the spacecraft temperatures back under control, and we will have a good 28-day mission.” May 25:	Skylab 2 (SL-2) was launched from ICSC Launch Complex 39, Pad B, on a two-stage Saturn IB launch vehicle into heavy dark clouds on time at 9:00 am edt. As Astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz headed toward the Skylab 1 Workshop they were to attempt to repair in orbit and man for 28 days, Commander Conrad told Mission Control, “We fix anything.” The csm/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with 224-km (139.2-mi) apogee and 150-km (93.2-mi) perigee 9 min 56 sec after launch. Six minutes later the csm separated. The S—IVB stage deorbit maneuver was performed at 2:23 pm edt and the stage splashed into the Pacific Ocean. The CSM rendezvoused with the Workshop at 4:30 pm EDT over the Guam tracking station on the fifth orbit. During 15 min of TV coverage the CSM flew around the Workshop, within 1.5 m (5 ft) of it. The astronauts confirmed that the SAS Wing 2 was missing and that the SAS Wing 1, deployed only 15°, was restrained by a piece of the micrometeoroid shield wrapped around the SAS beam fairing. Portions of the gold foil laminated to the Workshop skin for thermal protection had been torn and heat and uv radiation from the sun had scorched the skin. The astronauts soft-docked the CSM with the Workshop, using only three capture latches; ate dinner; and undocked to attempt to deploy the jammed solar panel. Weitz stood in the open hatch of the CSM with Kerwin holding his knees to keep him from drifting into space. He tried to free the solar panel with a shepherd’s crook and a pole with pruning shears attached without success. Conrad told Mission Control that the panel appeared to be “hooked in there like it’s nailed on.” The repair attempt was ended at 8:12 pm edt. The crew made four unsuccessful attempts to redock with the Workshop. Working in bulky spacesuits and gloves, the astronauts evacuated the air from the Apollo cabin and hooked up an electric cable to override a suspected short in the docking probe. “Yea. We got a hard dock out of it [a docking using all 12 sealing latches to seal the two spacecraft together],” Conrad said at 11:50 pm edt. The crew found one of the capture latches had stuck in the retracted position, but troubleshooting procedures recommended by Mission Control restored the latch. May 26-June 21:	The Skylab 2 crew entered the multiple docking adapter on the Skylab Workshop at 12:45 pm edt May 26 and performed activation and Workshop preentry tasks. A chemical detection device inserted into the passage indicated no lethal gas was present. At 2:30 pm edt Astronaut Weitz entered the Workshop wearing a gas mask, gloves, and soft shoes to protect him from the heat. Weitz told ground control, “The ows appears to be in good shape. It feels a little bit warm as you might expect, like 90 to 100 degrees [F; 305 to 310 K] in the desert. I felt heat radiating from everywhere but I never felt uncomfortable. And nothing I touched felt hot to me. It’s a dry heat.” Kerwin and Conrad followed Weitz. After a quick inspection, the crew closed the hatch. At 4:30 pm edt the crew began to deploy the solar parasol—a mylar shade folded against a telescopic pole—through the solar airlock. As they readied the parasol, the astronauts looked out of the windows and identified landmarks across the U.S. Weitz recognized Seattle, Wash., and Conrad spotted both launch pads used for the Skylab launches at Conrad and Weitz popped open the shiny aluminum and orange canopy at 8:30 pm edt May 26 (Mission Day 2) while Kerwin took TV photos from the attached Apollo cm. Significant external temperature decreases were noted almost immediately after deployment. Internal temperatures decreased more slowly. The Workshop was headed back to solar inertial attitude. By May 27 the Workshop temperature had dropped to 309 K (97°F). The crew activated systems and experiments while their back-and-forth excursions through the Workshop were televised to the earth. The Washington Post later said they resembled “skin divers snorkeling through a cave in the Caribbean” or a scene from the film “2001” with astronauts “in orange flight suits and white T-shirts swimming like fish through the big workshop, floating backwards and tumbling like gymnasts.” On May 28 the astronauts began the first medical tests, taking and processing blood samples and checking the conditions of their circulatory and metabolic systems. Checkout and preparation of the (atm) was begun. During a seven-minute televised space-to-ground news conference beginning at 1:09 pm edt, Conrad said the crew had adapted rapidly. “None of us has had any motion sickness. ... It seems to be like the simulator except with the absence of gravity.” Kerwin concluded that the brain and eyes must override the body’s vestibule system in the inner ear. “You say to your brain, ‘Brain, I want that way to be up.’ And your brain says, ‘OK, then that way is up.’ . . . Your brain will follow you.” Conrad agreed, “We’re in good shape for 28 days.” Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said later in the mission that it was “rather amazing” that the crew had shown no signs of the expected motion sickness. Data received were preliminary, but prelaunch exercises in a whirling chair might have helped avoid nausea. Temperatures continued to drop slowly, reaching 304 K (88°F). At 8:50 pm edt a 69-sec trim burn put the Workshop into a repeating ground track about 96 km (60 mi) west of normal, to acquire earth resources data. On May 29 checkout of the ATM was completed and four passes were made. Kerwin trained an array of telescopes to observe x-ray emissions and examine the structure of the sun’s atmosphere. He photographed three regions of the sun considered active by solar physicists and made detailed observations of the full solar disk and the corona. Conrad and Weitz prepared the earth-oriented cameras for earth resources experiment package (erep) passes. Two biomedical runs were made. During a private conversation with jsc, Conrad reported that the internal temperature had stabilized near 304 K (88°F) and that, while this would be tolerable for the rest of the mission, he did not think the crew could carry out the full protocol on the bicycle ergometer (exercise device). On May 30 the solar telescopes were aimed at the active regions of the sun while scientists on the earth received excellent TV photos of the solar corona and the solar disk in the uv spectrum. The first erep photo pass was made over a 3200-km (2000-mi) strip from Oregon to the Gulf of Mexico. Good pictures were obtained of the Great Salt Lake, gypsum beds in New Mexico, and the soil salinity of the Rio Grande Valley, as well as microwave measurements of the Gulf of Mexico. After the erep pass, the batteries—at a reduced level of 45% to 50% capacity—tripped off line and ceased to produce electricity. They had been designed to trip off at 20% capacity. One battery also lost the regulator that allowed the solar panel to recharge it, decreasing the total Workshop power by 6%, or 250 w, leaving 4200 w. The Workshop required 3600 w for maintenance, leaving only 600 w for experiments. The second erep pass was canceled for a power evaluation. Sixteen batteries were brought back on line but two remained off line and were useless. Heat, fans, and lights were powered down. Workshop power continued reduced May 31 and erep experiments were canceled. The crew continued medical experiments, each taking a turn in a rotating chair to provide data on motion sickness and maintaining balance in zero g. Weitz repaired the mirror system on the uv stellar photography experiment. Temperatures had dropped to 301 K (82°F). The Skylab astronauts took their first day off June 1 (Mission Day 8) and their first shower in space. On a 15-min color telecast they performed housekeeping chores and—to the music from the film “2001”— did handstands, somersaults, and cartwheels in the zero-g atmosphere. Conrad led the crew in a run around the watertanks. Centrifugal force overcame weightlessness, so the men could keep their feet on the track. On the ground Skylab officials announced the decision to make a second attempt to free the jammed solar panel, while engineers and the backup astronauts, led by Russell L. Schweickart, tested EVA procedures. On June 2, Conrad and Weitz made a 10-min erep photo pass from California to Central Mexico to gather data on earthquakes, volcanoes, pollution sources, mineral resources, and land-use patterns. On the ground Schweickart successfully tested three ways of freeing the jammed solar panel using a bolt cutter, a prying rod, and a surgeon’s bone saw. The astronauts completed the third erep pass over North America and the fifth ATM pass on June 3. The nuclear emulsion experiment, the transuranic cosmic ray detector, and the neutron analysis detector were deployed. Astronaut Conrad set a new world record for time in space at 1:17 am EDT, surpassing the 715-hr 5-min mark set by Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr. The first ball game in space was held in the Workshop. Conrad said a ball thrown in weightlessness “goes straight as an arrow.” The fourth erep pass was made June 4, as well as five hours of atm solar viewing. Dr. John Zeiglschmid, Skylab Flight Surgeon, told a JSC press briefing that the physical condition of the Skylab crew was excellent. They were consuming the proper amount of food and getting adequate rest. Conrad and Kerwin had lost only 0.5 kg (1 lb) ; Weitz had lost 1.8 kg (4 lbs). Top Skylab officials at msfc agreed that solar wing deployment techniques developed by Astronaut Schweickart were feasible, without unusual safety hazards. On June 6 preparations were made for the next day’s EVA. Conrad said, “I guess we have a fifty-fifty chance of pulling it off.” The 16 Workshop batteries were producing 4200 w—only 600 w more than the minimum necessary for the astronauts’ survival. One battery was down to half charge and others were believed to have been damaged by the heat. The astronauts photographed hurricane Ava during an erep pass, made an atm pass, and photographed uv spectra of stars. Conrad and Kerwin opened the am eva hatch at 11:23 am edt June 7 and extended their umbilicals and a rigged-up 7.6-m (25-ft) pole fitted with cutters for releasing the jammed solar wing, as Weitz took TV photos from the Skylab and the csm. Outsid Kerwin had difficulty keeping a firm footing, with only makeshift andholds and foot restraints, as he secured the end of the pole to antenna mount. His heart rate rose to 150 beats per minute and he \s burning energy at 2000 to 2500 BTUs an hour. Finally he extended the pole to the beam holding the wing and—with Conrad repeatedly telling him to “take it easy” and “cool it”—managed after several tries to fit the cutters around the small bolt that restrained the wing. Conrad moved hand over hand along the pole to the wing. Tangling of the 10.6- and 18.3-m (35- and 60-ft) flexible umbilicals linking the astronauts to spacecraft life support systems complicated their movements. Kerwin pulled a lanyard to snap the cutters and sever the bolt and then extended the wing using a rope attached to the upper surface. Conrad pulled a rope to break a frozen actuator. Two of the sections making up the wing were 40% deployed and the other about 30%. The two astronauts also changed a film magazine in a telescope camera and latched open a balky door on an x-ray telescope before reentering the Workshop and closing the am eva hatch at 2:53 pm edt, concluding 3 hrs 30 min successful eva. The Workshop was pitched up to expose the panels to more direct sunlight and unfreeze the hydraulic system that deployed them. After a few hours one section was 90% deployed, another 40%, and the third 29%. By the next day the sections were fully deployed. Additional electric power of 3000 w was obtained and all eight batteries supplied by the solar panels were charged and in good working order—paving the way for a full Skylab mission. From Mission Control Schweickart said, “Everybody’s shaking hands down here and we just wish we could reach up and shake yours.” President Nixon sent a message: “On behalf of the American people I congratulate and commend you and your crew on your successful effort to repair the world’s first true space station. In the two weeks since you left earth, you have more than fulfilled the prophecy of your parting words, ‘We can fix anything.’ All of us now have new courage that man can work in space to control his environment, improve his circumstances and exert his will even as he does on earth.” On June 12 the ninth erep pass was made. Weitz said he could see pollution flowing into Lake Erie and he couldn’t find Washington, D.C., because of haze. Conrad melted an aluminum alloy to study the behavior of molten metal in weightlessness and used an electron beam for welding inside a small vacuum chamber. On June 13 Dr. Hawkins told a JSC medical review that Kerwin and Weitz were no longer able to perform at preflight levels on the bicycle ergometer, indicating their cardiovascular systems had been weakened by weightlessness. The condition was not at dangerous levels and was not interfering with their normal day-to-day performance. Weitz photographed a massive explosion on the sun with the atm solar telescopes June 15. The flare had erupted from the center of the sun’s side facing the earth and covered an area 40 200 km (25 000 mi) wide. Conrad checked out the Apollo CSM for the return trip to earth, while Kerwin initiated the growth of bacteria in a culture medium and photographed its behavior in the space environment. On June 17 a trim burn corrected a cross-track error and positioned the vehicle for the start of the Skylab 3 mission. President Nixon telephoned the astronauts from Key Biscayne, Fla.: “I guess the way I could summarize this project is that it proves that man still matters. With all the technical machines . . . that you had to work with, it proved that when there were difficulties the ingenuity of men in space was what really mattered, and you have made us all very proud with the way you handled some difficult problems in this project.” The President invited the three Skylab astronauts to visit him at San Clemente, Calif., after splashdown. At 3:22 am edt June 18 (MD—25) astronauts Conrad, Kerwin, and Weitz surpassed the previous space endurance record held by the Soyuz 11 cosmonauts (launched June 6, 1971). Conrad asked that a message be relayed to Soviet cosmonauts giving “our respects at this point in our flight to them and their comrades. Wish them good luck from us in the future.” EVA-2 began at 6:53 am edt June 19. Conrad and Weitz moved through space to retrieve and replace the atm film cassettes while Kerwin photographed the eva for TV from inside the Workshop. Conrad also freed a stuck relay by striking it with a hammer. One of two dead batteries began charging immediately. From the ground Schweickart said, “It worked. Thank you very much, gentlemen. You’ve done it again.” The cameras for the white light coronagraph and x-ray spectroheliographic experiments were replaced by the astronauts to permit photography during the unmanned period between Skylab 2 and 3. eva operations ended at 8:29 am edt, after 1 hr 36 min. During a June 20 press conference from space Kerwin said the astronauts’ physical condition was “a pleasant big surprise. I’m tremendously encouraged about the future of long-duration flight.” June 22:	The astronauts undocked the csm from the Skylab Workshop at 4:55 am edt on Mission Day 29. As the csm pulled away and circled the Workshop, TV and photographic coverage were obtained by the crew, cm separation from the sm at 5:40 am edt was followed by initial service propulsion system firing at 6:05 am edt and a final deorbit maneuver at 9:11 am edt. The cm splashed down at 9:50 am edt 1340 km (830 mi) southwest of San Diego. A recovery helicopter dropped swimmers who installed a flotation collar and a sea anchor. The recovery ship Ticonderoga was maneuvered beside the CM and a crane lifted it aboard with the astronauts inside. Medical examinations on board the recovery ship found some dizziness and ill effects from weightlessness. The crew would travel by ship to San Diego and by air to Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., June 24. The Skylab 1-2 mission achieved its primary objectives of establishing the Skylab Orbital Assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data on the crew for use in extending the duration of manned space flight, and performing inflight experiments. It contributed significantly toward program objectives of determining man’s ability to live and work in space for extended periods, extending the science of solar astronomy beyond the limits of earth-based observations, and developing improved techniques for surveying earth resources from space. Despite mission anomalies, 80% of the solar data planned was obtained; 12 of the 15 earth resources data runs were accomplished; all 16 medical experiments were conducted as required and a time history of man’s adaptations to zero-g environment was obtained for the first time; and data were taken on all 43 experiments scheduled for Skylab 2 except those precluded by the use of the solar parasol and weight and power limitations. The performance of the flight crew was good and the mission was judged officially on July 14 to be a success. Major records set to date included the longest-duration manned flight, 28 days 50 min; the longest total time in space for one man, 49 days for Conrad (veteran of Gemini 5 and 11 and Apollo 12 missions) ; the longest inflight EVA, 3 hrs 30 min by Conrad and Kerwin June 7; and the longest distance in orbit for a manned flight, 18 531 559 km (11514 967 mi). Skylab 1-2 was the first U.S. manned orbital workshop. Skylab 3 was scheduled to be launched in August and Skylab 4 in November. The Workshop would be operated unmanned between manned missions. The Skylab program was directed by NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, msfc developed and integrated the major program components including the ows, AM, MDA, atm, payload shroud, and most experiments and was responsible for the Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles. KSc managed launch operations. JSC was responsible for flight operations, recovery, crew selection and training, and development of the modified CSM and the spacecraft launch adapter. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the overall direction of the Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition. (NASA prog off; NASA pao press briefing transcripts, 5/14/73-6/20/73; NASA Mission Rpt MR-3; PD, 6/25/73, 787, 827; NYT, 5/17/73-6/22/73; W Post, 5/16/73-6/22/73; W Star & News, 5/23/73-6/22/73; B Sun, 5/15/73-6/12/73; M Her, 5/14/73, 19A; H Post, 6/7/73) May 14:	Unsolicited cash contributions to NASA from persons in the U.S. and foreign countries since 1959 would be used to finance the 19 student scientific experiments on Skylab [see Jan. 26], NASA announced. The $5548 fund included individual gifts ranging from $1500 to the $0.35 contribution of an eight-year-old boy sent in 1970 because he had heard that NASA “didn’t have enough money.” A retired Navy chief petty officer had sent one day’s pay after each manned flight in memory of his son who had been killed in the Korean war. A naturalized citizen from Eastern Europe had sent $100 in 1964 because he wished to be a part of the space program that would mean the survival of a free U.S. (nasa Release 73—98)
Deputy Secretary of Defense William P. Clements, Jr., announced that dod would halt production of F—111 fighter-bomber aircraft when the current production run ended late in 1974 with the 543rd F-lll. In 1962 dod had planned to build 1726 F-llls for $3.4 million each, United Press said; the aircraft would wind up costing $14.6 million each, a cost overrun of 430%. (upi, W Post, 6/7/73, C8)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wis.), Chairman of the Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Development, Space, Science, Veterans, proposed to the Senate a counterbudget that would cut $4 billion from the President’s $268.7-billion FY 1974 U.S. budget request. The counterbudget would reduce the $3.1-billion space budget by $500 million. “The prime candidate for cutting is the space shuttle, which this year will cost us $400 million. ... I think Skylab, where spending of $315 million is scheduled, could be stretched out and postponed. Additional savings could be made in a much more vigorous effort to substitute unmanned for manned space efforts. Scientists tell us that unmanned flights can be as productive as manned flights at roughly half the cost.” (CR, 2/6/73, S2108-10)
m/g John B. Hudson (usaf), Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems of Air Force Systems Command, became a lieutenant general and afsc Vice Commander. He succeeded l/g Edmund F. O’Connor, who became Vice Commander, AF Logistics Command, (afsc Newsreview 10/73, 1) October 1—6:	National Space Week was observed by 32 states to honor Nasa’s 15th anniversary [see Oct. 1]. The governors of the states had responded to a request by members of the Federation of Americans Supporting Science and Technology (fasst). Illinois Gov. Daniel Walker said: “The declared policy of the United States, that ‘activities of space should be devoted to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind,’ has established our country as the scientific and technological leader in space. NASA has coordinated the efforts of scientists and engineers in every field, the aerospace industry and educational institutions.” (fasst Release, 10/30/73) October 1—18:	A 47-member NASA delegation led by Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Director Glynn S. Lunney met with Soviet counterparts in Moscow for two weeks of discussions of technical problems of the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. mission scheduled for July 1975. Discussions culminated in an Oct. 18 midterm review of the project by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, and Academician Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of the Intercosmos Council of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Dr. Low had arrived in Moscow Oct. 14; his stay included visits to the Institute of Geochemistry, the Institute of Space Research, the Cosmonaut Training Center, and the Space Flight Control Center. In an Oct. 18 communique Dr. Low and Academician Petrov confirmed their satisfaction with the astp project status. All major milestones were being met on schedule and, Dr. Low said, progress made indicated that the scheduled launch date could be met. Soyuz orbital and Apollo docking module drawings had been exchanged and agreement had been reached that U.S. specialists would participate in preflight final checkout of flight equipment at the Soviet launch site. Specialists would be exchanged to fit-check compatible equipment at U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. Academician Petrov told the press that U.S. specialists would be permitted at the Soviet launch site “up to the very minute of launching.” During the visit U.S. officials learned the deaths of three cosmonauts on Soyuz 11 June 30, 1971, were caused by accidental triggering open of an exhaust valve rather than by a hatch leak. The valve tripped open just after the reentry capsule separated from the larger orbiting module in a maneuver including firing of 12 explosive bolts. At least two crew members tried to close the valve but were unable to move fast enough. Unconsciousness from rapid decompression came in less than 10 sec; ground tests showed it would take 27 sec to close the valve by hand. U.S. officials said they were satisfied that subsequent modifications to the valve and crank mechanisms—tested on two unmanned flights, Cosmos 496 and 573, and on the manned Sept. 27-29 Soyuz 12 mission —were sufficient to prevent reoccurrence of the accident. (NASA Releases 73-199, 73-224; Smith, NYT, 10/19/73; jsc, astp Briefing transcript, 11/19/73; O’Toole, W Post, 10/29/73, Al; Av Wk, 11/5/73, 20-21) October 2:	NASA held three Skylab press briefings at Johnson Space Center. At a postflight crew press briefing, Skylab 3 Astronaut Alan L. Bean —who had splashed down Sept. 25, after a 59-day mission working in the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) with crew members Dr. Owen K. Garriott and Jack R. Lousma—said that the crew’s health had been “good the whole time.” Sufficient exercise, meals on time, and plenty of sleep had accounted f or their happiness and well-being. Having a scientist-astronaut aboard had created a “greater variety of interchange around the dinner table,” making “a better mission for everybody.” The mission would have been “50% less productive if Owen had not been there. He added a great amount to it . . . because his point of view is, just different.” Garriott said that a longer mission would necessitate “a somewhat less strenuous program,” but he could have spent eight hours a day at the wardroom window with a camera in each hand and a good supply of film “and never have any tendency to become bored.” Lousma said he still felt “a little less energetic” than before the mission, but within two weeks “I’ll be back to the same condition.” Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said that the crew was “in very good shape” but still had dizziness with specific head movements. Strength of the flexor and extensor muscles had decreased 20%. The astronauts’ weights were steadily climbing toward their preflight weights. Early blood tests had shown the red cell mass was down an average of 12% for all three crew members. The blood plasma was also down 15% to 20%. In an overview of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission, Skylab Program Office Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht said that the spacecraft (Command and Service Module 118) and crew members Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue were being readied for Nov. 11 launch. Final decision on the launch date would be made after further evaluation of the mission. In preparation, 140 kg (300 lbs) of operational equipment had been deleted from stowage. It had been replaced with another 150 kg (300 lbs) of operational equipment, 60 kg (130 lbs) for Skylab experiments, and 70 kg (150 lbs) of special equipment for Comet Kohoutek observations. After Oct. 8—10 flight readiness tests, only servicing, stowage, pyrotechnic installations, countdown demonstrations, and launch would remain. CSM—119, the rescue vehicle, was being prepared and would be available for a Jan. 6 launch if needed. Alfred A. Bishop, Manager of the jsc Missions Office, said that, after the first two weeks of acclimation, the Skylab 4 crew would perform 28 man-hours of experiments each day, an increase from the 19 to 221/j man-hours on Skylab 3. The increase would provide an additional 200 experiment man-hours. The crew would observe Comet Kohoutek, perform 12 experiments using the Apollo Telescope Mount, observe Mercury crossing the sun Nov. 10, observe a solar eclipse, and perform 10 to 14 new earth resources experiment package passes. (Transcripts)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of William E. Kriegsman to be a Commissioner of the Atomic Energy Commission succeeding Dr. James R. Schlesinger, who had become Director of the Central Intelligence Agency. The nomination was confirmed May 31. Kriegsman was manager of the Washington, D.C., office of Arthur D. Little, Inc., and a former White House staff assistant in environment, space, nuclear energy, and oceanography. (PD, 4/16/73, 368, 378; CR, 5/31/73, D603)
President Nixon announced his intention to nominate John R. Quarles, Jr., as Deputy Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency succeeding Robert W. Fri, whose resignation he accepted. The President also designated Quarles, Acting epa Deputy Administrator, as Acting Administrator pending the confirmation and appointment of Russell E. Train as Administrator. Quarles’ nomination was submitted to the Senate Sept. 5 and confirmed Sept. 14. (PD, 8/20/73, 982; 9/10/73, 1070; epa pio) August 16:	NASA announced tentative plans to observe the Comet Kohoutek during the Skylab 4 mission, planned for Nov. 9 launch to join the Sky-lab Orbital Workshop. The Apollo Telescope Mount instruments provided a broad capability for comet observations over a range of spectral .bands. Observations would begin in mid-November and continue until shortly before mission completion, scheduled for Jan. 4, 1974. The tentative plans would be reviewed after the completion of the Skylab 3 mission (launched July 28). If technical problems necessitated an earlier launch to minimize the length of unmanned operations, it would not be possible to observe the comet. A possible 10-day delay of the launch beyond Nov. 10 would also be considered, to permit observation of the comet until Jan. 14. NASA also deleted the requirement to maintain the capability to launch the backup Workshop, which originally was to have been maintained to Sept. 30. (nasa Release 73-162)
NASA test pilot John A. Manke successfully completed the second glide flight of the X-24B lifting body from Flight Research Center. The X-24B, launched from a B-52 aircraft at an altitude of 14 000 m (45 000 ft), completed all objectives: flying in transonic configuration, verifying longitudinal trim curve, obtaining stability and control data, making a pressure survey of the fin and rudder end, and studying landing gear dynamics. Part of the flight was flown with dampers off. All planned maneuvers were completed, (nasa prog off)
Wallops Station announced contract awards: $349 291 to RCA for a laser tracking system, $154 749 to Dynalectron Corp. for photographic laboratory services, $106 714 to Metric Systems Corp. for a real-time meteorological data-processing system, and $205 000 to the Joseph S. Floyd Corp. for rehabilitation of a sounding rocket facility. (WS Release 73-1)
Discovery by use of nasa’s Oao 3 (Copernicus) Orbiting Astronomical Observatory that the density of the universe was much lower than expected was announced on the first anniversary of the satellite’s launch. Princeton Univ. scientists Dr. John B. Rogerson and Dr. Donald G. York reported they had used Oao 3’s telescope to determine the relative abundance of deuterium (a heavy form of hydrogen) in interstellar gas to be one deuterium atom for every 100 000 atoms of gas. Knowing what fraction of hydrogen became deuterium and accepting the theory that deuterium had been created moments after the “big bang” believed to have started the expansion of the universe, the scientists had calculated the amount of matter created and the average density of the current universe. The extremely low density indicated that there was not a relatively large amount of invisible mass in the universe. (NYT, 8/21/ 73, 13; A&A 1972)
The Senate, by a vote of 90 to 5, passed H.R. 7528, $3.046-billion FY 1974 NASA authorization bill [see May 30], after rejecting an amendment proposed by Sen. J. William Fulbright (D-Ark.) that would have reduced the authorization by 4% ($122 million). (CR, 6/19/73, S11476— 503)
New York Federal Court Judge Edward Wienfeld dismissed the $2-million libel suit brought by Dr. W. Ross Adey, Univ. of California at Los Angeles brain research specialist, against New York-based animal welfare organization United Action for Animals [see Jan. 22]. The organization’s bulletin had criticized Dr. Adey’s treatment of Bonny, the instrumented monkey used to measure life functions under weightlessness during the NASA-Air Force Biosatellite 3 experiment (launched June 28, 1969). Judge Wienfeld said that, as a public official, Dr. Adey “must accept harsh criticism, ofttimes unfair and unjustified.” (upi, W Post, 6/27/73, A10) June 26:	Johnson Space Center’s selection of a United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. TF33—P—‘7 engine for use on the space shuttle orbiter in atmospheric flight was announced by NASA. The engine was similar to those used on the Air Force C-141 Starlifter transport aircraft. The USAF would secure 25 engines for NASA use during horizontal flight-testing of the orbiter and for ferry flight when the shuttle was operational, (nasa Release 73-121)
The Air Force announced award of a $2 056 889 cost contract to Utah State Univ. to study disturbed and undisturbed infrared atmosphere. Rocketborne instruments .would measure optical and infrared emissions, both natural and those stimulated by atmospheric dosing from a rocket-borne electron source, (dod Release 113-73) March 5—8:	nasa’s Fourth Annual Lunar Science Conference, at Johnson Space Center, was attended by more than 750 scientists from the U.S. and 12 foreign countries. Visitors included scientists from the U.S.S.R. who presented papers on Apollo lunar samples received from the U.S. At the opening session Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator said, “I can see at least a decade of fruitful analysis, synthesis, and integration of the information locked up in the material brought back and still coming back from the scientific stations left on the moon” in the Apollo program. Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg, California Institute of Technology scientist, described “lunar cataclysm.” Lunar dust brought back by Apollo astronauts had been estimated to be as old as 4.5 billion yrs. But most lunar rocks were less than 4 billion yrs old and none were younger than 3 billion yrs. The best explanation was that 3.9 billion yrs ago the moon was battered and bombarded on an unprecedented scale, creating so much heat that old rocks were destroyed and a new generation of rocks was created. Since then the moon might have experienced minor volcanic eruptions but nothing like that period of cataclysm. Some scientists believed the moon had cooled and gone into a period of hibernation. Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer of the State Univ. of New York said even the orange soil found by Apollo 17 astronauts had turned out to be 3.71 billion yrs old, an age disappointing to scientists who had believed the moon had been formed by more recent volcanic activity. Dr. Keith A. Howard, U.S. Geological Survey geologist, compared the lunar landslide found near the Apollo 17 landing site to a large, high-velocity avalanche on earth. Dr. Howard suggested that gas within the lunar soil had been released during the slide. Apollo 17 samples would be searched for evidence of fluids. One Apollo 17 instrument placed on the lunar surface had made an atom-by-atom search for evidence of lunar atmosphere. Although the moon had no atmosphere, traces of argon, neon, and helium had been found. Dr. John H. Hoffman, associate professor of physics at the Univ. of Texas, said only argon appeared to have been generated from the moon’s interior. Neon and helium apparently had been deposited by the solar wind. Conference attendees unanimously voted to congratulate NASA on completion of the Apollo program by sending a letter to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator: The conception, design, and implementation of lunar exploration represented “an extraordinary human and technological achievement.” To explore another planet, it had been necessary for man “to achieve many successive levels of technological capability and to surpass formidable barriers. This was accomplished brilliantly by the dedicated engineers and astronauts of NASA in conjunction with skilled management. On this technical base a new branch of science has been built.” (Transcript; Goddard News, 3/73, 2; jsc Roundup, 3/16/73, 1; NASA Activities, 4/15/73, 67) March 5-9:	More than 1000 administrators, congressmen, and government, industry, and university scientists attended the Erts 1 Earth Resources and Technology Satellite Symposium sponsored by Goddard Space Flight Center in New Carrollton, Md. Two hundred papers presented results from Erts 1 (launched July 23, 1972) experiments in agriculture and forestry, mineral resources and geology, environmental surveys, land-use mapping, and marine surveys. Dr. Marian Baumgardner, scientist at the Purdue Univ. Laboratory for the Applications of Remote Sensing, said results from Erts 1 study of semi-arid regions suggested that the satellite could identify and map vegetative, species, and management differences in range lands; gross soil patterns and differences related to agricultural and land-use-management problems and practices; areas of surface water and changes related to ground water recharge; crop damage by hail and windstorms; and areas of bare soil and related problems of erosion and conservation. Dr. William A. Fischer, U.S. Geological Survey scientist, said data from an Erts 1 study of Alaska had reinforced recent plate tectonic theories of a continuing mobility in the earth’s crust. The satellite had mapped fractures previously unknown or not put together as continuous structures in the earth’s crust. The fractures indicated “there has been a fundamental movement, extending deep down into the crust.” Dr. John Miller of the Univ. of Alaska said seismic data and Erts 1 identification of previously unknown fractures “has been an important input to the design of a bridge structure across the Yukon River . . . and possibly the pipeline.” (Transcript)
A decision by de Havilland Aircraft of Canada Ltd. to build the world’s first short takeoff and landing (stol) passenger transport aircraft was reported by the Washington Post. The firm would shortly begin work on two prototypes of 48-passenger, turboprop DHC—7 aircraft to be test-flown within two years. The aircraft would be certifiable by 1975. The Canadian government had approved $80 million for development of the DHC—7, designed for routes under 800 km (500 mi). The aircraft would operate from 600-m (2000-ft) runways with minimal noise and pollution. (Botwright, W Post, 1/21/73, L2) January 22:	Former President Lyndon B. Johnson died of heart attack in Austin, Tex., at the age of 64. During his senatorial career preceding his election to the Vice Presidency in 1961, Johnson had served in 1957 as Chairman of the Prepardeness Investigating Subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Armed Services, where he had instituted an inquiry into the status of U.S. satellite and missile programs. Hearings led to establishment Feb. 6, 1958, of the Senate Special Committee on Space and Astronautics with Johnson as Chairman. The Special Committee prepared the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 establishing NASA (effective Oct. 1, 1958). Before passage of the Space Act July 29, 1958, the Senate created the permanent Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences July 24. Johnson became first chairman—the position he held until 1961. Johnson was Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council 1961—1963 and was instrumental in persuading President John F. Kennedy to select attainment of a manned lunar landing within the decade as a national goal. Johnson had become 36th U.S. President on assassination of President Kennedy in November 1963 and had seen the first successful manned circumlunar flight, made by Apollo 8 Dec. 21—27, 1968, before he left office in January 1969. (W Post, 1/23/73, Al; CR, 1/29/73, S1467)
Rep. Kenneth J. Gray (D—111.) introduced H.R. 4225 for himself and Rep. Thomas P. O’Neill, Jr. (D-Mass.), Rep. John J. McFall (D-Calif.), and Rep. Charles M. Price (D—111.) Section 3 of the bill would repeal section of P.L. 92-520 that had changed the name of Jet Propulsion Laboratory to H. Allen Smith Jet Propulsion Laboratory. (CR, 2/8/73, H932; Sen Com on Public Works)
Skylab 3 scientist-astronaut Dr. Owen K. Garriott, Jr., received an honorary Doctor of Science degree from Phillips Univ. during Homecoming Day ceremonies in his home town of Enid, Okla. (Oklahoma Journal, 11/15/73) November 16—February 8, 1974:	The Skylab 4 Apollo spacecraft carrying a three-man crew was launched into near-earth orbit and rendezvoused and docked with the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) for the third and final manned mission in the Skylab program. Despite persistent problems with the spacecraft’s onboard control moment gyroscopes, the crew proceeded successfully, making four space walks and setting new manned flight records. The astronauts collected significant data in medical experiments, astronomy (including 121 observations of Comet Kohoutek), and earth resources surveys for 84 days before undocking for a safe return to earth Feb. 8, 1974. The CSM/S-IVB combination was placed in a phasing orbit with a 222.3-km (138.1-mi) apogee and 148.2-km (92.1-mi) perigee 9 min 45 sec after launch. Eight minutes later the CSM separated from the stage. The S-IVB/iU deorbit maneuver was commanded on the third orbit and the stage impacted in the Pacific Ocean at 3:00 pm EST. After five rocket maneuvers the CSM rendezvoused with the Orbital Workshop during the fifth orbit. Docking was achieved at 5:02 pm EST after two unsuccessful attempts. Carr radioed down to Mission Control, “Great to be home.” During rendezvous and docking Pogue suffered from motion sickness and vomited. Later, in a conversation unintentionally taped by the astronauts and transmitted to the ground the astronauts decided not to report the incident to ground controllers. Capsule communicator Alan B.	Shepard later told the crew, “We think you made a fairly serious error in judgment” in the attempt to cover up Pogue’s condition. Carr agreed, “It was a dumb decision.” Pogue recovered by late evening, Carr suffered only minor motion sickness problems, and Gibson remained in good health. Carr, Gibson, and Pogue entered the multiple docking adapter at 9:32 am est Nov. 17 (Mission Day 2) and began Workshop activation. They found a welcoming note on the teleprinter: “Jerry, Ed and Bill, welcome aboard the space station Skylab. Hope you enjoy your stay. We’re looking forward to several months of interesting and productive work. Signed, Flight Control.” In addition they found three dummies dressed in tan flight suits left by Skylab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Dr. Owen K. Garriott, and Jack R. Lousma. Pogue replenished the fluid in the Workshop’s primary cooling system, which had developed a leak during the Skylab 3 mission [see July 28—Sept 25]. The 5l^-hr task required Pogue to punch a hole into the plumbing lines to inject the fluid. Spacecraft activation was completed Nov. 21. November 22—February 4:	The first extravehicular activity (EVA1) began at 12:44 pm est Nov. 22. Pogue and Gibson moved through space to install film cassettes in the Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) cameras, deploy experimental hardware, and repair the control system for an earth-scanning antenna that had jammed during the Skylab 3 mission. Gibson, anchored in a portable foot restraint on the bottom of the spacecraft, held onto Pogue while Pogue rewired the instrument, bypassing a short circuit and restoring the antenna to 80% of its original capacity. Gibson and Pogue reentered the Workshop and began pressurization at 6:19 pm EST. The 6-hr 35-min eva surpassed the 6-hr 31-min record set Aug. 6 by Skylab 3 Astronauts Garriott and Lousma. At 3:45 am est Nov. 23 one of three moment gyros which controlled the spacecraft overheated and was ordered shut down by Flight Controller Philip C. Shaffer. Shaffer told the press at Johnson Space Center that a near-normal mission could still be flown but it would take more time and fuel to make maneuvers. Pogue began extensive photographic study of Comet Kohoutek. By the end of the mission Comet Kohoutek had been observed and recorded 121 times as it approached, looped around, and retreated from the sun. The first full day of scientific research was scheduled for Nov. 27. While photographing a barium cloud—created by the launch of a Black Brant IVA sounding rocket from Poker Flats, Alaska—the spacecraft’s thruster attitude-control system used three times the amount of nitrogen gas fuel anticipated. The extra fuel use, in addition to poor weather conditions, forced postponement of the first earth resources experiment package (erep) pass while ground teams designed improved techniques for managing attitude control and fuel consumption. For the first time Carr pointed the space station’s six large solar telescopes at an unusually active region of the sun. The first erep pass was made Nov. 29 during a 23-min 8850-km (5500-mi) sweep from the southwestern U.S. to South America. In a Johnson Space Center press conference Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said that the ground team had concluded that the Nov. 28 problem had been caused by an incorrect input of initial conditions into the fuel management program. Restrictions on maneuvers were eliminated and, with proper fuel management, the mission could “continue essentially as planned.” On Dec. 1 the astronauts photographed a laser beam pointed at them by Goddard Space Flight Center scientists who were testing the lasers as a reference point for possible use in spacecraft navigation and communications. Earlier attempts to spot the flashing green laser had failed. In a Dec. 13 Mission Day 28 Review of the first third of the mission Program Director Schneider said the Skylab 4 crew had accomplished 84 hrs of atm solar viewing, 45 separate observations of Comet Kohoutek, 80 earth observation experiments, and 12 erep passes, although a significant portion of the data from 9 passes had been lost because of wrong camera filters. Schneider said that the crew was in good physical and mental health and that their performance had been outstanding, but flight planners had needed to adjust work schedules to the pace of the crew. A spectacular limb prominence on the sun, estimated to be the largest observed in 25 yrs, was recorded by the crew Dec. 18—19. Astronauts Carr and Pogue opened the hatch for EVA-2 at 11:55 am est Dec. 25, Christmas Day. Pogue mounted three special cameras to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek before it passed behind the sun. Photographs were taken of the comet’s tail and coma. Carr replaced film cassettes in the atm and repaired a jammed filter on an ATM camera. The constant movement of Carr and Pogue outside the spacecraft disrupted Gibson’s efforts to aim the laboratory cameras at Kohoutek and the thruster attitude control system used more fuel than planned. Carr and Pogue reentered the Workshop and closed the hatch at 6:56 pm EST after a 7-hr 1-min spacewalk that surpassed Gibson and Pogue’s Nov. 22 record. The Dec. 28 perihelion passage of Comet Kohoutek was marked with a live ground-to-air televised conference between Dr. Lubos Kohoutek, discoverer of the comet (1973F), and the Skylab 4 crew. Gibson said that the comet, as seen on the white-light coronagraph, was growing dramatically. The tail fanned out 20° from the central axis and could be seen back to a distance three times the diameter of the coma. Dr. Kohoutek congratulated the “first human beings studying a comet from outer space” and wished them a flawless splashdown in February. The crew began EVA—3 at 12:29 pm est Dec. 29. Carr and Gibson moved outside to photograph the sun and Comet Kohoutek as it began its trajectory away from the sun. Gibson said the comet had a spike and a tail. “That spike is very evident. It is not 180 degrees out from the tail, but more like 160 degrees. It is yellow and orange . . . just like a flame. It seems to be the same distance out as the tail, and there is a diffuse amount of material which goes out and joins up with the tail.” The astronauts recorded other astronomical phenomena, retrieved samples from the magnetospheric particle collector, and retrieved the comet observation camera. At 3:58 pm EST Carr and Gibson moved back inside the Workshop and closed the hatch after 3 hrs 29 min. On Jan. 10 the mission was given a go-ahead for a seven-day extension, with weekly reviews through the end of a tentative 84-day total mission. In the 56-day mission review at JSC, Skylab Program Director Schneider said the crew was “in good spirits and excellent physical condition and the spacecraft is in good shape to continue.” On Jan. 13 and 14 the Skylab 4 crew photographed a solar flare from beginning to end—the first opportunity for scientists to study the complete life cycle of a solar flare. At 10:10 pm edt Jan. 14 Carr, Gibson, and Pogue had been in orbit 59 days 11 hrs 9 min, surpassing the record manned flight time in space on a single flight set by Skylab 3 Astronauts Bean, Garriott, and Lousma during their July 28—Sept. 25 mission. Mission controllers struggled with gyroscope problems with increasing frequency throughout the mission. On Jan. 22 the second control moment gyro was in the distress position for six hours, causing Skylab officials to order the recovery force into port at San Diego three days earlier than planned, erep passes were limited and other maneuvers reduced to conserve fuel and reduce stress. Despite nearly three dozen gyro 2 stress periods, gyros 2 and 3 held up for the rest of the mission. At 1:46 pm edt Jan. 25 (MD—71) the crew passed the record cumulative time in space of 69 days 15 hrs 45 min set by Bean during the Skylab 3 mission. The hatch was opened for EVA-^1 at 11:19 am edt Feb. 3. Gibson and Carr measured the atmosphere surrounding the Skylab solar instruments to evaluate the light-scattering produced when photos of the sun were taken. The astronauts also photographed the sun with an x-ray sensitive camera, retrieved film from ATM cameras, and removed a plate and piece of rubberized material from the side of the spacecraft for a study of effects of nine-month exposure to the space environment. eva operations ended at 4:38 pm edt after 5 hrs 19 min. The csm undocked from the Workshop at 6:34 am edt Feb. 8 (MD-85) and made a fly-around inspection of the Workshop. One of two redundant CSM rocket thruster systems developed a leak during reentry preparation, forcing the astronauts' to reenter without a. backup thruster system. Just before sm jettison at 10:45 am edt, a procedural error caused circuit breakers to open, blocking the stabilization and control thrusters from firing. Carr quickly took manual control for reentry. The cm splashed down upside down at 11:17 am edt Feb. 8, 282 km (175 mi) southwest of San Diego and 5 km (3 mi) from the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans—ending 1214 revolutions of the earth. The capsule was righted by flotation bags while the carrier maneuvered alongside, and the CM was raised by a crane to the hangar deck about 40 min after landing. Immediate medical examinations found the crew had no apparent severe effects from their long exposure to weightlessness. They had grown one to two inches taller from stretched spinal columns in space and had lost some muscle mass, with body fluids readjusted for zero gravity; but they lost most of the slim-trim look on return to the earth. They were back to normal in a few days. The astronauts would remain aboard ship in San Diego for medical examinations and, after a brief dockside ceremony Feb. 10, would fly to Houston. The men would be allowed to rejoin their families but contact with the general public would be restricted for one week. The Skylab 4 mission achieved its primary objectives of performing Saturn Workshop operations, reactivating the Skylab orbital assembly in earth orbit, obtaining medical data for use in extending the duration of manned space flights, and performing inflight experiments. All 58 planned scientific and technical experiments in biomedicine, solar astronomy, solar physics, and engineering were accomplished, erep instruments were operated during 39 passes over the earth and the crew spent 338 hrs photographing the sun and Comet Kohoutek with atm instruments. Skylab 4 was officially adjudged a success Mar. 29, 1974. Major records set by the mission included the longest-duration manned space flight to date, 84 days 1 hr 16 min; the longest cumulative time in space for a man, 84 days each for Carr, Gibson, and Pogue; the longest orbital EVA, 7 hrs 1 min Dec. 25; the longest cumulative inflight eva time for one mission, 22 hrs 24 min; and the longest distance in orbit for a manned mission, 55.5 million km (34.5 million mi). Skylab 4 was the third and final mission to man the Skylab Orbital Workshop. Skylab 2 astronauts had worked aboard the laboratory 28 days, May 15-June 22, conducting experiments as well as making repairs to the orbital assembly to salvage the Skylab program. The Skylab 3 crew collected data in medical experiments, solar astronomy, and earth resources surveys for 59 days, July 28-Sept. 25. There were no plans to send another crew to inhabit the Workshop, which would be g-dormant—lacking in power, air conditioning, and atmosphere—by Feb. 9. Skylab 1 was expected to remain in orbit for nine years before reentering the earth’s atmosphere and burning up. (NASA prog off; JSC press briefing & communications transcripts, 11/16/73—2/2/74; JSC Skylab Off; jsc, NASA Facts; NASA Release 74-8; Wilford, NYT, 11/17/73, 1; upi, W Star-News, 12/16/73, FI; AP, B Sun, 12/27/73, A6; McElheny, NYT, 2/7-9/73) November 16:	President Nixon issued a statement following the launch of Skylab 4: “The Skylab flight that begins today marks the conclusion of the single most productive program in the history of man’s quest for knowledge about himself and his world. The crew of Skylab will mark in space the 16th anniversary of America’s first step toward the heavens. From the launch of a 30-pound [13.6-kg] space satellite, we progressed to the exploration of the Moon, which is helping to determine Earth’s place in the universe. Now we are moving to determine through space technology man’s own place in the universe, and to greater understanding of our own planet. As we are grateful for the success of our previous ventures into space, and as we look to the success of that which is imminent, let us never take for granted the skill and courage and devotion of those who labor on behalf of the United States space program. Let us rather pause to reflect with pride upon what we have done, asking God’s blessings upon our efforts, and God’s grace upon those who bravely place their lives at the service of peace for all mankind.” (PD, 11/19/73, 1338)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue, scheduled for Nov. 11 launch to crew the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), completed training in the Neutral Buoyancy Simulator at Marshall Space Flight Center. The astronauts had spent 80 hrs since April 1972 performing 24 different exercises in the simulated weightless environment to prepare them for the three extravehicular activities scheduled for their mission. The backup crew —Vance D. Brand, Dr. William B. Lenoir, and Dr. Don L. Lind—would complete their training at MSFC Oct. 12. (msfc Release 73-145)
Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory held the first public demonstration of its new heart pacemaker that used electric and electronic components designed by NASA for spacecraft use. The new pacemaker, smaller and longer lasting than conventional models, could be implanted more quickly and easily. It had no life-limiting components or radioactive emissions, was immune from outside interference sources, and could be recharged by patients at home. It incorporated modified space satellite power cells, (nasa Release 73—150; Cohn, W Post, 8/8/73) August 8:	Spare-time diversions of the astronauts aboard the Orbital Workshop in the May 25-June 22 Skylab 2 mission and in Skylab 3 since July 28 launch were described in a Christian Science Monitor article. Skylab 3 Astronaut Dr. Owen K. Garriott, the first physicist in space, had been fascinated by the zero-g antics of his spiders Arabella and Anita and his mummichog minnows. Skylab 2 Astronaut Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin had experimented with a big blob of water which floated before him instead of splashing on the spacecraft deck. The blob had taken on the form of the sun and planets as he spun it in space. He had blown it into a bubble with a straw and then had blown bubbles within the bubble. His Skylab 2 colleague, Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., had discovered that centrifugal force could impel him around the weightless spacecraft upright if he got himself off to a fast enough start racing around the Workshop. Other astronaut pastimes included “marooning” (doing acrobatics in remote sections of the spacecraft), “hamming it up” for TV and “home movies,” reading novels and poetry, ricocheting weightless rubber balls around the laboratory, and flying paper airplanes. (Salisbury, CSM, 8/8/73)
NASA postponed the launches of the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop and the Skylab 2 crew from April 30 and May 1 to indefinite dates in May. The postponement was necessitated by an unexpected accumulation of problems in launch preparations for vehicle modules and experiments and first-time Skylab testing at Kennedy Space Center. Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider set tentative launch dates of May 14-15 but would announce official dates in late March after continued testing and reviews of flight planning. (Schneider TWX to NASA Centers, 1/22/73)
Apollo 13 Astronaut John L. Swigert, Jr., was named Executive Director of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics staff, succeeding Charles F. Ducander, who was retiring effective June 30. Committee Chairman, Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), said Swigert’s “broadly based skill and enthusiasm” would “aid in expanding the effort being made by the Committee to assure that our national space program and federal research and development will receive adequate support in the mid-1970s.” (AP, Houston Post, 4/14/73; Com Off)
Sen. John J. Sparkman (D-Ala.), for himself and Sen. James B. Allen (D—Ala.), introduced S.J.R. 69 to authorize the President to proclaim
NASA test pilot John A. Manke successfully completed the first powered flight of the X-24B lifting body. The experimental craft, being flown in a USAF-NASA hypersonic-aerospace-craft research program, was air-launched from a B—52 aircraft from Flight Research Center at 14 000 m (45 000 ft). Three chambers of the XLR—11 engine propelled the lifting body to mach 0.85 and 16 000-m (52 000-ft) altitude. A series of maneuvers obtained stability control data. A preliminary data check indicated excellent maneuvers had been performed. (NASA prog off)
A planned layoff of 2500 workers—including scientists, engineers, and blue collar personnel—had been announced by Lockheed-California Co., the Associated Press reported. The work force reduction of 9% of the 29 000 employees would follow earlier signing of an agreement with Eastern Airlines, Inc., in which the airline asked for delayed delivery of wide-bodied Lockheed aircraft. Eastern had lost $10 million during the first eight months of 1973. {W Post, 11/15/73, C13) November 15:	Final reviews of all launch preparations had been completed and Skylab 4 was “now GO for launch at 9:01 tomorrow morning,” Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider announced at a Kennedy Space Center news briefing. Leland F. Belew, Skylab Program Manager at Marshall Space Flight Center, said the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) had experienced no major problems during the unmanned period and was in “excellent shape to support a 60-day open-ended up to 84-day mission.” Col. Alan R. Vette, U.S. Air Force recovery forces, said that all Dept, of Defense recovery forces, were in position and ready for launch. The prime recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans was in port in San Diego and would sail in early January to Hawaii to support target points in the Pacific beginning Jan. 13. Any splashdown before that date would be covered by Air Force helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft out of Hickham Air Force Base in Hawaii. (Transcript)
Abandonment of technology, a “source of man’s strength,” would be a senseless alternative to its further development and use, Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Massachusetts Institute of Technology President, warned in a Technology Review article. Man’s exploitation of and dependency on the environment could not be changed through greater understanding of science and its application. Even a relevant technology alone would not suffice. Man needed “to develop the ability to estimate rationally and to choose among alternate courses of action, particularly when new technology is concerned. Above all, we need the humility to admit that we will not find any absolute answers or permanent solutions.” But the fallacy of the approaching doomsday argument was “that it ignores the considerable evidence we already have that man can in fact modify his behavior fast enough to avoid the catastrophic disasters predicted by the doomsday-sayers.” The evidence included the fact that scarcely a decade after Rachel Carson’s warning against pesticides (in her book Silent Spring) “those chemicals are severely controlled—possibly too much so—and biodegradable equivalents are on the verge of being introduced.” Lake Michigan’s marine life was nearing extinction 10 yrs ago; “by vigorous ecological controls it has been restored.” Development and control of the rapidly changing synthetic environment had become as important as contending with nature. Those who saw only evil in technology “fail to recognize that our situation would be much worse if the search for new technological solutions was stopped.” The challenge was “to move on from where we are to technologies and ways of employing them that will avoid uncontrollable effects in the future. Stopping science will shut off new knowledge and weaken our efforts to reverse the present situation. Technology alone is not the answer, but without technological developments few answers are likely to be found.” More than 30 yrs ago Dr. Vannevar Bush had called science the endless frontier; “it remains that today. The range of exciting research now exceeds that which was imaginable when Dr. Bush coined the title.” (Tech Rev, 5/73, 10-13) June 1:	Skylab 3’s target launch date had been changed to July 27, NASA announced at a Johnson Space Center press briefing. SL-3, to carry the second crew to the Orbital Workshop launched May 14, previously had been scheduled for Aug. 8. The new target date was set because unexpected use of Skylab hardware during the Skylab 1—2 mission had exposed electronics, batteries, and systems to unusual environments. Deputy Skylab Program Director John H. Disher said a July 27 launch would give greater solar power input, because the relation of the sun to orbit plane at that date would give the spacecraft a greater percentage of time in the sun. The precise date would be set after the end of the Skylab 2 mission. (Transcript; NASA Release 73—111)
Advanced communications satellites were discussed at a joint meeting of the Cleveland Chapter of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Institute of Electrical Engineers at Lewis Research Center. Joseph N. Sivo, head of LeRc’s Advanced Communications Systems Study Office, said higher powered communications satellites offered “real potential in educational and health service areas.” Communications satellites could beam educational TV to the people of India or Appalachia, link medical centers with patients in distant places, or speed mail service. Recause of NASA program cutbacks, “industry will have to pick up where nasa left off.” (LeRC Release 73-3)
The appointment of William J. Hamon, Director of Program Budget and Control in the Office of Manned Space Flight’s Sortie Lab Task Force, as NASA Resident Liaison Officer at the European Space Research Organization’s Research and Technology Center (estec) in Noordwijk, The Netherlands, was announced by NASA. He would be responsible for liaison between NASA Hq. and Marshall Space Flight Center and the ESTEC sortie lab project. (NASA Release 73—70)
Skyiab 3 Astronauts Alan L. Bean, Jack R. Lousma, and Dr. Owen K. Garriott concluded training for the second manned mission to the Skyiab Orbital Workshop, launched May 14. They practiced key flight maneuvers in a spacecraft simulator at Johnson Space Center and the complex countdown procedures to be used during the final two and one half hours before launch July 28. In an interview with the New York Times, Skyiab Program Director William C. Schneider said, “Everything seems to be going great.” (Wilford, NYT, 7/26/73; AP, B Sun, 7/26/73, A10)
Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz piloted their T—38 jet training aircraft from Johnson Space Center to Patrick Air Force Base near Kennedy Space Center to watch the May 14 launch of Skylab 1. ICSC technicians meanwhile tested the onboard batteries and emergency detection system on the Saturn V scheduled to boost the Skylab 1 Workshop into orbit. The Skylab 2 launch crew applied the protective covers that would shield the manned Apollo spacecraft during Saturn IB launch vehicle liftoff May 15. (upi, W Star & News, 5/13/73, 6; Wilford, NYT, 5/14/73, 24)
Assignment of l/c William E. Barry (usaf), a medical doctor, as Special Assistant to the NASA Administrator was announced. Dr. Barry had been selected from the White House Fellows Program, which provided highly gifted young persons experience in U.S. government and leadership. Dr. Barry had been an aeronautical engineer, a test pilot, and a flight surgeon in the Air Force. He had been named Air Force Systems Command Flight Surgeon of the Year and had won the Aerospace Medical Assn.’s Julian E. Ward Award for outstanding contributions to the art and science of aerospace medicine in 1972. (nasa Ann)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of William D. Ruckelshaus to be Deputy Attorney General and the nomination of Russell E. Train, Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality, to succeed Ruckelshaus as Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. (PD, 7/30/73, 931, 936) July 27:	In a Skylab 3 prelaunch press briefing at Kennedy Space Center, NASA Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said that the launch vehicle was “in good shape” with no open anomalies during the countdown. The crew “is eager, waiting” for their 7:10 am July 28 liftoff. The condition of the Unmanned Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) was good. The temperatures were under control and the electrical system had improved since the Skylab 2 mission (May 25-June 22). Col. Alan R. Vette of the U.S. Air Force recovery forces said that the recovery teams were trained and deployed around the world “ready to support the mission.” (Transcript)
Grumman American Aviation Corp. was formed by the merger of Grumman Corp.’s general-aviation interests and American Aviation Corp. Grumman’s Gulfstream 1 and 2 and Ag-Cat program assets were transferred to American Aviation Corp. in exchange for shares in American. Corporate headquarters of the new company would be in Cleveland, Ohio, with Grumman President E. C. Towl as company Chairman and American President and Chief Executive Officer R. W. Meyer as President. (Interavia, 4/73, 301; Grumman Corp pro) January 3:	President Nixon accepted the resignation of Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., as Science Adviser and Director of Office of Science and Technology [see Jan. 2]. (PD, 1/8/73, 10)
President Nixon submitted the nomination of G. Joseph Minetti to be reappointed as a member of the Civil Aeronautics Board for six years ending Dec. 31, 1979. (PD, 12/3/73, 1370, 1381)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of James W. Plummer, Vice President of Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. and General Manager of Lockheed Missiles & Space Co.’s Space Systems Div., to be Under Secretary of the Air Force. He would succeed John L. McLucas, who became Secretary of the Air Force July 19. {PD, 3/12/73, 1378, 1381)
Objectives of Skylab’s scientific and engineering experiments were outlined in a Kennedy Space Center press briefing. The 57 major experiment components aboard the space station scheduled for May 14 launch would provide data for 270 investigations in earth resources, solar astronomy, and materials science by 702 investigators and associates— 200 of them foreign. Dr. Edward J. McLaughlin, NASA Director for Space Medicine, said 20 life sciences experiments would provide “a comprehensive picture of the interactions of man with his environment and of various body systems that are influenced ... by the space environment.” They would deal primarily with the metabolic and cardiovascular systems, exercise capacity, and nutrition. Dr. Goetz K. Oertel, NASA Chief of Solar Physics, said the objective of Skylab astronomy was “the study of the stars, including the sun, and other objects in space such as planets,| comets, objects and libration points near the moon, and x-ray objects in the sky.” Emphasis would be placed on the study of solar activity known to influence general weather patterns and on solar flares, responsible for radio communication blackouts and interference. Skylab was unique in that it would be manned. The astronaut would be able to align the instruments and select targets of interest, taking advantage of phenomena as it occurred. Dr. Robert A. Parker, astronaut and Skylab program scientist, said that corollary experiments would study gas and particles surrounding the Skylab and their effect on sensitive instruments, collect micrometeoroids, study man-made disturbances in Skylab and their effect on instrument alignment, and study flammable materials and manufacturing techniques in the zero-g environment. (Transcript)
Richard W. Cook, Deputy Director, Management, at Marshall Space Flight Center, would retire in June, msfc announced. He would be succeeded June 3 by John S. Potate, who was attending Massachusetts Institute of Technology, on leave from his position of Director of the Apollo Program Control Office in the Office of Manned Space Flight. Potate had joined the omsf in 1969. (msfc Releases 73-47, 73-77; msfc Org Ann 0101)
The National Academy of Engineering announced election of 70 members, including Director Edgar M. Cortright, Jr., of Langley Research Center; Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, Marshall Space Flight Center Director; Ames Research Center engineer Robert T. Jones; Robert J. Parks, Assistant Jet Propulsion Laboratory Director for Flight Projects; and Communications Satellite Corp. President Joseph V. Charyk. (nae Release, 4/5/73)
Maj. Michael Love (usaf) successfully completed a captive flight of the X—24B lifting body attached to a B-52 aircraft from Flight Research Center. The flight was the first pilot checkout flight on the X—24B for Maj. Love, principal Air Force pilot in the nasa-usaf lifting body program, (nasa prog off; afsc Newsreview, 11/73, 3)
Sen. Edward J. Gurney (R-Fla.) reintroduced S.J. R. 94, to redesignate Cape Kennedy Cape Canaveral. {CR, A/Yl/13, S7554-5)
A technique of predicting probabilities that had been “absolutely mandatory” to the success of NASA’s Apollo program was being used by the Atomic Energy Commission to help determine the risk to the public of nuclear power plants, aec member and Apollo 8 Astronaut William A.	Anders said in testimony before the Congressional Joint Committee on Atomic Energy. The complicated technique of forecasting the reliability of mechanical systems and human beings using available data from similar activity components and subsystems was described by Massachusetts Institute of Technology nuclear engineer Dr. Norman C. Rasmussen during the nuclear reactor safety hearing. (Willard, W Post, 9/26/73) September 26:	Newspapers commented on the successful Sept. 25 splashdown of Skylab 3 [see July 28-Sept. 25], New York Times: “The word ‘triumphant’ is entirely appropriate because even at this early point it is evident that their 59-day stay in orbit was not only the longest manned space flight in history but also the most productive.” Skylab results to date had made two conclusions incontrovertible: “First, man can live and work effectively for long periods in space, a point particularly emphasized by the astronauts’ pleas in the last days of their journey to be allowed to remain longer in orbit. Second, stations in space are potentially as productive of scientific and technological benefits as the most optimistic predictions had suggested. There is every reason now to suppose that these benefits will range from the discovery of new mineral deposits on earth and early warnings about the formation and movement of storms to new and more effective methods of predicting the turbulence on the sun that interferes seriously with electronic communications on earth.” It could be taken for granted that “orbiting laboratories will become permanent fixtures in the heavens before too many years have passed. (.NYT, 9/26/73, 38) Chicago Daily News: The Skylab 3 astronauts had “earned their keep—and a place in the history of man’s conquest of the universe.” (C Daily News, 9/26/73)
Former astronaut Frank Borman, now an Eastern Air Lines, Inc., senior vice president, left Moscow after a visit to the U.S.S.R. at the invitation of the Union of Soviet Societies for Friendship and Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries. During the visit, which began April 28, Borman laid a bouquet at the Kremlin wall where Yuri Gagarin and other cosmonauts were buried and visited the cosmonaut training center and a Salyut orbital station mockup at Star City. In an interview he said that he believed the 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz space flight was “the forerunner, the prototype to exactly the type of mission that we’ll eventually see going to Mars. It is very difficult to project the pace at which space exploration will go forward, because it doesn’t depend on technology so much as it does on economic and political action. But I think that by the end of this century we will have a manned earth mission to Mars.” (Tass, fbis—Sov, 4/30/73, L2; 5/3/73, G2; Moscow News, 5/19-25/73)
Winners of an Army competition to develop the new advanced attack helicopter were announced by Secretary of the Army Howard H. Callaway. Bell Helicopter Co. and Hughes Helicopters & Hughes Aircraft Co. would compete in a flyoff with two prototypes per contractor. The flyoff winner would install and test the required subsystems for night vision, fire control, navigation, and communications. Values of the initial development contracts were $44.7 million to Bell and $70.3 to Hughes. (dod Release 316-73) June 22—July 28:	During unmanned operations of the Orbital Workshop, launched May 14, the Apollo Telescope Mount observed the sun’s chromospheric network, prominences, coronal transients, solar limbs, lunar libration clouds, and solar eclipses. Active atm operations were discontinued July 16 because the experiment pointing and control system’s primary pitch-rate gyroscope failed. An astrophysics particle collection experiment exposed outside the Workshop would be retrieved by the Skylab 3 crew, scheduled for July 28 launch. Sample panels of thermal coatings exposed on the airlock module also would be returned. Neutron analysis detectors, a student experiment, were monitored, (nasa prog off) June 23:	NASA held a Skylab 2 crew medical status briefing at Johnson Space Center. Dr. William R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said that the condition of Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz had improved over their June 22 splashdown condition. Conrad was in excellent shape, Weitz had no residual effects from the vestibular disturbances of the previous day, and Kerwin was “a thousand percent better” from the cardiovascular standpoint but still had some residual vestibular effects. (Transcript)
The National Science Foundation released Federal Scientific, Technical, and Health Personnel, 1971 (nsf 73—309). In 1971, as in most years since 1966, Federal scientific, technical, and health professional personnel increased little compared with the early 1960s. The Dept, of Defense remained, as in prior years, the largest employer of scientific and technical personnel. About 29% of Federal scientists and engineers performed research and development. The greatest concentration of R&D personnel was at NASA. More than one half of NASA’s scientists and engineers performed R&D activities. Salaries of Federal scientists and engineers increased between 1966 and 1971, largely to meet statutory requirements that they be comparable with non-Federal salaries. Women, accounting for 4% of all Federal scientists and engineers, appeared to be advancing in grade faster than men. (Text) October 1:	NASA’s 15th Anniversary. A National Space Club dinner honored leaders who had implemented the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, which established NASA Oct. 1, 1958. Honored guests included Dr. T. Keith Glennan, nasa’s first Administrator, Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, the first man on the moon (July 20, 1969), and Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., the first American in space (aboard Freedom 7, May 5, 1961). NASA’s future role was described by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator: “Unless and until Congress sees fit to change our role, I think NASA should continue to have this one primary mission: to do the necessary research and development in space and aeronautics to identify promising opportunities and meet national needs. In performing this primary mission, we will continue to work closely with user agencies in government and with the aerospace industry.” NASA also was transferring its technology and experience to nonaerospace sectors of the economy and helping other Government agencies solve societal problems. “It so happens that we have the reservoir of technology, and also some available manpower, at a time when the Environmental Protection Agency and other government departments need our help.” NASA had “unique capabilities to help bring into being a pollution-free, resourcesaving hydrogen economy, and to facilitate extensive use of the ultimate energy source, solar power.” NASA’s traditional function as the Nation’s civilian space and aeronautics r&d manager “assures us a challenging and rewarding future during NASA’s next 15 years.” (Program; Prepared text) Anniversary ceremonies also included open house at NASA Centers and annual awards presentations. (NASA Activities, 11/73) During its first 15 yrs NASA had completed 277 major U.S. and international launches, with 210 successful and one still under evaluation. With the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs successfully completed and Skylab progressing, NASA had established 15 768 man-hours in space. Astronauts had spent about 40 hrs in inflight extravehicular activity and more than 90 hrs on the moon. NASA manned spacecraft had spent nearly 400 hrs on the moon and had returned more than 385 kg (850 lbs) of lunar material. Of 38 Americans who had flown in space, 3 had made four space flights, 4 had made three, 10 had made two, and 22 had made one flight each. A dozen astronauts had walked on the moon, and 24 had flown around it. Man had learned he could live and work in space. In unmanned space exploration NASA had launched thousands of sounding rockets carrying U.S. and foreign experiments. Mariner 9 probe (launched May 30, 1971, and still orbiting Mars) had produced 7300 pictures of the planet, showing it to be dynamic and geologically active. Satellites had studied stars beyond the solar system through x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays. Oao 1 (launched Dec. 7, 1968) and Oao 3 (launched Aug. 21, 1972) had returned a wealth of information on the Milky Way and more distant galaxies. Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972, toward Jupiter) had revolutionized man’s study of the sun. The entire electromagnetic spectrum had been opened to man’s examination by study of stars in ultraviolet and x-ray. Observations from NASA-launched weather satellites had enabled forecasters to observe weather systems from space as they developed and to forecast their effects as they moved into inhabited parts of the world. Man had learned what instruments in space could provide in information about the earth’s resources and their efficient use to facilitate decision making, improve the lot of developing countries, and preserve and improve conditions in countries like the U.S. NASA had provided technological advancements to preserve the U.S. position as world leader in civil and military aeronautics. The joint NASA, Air Force, and Navy X—15 rocket-powered aircraft program had, during 10 yrs of flight, studied effects of hypersonic flight on aircraft skin friction and thermal expansion, pioneered the use of ablative coatings, aided efficient structural design, and served as a workhorse test-bed for nearly 40 experiments. NASA contributions also included the single-pivot variable-sweep wing, which allowed efficient flight at both high and low speeds; supercritical wing and fuselage shapes that permitted an aircraft to cruise at 15% higher speed without increased fuel consumption; and the world’s first digital fly-by-wire control aircraft with a computer-controlled electronic system. The clean combustion program was providing new concepts to reduce pollution from engine exhaust. The aircraft noise-abatement program focused on development of an avionics system, refinement of operational procedures, and the demonstration of two-segment flight paths for quieter landing approaches. The refan program was demonstrating JT8D engine and nacelle modifications to reduce noise of existing jet aircraft. In applications the knowledge gained in 15 yrs was being applied in science, medicine, navigation, communications, agriculture, crime prevention, and commerce. NASA-developed technologies were producing safer buildings, bridges, and aircraft and improved tires, roads, and railbeds. In international cooperation, NASA had conducted 18 cooperative satellite and space probe projects and flown 25 international experiments on its spacecraft. The global system of Intelsat communication satellites comprised 12 satellites launched by NASA. Ahead were completion of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission; the July 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission to dock a U.S. and a Soviet spacecraft in space; and the introduction of the revolutionary space shuttle with its European-built Spacelab in the 1980s. In unmanned exploration Mariner 10, scheduled for launch toward Mercury and Venus in early November, was expected to provide the first photos of Mercury. Pioneer 10 was headed for a year-end rendezvous with Jupiter, and Pioneer 11 (launched April 5, 1973) was scheduled for a second reconnaissance of Jupiter in December 1974. Work was proceeding on two Mariner spacecraft for 1977 launch toward Jupiter and Saturn. Major thrusts expected for the 1980s were outlined in a statement released to the press by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator. NASA would be vigorously developing and demonstrating systems and technologies that would make space activities useful to national and world communities, monitoring the environment and resources, developing electric power from the sun, and using space as a laboratory for new technology and processes. Continued scientific exploration of the earth, space, and the solar system seemed inevitable. And the 1980s might well be a period of preparation for continued manned exploration and exploitation of the solar system, the two-way direct transfer of information between satellites, a long-duration manned space laboratory, automated outer planet orbiters and atmosphere probes, and probably, before the end of the century, a program to establish a manned lunar base for exploration and research, (nasa Release 73-190)
The Senate adopted S.Res. 10, establishing the number of members of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences at 13, and S.R. 12, which elected Chairman and majority members to the Committee. Majority members were Democrats Sen. Frank E. Moss (Utah), Chairman, succeeding Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D—N. Mex.), who had retired; Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (Wash.); Sen. Stuart Symington (Mo.) ; Sen. John C. Stennis (Miss.) ; Sen. Howard W. Cannon (Nev.) ; Sen. James G. Abourezk (S. Dak.) ; and Sen. Floyd K. Haskell (Colo.). {CR, 1/4/73, D6; A&A 1972)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nominations of Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs Jerry W. Friedheim to be Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs and of John 0. March to be Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs. Friedheim would succeed Daniel Z. Henkin, and March, Gardiner L. Tucker, both of whom had resigned. (PD,	355, 365,
The dizziness and nausea of Skylab 2 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz on their return to the earth June 22 were probably due to problems of the inner ear, the Wall Street Journal quoted Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, Johnson Space Center Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, as saying. The symptoms had occurred particularly when the men moved their heads from side to side. Dr. Hawkins had theorized that the fluid in the semicircular canal, whose movement transmitted impulses via tiny hairs in the ear to the brain, was out of action because of the long period of weightlessness. When the astronauts had come under the sudden influence of gravity, the inner-ear mechanism became unusually sensitive to almost any head movement. Ordinary movements could produce the symptoms of motion sickness. The inner-ear balancing mechanism could adapt to gravity quickly. Dr. Kerwin, the most affected, had returned to normal after 12 hrs. (Bishop, WSJ, 6/25/73)
The U.S. Supreme Court ruled 5 to 4 that municipalities could not enact local curfews on jet flights at their airports to control noise. Justice William 0. Douglas said in the majority opinion: “We are not at liberty to diffuse the powers given by Congress to F.A.A. [the Federal Aviation Administration] and E.P.A. [the Environmental Protection Agency] by letting the states or municipalities in on the planning.” (NYT, 5/15/73, 11)
The National Science Foundation released Resources for Scientific Activities at Universities and Colleges, 1971 (nsf 72—315). Scientists in research and development declined 1% per year between 1969 and 1971 from an annual growth rate of 6% from 1965 to 1969. Teaching staff growth rate remained at about 10% per year 1965-1971. R&D scientists dropped from 26% of the total teaching staff in 1965 to 20% in 1971. The increase of graduate students working on R&D projects fell from an annual rate of 8% 1965-1969 to 2% 1969-1971. Science expenditures in 1970 totaled $7.9 billion—an increase of 6% per year over the $7.0 billion in 1968. The 1964-1968 annual growth rate was 15%. Federal financing of R&D leveled off to a 3% increase per year in 1968 to 1970, but recent data indicated a higher rate of increase in Federal obligations to colleges and universities for FY 1972 and FY 1973. (Text) April 3-May 28:	The U.S.S.R. launched unmanned Salyut 2 scientific space station from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with 260-km (161.6-mi) apogee, 215-km (133.6-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The Soviet news agency Tass announced objectives were to perfect design, onboard systems, and equipment and to conduct scientific and technical experiments in space flight. Tass said systems were functioning normally. Western observers speculated that a manned spacecraft would be launched to dock with Salyut 2 and establish a manned orbital workshop, resuming Soviet manned space flight after a two-year hiatus. The large Soviet tracking ships Gagarin and Komarov had been sighted in March moving from the Black Sea toward positions in the Atlantic Ocean. On April 11 Tass confirmed earlier U.S. press reports that Salyut 2 had been maneuvered into a higher orbit. April 4 and 8 maneuvers had raised it to a 296-km (183.9-mi) apogee and 261-km (162.2-mi) perigee, with an 89.8-min period and a 51.6° inclination. Stable radio communication was being maintained and the “improved design of onboard systems and instruments” was being tested. Tass said systems and instruments were functioning normally. The new orbit, out of normal range of a manned Soyuz spacecraft, indicated to some observers a holding orbit because of delay in launching cosmonauts to join the station. Tracking data showed an increase in the number of fragments following the spacecraft after April 14. By the end of the month Goddard Space Flight Center listed 27 objects, of which 25 had reentered the atmosphere. On April 18 Moscow sources said the U.S.S.R. had no plans for a manned flight to link with the space station and that Salyut 2 was carrying out experiments in connection with the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission planned for 1975. Earlier Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of the cosmonaut training project, had said Salyut laboratories could gather information for weather forecasting, geology, transport, communications, agriculture, and environmental protection— without mentioning manned flight. By April 25 U.S. observers suspected that an April 14 failure, possibly an explosion or a wildly firing thruster, had sent the station tumbling end over end, tearing off the four solar panels and damaging the compartment, making cosmonaut manning of the station impossible. Radio signals from Salyut 2 were reported to have ceased. On April 28 Tass reported that Salyut 2 had “concluded the programme of flight” and that the data obtained in the experiments confirmed “the correctness of design and structural decisions and the properties chosen for the main systems and on-board equipment of the station. These data will be used in building a new spacecraft.” The spacecraft reentered May 28. Salyut 1, the world’s first experimental orbiting workshop, had been launched April 19, 1971. A three-man crew—launched aboard Soyuz 10 April 23, 1971—had docked with Salyut 1 but did not board, returning to earth after two days in space. Three more cosmonauts—launched on Soyuz 11 June 6, 1971—docked, boarded the station, and conducted scientific experiments for 23 days. During their return to earth in Soyuz 11 June 30, they died after a valve accidentally opened and evacuated the air from the spacecraft compartment. A second Salyut was believed by Western observers to have been launched in July 1972 without achieving orbit, (gsfc SSR: 4/30/73; 5/23/73. Un Gen Assembly Release A/AC.105/INF.272. fbis-Sov: 4/4,12,30/73. NYT: Wilford, 4/4,11,25/73; 4/29/73. W Post: 4/16/73; O’Toole, 4/18,25/ 73, 5/2/73, 10/29/73; upi, 4/19/73. Av Wk: 4/9/73, 21. A&A 1971.) April 3:	Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering in the Dept, of Defense, testified that dod space shuttle efforts were being expanded, during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. A program memorandum on dod shuttle use, to be coordinated with NASA, would include plans for early entry into the shuttle program, identify key dod planning milestones, and treat funding and management issues. dod would “place increased emphasis on new concepts of payload design and operation . . . essential to achieving the Shuttle’s full potential for more effective, less costly space operations.” Goals of dod planning and coordination were to ensure that NASA knew and understood dod needs so that the shuttle would be of maximum utility to dod, to provide data essential to integrated planning and support decisions on future shuttle use, to explore ways to benefit most from the shuttle’s unique capabilities, and to coordinate dod shuttle activities with NASA to the best possible use of both agencies. The dod Shuttle-User Committee had been established as “a focal point for our broad and varied interests in the future military use of space.” The Committee, under Air Force chairmanship, included representatives of other military departments and the Joint Chiefs of Staff; NASA would be invited to provide an observer. The Committee would guide studies of payloads and missions, explore the transition from launching dod payloads with expendable vehicles to using the shuttle, and possibly would identify experimental dod payloads to be carried on shuttle research and development flights for NASA. DOD’s FY 1974 space program budget request of $1.6 million, $205 million more than in FY 1973, would reduce the vulnerability of the Transit navigation satellite system; procure spacecraft and boosters for the Fleet Satellite Communications (fltsatcom) System and the Defense Satellite Communications System (dscs) ; cover research and development costs of early-warning general support; and increase supporting r&d for the space test program, for advanced surveillance technology for earth-limb-measurement satellites, and for a joint-service navigation satellite experiment. FY 1974 funding for procurement of early-warning satellites and boosters had been reduced. (Transcript)
NASA held two Skylab 1—2 postmission briefings at Johnson Space Center. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, told a NASA press conferC ■ 3 ence that, “as near as we can tell, essentially all of the objectives that were anticipated for this mission have been completed. And needless to say none of us really dreamed that this could be done at the time that the meteoroid shield failed to deploy. So it exceeded our wildest expectations at that time.” Skylab 1-2 could be symbolized by a hammer, and the Skylab 2 astronauts could be characterized as “the master tinkerers of space.” The mission’s anomalies had made no major impact on NASA’s budget. Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said at a crew medical status briefing that the astronauts had “looked rather wobbly and unsteady when they got out of the spacecraft.” The crew—aware of the increased pull of gravity—had said they felt as if they were “very heavy . . . like about a two-G load.” All three men had experienced dizziness, lightheadedness, and some nausea. Astronaut Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin felt more of these effects than Charles Conrad, Jr., and Paul J. Weitz. His blood pressure had dropped to a critical level 25 min after splashdown and he had to inflate his spacesuit to force the blood back up from his legs to his brain. During medical tests aboard the recovery ship Ticonderoga, Conrad had performed at his premission level. Weitz had experienced a sudden drop in blood pressure and pulse rate while on the bicycle ergometer but had recovered within a five-minute rest period. Kerwin had demonstrated more of the vestibular disturbance and was unable to complete any of the tests. (Transcripts)
President Nixon’s intention to nominate Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Director of the Central Intelligence Agency and former Atomic Energy Commission Chairman, to be Secretary of Defense succeeding Elliot L. Richardson, was announced by the White House Press Secretary. William E. Colby would succeed Dr. Schlesinger. The nominations were submitted to the Senate May 24 and confirmed June 28. Richardson would become Attorney General May 25. (PD, 5/14/73, 661—2; 5/28/73, 709, 714; CR, 6/28/73, S12394)
Navy plans for collecting temperature and cloud-cover data directly from Air Force weather satellites were reported by Aviation Week & Space Technology. A receiver and computer processing center at Monterey, Calif., would prepare data for worldwide dissemination to the fleet and would process weather photos and atmospheric vertical-temperature profiles. (Av Wk, 10/8/73, 9) October 9:	The original name Cape Canaveral was restored to Cape Kennedy by the Dept, of the Interior, acting on a unanimous recommendation by an interagency committee of the Board on Geographic Names. Historians believed the Cape had been named Canaveral by Spanish explorer Ponce de Leon more than 400 yrs before, the Orlando Sentinel Star later reported. The action made no change in the name of NASA’s Kennedy Space Center, named for the late President John F. Kennedy. (Dept Int Release, 10/9/73; CR, 10/10/73, H8880; O Sen Star, 10/10/73, 1)
The House passed H.R. 7528, the $3.074-billion nasa FY 1974 authorization bill [see May 9], by a vote of 322 to 73. Rejected were a motion to recommit the bill to the Committee on Science and Astronautics, an amendment by Rep. Bella S. Abzug (D—N.Y.) to delete $567 million for space shuttle programs, and an amendment by Rep. John Conyers, Jr. (D-Mich.), to prohibit use of tracking and data acquisition funds in South Africa because of South Africa’s apartheid policy. (CR, 5/23/73, H3921-51)
Grumman Corp. spokesman told the press in Bethpage, N.Y., that Grumman had accepted an $18-million, short-term loan from the Navy at the same time the firm had said it would not honor a contract to provide the Navy with F-14 jet fighter aircraft, (upi, W Post, 1/4/73, D6) January 4:	President Nixon announced that Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, would remain in the NASA positions during the President’s second term of office. President Nixon also accepted the resignation of Gerard C. Smith as Director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, U.S. Ambassador, and Chief of the U.S. delegation to the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (salt). He announced the resignation of Secor D. Browne as Chairman and of Whitney N. Gillilland as Vice Chairman of the Civil Aeronautics Board. He submitted to the Senate the nominations of Elliot L. Richardson to be Secretary of Defense and of Secretary of Transportation John A. Volpe to be U.S. Ambassador to Italy. {PD, 1/8/73, 10’12) . . . .
nasa published The Quiet Sun (nasa SP-303) by Skylab 4 Astronaut Edward G. Gibson. In the foreword Dr. Leo Goldberg, Kitt Peak National Observatory Director, said the up-to-date textbook of solar physics was “written from the point of view of a physicist seeking to understand and interpret solar observations in the framework of theoretical physics. This orientation as well as the primary purpose of the book combine to make it a unique and valuable contribution to the literature of solar physics, and a superb textbook for college-level and graduate students.” (Text)
First anniversary of the launch of Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite from Western Test Range July 23, 1972. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, at an anniversary celebration at the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia, said the use of space technology to solve the earth’s problems was “a second giant stride for mankind.” Erts 1 had had “a profound effect on the thinking of the world, particularly on our approach to the emerging problems of protecting our environment and maintaining the quality of life for all of Earth’s people. I think it means that we do have to be sensitive to how we use these precious resources; not just clean air and water, but clean land.” In the program to follow, “the ocean is also going to be a precious resource that we must conserve.” Dr. Fletcher said 38 countries were participating in the ERTS program, with 300 principal investigators—200 in the U.S. and 100 in foreign countries—examining ERTS data. Dr. William Nordberg, Chief of Goddard Space Flight Center’s Laboratory for Meteorology and Earth Sciences, reviewed Erts 1’s year-end status: its multispectral scanner was fully operational, the retum-beam-vidicon TV cameras had been turned off but could be reactivated, one of the two tape recorders was still operating, although at reduced capacity. More than 60 000 erts scenes—equivalent to an area more than four times the globe—had been imaged, 333 000 unique messages had been relayed from some 140 platforms at remote sites, and nearly 3 million photos had been reproduced at the NASA Data Processing Facility. (NASA Activities, 8/15/73, 134-6)
NASA, on its 15th birthday, found itself “in the throes of an identity crisis,” John N. Wilford said in a New York Times article. After a “fast and glorious youth, full of promise and widely heralded achievement,” could NASA, “knowing that it could be flying to the moon and beyond, adjust to a more mundane existence?” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, had said in a recent interview: “Our charter is clear: We have to make the country strong in space. But NASA has to move back from the spectacular. We will become more like one of the service agencies of government.” (NYT, 10/1/73, 62)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented an award of $10 000 to Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientists Paul M. Muller and William L. Sjogren in a JPL ceremony. The award was for a 1968 discovery of mascons (mass concentrations of dense material beneath the lunar surface) and for imaginative interpretation of the discovery’s results and implications significant to the success of the Apollo program and future studies of the earth and other planets. The mascon discovery had received international recognition. Muller and Sjogren had been awarded the 1971 Magellanic Gold Medal of American Philosophical Society and had been elected members of the Society of Sigma Xi and Fellows of Britain’s Royal Astronomical Society, (nasa Release 73-6; NASA PAO)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of John Eger to be Deputy Director of the Office of Telecommunications Policy. Eger, legal assistant to the Federal Communications Commission Chairman, would succeed George F. Mansur, Jr., who had resigned effective April 1. (PD, 8/6/73, 951, 957)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) introduced S. 60 to authorize acquisition and maintenance of the Goddard rocket launching site in Auburn, Mass., by the National Park Service as tribute to late U.S. rocket pioneer. The first liquid-fueled rocket had been launched on the site by Dr. Robert H. Goddard March 16, 1926. (CR, 1/4/73, S135)
President Nixon accepted the resignation of Dr. John S. Foster, Jr., as Director of Defense Research and Engineering, and announced he would nominate as Dr. Foster’s successor Dr. Malcolm R. Currie, Vice President for Research and Engineering of Beckman Instruments, Inc., in Fullerton, Calif. Dr. Currie had been with Hughes Aircraft Co. 19541969, serving as Vice President from 1964 until he went to Beckman in 1969. The nomination was submitted to the Senate June 6 and confirmed June 15. (PD, 6/11/73, 736, 752, 753; CR, 6/15/73, D695)
The crew of Skylab 2—Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, alnd Paul J. Weitz—participated in a simulated launch-to-rendezvous training session at Johnson Space Center. (AP, B Sun, 5/9/73, A10)
Soviet authorities had returned data tape and altitude recorder film salvaged from the scientific payload aboard a NASA balloon that fell in the Siberian wilderness after its July 15 launch from Fort Churchill, Canada, NASA announced. Recovery had followed a request for Soviet assistance from Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, to Chairman Boris N. Petrov of the Soviet Council for International Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space. Dr. Naugle and Academician Petrov were cochairmen of a NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences Joint Working Group on Near-Earth Space, the Moon, and the Planets. The cosmic ray detector and other instruments aboard the balloon had been damaged in the crash, but the data tape and film flown from Moscow had been pronounced usable by U.S. investigators. The experiment had been designed to measure distribution of electrons and positrons in primary cosmic rays, (nasa Release 73195)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), with 30 cosponsors, introduced S. 32, National Science Policy and Priorities Act of 1973—reintroducing S. 32 from the preceding Congress. The bill, passed by the Senate but not the House, provided three-year authorization of $1.8 billion for “civilian research and engineering problems of our society.” (CR, 1/4/73, S103— 12)
NASA held an Apollo-Soyuz Test Project news briefing at Manned Spacecraft Center. U.S. Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney said the U.S.S.R. had agreed to lower the Soyuz cabin pressure to within 350 newtons per sq cm (5 lbs per sq in) of Apollo pressure during the July 1975 joint docking mission, to eliminate two-hour depressurization for each crew member before transfer to the other spacecraft. The change Would permit time for all three astronauts and two cosmonauts to fly in the others’ spacecraft. Previously, Only two astronauts had been scheduled to make the transfer. Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, commander of the U.S. crew, said “the mission is going to be one of the most difficult . . . because it involves a different country, different language, different operating techniques. . . . But it can certainly open the doors for future cooperation between the countries, can enhance our capabilities” for progress together. Astronaut Donald K. Slayton, who would fly his first mission since he was disqualified from Project Mercury’s Aurora 7 flight (launched May 24, 1962) because of an erratic heart rate, said, “I think I’ve been pretty fortunate. And I don’t believe in looking back at the past too much except in relation to what benefit it will give me in the future.” Astronaut Vance D. Brand, who would make his first space flight, said, “I am really happy to get on this mission. I think as we look back over the years, it’ll be regarded as a very historic thing . . . having the doors open between the Soviet Union and the United States.” (Transcript)
The decision to publicize weather information from a secret Air Force satellite system was announced by Under Secretary of the Air Force John L. McLucas at a Washington press conference. Information would be made available to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration from “several” satellites orbiting at altitudes of 800 km (500 mi), providing more precise information on cloud cover than available from the higher altitude noaa satellites. A usaf—noaa meeting March 19 would arrange for transfer of information. (W Star & News, 3/7/73, A6)
A U.S. Navy and United Kingdom agreement to begin an eight-month study of an advanced vertical or short takeoff and landing (v/stol) Harrier aircraft was announced by Secretary of the Navy John W. Warner. Rolls-Royce Ltd. and Hawker Siddeley Group Ltd., of the U.K., and McDonnell Douglas Corp. and United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. would study the design of the Pegasus 15 engine, specifications of the new power plant, projected costs, identification of airframe modifications for the uprated engine and an advanced technology wing, test performance predictions, preparation of a preliminary aircraft specification, and definition of a possible full development program. (dod Release 189-73)
The U.S. flight crew for the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission was announced by NASA. Prime crew: Thomas P. Stafford, commander; Vance D. Brand, command module pilot; Donald K, ) Slayton, docking module pilot. Backup crew: Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, and Jack R. Louama. Support crew: Richard H. Truly, Robert F.	Ovennyer, Robert L. Crippen, and Karol J. Bobko. Joint crew training would begin in the summer of 1973, when Soviet cosmonauts would visit the U.S. for several weeks. U.S. astronauts would spend an equal time in Russia in the fall of 1973. (NASA Release 73-15)
The Senate Committee on Appropriations assigned members to the Subcommittee on Dept, of Housing and Urban Development, Space Science, Veterans: Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), Chairman; Sen. John 0. Pastore (D—R.I.); Sen. John C. Stennis (D-Miss.) ; Sen. Mike Mansfield (D-Mont.) ; Sen. Daniel K. Inouye (D-Hawaii) ; Sen. Rirch Rayh (D—Ind.) ; Sen. Lawton M. Chiles, Jr. (D-Fla); Sen. Charles M. Mathias, Jr. (R—Md.) ; Sen. Clifford P. Case (R—N.J.) ; Sen. Hiram L. Fong (R—Hawaii); Sen. Edward W. Brooke (D—Mass.) ; and Sen. Ted Stevens (R-Alaska). {CR, 1/18/73, D31)
August 19:	Former Presidential Staff Assistant Guy W. Simpler assumed the newly established NASA position of Special Assistant to the Assistant Administrator for Institutional Management (for Executive Recruiting). The position had been established to provide for key personnel recruitment at top level. Simpler had been responsible for search assignments for subcabinet-level positions at the White House. (NASA Hq WB, 8/31/73) August 20:	Twentieth anniversary of the first successful Redstone missile launch Aug. 20, 1953, from an improvised pad at Cape Canaveral (now Cape Kennedy), Fla. The Redstone, developed for the Army by Dr. Wernher von Braun and his rocket team, was the first truly ballistic missile in the U.S. The Mercury-Redstone vehicle launched NASA’s Freedom 7 May 5, 1961, on the mission carrying Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., as the first American in space, (msfc Release 73-112)
A Science editorial commented on the resignation of President Nixon’s Science Adviser, Dr. Edward A. David, Jr. [see Jan. 3]: The resignation and “likelihood that the office of the President’s science adviser will be abolished come as a disappointing shock. David is a scientist-engineer of very broad competence who maintained intellectual integrity in the emotional heat of politics.” Abolition of office was “one of many consequences of President Nixon’s determination to reorganize the Executive Office of the President.” It was probable that the President’s Science Advisory Committee and the Office of Science and Technology “would vanish” in reorganization. Criticism of Presidential Science Advisers had been “that they often became so involved in the day-to-day fighting of political brush fires that they lost sight of the forest.” The scientific establishment had fought against creation of a Dept, of Science. “It has been argued that science and technology permeate the activities of virtually all executive agencies and that centralization would not be wise. The argument had been driven home too well. In consequence, there is now danger that science, while being everywhere, will be nowhere.” (Abelson, Science, 1/19/73, 9)
Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23, 1972) had returned valuable imagery and digital tapes from the spacecraft’s multispectral scanner to the Brevard County, Fla., Planning Dept., Kennedy Space Center reported. John W. Hannah, Brevard Development Administrator and principal investigator in the Brevard erts experiment, had said interpretation of the images would yield information on beach erosion, street development patterns, landscape disturbances, identification of land use, and land drainage patterns, (icsc Release 14-73)
Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser, resigned to return to private industry. The former communications systems scientist at Bell Telephone Laboratories, Inc., had served as Director of White House Office of Science and Technology for 28 mos and had instituted reorganization of the Federal science complex. The New York Times quoted White House sources as saying the resignation was prompted by disappointment that his advice had not been heeded by the Nixon Administration. Federal support for science and technology expressed as percentage of budget outlays for research and development had reached the lowest point since latter years of the Eisenhower Administration. The White House had declined comment on the resignation and had not released the text of Dr. David’s letter to the President. (Lyons, NYT, 1/3/73, 1)
Sen. Gaylord Nelson (D-Wis.), on behalf of himself and Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D—Wash.), introduced S. 2782 to establish a National Energy Information System, to authorize the Dept, of the Interior to undertake an inventory of U.S. energy resources on public lands and elsewhere, and for other purposes. (CR, 12/6/7.3, S22002) December 7:	A major reorganization plan that included two key directorates at Johnson Space Center had been announced by Dr. Christopher C.	Kraft, Jr., jsc Director, the jsc Roundup reported. Effective immediately, the reorganization would not be implemented fully until February 1974. Flight Crew Operations and Flight Operations would be combined into a new Flight Operations Directorate devoted entirely to space flight and aircraft activities. A new Data Systems and Analysis Directorate would provide institutional and programmatic data systems and analysis and the onboard software for the space shuttle. Pilot astronauts in the former Flight Crew Operations Directorate would be assigned to the Astronaut Office in the new Flight Operations Directorate. Scientist-astronauts would be assigned to Astronaut Offices in the Science and Applications and Life Sciences Directorates. Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht and Flight Control Div. Chief Eugene K. Kranz would be Director and Deputy Director of the new Flight Operations Directorate. They also would continue in their present assignments through completion of the Skylab program. Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., would be Chief of the Flight Control Astronaut Office. Howard W. Tindall, Jr., and Lynwood C. Dunseith had been named Director and Deputy Director of the Data Systems and Analysis Directorate. Astronaut Owen K. Garriott was Deputy to Director Anthony J. Calio of the Science and Applications Directorate; Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt would be Chief of the Science and Applications Astronaut Office. Astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin would be Chief of the Life Sciences Astronaut Office, which also would include astronaut physicians F. Story Musgrave and William E. Thornton. In addition to their duties as space shuttle crew candidates, Astronauts Fred W. Haise, Jr., Charles M. Duke, Jr., and Eugene A. Ceman had been assigned duties in project management. Haise would be Technical Assistant to the Space Shuttle Orbiter Project Manager, Duke would be Technical Assistant to the Acting Manager for Space Shuttle Systems Integration, and Cernan would be Special Assistant to the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Manager. Of 37 astronauts on active flight status, 26 were pilots. Of these, 16 would participate in space shuttle activities; 10 had been assigned to the 1975 U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. Eight scientist-astronauts would work in the Science and Applications Office, and three in Life Sciences. (Roundup, 12/7/Ti, 1)
A need “to shift gears and return to the main line of development in space flight” was underlined by Michael A. G. Michaud in a Spaceflight article: The purposes of space flight “go far beyond our lifetime. Ultimately, our journey away from Earth will determine the future of the human race; this millennial, evolutionary effort must not founder now for lack of a satisfying rationale.” The basic purpose of space flight was “to expand the realm of Man.” Reasons were to challenge human abilities, learn more about the universe we live in, search for extraterrestrial intelligence and prepare for contact with it, develop and test technologies for earth use, stimulate and employ advanced sectors of the economy, improve orbital applications of space technology with immediate benefits, develop and test military technology, and encourage international cooperation. Michaud proposed a medium-term program to the year 2000 to assemble a manned space station in earth orbit, build a base on the moon, land human beings on Mars by 2000, prepare for interstellar flight, search for planets in other systems, and begin the search for extraterrestrial intelligence. A long-term program beyond 2000 would plan to send unmanned probes to the most promising nearby stars, create a permanent colony on Mars, experiment in planetary engineering—possibly on Venus, “where orbiting space vehicles could introduce materials into the atmosphere that might change its composition” —launch the first manned interstellar flights, and communicate with extraterrestrial intelligence. [SF, 10/73, 362-5)
NASA announced the appointment of Edward Z. Gray, Assistant to the President of Grumman Aerospace Corp., as Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization, effective April 16. Gray, an Associate Fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, had been with NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight for four years before joining Grumman in 1967. From 1940 to 1963 he was with Boeing Co. (nasa Release 73-54)
The 1972-73 edition of Jane’s Fighting Ships was published in London. In the foreword, editor Capt. John Moore said the Soviet navy was “a pre-eminent force with its own air power and with a greater range of submarines than any other. Above all, it has a far greater proportion of ships less than 10 years old than any other major fleet.” (AP, P Inq, 7/26/73, 11)	_ July 24-Aug. 8:	A summer school on manned space flight—sponsored at Nottingham Univ., England, by the European Space Research Organization (esro)—was attended by 63 graduate scientists and engineers from 13 countries and by NASA representatives. Its theme, “The Implications for European Space Programmes of the Possibilities of Manned Mission,” was based on use of the space shuttle Spacelab. (ESRO Newsletter, 10/73, 1)
nasa launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from Woomera, Australia. The first carried a Univ. of Wisconsin astronomy experiment to a 171.9-km (106.8-mi) altitude. The second, launched 50 min later, carried a Naval Research Laboratory astronomy experiment to a 154.5km (96.mi) altitude. Both rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 13:	The decision to launch Skylab 4, the third and final mission to man the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14), at 9:01 am EST Nov. 16 was announced at a Kennedy Space Center press briefing by Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider. The replacement of eight damaged fins discovered on the Saturn IB launch vehicle Nov. 6 was complete and additional precaution had been taken by retrofitting an aluminum block over two lower brackets on each of the tail fins. Cracks found on the aft interstage structural beams Nov. 12 were left untouched after stress tests showed that the cracks would not worsen even under the most extreme aerodynamic stress. “We know of nothing today that would keep us from going,” Schneider said. Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue arrived at Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., from Houston to participate in the countdown, which was ordered resumed. (Transcript; O’Toole, W Past, 11/14/73, A24)
Plans to operate the new Trident nuclear-powered submarine with 24 missiles of 6500- to 9700-km (4000- to 6000-mi) range from the Pacific Ocean were announced by Secretary of the Navy John W. Warner. Facilities at the Bangor Annex of the Naval Torpedo Station Keyport near Bangor, Wash., would be expanded as base for Trident, to broaden the area of operations of deterrent submarines, (dod Release 84—73; NYT, 2/17/73, 30)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), Chairman of the Special Subcommittee on the National Science Foundation of the Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare, introduced S. 1977, $704 million FY 1974 NSF authorization bill. The bill would establish an Energy Research Div. and would authorize not less than $50 million for energy research programs. (CR, 6/11/73, S10810-12)
President Nixon submitted to the Senate the nomination of Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council 1969—1973, to be a Commissioner of the Atomic Energy Commission for the term expiring June 30, 1978. The nomination was confirmed Aug. 2. Anders would succeed James T. Ramey, whose term had expired. {PD, 7/23/73, 914, 920; CR, 8/2/73, D960)
The Senate confirmed the nomination of Col. Michael Collins (usaf, R.) to be a brigadier general. Gen. Collins, Apollo 11 command module pilot, was Director of the National Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution. (CR, 4/6/73, S6858; NASA Astronauts)
The 24-nation Geneva disarmament conference ended its 1973 session with no progress to report. Some members had charged that the conference had reached a state of complete paralysis, the New York Times later reported. (NYT, 8/31/73, 4) August 31:	The third glide flight of the X-24B lifting body was completed successfully near Flight Research Center by nasa test pilot John A. Manke. Objectives were to evaluate stability and control, roll and damper-off handling qualities, effects of water and alcohol jettison, landing gear dynamics, and control system operations with only two hydraulic pumps. Manke reported an excellent flight and good response with damper off. Touchdown was five minutes after air-launch, (nasa prog off)
The award of a $7 125 497 firm-fixed-price contract to Litton Systems, Inc., for avionics for the F-4 jet fighter aircraft was announced by the Air Force, (dod Release 360-73) July 20:	Skylab 3, scheduled for launch July 28 as the second manned mission to crew the Skylab Workshop, would be extended from 56 days to 59 days to provide a better recovery posture, NASA announced. Splashdown would be 6:26 pm edt Sept. 25, in the Pacific Ocean 547 km (340 mi) southwest of San Diego. A comprehensive review of the medical findings of Skylab 2 (launched May 25) had indicated that a 59-day mission was medically feasible. The medical data obtained on Skylab 3 would be reviewed at midmission point and weekly reviews would be scheduled for the remainder of the flight. Following each review, approval for continuation of the flight would be made for the next seven days by Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider. Simulated T-zero ignition and liftoff with the fully fueled Saturn IB and Apollo spacecraft on its launch pad was successfully completed in the Skylab 3 countdown, begun July 15. (nasa Release 73-136; ksc Release 163-73)
The Air Force had ordered the last F—111 swing-wing fighter bomber from General Dynamics Corp., United Press International reported. Plans to procure parts to maintain and modify existing models would require a $29-million budget item. (W Post, 1/31/73, A16) During January:	NASA issued The Interplanetary Pioneers, Vol. 1, Summary (nasa SP-278). The three-volume series by William R. Corliss traced NASA’s Pioneer program from its May 1960 inception through Pioneer 9 (launched Nov. 8, 1968). The program had begun with the launch of early lunar probes Pioneer 1 through 5 by Ames Research Center. Later Pioneers—Pioneer 6 (launched Dec. 16, 1965), Pioneer 7 (launched Aug. 17, 1966), Pioneer 8 (launched Dec. 13, 1967), and Pioneer 9—had been the first spacecraft to orbit the sun systematically at widely separated points in space. They had collected information on space, solar winds, and cosmic radiation of both solar and galactic origin. The Pioneers had been “superbly reliable scientific explorers, sending back information far in excess of their design lifetimes over a period that covers much of the solar cycle.” Vol. II, System Design and Development (SP-279), and Vol. Ill, Operations (SP—280), had been issued in 1972. (Text)
Air Force Secretary John L. McLucas outlined the Air Force role in space in a speech before the Military Order of the World Wars in Memphis, Tenn. Twenty-six military communications satellites orbited as a research effort had proved so successful they were converted to a basic operational system in 1967. Half of these were still operational. An experimental tactical communications program was essentially complete; satellites and some receivers for aircraft, ships, trucks, jeeps, and a man-pack had been tested. The first operational Fleet Satellite Communications System would improve control for Navy ships and Air Force strategic aircraft. A second military use of space provided data for weather analysis and forecasting. McLucas had announced in March that information from an advanced meteorological satellite program was being made available to the public through the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Satellites also provided early warning of missile attack, detection of nuclear explosions in the atmosphere, and navigation data. A single satellite system to meet all requirements was under study. (Av Wk, 2/18/74)
Skylab 4 crewmen Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue began a 21-day prelaunch isolation period geared to a possible Nov. 10 launch. The astronauts would crew the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) in the third and final manned Skylab mission. The isolation would minimize the exposure of the crew to infectious disease, (nasa Release 73—220) October 21:	Not since the 1947 first report of what came to be known as “flying saucers” had there been “such widespread reports of unidentified flying objects, or ufo’s, as in recent days,” the New York Times said. They had ranged from a report of a flying V formation of lights in Rochester. N.Y., to press accounts of “strange creatures with weirdly shaped heads” stopping cars on Route 90 in Gulfport, Miss. Two men in Pascagoula, Miss., had said they had been taken aboard a UFO by creatures with crab-claw hands [see Oct. 12]. The Federal Aviation Administration had said that no reports of special significance had been submitted by airline pilots, and an Air Defense Command spokesman had denied that any UFO had been detected in the last three weeks. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/21/73, 65) October 23:	Two fuel tanks on the Saturn IB launch vehicle scheduled to launch the Skylab 4 astronauts toward a Nov. 10 rendezvous with the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) buckled slightly after fueling at Kennedy Space Center. The dome-shaped top sections of the tanks sank after ground crews pumped 163 cu m (43 000 gal) of kerosene fuel into the Saturn IB’s four giant tanks and then drained some off to prevent expansion or overpressurization. A plastic cover protecting the tanks from a rainstorm prevented air from rushing into the aluminum tanks as the fuel was drained. The resulting vacuum buckled the tanks inward. Metallurgy experts were flown to KSC from Marshall Space Flight Center to assess the problem. (W Star-News, 10/24/73, A23; AP, B Sun, 10/24/73)	.
b/g William J. Kennard (usaf, Ret.), former air surgeon of the Military Air Transport Service, died at Andrews Air Force Base, Md., at age 67. He had served from 1959 to 1967 as Executive Vice President of the Aerospace Medical Assn, and managing editor of Aerospace Medicine. (W Post, 10/26/73, C8) October 24:	Establishment of the Spacelab Program Office in the Office of Manned Space Flight was announced by nasa. The new office, to be headed by Douglas R. Lord, would replace the Sortie Lab Task Force. The reorganization followed the Sept. 24 signing of a cooperative agreement by NASA and the European Space Research Organization which called for European design, development, and manufacture of a Spacelab to be flown in the space shuttle orbiter. (NASA Release 73-228)
nasa’s 15th Annual Awards Ceremony was held in Washington, D.C. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented NASA’s highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal, to Arnold W. Frutkin, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs; Robert H. Gray, Kennedy Space Center Director of Launch Operations; S. Neil Hosenball, Deputy General Counsel; Roy P. Jackson, Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology; and William E. Lilly, Comptroller. The NASA Distinguished Public Service Medal, the agency’s highest award to non-Government personnel, was presented to Dr. Leo Goldberg, Director of Kitt Peak National Observatory, and Dr. Frank Press, Massachusetts Institute of Technology lunar geophysicist. The Group Achievement Award went to the Apollo Lunar Sounder Investigator Team, Jet Propulsion Laboratory; the Communications Cost Reduction Team, NASA Hq.; the Mariner Venus/Mercury 1973 Program Team, jpl; the Scout Project Team, Langley Research Center; and the YF-12 Thermal Loads Calibration Team, Flight Research Center. Other awards included the Exceptional Service Medal to 35 persons and the Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 32. (Program; NASA Release 73-219) October 26:	Skylab 4, the third manned Skylab mission—crewed by Gerald P. Carr, commander; Dr. Edward G. Gibson,, science pilot; and William R. Pogue, pilot—was scheduled for launch Nov. 10 at 11:40 am EST, Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider announced. Plans called for a 60-day or more, open-ended mission carrying enough consumables for 85 days. Mission extensions would be considered on the 56th, 63rd, 70th, and 77th days of the flight. Up to five extravehicular activities would be scheduled, to install and retrieve Apollo Telescope Mount film and experiment samples, repair an antenna on an earth resources experiment, and photograph the Comet Kohoutek on Dec. 25, just before it swung around the sun. An extended 85-day mission would splash down Feb. 3, 1974, at 12:15 pm est off the Pacific Coast near San Diego, (nasa Release 73—233)
nasa launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from Woomera, Australia. The first carried a Univ. of Wisconsin galactic astronomy experiment. The second, launched two hours later, carried a California Institute of Technology astronomy experiment. Both rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (gsfc proj off) November 3—13:	NASA’s Mariner 10 (Mariner-J) Venus-Mercury probe was launched into a parking orbit from Eastern Test Range at 12:45 am est by an Atlas-Centaur Dl-A launch vehicle. After a 25-min coast, a 130-sec burn of the Centaur engines injected the spacecraft into a heliocentric orbit that would allow Mariner 10 to pass within 5300 km (3300 mi) of Venus Feb. 5, 1974. Using the gravitational field of Venus to change the speed and flight path of the spacecraft, Mariner 10 would travel toward a March 29 encounter with Mercury, approaching the sun more closely than any other planetary mission. Mariner 10 would be the first spacecraft to use gravity assist in a dual-planet mission and the first to explore Mercury. The primary objective was to measure Mercury’s environment, atmosphere, surface, and body characteristics and to make similar investigations of Venus. Secondary objectives were to perform experiments in the interplanetary medium and to obtain experience with a dual-planet gravity-assist mission. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED! The seven experiments aboard the octagonal 503-kg (1108-lb) spacecraft included a TV camera and an infrared radiometer to investigate the planet’s surface; plasma science experiment, charged particle telescope, and magnetometer to investigate the environment around the planet and the interplanetary medium; dual-frequency-radio science experiment and ultraviolet spectrometer to measure characteristics of the Mercury neutral atmosphere and ionosphere if they existed; and celestial mechanics experiments to measure planetary mass characteristics and test the theory of relativity. All experiments had been designed and selected for their Mercury scientific objectives but also would obtain important data at Venus and during the cruise phases. The Tidbinbilla, Australia, tracking station was unable to maintain command lock with the spacecraft following spacecraft injection. Acquisition of the star Vega by the spacecraft Canopus tracker also was delayed, but two-way communications were established within an hour and, after repeated commands, Vega was acquired. Solar panels, high-gain and low-gain antennas, and plasma science and magnetometer booms were deployed. On Nov. 4-5 four moon and three earth TV picture mosaics were completed. By Nov. 6 the spacecraft was 1 394 000 km (866 000 mi) from the earth, traveling at a speed of 4.32 km (2.68 mi) per sec. All science experiments except the infrared radiometer and electrostatic analyzer had been turned on. The scanning electron spectrometer portion of the plasma science experiment was not operating properly and the problem was being analyzed. Four trajectory correction maneuvers were scheduled during the mission. The first, Nov. 13, successfully adjusted the flight path for closest approach to Venus on Feb. 5, 1974, as planned. A second would be made Jan. 18, 1974. On Feb. 9 and March 1, 1974, after the Venus encounter, maneuvers would target the Mariner 10 to pass Mercury at 1000-km (620-mi) altitude. The Mariner program, including mission operations and tracking and data systems, was managed by Jet Propulsion Laboratory under the direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science. Lewis Research Center, with contractor General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div., was responsible for the launch vehicle. Previous missions had been made to Mars, including Mariner 4, 6, 7, and 9 (launched Nov. 28, 1964; Feb. 24, 1969; March 27, 1969; and May 30, 1971). Mariner 9 had been the first spacecraft to orbit a planet other than the earth. All others had been flyby missions. (nasa prog off; jpl Release 673) November 3—January 9, 1974:	NASA’s Pioneer 10 interplanetary probe (launched March 2, 1972) became the first spacecraft to reach Jupiter during a two-month encounter, returning new findings about the giant planet and continuing toward Uranus and eventual exit from the solar system. November 3—December 3:	Encounter operations were begun Nov. 3 by Ames Research Center controllers and scientists and on Nov. 4 Pioneer 10 began sending photopolarimeter images of Jupiter to the earth three to eight hours a day. By Nov. 6 the spacecraft, 25 000 000 km (15 500 000 mi) from Jupiter, had begun measuring the placet’s atmosphere above Jupiter’s orange-and-blue-striped cloud tops and the characteristics of particles making up the dense clouds. On Nov. 8 the spacecraft crossed the orbits of Hades and Poseidon, the first two of Jupiter’s outer moons, and on Nov. 9 and 11 it crossed the orbits of Pan and Andrastea. At a Nov. 19 press briefing at arc Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, said that low temperature in that area of the solar system slowed evolution and scientists hoped to find objects not very different from what they were at their formation. “The passage of Pioneer 10 past Jupiter also marks the gateway to the exploration of the outer solar system. This is an exploration which is critical if we truly want to understand the formation and evolution of our solar system.” Dr. William H. Kinard, Langley Research Center scientist, said that Pioneer 10 had encountered 100 times more space dust than expected during the journey between the Asteroid Belt and Jupiter. He expected that 30 times more particles would be detected as the spacecraft neared Jupiter. Pioneer 10 crossed the orbits of Jupiter’s moons Demeter, Hera, and Hestia Nov. 22 and was 11400 600 km (7 084 000 mi) from Jupiter. By Nov. 25 a charged particle detector aboard the spacecraft had begun to show traces of particle radiation. Preliminary indications were that the probe was beginning to cross into Jupiter’s magnetosphere, estimated to be 20 times stronger than the earth’s. The planet’s radiation belts contained particle concentrations up to 1 million times higher than the earth’s Van Allen Belt and were considered by some scientists to be extremely dangerous to the spacecraft’s electronics. At a distance of 8 336 400 km (5180 000 mi) from Jupiter, spacecraft instruments began returning pictures of Jupiter’s great red spot. The final spacecraft-attitude change before encounter was made Nov. 26 and a 24-hour day of imaging and polarimetry began. At 3:30 pm EST Nov. 26 Pioneer 10 successfully crossed Jupiter’s bow shock wave at a distance of 7 709 000 km (4 790 000 mi)—with great turbulence when the solar wind hit Jupiter’s magnetic field. The spacecraft was unaffected by the turbulence hut data from 6 of its 11 instruments changed dramatically. Solar wind speed abruptly decreased to half the normal velocity and solar wind temperatures rose sharply. On Nov. 27, at a distance of 6 760 000 km (4 200 000 mi) from Jupiter, the spacecraft crossed into the planet’s true magnetic envelope, the region of interplanetary space into which the solar wind could not penetrate. Pioneer 10 crossed the magnetopause, entering the magnetic field for the first time at 3:30 pm est. At a Nov. 29 press briefing arc scientists said new data had shown the reach of Jupiter’s magnetic field to be greater than predicted. It stretched more than 13 000 000 km (8 000 000 mi) in diameter and its strength was 40 times that of the earth’s ma'gnetic field. Its direction was south, rather than north as predicted. The strength of the magnetism at 6 400 000 km (4 000 000 mi) from the planet seemed to rise and fall in a regular 10-hour phase, possibly because of the planet’s rotation. Jupiter’s mass was also found to be greater than estimated and the spacecraft was being drawn toward Jupiter faster than planned; it would arrive at its closest approach two minutes earlier than predicted. On Nov. 30 Pioneer 10 recorded a sharp drop in magnetic and radiation measurements, indicating disappearance of the magnetic field. Eleven hours later the spacecraft again crossed the magnetopause, which had apparently been driven toward the planet by a disturbance in the solar wind. At 1 427 500 km (887 000 mi) from the planet, the spacecraft entered Jupiter’s dipole magnetic field. Preliminary data indicated that the outer portions of Jupiter’s magnetic field did not rotate with the planet and were more flattened than the earth’s field. Also, the magnetic dipole center was appreciably offset, both radially and toward the north from the center of the planet. The magnetic axis was tilted from the spin axis. Pioneer 10 crossed the orbits of Jupiter’s innermost moons—Callisto, Ganymede, Europa, and Io—Dec. 2-3. As it came within 446 000 km (277 000 mi) of Ganymede, the infrared radiometer indicated the moon’s surface temperature was 125 K (—235°F). Six hours before its closest approach to Jupiter the probe entered the dangerous region of intense radiation and, soon after, the imaging system ceased returning picture data. Radio commands switched the system back to normal operation within 30 minutes, however. The press later reported that NASA attributed the mishap to an unidentified flight control room guest who had inadvertently pressed against a cathode ray display, pushing a button that cut out eight instruments. December 3—11:	As the gold and silver spacecraft approached Jupiter and radiation intensity increased 10-fold every two hours, reaching 65 million ev 90 min before periapsis, tense scientists paced the floor of arc’s Mission Control with fingers crossed. At 9:25 pm est Dec. 3, after a flight of 641 days and 826 000 000 km (513 000 000 mi), Pioneer 10 sped past Jupiter at an altitude of 130 000 km (81 000 mi), traveling 155 140 km per hour (96 400 mph), the fastest speed ever achieved by a man-made object. The spacecraft’s 11 instruments sent back readings and pictures that came in loud and clear, taking 46 minutes to reach a jubilant team on earth. “Needless to say, we’re elated,” Dr. John Wolfe, Pioneer Project Scientist, told cheering newsmen. The Washington Post later described the scene at arc: “So deluged were Pioneer scientists with transmissions of the spacecraft’s instruments, they were literally changing their minds about Jupiter’s physics and chemistry every hour.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said, “Some of us have been looking through telescopes at Jupiter since our early teens. This is more than we ever dreamed of.” The spacecraft suffered no apparent failures and continued to function as planned. However, preliminary estimates of radiation belt parameters and observed effects on the spacecraft and instrumentation indicated that the margin of survival had been small. As Pioneer 10 flew by Jupiter, the spacecraft was accelerated and slung by the planet’s gravity into a new trajectory that would take it past the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and, traveling at a constant 40 000 km per hr (25 000 mph), out of the solar system toward the constellation Taurus. Pioneer 10 would be the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. By 7:00 pm EST Dec. 4, it had traveled nearly 1600 000 km (1000 000 mi) beyond Jupiter. December 11—January 9:	arc Mission Control ended Jupiter picturetaking Dec. 11 and returned to routine interplanetary operations. The spacecraft recrossed the bow shock wave Dec. 12 and continued into interplanetary space. By Dec. 14 the spacecraft was 10 881000 km (6 761 000 mi) from Jupiter, traveling at 83 525 km per hr (51 900 mph) toward the edge of the solar system. Preliminary findings from the encounter included the discovery of an ionosphere (implying a tenuous atmosphere) surrounding Jupiter’s moon Io, detection of helium in Jupiter’s atmosphere, new density measurements of the entire Jovian system that would affect current theories on the formation of the universe, and new temperature measurements of Jupiter that indicated little difference between average daytime and nighttime temperatures. Pioneer 10 was expected to continue collecting and returning data until it reached the orbit of Uranus in 1980, almost 3 200 000 000 km (2 000 000 000 mi) from the earth. Data returned would determine whether the second Jupiter probe, Pioneer 11 (launched April 5 and crossing the Asteroid Belt since August), could safely be retargeted closer to the planet. The Pioneer 10 mission was officially adjudged a success Jan. 9, 1974. The Pioneer program, begun in 1958, was directed by arc. Pioneer 6 and 7 (launched Dec. 16, 1965, and Aug. 17, 1966, to study the heliocentric space environment) and Pioneer 8 and 9 (launched Dec. 13, 1967, and Nov. 8, 1969, to study interplanetary phenomena) continued to supply data from heliocentric orbit on solar plasma, magnetic and electric fields, and cosmic rays, (nasa prog off; arc Release, 11/6/73; nasa Releases 73-243K, 73-256, 73-279; Wilford, NYT, 11/25/73; 11/30/73, 1; 12/4/73, 1; 12/5/73, 13; O’Toole, W Post, 12/4/73, Al; AP, W Star-News, 11/28-29/73; AP, B Sun, 12/3-4/73; Miles, LA Times, 12/4/73; 12/6/73) November 3:	The Skylab 4 launch crew successfully completed a simulated launch of the Saturn IB booster at Kennedy Space Center. The booster was scheduled to lift the Apollo command and service module and crew members Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue into orbit Nov. 10 to dock with the Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) and begin NASA’s third manned Skylab mission. Following the perfectly timed simulation, the fuel was drained from the launch vehicle and preparations for the final countdown were begun. (AP, B Sun, 11/3/73, A7)
Univ. of Texas physicists A. A. Jackson IV and Michael P. Ryan, Jr., proposed in a Nature article that the event that leveled forests in a wide region of Siberia on June 30, 1908, was the passage of a black hole that had plunged completely through the earth. They suggested that ships’ logs for that date be examined for evidence of an unusual occurrence. The object that fell on Siberia had been referred to as the Tunguska meteorite, although it had left no crater or other clearly identifiable meteorite residue. “We suggest that a black hole of substellar mass . . . could explain many of the mysteries associated with the event.” (Nature, 9/14/73, 88-89) September 14—23:	The first major international aerospace show in Latin America was held in Sao Paulo, Brazil. More than 250 firms from 11 nations displayed products from satellite equipment to metal forgings, aircraft, helicopters, and small components. Aircraft exhibited included the British Hawker Siddeley Harrier vstol [vertical or short takeoff and landing] fighter, Fokker F-28 twin-jet transport, Israel Aircraft Industries’ Arava cargo transport, Aeronautica Macchi MB-326 jet trainer-fighter, Aerospatiale A-300B Airbus, Canadair CL-215 amphibian, Northrop F-5E light jet fighter aircraft, and Lockheed C-5A heavy logistic transport. Of the nations invited to participate by the sponsoring Brazilian Ministry of Aeronautics, only Japan and the U.S.S.R. had declined. (Av Wk, 9/17/73, 22; Interavia, 9/73, 954) September 17:	The liquid-fueled “core” vehicle of the Titan-Centaur launch vehicle was moved from the Vertical Integration Building to the Solid Motor Assembly Building in the Titan complex at Kennedy Space Center. Twin 26-m (85-ft) solid-fueled-rocket strap-on boosters would be attached to the core. The Titan-Centaur, scheduled to be launched on its proof flight in January 1974, mated the Titan III core vehicle and its twin solid-fueled rockets with the Centaur high-energy liquid-fueled final stage. The 49-m (160-ft), 3610-kg (7959-lb) configuration was designed to carry heavy payloads on orbital and planetary missions, such as the Viking Mars mission and the joint U.S. and West German Helios mission to the sun, during the mid- and late 1970s. The liftoff thrust of the twin solid-fueled boosters was 10.8 million newtons (2.4 million lbs). On its proof flight the Titan-Centaur would carry a mass model of the Viking spacecraft and a 66-kg (145-lb) Space Plasma High Voltage Interaction Experiment (sphinx) spacecraft, to measure in orbit for one year the interaction of space plasmas with high-voltage surfaces. The main purpose of the flight would be to demonstrate that the launch vehicle and launch facilities could support operational missions and that the Centaur could perform an operational two-burn mission and an operational three-burn mission carrying a payload to a synchronous altitude of 35 888 km (22 300 mi). The effort to integrate the Titan with the Centaur had begun in the mid-1960s when NASA recognized the need to fill a performance and cost gap between the Atlas-Centaur and Saturn launch vehicles, (ksc Release 215-73)	*
Concorde 02, reproduction model of the Anglo-French supersonic transport, flew from Washington, D.C., Dulles Airport to Paris’ Orly Field in 3 hrs 33 min. The aircraft had participated in dedication of the Dallas-Fort Worth airport Sept. 21. (Concorde Bull 12, 1/1/74) September 26-27:	Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D—Wash.) explained S. 2495, a bill to apply NASA’s expertise to solving domestic problems, during the first day of two-day hearings on the state of the aerospace industry by the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Sen. Magnuson, with Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) and Sen. John V. Tunney (D-Calif.), introduced the bill Sept. 27. The bill, the Technology Resources Survey and Applications Act, would amend the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 to provide “an organization within NASA to carry out programs ... to resolve critical national problems. This would expand an activity already underway within NASA and enable us to better utilize a capability which has already exhibited an impressive record of success.” The programs would be determined by a National Technology Resource Council of Cabinet members and heads of technological agencies, which would make its recommendations to the President. Sen. Magnuson suggested changing NASA’s name to the National Applications of Science Administration. “I do believe the name . . . would accurately reflect the new role which my bill attempts to create for NASA.” Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., President of the Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., testified that foreign competition for U.S. and international aerospace markets was currently “of a scope, determination, and quality that we have not had to face since World War II. The underpinning of strong research and development programs—vital to our technological advance—is being downgraded to a serious degree. There is an alarming scarcity of private sources of financing for the development and production of new commercial aircraft. As a low-profit industry, traditionally averaging a profit about half that of other manufacturing industries, we lack the resources for reinvestment, cushioning against risk, and attracting investors. Above all, there is uncertainty in this transitional period about future national gods which might utilize our capabilities. Will we continue to contribute primarily to space exploration, defense, and long-range air travel, or will we next find ourselves emphasizing such efforts as environmental control, law enforcement, health delivery services, housing, and urban mass transit?” Dr. Wernher von Braun—Vice President, Engineering and Development, Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning—testified on the future of satellite communications: “There is no field in which the goals of space applications are expanding at a faster rate.” Ever since NASA demonstrated “that radio signals bounced off passive reflection satellites such as the Echo balloon or rebroadcast by active repeater spacecraft such as Early Bird, worldwide communications by satellite have been growing. . . . Satellites, by providing international telephone and television service, are an important force in overcoming regional and national barriers. It is difficult to maintain hostility and isolation in the presence of free communications.” Satellite communications would “soon be commonplace in our country.” With the advent of the reusable space shuttle to service and repair satellites in the 1980s, “even nations with limited fiscal resources can put in a network of smaller, far less expensive ground stations.” Thanks to NASA programs initiated a few years ago, “the United States is still quite active in the area of pioneering new technology for communications satellites.” (Transcript) September 27—29:	The U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 12, carrying cosmonauts l/c Vasily G. Lazarev and flight engineer Oleg G. Makarov, from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 5:18 pm local time (3:18 pm Moscow time; 8:18 am edt) into earth orbit with 229-km (142.3-mi) apogee, 180-km (111.8-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 51.7° inclination. Soviet news agency Tass announced the objectives of the two-day mission were to test improved flight systems, test manual and automatic control in various flight conditions, and obtain spectrographic data of separate sections of the earth “for the solution of economic problems.” The flight would further improve development of manned spacecraft. After six hours in flight the cosmonauts reported they had adjusted to weightlessness and were carrying out all scheduled activities. All spacecraft systems were functioning normally. During the first day, Lazarov—45-yr-old air force test pilot and physician—and Makarov— 40-yr-old engineer who had taken part in developing the control board and flight program for Yuri A. Gagarin’s Vostok 1 mission of April 12, 1961—maneuvered their spacecraft in orbit to test manual and automatic control and piloting techniques. The spacecraft was moved into a higher and nearly circular orbit, with parameters reported by Tass as 345-km (214.4-mi) apogee, 326-km (202.6-mi) perigee, 91-min period, and 51.6° inclination. The cosmonauts also made spectrographs of natural formations of the earth’s surface. They were reported Sept. 28 to be in high spirits and good physical condition. Tass reported a new spacecraft design and a new spacesuit, “very simple and comfortable,” were being tested. Spacesuits were worn for launch and descent but not during the flight itself. On Sept. 29 the crew oriented their spacecraft and fired the braking engine. The landing module separated from the spacecraft and entered descent trajectory. The parachute system was deployed at 7.6 km (4.7 mi) above the earth and engines softlanded the craft 400 km (250 mi) southwest of Karaganda in the Kazakhstan Steppe at 2:34 pm Moscow time (7:34 am edt). A medical check at the landing site showed “the state of [the cosmonauts’] health is good.” Soyuz 12 was the first Soviet manned space flight since the 1971 Salyut 1-Soyuz 11 mission. Soyuz 10 (launched April 23, 1971, carrying three cosmonauts) had docked with the orbiting Salyut 1 space laboratory (launched April 19) but the cosmonauts had not boarded. American observers believed the Soyuz spacecraft had spun out of control, causing the cosmonauts to become ill and necessitating an early return to earth. Three cosmonauts launched June 6, 1971, on Soyuz 11 had docked with and boarded Salyut 1. They worked successfully in orbit for 24 days but were found dead on landing, from pressure loss in the landing craft, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/73; fbis-Sov, 9/28/73, Ul-A>; 10/1/73, Ul—3; SBD, 9/28/73, 138; Kaiser, W Post, 9/28/73, Al; Shabad, NYT, 9/30/73, 1; Seeger, W Post, 9/30/73, 145) September 27:	The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite on a Titan IIIB-Agena launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base into an orbit with a 384.6-km (239-mi) apogee, 128.8-km (80-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 110.5° inclination. The satellite reentered Oct. 29. (Pres Rpt 74; Wilson, W Post, 10/16/73, A7)
Appointment of Roald Sagdeyev as Director of the Soviet Space Research Institute was announced in Vestnik, monthly publication of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences. Sagdeyev replaced Georgy I. Petrov, who went into voluntary retirement. Sagdeyev, a nuclear physicist, had been made a corresponding member of the Academy of Sciences in 1964 and had become a full member in 1968. Before his appointment as Director, Sagdeyev had specialized in plasma physics at the Nuclear Physics Institute in Novosibirsk. (AP, W Post, 9/23/7$, Al; 9/24/73, A21) September 2—7:	The 66th Annual General Conference of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) was held in Dublin, Ireland. U.S. participants included Apollo 17 commander Eugene A. Cernan and Apollo 16 commander John W. Young. The 1972 fai Gold Space Medal was presented to Cernan in recognition of the Dec. 7-19, 1972, final Apollo mission which had “accomplished all of its goals and magnificently concluded the extraordinary and highly successful Apollo program.” Cernan also received t'he 1972 De la Vaulx Medal for his absolute world record of 21 hrs 32 min 44 sec for “Duration of Stay Outside his Lunar Module ‘Challenger’ Spacecraft,” set during Apollo 17. Young received the Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for “remarkable leadership, skill, daring and dedication” as commander of the April 16-27, 1972, Apollo 16 mission and the V. M. Komarov Diploma, on behalf of himself and Apollo 16 Astronauts Thomas K. Mattingly II and Charles M. Duke, Jr., for successful completion of all but one of the mission’s 33 major experiments. The Groupe Diplome d’Honneur for Aeronautics was awarded to the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration “in recognition of its outstanding contribution to air traffic efficiency and safety by the development of the now fully operational Automated Radar Terminal System” (arts). The Groupe Diplome d’Honneur for Astronautics went to Boeing Co. Aerospace Group for design and production of the lunar roving vehicle (lrv) used during the Apollo 15, 16, and 17 missions. The Paul Tis-sandier Diploma was presented to Kay A. Brick for “her outstanding contributions to women’s aviation over the past 23 years” as a member and Chairman of the Board of the All-Women’s Transcontinental Air Race “Powder Puff Derby.” (naa News, 9/73, 1—2; faa Release 73— 155; A&A 1972) September 3:	The U.S. had “discreetly blocked” Soviet attempts to purchase 10 ilc Industries’ Apollo lunar-configured spacesuits, Aviation Week & Space Technology'said. The U.S.S.R. had been told that U.S. export of such technology could not be approved. (Av Wk, 9/3/73, 11) September 4:	World atlases were inaccurate in delineating outer boundaries of polar icecaps according to imagery returned by Nimbus 5 (weather satellite launched by NASA Dec. 10, 1972), NASA announced. A Goddard Space Flight Center study had shown that synoptic photos from Nimbus 5 clearly indicated polar regions underwent large-scale changes in a short time. Boundaries between the multiyear icepack around the North Pole and the large areas of first-year ice varied significantly within one freezing season. Even greater changes occurred around Antarctica. Nimbus 5 also was measuring daily rainfall distribution over the earth’s oceans to indicate to meteorologists how much energy was being released into the global atmosphere. An electrically scanning microwave radiometer aboard the spacecraft was measuring rainfall rate and heat thus released to enable forecasters to understand a tropical storm or hurricane and predict its 24- to 48-hr intensity, (nasa Releases 73-176, 73-175)
Findings that the Aug. 4, 1972, solar storm—the largest ever recorded— had caused a small but measurable increase in the length of a day on earth were reported in Nature by Goddard Institute for Space Studies research associate Stephen Plagemann and John Gribben, an astronomer employed by Nature. Examination of U.S. Naval Observatory data had shown a daily increase in the day’s length 10 times greater than usual between Aug. 4 and Aug. 8, indicating that the earth’s rotation had slowed down fractionally. After a few days, the rotation rate had returned to its normal level. (Nature, 5/4/73, 26)
The last Apollo splashdown party given by National Space Club in Washington, D.C., had the theme “Salute to Apollo: Man’s Promise for the Future.” The program included remarks and messages from President Nixon; Vice President Spiro T. Agnew; Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences; Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt; former NASA Administrator James E. Webb; North American Rockwell Corp. Vice President and President-Aerospace Group William B. Bergen; and Grumman Aerospace Corp. President Joseph G. Gavin, Jr. Former President Lyndon B. Johnson who had died during day, had sent a message commending space pioneers who had “made the Apollo miracle a living reality. It has been more . . . than an amazing adventure into the unexplored and the unknown. The Apollo program has been and will endure as a monument to many things—to the personal courage of some of the finest men our nation has produced—to the technological and managerial capability, which is the genius of our system—and to a successful cooperation among nations which has proved to all of us what can be done when we work together with our eyes on a glorious goal.” Master of Ceremonies Peter S. Hackes of National Broadcasting Co. eulogized President Johnson as “the policy father of the space program.” A message from Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D-Minn.), former Vice President and Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said the Apollo program had been an “outstanding example of government, industry, and university cooperation and has really shown brilliance of management and technological competence.” An Apollo film was narrated by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, NASA Apollo Program Director. Dr. Petrone said the Apollo program had taken 12 yrs “and I don’t look upon this as curtains at the end of a play. It’s like the curtain at the end of the first act. It’s just beginning.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said President Johnson had been instrumental in achieving congressional support for the space program. Apollo 8 Astronaut William A. Anders recalled President Johnson as “a very large man, very down to earth” who had the spirit of an astronaut, but was “a little too big” to be one. (Program; Texts; Smyth, W Post, 1/23/73, B2; ri pio)
