NASA’s shrinking work force and the relatively few available women and minority engineers and scientists were responsible for the agency’s admittedly poor record on equal employment, Dr. Dudley G. McConnell, NASA Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs, told the Senate Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Housing and Urban Development, Space, Science, and Veterans. The hearing was investigating the October 1973 dismissal of a NASA official, Mrs. Ruth Bates Harris, after she and two coauthors asserted in a report that the agency was not moving fast enough to hire women and minority workers and that NASA’s proportion of minority employees was the lowest in the Government. Despite the difficulties, NASA in the past had hired well above the agency’s current percentage of minorities: 10.3% in 1971; 13.2% in 1972; and 16.3% in 1973. Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley denied the report was the reason for the Harris termination but conceded NASA’s poor record on minority hiring. Subcommittee Chairman William Proxmire (D-Wis.) ordered the agency to report to him quarterly on progress toward its own equal opportunity goals. (Transcript)
Key appointments in the space shuttle program at Marshall Space Flight Center became effective. Robert E. Lindstrom became Manager of the Space Shuttle Office, replacing Roy E. Godfrey, who became Special Assistant to the msfc Director. Within the Shuttle Office, James R. Thompson became Project Manager for the space shuttle main engine. John A. Chambers became Deputy Manager of the Shuttle Engine Office and Frank M. Stewart became technical assistant to the Manager of the Shuttle Projects Office, (msfc Release 74-41)
John H. Disher, Skylab Program Deputy Director since August 1965, had been named Director of Advanced Programs in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA announced. Skylab had concluded operations with the 8 Feb. splashdown of its third manned mission to visit the Nation’s first experimental space station. In the Advanced Program Office, Disher would head evaluations of concepts for manned space activities within changing national needs and priorities, to guide transition from present to future programs. From 1959 to 1961 Disher had headed advanced manned missions. He had also served as Apollo Test Director and Assistant Director for Apollo Spacecraft Development, (nasa Release 74-48)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, released the budget statement he had given at a 2 Feb. press briefing. The FY 1975 NASA budget plan for new authorization of $3,247 billion and spending of $3,273 billion, although a “constrained budget,” would carry forward the programs planned in FY 1974. Goals and major programs were the same, with three new projects in space science and applications, but the space shuttle had been slipped four to six months. NASA’s FY 1974 budget had “reflected a sharp temporary reduction, because of Government-wide fiscal problems . . . , below the $3.4 billion level previously planned as the long-term level.” Increases in FY 1975 and later years were therefore “in order to approach again the level required to maintain . . . advances in space and aeronautics for the rest of the decade.” The FY 1975 increase of “about $100 million,” however, was less than required to return to NASA’s complete program as planned, and adjustments had been necessary. Principally, the first manned orbital flight of the shuttle was rescheduled to the second quarter of 1979, instead of the end of 1978, but NASA had a “firm commitment now” that there would be no more slips for budgetary reasons, and none was expected for technical reasons. NASA Comptroller William E. Lilly said at the briefing the stretchout was expected to increase shuttle costs about $50 million “in 1971 dollars.” The $800 million requested for the shuttle was $89 million less than NASA had submitted to the Office of Management and Budget. In the three new space flight projects, Pioneer Venus had top scientific priority as the next step in planetary exploration. Two missions launched in 1978 would study the Venus atmosphere for a better understanding of that planet and of the earth’s atmosphere, meteorology, and climatology. In the second new start, seasat, an experimental applications satellite, would measure ocean characteristics to aid scientific understanding of ocean dynamics and determine if a forecasting system could be developed, seasat-a was to be launched in 1978. The third start, the Heat Capacity Mapping Mission (hcmm), would launch an Explorer satellite in 1977 to make thermal measurements of the earth’s surface to help find mineral resources and potential geothermal energy sources and to discriminate rock structures for planning civil works such as highways. NASA was asking $6 million to build the world’s first large infrared telescope, on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, for planetary research to complement planetary space flights, especially to provide data for the 1977 launch of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn probe. Another new thrust, still in the planning stage, was the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss) , to return the large amounts of data expected from the shuttle in the 1980s and permit phase-out of some tracking stations. NASA would not develop the spacecraft for the TDRSS but would lease satellite services from a private organization, beginning in CY1979. Analysis of data from the Skylab missions that were ending with the 8 Feb. splashdown of Skylab 4 would continue for many years. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project joint engineering and training activities with the U.S.S.R. were on schedule. All shuttle hardware prime contractors and most subcontractors had been selected, and the Dept, of Defense tentatively planned to modify an existing upper stage for use as an interim space tug with, the shuttle. Erts 1, launched 23 July 1972, was still working well, exceeding its design life by more than six months. ERTS-b, previously planned for 1976 launch, had been moved to 1975. A number of nasa and 11 commercial applications launches were scheduled during the year. A nominal communications satellite research program would be continued. In space astronomy, oso-i was scheduled for 1975 and the heAo series would be resumed, with launches planned for 1977, 1978, and 1979. Astronautics programs would continue to develop technology to improve fuel economy, reduce noise, and improve performance of U.S.-built civil transport aircraft. nasa’s Civil Service employment was to be stabilized at the end of FY 1974 levels except for a further reduction of 354 persons at Marshall Space Flight Center following completion of Skylab. NASA’s FY 1975 total would be 24 616, about 2200 less than in FY 1973 and 354 less than in FY 1974. Support service contractors at the Centers had reductions planned at about the same level, the 25 000 FY 1973 total dropping to 24 000 in FY 1974 and to 22 000 in FY 1975. (Text; NASA, FY 75 Budget Briefing transcript & background material)
Dr. John F. Victory, former Executive Secretary of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, died in Tucson, Ariz., at the age of 82. Dr. Victory, naca’s first employee when it was established in 1915, had been appointed Secretary of naca in 1921 and in 1948 had been named its Executive Secretary, responsible for naca’s functioning as an independent research agency. When NASA succeeded naca in 1958, he served as special assistant to Dr. T. Keith Glennan, NASA Administrator, and he remained with NASA until retirement in 1960. Dr. Victory, who had been known as “Mr. Aviation” in the industry, had received numerous awards, including a Presidential Medal for Merit, the first Air Foundation Certificate of Recognition, the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy, and naca’s Distinguished Service Medal. (NASA Activities, Feb 75, 18)
Medical tests of Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue—begun after their 8 Feb. splashdown—continued on board the U.S.S. New Orleans. All three astronauts reached their maximum preflight work rates on the bicycle ergometer. Each astronaut completed the full run on a whirling chair, reaching a rate of 30 rpm while making 150 head movements with no problems. A test of muscle function showed no significant decrease. As soon as the men had landed, the pull of gravity had compressed the vertebrae of their spinal columns, removing the inch or more of height gained in weightlessness. Carr had gained slightly in weight; Pogue had lost one kilogram and Dr. Gibson a little more than two. (McElheny, NYT, 11 Feb 74, 7)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue had experienced a harrowing last hour in space when they could not get commands to the secondary control system, which pointed the spacecraft heat shield at the correct angle during reentry. After discovering a leak in the prime reaction control system, the astronauts tried and failed to activate the secondary system. “Our hearts fell and our eyeballs popped,” Carr said at a 22 Feb. Johnson Space Center press conference. Carr, commander of the mission, instead had used a manual procedure to bypass the computer controlling the engine’s firing and guided the spacecraft to a safe on-target splashdown. The press later quoted a NASA spokesman as saying that the failure to activate the backup control system was “just a matter of a switch not being thrown.” (O’Toole, W Post, 15 Feb 74, Al; upi, Richmond Times-Dispatch, 16 Feb 74; Maloney, H Post, 23 Feb 74)
“I am sure life will move out from the Earth, probably first to the Moon and then to Mars,” Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said in a speech reviewing NASA’s planetary program before the National Space Club. Just what form of life would be transplanted, whether man or some simple organism, would be the subject of debate. Four planets—Jupiter, Venus, Mars, and Mercury—had already been visited. The next major event would be the Viking landings on Mars in 1976. Historically, two significant events in 1965 had determined the direction of the planetary program. The first was r. study at Woods Hole, Mass., which had recommended that the space program, following Apollo, should search for life on the planets and give first priority to the study of Mars—while also maintaining a wide-ranging program of general planetary exploration—because Mars most closely resembled the earth and was the most likely to support life. The second event, the 14 July 1965 flight of Mariner 4 past Mars, supported the recommendations when it found evidence of water in the Martian atmosphere. “In retrospect, I think the decision . . . has been sound.” But a major decision that faced NASA this summer, one year before the launch of Viking, was whether there should be follow-on Viking missions. “Should Mars continue to have first priority in planetary exploration? . . . Clearly, if we find evidence of life on Mars, . . . Mars will have first priority.” (Text)
The nasa Space Shuttle Cost and Review Committee recommended program changes to Dr. James C. Fletcher, Administrator, to reduce rising costs. It also reported design changes made necessary by thermal weight constraints. The committee, headed by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight John F. Yardley, recommended delaying the second shuttle orbiter flight, refurbishing the first test orbiter earlier than planned instead. Deferrals of three months to two years were recommended for components of the second shuttle launch complex at Kennedy Space Center, which had originally been scheduled for completion about the time of the first shuttle flights. Also recommended was a delay in the development of improved spacesuits and portable life support systems for extravehicular activities from the space shuttle. Instead, evas would use Apollo-style hardware. Emergency barriers on shuttle runways and a building at Ksc for installing fairings and parachutes on solid-fueled rocket motors were judged unnecessary. Some tests were recommended for cancellation. Design changes to accommodate thermal and weight constraints included payload doors of a graphite epoxy composite that expanded less when heated and weighed 400 kg less than die aluminum composite originally planned for use. Solid-fueled-rocket separation motors that would provide a higher thrust level for a shorter time when separating die large solid-propellant boosters from the orhiter after launch were found to cause no orbiter damage—solving a possible problem anticipated with the original separation motors. The committee also recommended switching to a new thermal coating material for the external liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen tank to prevent tank overheating during launch, (nasa prog off, interview, 22 Sept 75; Av Wk, 9 Sept 74, 9-10; NASA Off of Admin, Daily Appointments Calendar)
The Navy had selected International Business Machines Corp. Electronic Systems Center as prime contractor for the light airborne multipurpose system (lamps) helicopter, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Under a $13.8-million contract, IBM would develop and test a prototype antisubmarine warfare and avionics and weapon control system for installation and integration in a helicopter furnished by the Navy. (Av Wk, 8 April 74,24) 8 April-3 May: Some 75 Soviet aerospace specialists—including U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Technical Director Konstantin D. Bushuyev, prime crewmen Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, Flight Director Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, and training officer for astp crews Valery F. Bykovsky—joined U.S. astp astronauts and specialists at Johnson Space Center to continue technical discussions and planning for the July 1975 joint astp mission. Agreement was reached that specialists and flight crews would visit the U.S. launch site in February 1975 and the U.S.S.R. launch site in May 1975, for familiarization with the spacecraft and to test compatible equipment. NASA had defined no technical need for U.S. representatives at the Soviet launch site during actual liftoff; U.S. specialists would be in the control center. Apollo docking module and Soyuz life-support-system tests were reviewed, in addition to safety assessment reports on control systems and spacecraft manufacturing test and checkout. Schedules for each of the five joint experiments—ultraviolet absorption, biological interaction, microbial exchange, multipurpose furnace, and artificial solar eclipse— were approved. Agreement was also reached on the basic approach and content of the joint flight readiness review, to be held in May 1975. The U.S.S.R. crew and U.S. astp Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton walked through hundreds of procedures for the first time as crews, to verify the integrity of the docking module that would connect the Soyuz and Apollo command and service modules. At a 26 April press conference Stafford demonstrated his proficiency in the Russian language by answering newsmen’s questions in Russian. Cosmonauts and astronauts agreed that “we’ve no problem in language.” One cosmonaut said, “Our work is considerably better when the American crew speaks Russian and our crew speaks English.” Glynn S. Lunney, astp Technical Director for the U.S., said during a 3 May press briefing that the work in the U.S. and jointly was on schedule. The progress “has been good and . . . gratifying.” Prof. Bushuyev said that “there can be no longer any doubt that we will be successful in preparing for and achieving our joint flight in July 1975.” (jsc Roundup, 12 April 74, 1; astp Communique; Press briefing transcripts, 26 April 74, 3 May 74)
President Nixon wired salutations to Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue aboard the recovery ship U.S.S. New Orleans after their successful splashdown at 11:17 am edt. The astronauts, launched 16 Nov. 1973, had set an 84-day space flight record in the Orbital Workshop. The President said: “On behalf of the American people, I salute Skylab’s third crew of astronauts on their safe return to earth. They have successfully completed man’s longest space journey and brought to an end one of the most scientifically productive endeavors in the history of human exploration. From the Skylab program, we have learned that we can live and work in space for long periods of time. And we have found that the results of these efforts can be of enormous practical value to life on earth. “Skylab now joins the ranks of the Santa Maria, the H.M.S. Beagle, the Spirit of St. Louis, and the Eagle. Each of these great vehicles has carried us beyond the contemporary limits of human knowledge into a new comprehension of our own possibilities and a new definition of our own destiny. We welcome the men of Skylab home, and we salute them and all their predecessors who have launched us on this great adventure.” {PD, 11 Feb 74,193; A&A 1973) .
President Ford outlined “Project Interdependence,” a global approach to the energy problem, in his address to the ninth annual World Energy Conference in Detroit. The President proposed that all nations increase production, reduce consumption, and eliminate waste of energy; that a cooperative spirit exist; that poor nations receive special attention; and that fuel prices reach a level providing strong incentives to producers without disrupting consumer economics. Describing U.S. mobilization to achieve long-term goals, the President said the energy program would require “a commitment in excess of the successful one made by John F. Kennedy to put a man on the Moon in the last decade.” (PD, 30 Sept 74,1181—6)
9 May: NASA announced the appointment of John F. Yardley as Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. Yardley—who had been Vice President and General Manager of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. Eastern Div. since 1972—would replace Dale D. Myers, who had returned to private industry. At McDonnell Douglas, Yardley had served as project engineer for Mercury spacecraft design 1958—1960, Launch Operations Manager for Mercury and Gemini Spacecraft 1960-1964, Gemini Technical Director 1964-1967, and as Corporate-wide General Manager for the Skylab project, (nasa Ann, 9 May 74)
Research into automotive propulsion systems was reviewed by NASA, Dept, of Transportation, and Environmental Protection Agency officials in hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. H.R. 10392 had been introduced 19 Sept. 1973 to authorize nasa research toward development of economical, energy-conserving systems with clean emissions and improved performance. Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, testified 4 Feb. that Lewis Research Center was testing epa’s experimental engine, under a June 1973 agreement with epa on work toward a low-pollution gas-turbine-powered vehicle. Upgraded engine work would be completed by mid-1975 and vehicle performance evaluation before the end of CY 1975. First results of Jet Propulsion Laboratory investigations of hydrogen injection into fuel to improve efficiency and reduce pollution in conventional automobile engines promised achievement of 1977 Federal emission standards with 25% improvement in fuel economy. LeRC Director Bruce T. Lundin testified that, in addition to the gas turbine engine, a broader, longer range, advanced technology program was under way, with 13 industry contracts for such improvements as a low-emission combustor, higher-temperature heat exchangers, lower-cost turbine discs, turbine wheel cooling, and low-cost fuel controls. Dr. William H. Pickering, Jpl Director, reported a test automobile using bottled gas to inject hydrogen into the fuel had already met the carbon monoxide emission standard and had almost met the nitrogen oxide standard, although the hydrocarbon emissions remained a problem. With engine modifications to produce hydrogen from gasoline, instead of using bottled gas, performance per gallon of fuel was expected to improve 25% over the conventional engine. (Transcript) 4- 8 February: The first meeting of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization’s Assembly of Parties was held in Washington, D.C. Seventy-two of the eighty-four member governments were represented. Raymond J. Waldmann (U.S.) was elected Chairman and Dr. Osama Anani (Jordan) was elected Deputy Chairman. Elected as Vice-chairmen were Ambassador Alejandro Orfila (Argentina), Ambassador Adolfo Alessandrini (Italy), Ambassador Leonard 0. Kibinge (Kenya), and Ambassador Motoo Ogiso (Japan). The Assembly of Parties found that the proposed U.S. Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (goes) and maritime satellite system would not interfere with the intelsat system, goes was technically compatible with the use of the radio-frequency spectrum and orbital space by the existing or planned satellites. The maritime satellite system would not prejudice direct satellite telecommunication links. The Assembly refused a United Nations request for free use of INTELSAT satellites, although a priority access arrangement, for periods not exceeding 90 days during an emergency, would be worked out. (intelsat Release 74-12). 5- 22 February: Mariner 10, launched 3 Nov. 1973, passed within 5800 km of Venus—within 15 km of the planned aim point—at 1:01 pm edt 5 Feb. The encounter sequence was accomplished according to plan and data were transmitted over the 45 million km between the earth and Venus at a rate of 117.6 kilobits per sec. Excellent ultraviolet cloud-structure pictures and new data on particle environment and mass, density, and shape of the planet were returned. Because Mariner 10 approached Venus on the dark side, the TV sequence was not begun until shortly before the encounter, at 12:21 pm edt. The spacecraft flew behind Venus at 1:07 pm edt for 20 min; TV signals were stored on tape and recovered without difficulty after Mariner 10 emerged from the occultation zone. During occultation, the spacecraft’s radio antenna was aimed toward the edge of the planet so that the radio signals were bent around Venus by the extremely dense atmosphere and sent on to the earth. All science instruments functioned normally except the scanning electrostatic analyzer. The TV sequence was completed 13 Feb. after some 4165 pictures were returned to the earth. During the flyby, the 503-kg spacecraft used the gravitational field of Venus to slow its speed and direct the flight path toward a 29 March encounter with Mercury. By 22 Feb. Mariner 10—its speed increasing as it came nearer the sun—was traveling 3 million km per day toward the planet. Preliminary science results were presented at a press briefing 7 Feb. at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Dr. Herbert S. Bridge, Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientist, said the solar wind was interacting with the ionosphere of Venus, producing a magnetic tail that could be detected as a modified plasma flow as far out from the planet as 500 Venus radii. Dr. James A. Dunne, Mariner project scientist, said the magnetic field doubled just before radio occultation but that no evidence of an intrinsic planetary magnetic field was found. Preliminary radio science results indicated that Venus was very round, 100 times less oblate than the earth, and confirmed that Venus had a dayside ionosphere. The mass of the planet was slightly less than that derived from previous data. Hydrogen was a major element of the Venus cloud deck, possibly present in droplets of sulfuric acid as well as water vapor. Manner 10 found no evidence of deuterium on the planet, indicating that the hydrogen had originated from the solar wind. Helium, carbon, and atomic oxygen were found in the atmosphere, with possible traces of argon and neon. Outer atmosphere temperature of 590 K (600°F) was suggested. TV data indicated a uniform main cloud deck with three or four layers and a stratified haze layer. TV pictures in uv showed a classical “Y” feature that originated in the equatorial region and spiraled toward the pole. Clear circulation patterns could be seen at the poles, caused by rising gas transporting excess solar heat from the equatorial zone by convection. The atmosphere was smooth, with no swirling storms, (nasa mor, 11 March 74; Briefing transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 5 Feb. 74, 18; 6 Feb. 74, 1; Miles, LA Times, 6 Feb 74)
The space shuttle would introduce a new mode oi space research in the 1980s, Dr. John E. Naugle, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, said at a space transportation system press briefing in Washington, D.C. Sounding rockets gave the scientist an immediate return of data but only for a very short-duration flight. Satellites provided longer mission times but it might be five to seven years from the initiation of the project until data were received. Experiments flown on the shuttle could remain in orbit from 7 to 30 days and then be returned immediately for evaluation. This capability would be a powerful tool in the development of new technology. Dr. Myron S. Malkin, Space Shuttle Program Director, said NASA’s commitment to Congress called for a total development cost of $5.15 billion in 1971 dollars for two operational shuttle vehicles plus $10.5 million for each of 725 missions projected for 1980-1990. Mission costs would be shared by participating experimenters, and estimates were now running at $9.05 million per flight because of reduced estimates for external tank development. Cost for a shuttle flight, which could take 29 500 kg into orbit, contrasted with $18 million for a 4500-kg payload launched on an expendable Atlas booster and up to $58 million to orbit 14 000-18 000 kg on a Saturn IB. Shuttle development was on schedule; the first approach and landing tests were to be in the second quarter of 1977 and the first manned orbital flight in 1979. Orbiter manufacture was under way. The main engine oxygen burner had been tested 14 April and the first big engine firing was scheduled for the end of 1975. NASA would need a fleet of seven orbi-ters at $250 million each if the projected missions were flown. Elwood W. Land, Jr., of the Space Shuttle Systems Office said a 25-astronaut flight corps probably would be maintained to fly missions averaging more than one a week. LeRoy E. Day, Space Shuttle Program Deputy Director, reported the main engine was being designed to make 55 starts before refurbishment was necessary. Engine lifetime would be much longer. The solid boosters were being designed for 20 flights. Phillip E. Culbertson, Director of Mission and Payload Integration, said that all but the smallest expendable launch vehicles would be phased out about three years after the shuttle became operational. (Transcript)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, was presented the 1974 Rockefeller Public Service Award for Administration by President Ford at the Mayflower Hotel in Washington, D.C. As Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight at NASA Hq., Deputy Director of Manned Space Flight Center, and then msc Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program before becoming NASA Deputy Administrator in 1969, Dr. Low had been responsible for development of the Mercury and Gemini programs, an original planner of the Apollo program, and negotiator for the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. He had joined the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics in 1949 and moved to NASA when it was established in 1958. Dr. Robert M. White, Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, also received one of the five $10 000 awards, for physical resource development and protection. Established by John D. Rockefeller II in 1952 to honor excellence in the career Civil Service, the awards were administered by the Princeton Univ. Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs. {PD, 9 Dec 74, 1528-9; Marshall Star, 11 Dec 74; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74, 8; NASA Biog)
nasa’s 16th Annual Awards Ceremony was held in Washington, D.C. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented nasa’s highest award, the Distinguished Service Medal, to Robert L. Krieger, Director, Wallops Flight Center; Norman Pozinsky, Hq. Director, Network Development and Engineering; Martin L. Raines, Johnson Space Center Director of Safety, Reliability, and Quality Assurance; Lee R. Sherer, Director, Flight Research Center; and John M. Thole, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science. The NASA Distinguished Public Service Medal, the agency’s highest award to non-Government personnel, was presented to Jack M. Campbell, President of the Federation of Rocky Mountain States and former Governor of New Mexico; Harry Dornbrand, Executive Vice President, Fairchild Space and Electronics Co.; and Jesse L. Greenstein, California Institute of Technology astrophysicist. The Group Achievement Award went to 12 teams at Centers and Headquarters, the Exceptional Service Medal to 51 persons, and the Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 16. (Program; NASA Activities, 15 Nov 74,20)
The first Skylab crew—Charles Conrad, Jr., Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, and Paul J. Weitz—who flew on Skylab 2, 25 May-22 June 1973—was awarded the Haley Astronautics Award at the Conference on Scientific Experiments of Skylab, Huntsville, Ala. The annual award was given by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics “for outstanding contributions by test personnel who undergo personal risk in the advancement of space flight.” The three-day conference, 30 Oct.—1 Nov., was sponsored jointly by the AIAA and the American Geophysical Union, (msfc Release 74-205; msfc pao, interview)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue, who splashed down 8 Feb. after 84 days aboard the Orbital Workshop, completed a third day of post-splashdown tests before a brief welcoming ceremony at dockside in San Diego, Calif. The astronauts then flew to Ellington Air Force Base, Tex., for a reunion with their families. Medical tests would continue throughout the week and the three men would continue to eat the precisely controlled diet begun three weeks before their 16 Nov. 1973 launch. (McElheny, NYT, 11 Feb 74,7)
The first prototype B-l intercontinental strategic bomber was unveiled at Palmdale, Calif., by the Air Force and Rockwell International Corp. Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger told on-lookers that the new aircraft was needed to complement the U.S. arsenal of land-based and submarine-based missiles. Although smaller and lighter than the B-52 it was meant to replace, the B-l could fly farther and faster, carry almost twice the payload, and use a shorter runway. Powered by four 133.4-kilonewton-thrust (30 000-lb) turbofan engines and lifted by variable geometry, or “swing” wings, the bomber could fly efficiently at speeds in excess of mach 2. The projected cost of production models— $76.4 million each—made the future of the aircraft controversial and uncertain, (dod Release 505-74; Getler, W Post, 27 Oct 74, A6; Wright, NYT, 27 Oct 74,43) 26 October—4 November: An agreement for NASA to submit life sciences experiments for flight aboard the next available Soviet biological satellite was negotiated during the fifth joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Working Group on Space Biology and Medicine in Tashkent, U.S.S.R. The first U.S. experiments would be passive specimen modules, completely autonomous from spacecraft power, life support, and data-recording systems, and would require no operational commands from the ground during flight. NASA would prepare descriptions of the proposed experiments in December and deliver flight hardware by 15 Aug. 1975. U.S. investigators would also participate in pre- and postflight studies of blood and tissue samples from animals flown aboard the next Soviet biological satellite. The protocol was confirmed by NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences 4 Dec. Representatives also discussed preparations for the joint July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission; exchanged results from Apollo, Skylab, Cosmos, Salyut, and Soyuz programs; and discussed pre- and postflight examinations, vestibular training, and crew reaction to flight. (nasa Gen Mgt Rev Rpt, 16 Dec 74, 42-3; NASA Release 74-237; NASA Int Aff, interview, 17 Oct 75; Moscow Domestic News Service, fbis-Sov, 29 Oct 74, BIO; 8 Nov 74, U1) 27 October-2 November: The 67th Annual General Conference of the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (fai) convened in Sidney, Australia. Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., was presented the 1973 fai Gold Space Medal for his role as Skylab 2 commander, and Astronaut Alan L. Bean was presented the Yuri Gagarin Gold Medal for his role as Skylab 3 mission commander. Both men also received the De la Vaulx Medal for their successive space duration records. (naa News. Oct 74, Dec 74,1) 28 October-9 November: Luna 23, second Soviet lunar mission of 1974, was launched from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tvuratam into a parking orbit with 246-km apogee, 183-km perigee, 88.7-min period, and 51.5° inclination, where the “automatic station” was separated and launched on a near-to-planned trajectory to the moon. After a 31 Oct. flight path correction, the spacecraft on 2 Nov. entered a, lunar orbit with 104-km apogee, 94-km perigee, 117-min period, and 138° inclination. On 4 and 5 Nov. the orbit was changed to 105-km apogee and 17-km perigee. The spacecraft landed in the southern part of the moon’s Sea of Crisis 6 Nov., but rugged terrain damaged a device designed to take rock samples from a 2.5-m depth. The planned drilling and collection of lunar soil had to be abandoned for a reduced equipment-testing program. Work with the station was discontinued 9 Nov. (gsfc Wkly SSR, 24-30 Oct 74; Domestic News Service, fbis-Sov, 29 Oct 74, Ul-2; 10 Nov 74, Ul; Tass, fbis-Sov, 4 Nov 74, Ul; Av Wk, 4 Nov 74, 13; SF, April 75,152) _
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of Kennedy Space Center since its establishment in 1962, announced his retirement. Born in Germany, Dr. Debus had begun his career in U.S. military and NASA space programs in 1945, when with Dr. Wernher von Braun he had joined the Army’s ballistic missile program. He had supervised the launch of the first Redstone ballistic missile in 1953 and the flight-testing of Jupiter and Pershing missiles and Jupiter C and Juno launch vehicles until the Army team was transferred to NASA in 1960. He had directed the launch of the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, on 31 Jan. 1958, and NASA launch programs from the flight of Alan B. Shepard, Jr., in 1961 to preparations for space shuttle operations. Dr. Debus had received the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award from the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics as well as the Army’s highest civilian decoration, the Exceptional Civilian Service Medal, and NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal. (ksc Release 135-74; Debus letter to ksc employees)
The success of Skylab’s Apollo Telescope Mount solar experiment was more than a milestone in space exploration, Dr. John Eddy, solar physicist of the Boulder, Colo., High Altitude Observatory, said in a New Scientist article. This battery of the world’s most advanced telescopes lofted to the ideal observation site had clarified previous theoretical sketches of the vertical extent of the sun’s chromospheric structures. Spicules, which outlined the giant circulation cells of the chromosphere and extended through the transition region, disappeared at temperatures of 1 million K in the low corona, suggesting that the magnetic field lines diverged in the corona. First results from the atm x-ray observations destroyed the common concept of a homogeneous background corona, which had served as a basis of modern coronal physics, and revealed that the corona was composed almost entirely of closed loop structures fitting magnetic field lines calculated from observed photospheric fields. Reasons for the ATM success included the large-scale and highly sophisticated instruments, large data-storage capability, efficiency of instrument operation, operation of the six instruments in concert, extensive ground support, and astronaut interest and training. Program results would be shared by scientists in many countries and the program appeared a good investment, in scientific yield per dollar spent. (New Scientist, 21 March 74, 738-741)
Large underwater oscillations, called “internal waves” and usually invisible at the surface, had been detected by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration scientists Dr. John R. Apel and Robert Charnell, using images from NASA’s Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched 23 July 1972), noaa announced. The scientists speculated that internal-wave formation by lunar and solar tides and their subsequent 'breaking and dissipation of energy were important processes in the gradual lengthening of the day over millions of years. The waves also affected the propagation of sound in the ocean and contributed to the mixing processes in its upper layers. Internal waves changed the way sunlight was reflected from the ocean surface overlying them, and the change was detected in the satellite images, (noaa Release 74-32) 2b February: The U.S. Postal Service announced the design of a 10-cent stamp to commemorate the Skylab program. To be issued 14 May on the first anniversary of the launch of the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop, the stamp would depict the 7 June 1973 two-man spacewalk that freed the jammed solar panel during the Skylab 2 mission (25 May to 22 June 1973). The horizontal stamp was designed by Robert T. McCall of Arizona, (usps Release 11)
Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., the first U.S. man in space and the fifth man to walk on the moon, announced his retirement from NASA and the Navy effective 1 Aug. During his 5 May 1961, 14.8-min Mercury -Redstone 2 mission, Shepard flew his Freedom. 7 spacecraft to a 186.2-km altitude and initiated the U.S. manned space program. He commanded the Apollo 14 lunar landing mission 31 Jan.—9 Feb. 1971. Shepard would join the Marathon Construction Co. of Houston, Tex., as a partner and Chairman, (nasa Release 74-203; A&A 1961)
President Nixon announced he would appoint John C. Sawhill Administrator of the Federal Energy Office. He would succeed William E. Simon, who would be nominated Secretary of the Treasury. Sawhill had been Deputy Administrator of eeo since 4 Dec. 1973. {PD, 22 April 74, 413)
Dr. Edward G. Gibson, science pilot on the 84-day Skylab 4 mission (16 Nov. 1973—8 Feb. 1974), announced he would leave the NASA astronaut corps 30 Nov. 1974. Dr. Gibson, a scientist-astronaut since 1965, would join Aerospace Corp. of Los Angeles as a senior staff scientist, specializing in the interpretation of solar data gathered during the 171 days of manned operation in the Skylab program. He had held primary responsibility for the 338 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount operation on Skylab 4, making extensive observations of solar processes, (jsc Release 74-246)
Dr. Edward U. Condon, a leading U.S. atomic scientist, died at the age of 72 in Boulder, Colo., of complications from heart disease. In 1940 Dr. Condon had become a member of the National Defense Research Council and, in 1941, a member of the Roosevelt Committee on Uranium Research. During the World War II he played an important role in the development of the atomic bomb. In 1945 Dr. Condon had been appointed Director of the National Bureau of Standards but resigned in 1951 because of House Un-American Activities Committee investigations as a “weak” security link. In 1952 he appeared before the Committee and denied charges under oath. From 1945 to 1951 Dr. Condon had been a member of the National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics. In the 1950s he developed a missile nosecone—later used by U.S. astronauts—that could withstand the high temperatures of reentry into the earth’s atmosphere. In 1954 he returned to teaching and, while on the Univ. of Colorado faculty, he undertook an Air Force study to investigate sightings of unidentified flying objects. (Weil, W Post, 27 March 74, C4; Slusser, W Star-News, 27 March 74, B5; Who’s Who; House Un-Am Activities Com Special Subcom Rpt)
Two scientists had predicted that in 1982 a rare alignment of all nine planets on the same side of the sun would produce major earthquakes, Newsweek reported. In their book The Jupiter Effect, John Cribbin of the British magazine Nature and Stephen Plagemann of Goddard Space Flight Center warned that increased solar activity caused by the alignment, which occurred every 179 yrs, would alter wind directions in the upper atmosphere. The frictional effect exerted on the solid earth by atmospheric circulation would change with the winds. The consequent braking of the earth’s rotation rate would trigger earthquakes in areas, like California, under geological stress. (Newsweek, 16 Sept 74, 57)
Former astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., defeated Sen. Howard M. Metzenbaum in the Ohio Democratic primary in his third try for nomination to the U.S. Senate. Glenn’s first try for a Senate seat in 1964 had ended when injuries from a fall forced him out of the primary. In 1970 Metzenbaum defeated Glenn, in the primary. Glenn became the first U.S. astronaut to orbit the earth 20 Feb. 1962. (Farrell, NYT, 9 May 74, 2: A&A 1964; Hope, W Star, 6 May 70, Al)
“No other person who has flown in space has captured the experience so vividly,” Henry S. F. Cooper said in a review of Carrying the Fire: An Astronaut’s Journeys by Apollo 11 Astronaut Michael Collins. Although the book was “long and rambling,” touching a great many bases in Collins’ career from Air Force test pilot through Gemini 10 and Apollo, “it is something new under the sun to find an astronaut who isn’t afraid to express his feelings.” Collins was best at single impressions, . “little snapshots,” still sharp and clear five years after the lunar landing. Two days out on the mission, “ ‘The moon I have known all my life, that two-dimensional, small yellow disk in the sky, has gone somewhere to be replaced by the most awesome sphere I have ever seen. . . . This cool, magnificent sphere hangs there ominously, a formidable presence without sound or motion, issuing us no invitation to invade its domain.’ ” Collins had cast off the “diffidence astronauts normally wear like spacesuits to protect themselves from prying earthlings. ... ‘I have been places and done things you simply would not believe. I have dangled from a cord a hundred miles up; I have seen the earth eclipsed by the moon, and enjoyed it. I have seen the sun’s true light, unfiltered by any planet’s atmosphere. I have seen the ultimate black of infinity in a stillness undisturbed by any living thing. ... I do have this secret, this precious thing that I will always carry with me.’ ” (NYT Booh Review, 11 Aug 74,1)
John W. Crowley, Jr., NASA Director of Aeronautical and Space Research from the agency’s establishment in 1958 until his retirement in 1959, died in Denver, Colo., at the age of 75. Crowley had joined NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, at Langley Aeronautical Laboratory in 1921, becoming Chief of the Aeronautics Div. in 1940 and Head of the Research Dept, in 1943. He came to naca Hq. in 1945 as Acting Director of Aeronautical Research and was appointed Associate Director for Research in 1947. Crowley received NASA’s first Distinguished Service Medal in 1959. (W Post, 1 Aug 74, C7)
A Federal grand jury had charged Charles R. Riser of Maryland with mail fraud in setting up Andromeda Space Covers, a mail-order firm selling fake space exploration items, the Baltimore Sun reported. Fifteen persons had paid for golf balls driven across the moon by Astronaut Alan B. Shepard, Jr., during the January 1971 Apollo 14 mission, but he had used only two balls and these were still on the moon. The assistant U.S. attorney on the case said that astronauts might be called to state whether signatures on other souvenirs were authentic. (Erlandson, B Sun, 14 Sept 74, B20)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue, launched 16 Nov. 1973, discussed their changed attitudes during an inflight press conference held on their 48th day aboard the Orbital Workshop. Science Pilot Gibson said that from space “you see the Earth as one unit, you see the Sun as a star, and you can see all the other stars out there . . . and just the number ,of possible combinations . . . which could create life, . . . makes [life elsewhere in the universe] seem very much more likely.” Pogue said that the mission had had a great spiritual impact on him. “At the beginning of the mission, I tried to operate like a machine. . . . Now I’m trying to operate as a human being within the limitations I possess.” Now he would “feel much more inclined toward humanistic feeling toward other people.” (Transcript)
The U.S. Postal Service issued a stamp commemorating the Skylab program on the first anniversary of the launching of the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop. The yellow, red, blue, and black stamp depicted the Workshop and Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin as they worked in space to repair the spacecraft, which had been damaged during launch. (Tower, NYT, 28 April 1974, 30)
President Nixon announced his intention to nominate John C. Sawhill to be Administrator of the Federal Energy Administration. He had served as Deputy Administrator of the Federal Energy Office from 4 Dec. 1973 to 8 May 1974, when he became Acting Administrator. The nomination was sent to the Senate 28 May and confirmed 18 June. (PD, 27 May 74, 541-542 ; 3 June 74, 570; nasa LAR, XIII/82)
An electric rocket engine that short-circuited aboard Sert II Space Electric Rocket Test satellite in 1970 had been restarted in space and successfully operated for six weeks, scientists at Lewis Research Center reported. Launched 3 Feb. 1970 to demonstrate that electric propulsion could be used for future space missions, Sert II was to have operated an ion engine for six months in space. Engine thruster 2 shut down after less than three months of operation; thruster 1 performed for five months. Both failures were attributed to a small chip apparently eroded from a molybdenum grid and lodged between two grids at the back of the engine. William R. Kerslake, Sert II experiment manager, believed the chip was jarred loose in summer 1974 when the spacecraft was spun up by its cold-gas thruster system to obtain a better sun angle for solar arrays. Since then, the thruster had been operated successfully on 17 occasions for short periods, obtaining up to 80% of its maximum thrust. Electrical Propulsion Branch Chief Robert C. Finke said operation after 4% years proved “the long term storability of this thruster design” and indicated that the system could be “confidently incorporated into future missions requiring several years of thruster operation.” (LeRC Release 74—60)
Safety was of prime importance to NASA management and NASA-Soviet joint working groups planning the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in a letter to Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wis.). The response to a Sen. Proxmire letter expressing concern for astp crew safety in light of past failures of the Soyuz and Salyut spacecraft explained that NASA had requested and received from the Soviets a detailed explanation of the Soyuz 11 (6-30 June 1971) failure, in which three cosmonauts were killed, and of the test program to correct the problem. NASA officials had also asked for information on the 26-29 Aug. Soyuz 15 mission, which astp technical personnel were expected to discuss during joint meetings 9-23 Sept. (Letter, Proxmire to Fletcher, 3 Sept 74; letter, Fletcher to Proxmire, 10 Sept 74)
Major reorganizations were announced at NASA Hq. and Marshall Space Flight Center by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, msfc Director. Dr. Fletcher said the Headquarters reorganization and key personnel appointments would consolidate planning and direction of research and development programs under the Associate Administrator and overall planning and direction of the field center operations under the newly created position of Associate Administrator for Center Operations. Dr. Petrone was named Associate Administrator. He would remain as msfc Director until early summer when he would be replaced by Dr. William R. Lucas, msfc Deputy Director. Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science, was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator. He would also continue as Acting Associate Administrator for Space Science until a successor was named. Dr. George M. Low, in addition to his duties as Deputy Administrator, would serve as Acting Associate Administrator for Center Operations until the new position was filled. He would be assisted by Edwin C. Kilgore, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. Gen. Bruce K. Holloway (usaf, Ret.), who would also continue as the Assistant Administrator for Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs, was named Acting Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology. Bernard Moritz was appointed Associate Administrator for Organization and Management. The reorganization, effective 15 March, followed completion of the Apollo and Skylab programs and would provide mechanisms for the phaseover from conventional launch vehicles to the space shuttle and new programs, Dr. Fletcher said. At msfc, Dr. Petrone said that the reorganization, effective 30 May, would enable the Center to fulfill requirements of its varied assigned programs and improve its competitive position to obtain new assignments. The major changes were in the Science and Engineering Directorate. A Deputy for Operations and a Deputy for Systems had been established. Business operations and control of all resources had been consolidated into a centralized office at the directorate level. Elements under the s&E Directorate included two associate directors, an Associate Director of Engineering and an Associate Director of Management; two offices, Reliability and Quality Assurance and Research and Technology; and eight laboratories. The laboratories were being restructured to emphasize system engineering and integration, analysis, design, and testing. The in-house capability to manufacture, inspect, and check out major hardware projects had been eliminated, with the associated supply, warehousing, and procurement capability. Reorganization in msfc’s Administration and Program Support Directorate included consolidation of Center-wide automatic data-process-ing functions within A&PS. Offices under a&PS would include Technology Utilization, Manpower, Financial Management, Facilities, Procurement, Management, Services, Logistics, and Computer Services. (NASA Ann, 5 March 74; NASA Release 74-76; msfc Release 74-31)
NASA announced the appointment of William C. Schneider as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, effective 21 July. Schneider had served as both Acting Associate and Acting Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight from 18 March to 17 May and had been Skylab Program Director from December 1968 until the end of the Skylab program, (nasa Ann, 19 July 74; NASA Release 74207)
During the third quarter of the Federal energy conservation program, energy savings in the nondefense agencies had been 19% of anticipated energy use, and savings by the Dept, of Defense had been 31%, President Nixon said in a statement following receipt of a report from Federal Energy Administrator John C. Sawhill. Total savings for the first nine months of the Federal program had equaled 75 million barrels of oil, or $600 million in reduced costs. Secretary of Commerce Frederick B. Dent had reported that industrial energy consumption had been reduced by 5% per unit of output October 1973-January 1974. This rate, which was expected to be maintained or exceeded in 1974 by all of commerce and industry, would bring annual savings equal to 425 million barrels of oil. (PD, 8 July 74,788)
John M. Thole had been appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science effective 1 Sept., NASA announced. Thole would succeed Vincent L. Johnson, who had retired. Former project manager for the Applications Technology Satellite at Goddard Space Flight Center, Thole had joined gsfc in 1960 and had held a variety of project management positions since that time, (nasa Ann, 26 Aug 74) 26 August-20 September: Thirty NASA engineers and technicians met with U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences counterparts in Moscow as joint preparations for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project’s July 1975 flight continued. On 8 Sept, another group of 47 specialists and engineers headed by U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney arrived in Moscow for 2 weeks of meetings with the Soviet group headed by U.S.S.R. Technical Director Konstantin D. Bushuyev. The project directors announced plans for joint prelaunch tests at the U.S. launch site 1-8 Feb. 1975 and at the U.S.S.R. launch area 5-13 May 1975. Flight crews and technical specialists from both countries would participate. Soviet specialists also announced plans to fly a manned Soyuz mission to test ASTP-related systems. NASA would be informed of further details before the flight to permit tracking. Thirteen U.S. flight controllers were also spending two Weeks in Moscow beginning 15 Sept., meeting with Soviet controllers for familiarization and training, including briefings on Soviet Mission Control Center operations, Soyuz spacecraft systems, and the mission flight plan, (jsc astp Press Communique, 20 Sept 74; jsc Roundup, 13 Sept 74; jsc Release 74-250) year in space. Dr. G. D. Whedon of the National Institutes of Health stated that weightlessness could threaten capable musculo-skeletal functions during space flights lasting up to three years unless measures could be developed to prevent significant losses of calcium, phosphorus, and nitrogen. Continued loss of calcium could cause astronauts to break their backs or legs and could promote formation of kidney stones. Dr. William E. Thornton, life scientist in the jsc Astronaut Office, reported that by Mission Day 3 all Skylab crewmen had lost more than 2000 cc (2 qts) of extravascular fluid from calf and thigh; at recovery, a sharp reversal was noted. The Thornton team suggested that the reason for the shift was the intrinsic and unopposed lower limb elasticity, which forced venous blood and other fluids toward the head. Other investigators reported that such cardiovascular changes as the heart’s decreased ventricular size and the suppression of red blood cell production was the body’s accommodation to weightlessness. These physiological changes had been the expected response to a lack of exertion; they reversed after the astronauts’ return to earth, (jsc Roundup, 30 Aug 74,1-2; JSC proj off, interview, 12 Aug 75; Altman, NYT, 1 Sept 74,14)
NASA announced the selection of four U.S. scientists—Dr. David J. Anderson, Kresge Hearing Research Institute at the Univ. of Michigan; Dr. Joseph Bragin, California State Univ.; Dr. John Oro, Univ. of Houston; and Dr. Alfred R. Potvin, Univ. of Texas—for its 1974 life sciences research program. Each scientist would spend a year at a NASA Center studying life sciences related to space exploration. The program had heen recommended hy the National Academy of Sciences to increase participation in space- and aeronautics-related research hy the scientific community. (NASA Release 74-197)
Astronaut Henry W. Hartsfield was presented the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1973 by Secretary of the Air Force John L. McLucas in a ceremony at National Geographic Society Headquarters. Hartsfield received the trophy—presented annually to the Air Force employee who made the most significant contribution to U.S. progress in space—for his part in saving the $2.5-billion Skylab program. Hartsfield, serving as capsule communicator during the Skylab 2 mission (25 May-22 June 1973), played a key role in preparing and evaluating crew procedures and equipment for transporting, installing, and deploying the parasol sunshade to protect the Skylab Orbital Workshop after it had been damaged during its 14 May 1973 launch. Hartsfield also had been instrumental in developing procedures for installation by the Skylab 3 crew (launched 28 July 1973) of a compact, lightweight replacement package for the failing gyroscopes in the Skylab attitude control system, (ngs Release, 8 Oct 74)
U.S. District Court Judge Joseph C. Waddy denied a request by the American Federation of Government Employees for a preliminary injunction that would have blocked NASA plans to lay off or reduce in grade 657 employees at Marshall Space Flight Center. The denial followed a 30 May temporary restraining order issued by Judge Waddy in response to an amendment to a 1967 suit filed by the AFGE against NASA and the Civil Service Commission. The suit challenged NASA’s alleged hiring of private contractors for vacated civil service jobs. In a November 1973 decision, the Federal District Court judge had ordered esc to review contract jobs at msfc to determine whether they met standards set forth in the Pellerzi rule, which guided CSC in evaluating contracts for personal services, (nasa Off Gen Counsel, interview, 23 Jan 76; Casebolt, Huntsville Times, 31 May 74; Cramer, W Star-News, 1 June 74) .
Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider testified before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight in NASA’s FY 1975 authorization hearings on early results from Skylab’s earth resources data. Perhaps the most interesting so far was the unconfirmed indication of mineral deposits near Ely, Nev. The Skylab earth resources experiment package had also identified several areas of citrus fruit fly infestation on the Mexican side of the Rio Grande, demonstrated the use of remote sensing for snow mapping, identified new urbanization patterns in Phoenix, Ariz., and inventoried vegetation patterns in California test sites. A Baltimore-Washington area photo and similar imagery for 12 other cities were being used by the Dept, of Interior to test their use for updating the 1970 census. Dr. Joseph P. Kerwin, astronaut on the 25 May-22 June 1973 mission to man the Orbital Workshop, testified that Skylab astronauts were healthy, happy, and not under significant stress during their long flights. After initial decreased appetite, an astronaut had a feeling of well-being with normal thirst and appetite, although he had a continued feeling of fullness in the head and tended to assume a peculiar posture with neck extended and moving backwards and elbows, hips, and knees flexed at 20° to 30°. He tended to become sleepy and required frequent exercise to restore vigor and alertness. His voice had a peculiar nasal quality. After the third day he was virtually immune to motion sickness.. Without gravity, there was no automatic sensation of up and down and without vision he could quickly get lost. Dr. Harry C. Gatos, Massachusetts Institute of Technology scientist and Skylab materials processing investigator, testified Skylab experiments had shown that segments of crystals partially regrown in space exhibited none of the inhomogeneities from dopants (electronically active chemical elements) that characterized earth-grown crystals and inhibited their efficiency. In addition to preparation of special materials for electronic and medical uses, materials processing studies in space would provide an understanding of the structures of materials and permit preparation of materials to perform closer to their theoretical limits. Crystal-growing technology was developing new means to create and store power and could, within five years, provide a practical economic basis for using solar power. (Transcript)
Inflation would force even more extensive cuts in NASA operations if funding did not increase in the next few fiscal years, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported in a survey of nasa belt-tightening. The magazine quoted nasa Comptroller William E. Lilly as saying cost contracts for major spacecraft programs had a 9-12% inflation rate. The overall effective impact of inflation was 7—7.5% at NASA, but these averages were much lower than for many specific areas. Although materials increases were averaging 15-20%, particular increases ranged from 0-100%. The 7% inflation rate in Center supplies was being absorbed by using inventories and by decreasing the use of supplies. Utility cost increases of 20-30% at NASA Centers had been countered by lower use— a 30% cut—but Centers were still paying 10-15% more. Overall wage rates could increase 20-30% over the next three years, Lilly had said, because of a trend-setting agreement between the Boeing Co. and the International Assn, of Machinists and Aerospace Workers. Support service contracts were showing a 7-9% yearly inflationary increase. NASA Centers were seeking new solutions. At Goddard Space Flight Center, more fixed-price contracts were being issued, but predicting economic changes was problematic, according to William R. Mecca, gsfc Deputy Director for Administration and Management, gsfc had begun limiting data acquisition from spacecraft and drawing up contingency plans for many unmanned programs—like the International Sun-Earth Explorer Spacecraft program and the International Ultraviolet Explorer program—to save costs if primary plans began to exceed spending limits. Marshall Space Flight Center had reduced its work force by 850— about 15%—since June 1973 and had closed 47 structures. Lewis Research Center had cut its power needs 7%, using a transient data-record-ing system to reduce operating hours. Johnson Space Center, along with others, had been hiring young persons rather than high-salaried experienced persons. JSC electric costs were still increasing even though the Center had reduced its exterior lighting by 75% and its interior lighting by 33%. Kennedy Space Center was phasing construction for shuttle and other programs, outfitting facilities to meet minimum initial operational requirements rather than for long-range mission models. Consideration was being given to advance procurement for lower costs and for preventing slowdowns from shortages. (Covault, Av Wk, 2 Dec 74, 38-42; Lilly, interview, 19 Sept 75)
Dr. John F. Clark, Goddard Space Flight Center Director, announced appointment of a committee to review all aspects of the Thor-Delta launch vehicle program, including all anomalies in recent Thor-Delta launches. Pending completion of the review, the 10 June launch of Westar-B—the second of Western Union’s domestic communications satellites—had heen postponed, (nasa Release 74—147)
Dr. Noel W. Hinners’ appointment as nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science became effective. He succeeded Dr. John E. Naugle, who had become Deputy Associate Administrator. Dr. Hinners, Director of Lunar Programs in the Office of Space Science before his appointment, had joined NASA in 1972 as Deputy Director and Chief Scientist of Apollo Lunar Exploration in the Office of Manned Space Flight, (nasa Ann, 26 June 74)
Skylab . . . has demonstrated that this nation is capable of conducting broader and more useful beneficial activities in space that directly relate to our own planet Earth,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said at a postrecovery press briefing at Johnson Space Center. It had “moved the space program from the realm of the spectacular into a new phase that can be characterized ... as almost businesslike if not yet quite routine.” The Skylab experience was necessary for the future in space and had confirmed that NASA was proceeding in the right direction with development of the space shuttle. Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said 30 earth resources passes had been planned and 39 accomplished during the Skylab 4 mission. There had been 350 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount observations planned and 338 hrs completed. Observations of Comet Kohoutek included 13 by the Apollo Telescope Mount and 111 by other instruments. All 28 planned corollary experiments and all major medical and student experiments had been completed. Original planning had called for 140 days in orbit for the three manned missions; 172 were accomplished. Skylab’s greatest achievement “was to prove . . . there is no limit in our space research”; the limit “is only our resolve, not our ability to do work, not the ability of men to work and not our technical knowledge.” (Transcript)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, would receive the National Civil Service League’s Career Service Award for Sustained Excellence, NASA announced. Dr. Naugle had joined NASA in 1959 as head of the Nuclear Emulsion Section at Goddard Space Flight Center and, in 1967, had become Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Science at Headquarters. Under his leadership, scientists had mapped the entire surface of Mars, collected the first detailed information about Jupiter and its moons, and advanced the use of unmanned spacecraft as astronomical observatories. Dr. Naugle would receive the award, given to Federal officials with at least 10 yrs outstanding public service, on 9 Oct. Dr, Carolyn Huntoon, Johnson Space Center, would receive the League’s Special Achievement Award for her design of a Skylab experiment that had measured biochemical reactions to weightlessness. (NASA Release 74-252)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded more than $28.2 million in contracts of $25 000 or more. Among awards were $2 253 300 to Inscho’s Mechanical Contractors, Inc., for construction of the X-Ray Telescope Facility at msfc ; also $695 000 to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and $687 201 to Martin Marietta Corp., for Large Space Telescope support system module studies, (msfc Release 75-18) 1974 in Summary The U.S. orbited 28 payloads in 22 launches during the year. The U.S.S.R. orbited 95 payloads in 81 launches; Italy launched 2 payloads, using NASA launch vehicles; and Japan launched 1. U.S. launches included 16 payloads in 14 NASA launches and 12 spacecraft in 8 Dept, of Defense launches. For the first year since 1967 the U.S. launched no men into space, although Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue completed the longest mission yet accomplished by man when they splashed down in the Pacific Ocean 8 Feh. after 84 days in space. The U.S.S.R. orbited three two-man crews during the year, including two crews to dock with the Salyut 3 space station. The Soyuz 14 crew docked and worked aboard the laboratory for nearly 16 days, but Soyuz 15 failed to dock and it returned to earth after 48 hrs in space. Soyuz 16 tested the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project configuration in December. The U.S.S.R. also launched the Salyut 4 orbiting space station, to be joined by a two-man crew in January 1975. The 16 NASA-launched payloads—li paid for by domestic and foreign corporations or foreign governments—included 7 communications, 1 applications technology, 2 meteorological, and 6 scientific satellites. These were in addition to 2 Italian-launched cooperative scientific satellites. Comsats included two spacecraft launched for United Kingdom military communications ■—Skynet IIA into too low an orbit, followed later by the successful Skynet IIB, Westar 1 and 2, launched for Western Union Telegraph Co., were the first U.S. commercial domestic communications satellites. The most complex and versatile of the Applications Technology Satellites, Ats 6, went into orbit in May. The spacecraft was transmitting medical and educational telecommunications to small inexpensive ground stations in remote areas of the U.S. and would, in 1975, he positioned to broadcast educational programs to 5000 villages in India. Symphonie 1 was launched for France and West Germany as the first of two experimental communications satellites. Intelsat-lV F-8 was launched for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, and Amsat Oscar 7 for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. as a secondary payload on the Noaa 4 launch. The two meteorological satellites included Synchronous Meteorological Satellite Sms 1, launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to provide continuous day and night images of cloud cover over the U.S. and Atlantic Ocean for the first time. Sms 1 was the first meteorological satellite in synchronous orbit. Noaa 4 was launched as part of noaa’s global weather watch program. All but one of NASA’s six scientific payloads were cooperative efforts with foreign countries. Miranda (UK-X4) was launched for U.K. to measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft as well as test spacecraft systems. Spain’s first satellite—Intasat, put into polar orbit as a secondary payload with Noaa 4—began studies of the ionosphere. Two spacecraft were launched in cooperation with West Germany: Aeros 2 to measure aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation, Helios 1 into solar orbit to investigate interstellar space closer to the sun than any previous spacecraft had and to gather extensive new data on the sun. NASA and The Netherlands joined to orbit The Netherlands Astronomical Satellite Ans 1 to study stellar uv and x-ray sources. NASA’s only all-U.S. scientific payload, Hawkeye 1 (Explorer 52), was launched into polar orbit to study plasma properties of the magnetosphere over the north polar cap. A Titan-Centaur proof-flight vehicle carrying a Viking spacecraft model and a sphinx satellite failed to achieve orbit and was destroyed during launch operations. The new NASA launch vehicle later successfully launched Helios 1. Italian launch crews, using NASA launch vehicles, launched two satellites into earth orbit from the San Marco launch platform in the Indian Ocean off the East African coast. San Marco 4 in February carried two U.S. and one Italian experiment into orbit to measure diurnal variations in the equatorial neutral atmosphere. Ariel 5 was launched in October for U.K., to study galactic and extragalactic x-ray sources, in the first Italian launch for a country other than the U.S. or Italy. Japan launched its fifth satellite, Tansei 2—Japan’s first on a guided booster. In addition to the three manned Soyuz missions^ the U.S.S.R. launched 2 Salyut space stations; 3 unmanned Soyuz spacecraft identified as Cosmos 638, 656, and 672 ; 7 Molniya comsats; 5 Meteor meteorological satellites; 2 cooperative Intercosmos; 2 Luna lunar probes; and 71 spacecraft under the Cosmos designation. Space Science and Exploration Besides the new scientific satellites, NASA continued systematic exploration of the solar system as Pioneer 11, launched in April 1973, sped to within 42 000 km of Jupiter 3 Dec. The spacecraft photographed the giant planet and its moons, transmitting new information on the planet’s weather patterns, atmosphere, and radiation belts. Data from Pioneer 11 and its predecessor Pioneer 10, which had encountered Jupiter in December 1973 revealed that Jupiter was hotter than previously estimated and composed largely of liquid hydrogen. Cyclones and anticyclones stretched completely around the planet with rising grey-white cloud ridges extending 20 km above Jupiter’s distinctive orange-brown belts. Jupiter’s great red spot was probably the vortex of a great storm that had- raged along a 400 000-km front for centuries. At year’s end Pioneer 11 was speeding toward rendezvous with Saturn to give man his closest look at that planet while Pioneer 10 raced to cross the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and become the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. Meanwhile Mariner 10—after passing within 5800 km of Venus and sending back new information on particle environment, mass, and density of that planet—made two successful flybys of Mercury in March and September. The spacecraft transmitted data that gave scientists mass measurements 100 times better than previous ones, described a detached, well-defined bow shock wave, and showed temperatures varying from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side ( — 300°F to 800°F). During the two encounters the spacecraft photographed 45% of the planet’s surface. By the end of the year Mariner 10 was headed for a third Mercury encounter in March 1975. Preparations for the two 1975 Viking missions to Mars continued with the qualification-testing of Viking science instruments, engineering subsysterns, and entire orbiter and lander spacecraft. During the last quarter of the year the lander successfully completed critical surface simulation tests that included subjecting the spacecraft to temperatures approximating Martian conditions and dropping it from 0.6 m to determine the effects of landing shocks on the integrated Viking equipment. A detailed spacecraft design for the 1977 Mariner mission to Jupiter and Saturn was completed while a major effort to find a satisfactory way to protect the spacecraft from Jupiter’s strong radiation continued. A major new space science start, approved in nasa’s FY 1975 budget, was the 1978 dual Pioneer-Venus mission to obtain detailed measurements of the Venus atmosphere with an orbiter and four atmospheric entry probes. Hughes Aircraft Co. was chosen in February for spacecraft design, with an option for spacecraft development, and experimenters and scientific instrumentation were selected in June. NASA continued preparations to place the Large Space Telescope in earth orbit to make detailed astronomical observations 10 times deeper into space than possible before. During 1974, preliminary system definitions and advanced technological development were carried out on selected elements of the LST. Besides preparing for future missions, scientists continued analysis of data accumulated from previous missions. A Lunar Data Analysis and Synthesis program began to correlate existing data and data still being collected by the five Apollo lunar surface-experiment packages (alsep) left on the moon during the lunar landing program. With the conclusion of the Skylab flight program, large volumes of new data on the sun and the earth and the most comprehensive inflight data yet on man’s adaptation to space flight became available. During the year sounding rockets, balloons, telescopes, and instrumented aircraft continued to increase knowledge of the universe. NASA launched nearly 80 sounding rockets from sites around the world. A significant accomplishment was the launch of 54 sounding rockets within 24 hrs to support the Joint NASA-Air Force Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution of Ions and Neutrals (aladdin) program. During 1974 scientists in programs outside NASA as well as in, using data from both orbital and suborbital programs, discovered a 13th moon of Jupiter, observed a pulsar that was a member of a double star system, obtained new data on the size and shape of the Crab Nebula, discovered a galaxy six times larger than any previously known in the universe, and made the greatest advance yet in cometary research with the study of the Comet Kohoutek, including first-time identification of water molecules in a comet. The U.S.S.R. continued a program of space exploration with the launch of lunar probes Luna 22 in May and Luna 23 in October. Luna 22 studied the lunar surface and atmosphere from lunar orbit. Luna 23 was damaged while landing on the moon’s surface and its work was discontinued after three days of equipment testing. Space Transportation and Technology The space shuttle program accelerated, with funding increasing from $475 million in FY 1974 to $800 million in FY 1975. But this total reflected an $89-million cut by the Office of Management and Budget from planned space shuttle funding, delaying the program four to six months. The final maj or contract was awarded and design work neared completion; by year’s end the program moved into hardware test and fabrication stages. Construction of the shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center began in April and throughout the year contracts were awarded for additional space shuttle facilities. The European Space Research Organization selected VFW-Fokker/ ehno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor to design and build Spacelab for missions on the shuttle. Primary efforts were directed toward planning early shuttle missions and making analyses for a NASA mission model. In solid propulsion technology, the final motor—the first with a restart capability—in a series of high-efficiency solid-fueled motors was successfully static-fired. The October firing marked the first time a spacecraft solid-fueled motor had been fired, quenched, reignited, and requenched. Another significant step was the static-firing of a thermally sterilized solid-fueled motor. Electric propulsion—attractive as auxiliary propulsion for long-life station-keeping and attitude control—took a stride forward with the tests of a 4.5-millinewton (0.001-lb-thrust) ion engine aboard Ats 6. In spacecraft energy system technology, solar cells were made from a silicon ribbon grown directly from the liquid state, a critical first step in low-cost manufacture of solar cells. Other advances were made in laser, nuclear, atmosphere-entry, material-and-structures, guidance, and control-and-information technology. The X—24B lifting body completed 15 flights in the NASA and Air Force program to develop a safe piloted vehicle for reentry from space flight and to develop hypersonic technology. Following the first supersonic flight in March, the vehicle’s performance and handling qualities were evaluated in the speed range between mach 1.6 and landing. NASA’s aeronautics research and development program to reduce fuel consumption, reduce undesirable environmental effects, improve safety, and advance technology continued during the year. Flight tests of an F—111 equipped with the NASA-developed supercritical wing demonstrated a 15% reduction in fuel consumption. Other tests using flexible aircraft skin concepts, composite materials, active-control technology, and alternative fuels also demonstrated reduced drag and potential fuel savings. In NASA’s refan program—an effort to reduce noise of the JT8D engine that powered most of the Nation’s narrow-body commercial fleet—three refanned engines demonstrated in ground tests that the ground area affected by objectionable noise from commercial aircraft could be reduced by 75%. In another technique, a DC-8 using a NASA-developed two-segment landing approach reduced the ground area affected by excessive noise 53%. Efforts to measure and reduce aircraft engine exhaust in the atmosphere continued with the Global Air Sampling Program. A United Air Lines, Inc., Boeing 747 equipped with an atmospheric sampling instrument began measuring aircraft pollution on commercial air routes, while the clean combuster technology program was expanded to reduce engine emissions. Programs to improve aircraft safety continued to make progress. Techniques to reduce hazardous trailing vortices were flight-tested. A NASA-developed prototype system to track aircraft wakes near airports, allowing traffic controllers to adjust aircraft spacing more closely, was being operationally evaluated at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York City. The Dept. ,of Defense A-10 close-air-support program moved into production stage, with the first of six aircraft in final assembly and checkout. Production of an initial increment of 22 aircraft was approved in December, with a full production decision expected late in 1975. dod’s B-l advanced strategic bomber moved through engine preliminary flight-readiness tests in April, rollout in October, and first flight in December. Following flight testing, a production decision would be made in 1976. The first operational F—15 advanced tactical fighter was delivered in November. At year’s end 20 test aircraft had accumulated more than 300 flight hrs. International Cooperation Aerospace activities continued to become more international. Of the 16 NASA-launched payloads, 10 were cooperative efforts with foreign organizations. In addition, the 2 Italian-launched payloads carried U.S. experiments. During the year negotiations were completed on an agreement for NASA to furnish reimbursable launches for three future synchronous-orbit Japanese satellites, nasa-esro Spacelab working groups met throughout the year on experimental objectives and user requirements. Investigators from 42 countries and 5 international organizations were selected for Earth Resources Technology Satellite follow-on investigations, and Italy and Iran signed agreements with NASA to build earth stations to receive ERTS data directly. The 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project neared flight readiness. Joint compatibility tests of communications and docking systems were carried out and intensive joint flight-crew and flight-controller training was begun. Apollo hardware was completed. The U.S.S.R launched two unmanned and one manned Soyuz spacecraft (Cosmos 638 and 672 and Soyuz 16) to check out new systems and equipment for the joint mission. NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences approved public information plans and plans for prelaunch testing at the U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. U.S. and Soviet specialists exchanged information about the moon, planets, environmental problems, and biomedical results from U.S. and U.S.S.R. space flights. U.S. and Soviet scientists preparing a joint experiment using Ats 6 data met in the U.S. in October for technical coordination. And plans were formulated in October for a U.S. life science experiment to fly on the next available Soviet biological satellite. For 101 days, June-September, the U.S. and 69 other countries participating in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment monitored nearly every known meteorological factor along a 52-million-sq-km tropical area of land and sea from the eastern Pacific Ocean across Latin America, the Atlantic Ocean, and Africa to the western Indian Ocean. More than 4000 persons using 41 ships, 40 instrumented buoys, 12 aircraft, and 6 satellites probed from 1.6 km below the sea surface to the top of the atmosphere to improve weather predictions, assess pollution, determine the feasibility of large-scale weather modification, and establish new bonds of international cooperation. " Applications and Energy During 1974 space technology continued to make significant contributions to the quality of life. In addition to 1974-launched Ats 6, Sms 1, Westar 1 and 2, Intelstat-lV F-8, and Noaa 4 to improve weather predictions and communications on the earth—Erts 1, launched in July 1972, completed 29 mos in operation. Erts 1 had transmitted more than 100 000 photos covering three fourths of the world’s land masses and coastal areas, erts data—used to monitor urban and agricultural development, locate air and water pollution, update maps, and find new water and mineral resources—had been provided to more than 300 U.S. and foreign investigators in government, universities, and industry, erts—b development continued on schedule. NASA’s pollution monitoring program—to develop and demonstrate technology to monitor atmospheric and water pollution—completed its second year. Procurement for design and construction of the Nimbus-G Oceanographic and Air Pollution Observing Satellite, planned for 1978 launch, was under way. The Lower Atmospheric Composition and Temperature Experiment (lacate) was demonstrated in May and a test in the advanced applications flight experiment program-—using balloons, sounding rockets, and aircraft as well as ground-based experiments—successfully gathered atmospheric data over a five-hour period. dod expanded and improved its Defense Satellite Communications System and let contracts for Phase 1 navstar global positioning satellites. The Defense Meteorological Satellite program continued to furnish weather data for military and civilian use. Space technology continued to be applied to medicine. A digital computing cardiotachometer to monitor heart rates, an automated blood pressure monitoring system, and a new method of attaching artificial limbs were among the NASA-developed contributions demonstrated in 1974. An Office of Energy Programs was established in NASA to focus the application of its aerospace technology to energy needs. In addition to programs to reduce aircraft air pollution and energy consumption and develop new fuels, NASA, under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974 and in cooperation with the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development and other Federal agencies, was investigating the use of solar energy for heating and cooling buildings. An experimental solar house at Marshall Space Flight Center would ultimately derive up to 85% of its heating and cooling energy from the sun. Solar heating and cooling were being demonstrated in school. NASA continued research on wind energy systems, with the construction of a 100-kw wind-powered generator at Lewis Research Center; low-pollution, low-fuel-consumption automotive engines; aerodynamically designed vehicles to increase fuel economy; energy conversion systems. NASA distributed some 300 new Tech Briefs and 30 special compilations of new technology items to 15 000 subscribers in business and industry. Use of Regional Dissemination Centers for space technology applicable to other uses increased 34%, to 4000 clients. Tracking and Data Acquisition The Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) supported some 40 flight projects during 1974, including all NASA’s earth-orbital missions as well as space projects of foreign governments and private industry. Congress authorized funds for procurement activities for a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss)—two earth-orbiting satellites leased by NASA to relay data between low-altitude spacecraft and a single ground station. The authority to proceed further was subject to additional congressional review of a NASA-owned versus a leased system. (Pres Rpt 74; NASA Release 74r-330; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74; A&A 74)
Three Intelsat IV communications satellites transmitted the Muhammad Ali-Joe. Frazier boxing match in New York City to 17 countries. The three-hour match, won by Ali by a decision, was transmitted to Argentina, Australia, Barbados, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Jamaica, Japan, Korea, Mexico, Nicaragua, Philippines, Puerto Rico, Thailand, United Kingdom, Venezuela, and Zaire. (ComSatCorp Release 74-6; W Star-News Library) 28 January-1 February: The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held its 10th Annual Meeting and Technical Display 28—30 Jan. and 12th Aerospace Sciences Meeting 30 Jan.-l Feb. in Washington, D.C. “Spaceship Earth—A New Perspective” was the theme of the meeting, chaired by Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President of Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former Marshall Space Flight Center Director and NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning. At the honors banquet 30 Jan. Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of Kennedy Space Center, received the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award for 1973 for scientific, engineering, and organizational contributions to manned and unmanned space missions, beginning with the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, in 1958. Dr. John H. Wolfe, Chief of Ames Research Center’s Space Physics Branch, was given the aiaa Space Science Award for 1973 for his leading role in the Pioneer missions and his contribution to man’s understanding of interplanetary space. The Goddard Award was shared by Paul D. Castenholtz, Rockwell International Corp.; Richard C. Mulready, United Aircraft Corp.; and John L. Sloop, former NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology—for significant contributions to the development of the practical liquid oxygen and hydrogen rocket engine. Winner of the aiaa History Manuscript Award for 1973 was Dr. William M. Leary, Jr., Univ. of Georgia historian, for “The Dragon’s Wings: The China National Aviation Corporation and the Development of Commercial Aviation in China.” Carroll H. Woodling, Chief of Johnson Space Center Crew Training and Simulation Div., received the de Florez Training Award for advancing development of space flight simulators and for flight training programs. The G. Edward Pendray Award was awarded to Frederick I. Ord-way III, Univ. of Alabama, for his contributions to the literature recording the history and benefits of the space program. Willis H. Hawkins, Lockheed Aircraft Corp., was awarded the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award for contributions to the design and development of aerospace vehicles— including vertical take-off, transport, interceptor, and supersonic fighter aircraft-—and to missile and space programs including ramjet and reentry test vehicles. The Lawrence Sperry Award went to Dino A. Lorenzini, Air Force Academy, for developing a modern inertial guidance test facility incorporating computer-control, data-acquisition, sensor-excitation, and seismic-isolation technology. . Dr. Harold A. Rosen, Hughes Aircraft Co., received the Spacecraft Design Award for contributions to the development of satellite communication systems, including the spin-stabilized synchronous-orbit spacecraft concept and commercial systems. Dr. Alan M. Lovelace of the Air Force Systems Command delivered the von Karman Lecture, “Advanced Composites,” pointing to a need for competitive cost and innovative design to realize the advantages of composites in material, fabrication, and configuration. The Dryden Research Lecture was delivered by Herbert F. Hardrath, Langley Research Center, who reviewed the use of fracture mechanics to choose materials, configure safe and efficient structures, specify inspection procedures, predict lives of flawed structures, and develop the reliability ofcurrent and future airframes. Daniel J. Fink, Vice President of General Electric Co. and General Manager of the GE Space Div., was installed as 12th president of aiaa. The 19 new Fellows elected included Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, msfc Director; John P. Campbell and John P. Reeder, LaRc; and Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. Inducted as Honorary Members were Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) and Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.). (AdcA, Mar 74; AIAA Bull, Jan 74; aiaa Releases, 21 Dec 73; aiaa History Newsletter, 24 May 74; Ksc Release 14r-74; arc Astrogram, 18 Jan 74, 1; Marshall Star, 30 Jan 74,1)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue briefed members of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics on the Skylab program: Carr said that, in space, material samples such as paper, teflon, nylon, and neoprene-covered nylon were self-extinguishing when ignited, because of a lack of convection. Polyurethane, however, burned “like something soaked in gasoline. ... I am very certain that we will never ever see polyurethane foam in a spacecraft.” Dr. Gibson said that a leg muscle problem that had hindered previous Skylab crews in their ability to walk and run upon return to earth had been solved by a very crude treadmill device used to simulate walking and running. “We worked at it every day, and the condition we came back in was good testimony to the utility of that device.” Pogue narrated a dramatic presentation of slides taken from the Skylab Workshop—of mountainsides eroded by stripmining, forests denuded by the clearcutting of timber, cities obscured By smog, and rivers and lakes muddied by pollution and silt. He said that the astronauts had been constantly amazed how clearly such effects could be seen from their perch in space. “It has an emotional feedback.” Carr said that it had become “very, very clear . . . that we don’t have a whole lot of places to live comfortably on this Earth and we must take care of it.” Dr. Gibson said that the crew would like to see future missions make more use of man’s capability to use his own judgment in data collection. “We would like to see instruments with high-data capability which could be pointed and selectively operated.” Carr said that, “if you are going to use man in space, he is going to be happy if he can use his own judgment and ... is productive. If he is nothing but a switch twiddler working against the clock, he is going to become very bored, and he is going to have psychological problems.” (Transcript)
The appointment of Richard G. Smith as Deputy Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, effective 18 Nov., was announced by Center Director William R. Lucas. Smith would also continue as acting director of MSFc’s Science and Engineering Directorate. Since 1960, Smith had held positions of increasing responsibility in the Science and Engineering Directorate, including Saturn Program Manager from 1970 to 1973. (msfc Release 74-218)
Johnson Space Center announced two personnel changes: Astronaut John W. Young, veteran of four space flights, had heen named Acting Chief of the Astronaut Office in the Flight Operations Directorate. He was replacing former Astronaut Office Chief Alan B. Shepard, Jr., who would serve as senior adviser to Young. Astronaut Russell L. Schweickart had heen named Director of User Affairs at NASA Hq., effective 1 May, replacing Albert T. Christensen, who would return to private industry. The User Affairs Office maintained close ties with users of NASA’s applications program and ensured a flow of information and that the programs were responsive to user needs. (JSC Releases 74-71; 74-72)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications held hearings on the FY 1975 NASA authorization. Dr. William Nordberg, Chief of Goddard Space Flight Center’s Laboratory for Meteorology and Earth Sciences, said data from Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched 23 July 1972) had demonstrated savings in land use planning and regulation of 10 to 100 times conventional costs in both dollars and personnel. Every cloud-free photo taken by the satellite had been sold to the general public at least once. One photo of an Alaskan naval petroleum reserve showed a striking alignment of lakes indicating that the deposits might extend the known petroleum area. Dr. Warren A. Hovis, gsfc scientist, testified that the Heat Capacity Mapping Mission (hcmm) satellite to be launched in 1977 would use a thermal mapper, with a resolution of 0.5 km in optimum orbit, to determine maximum daily temperature variations and thermal inertia of surface material, identify mineral resources, map natural and man-made thermal effluent, and investigate geothermal source location by remote sensing. . Data from the seasat-a satellite to be launched in 1978-^-or from one of its follow-on systems—-would provide optimum, minimum-time ship routing around storms and away from adverse wind, waves, currents, and ice conditions, Dr. John R. Apel, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorologist, testified 6 March. The savings from a one-day decrease in transatlantic crossing time could amount to millions of dollars each year for shipping interests. (Transcript)
Directors of Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and Textron Inc. announced tentative agreement on a management reorganization to aid the financially troubled Lockheed. Textron would invest $85 million in Lockheed shares and stock. Textron’s Chairman and Chief Executive Officer G. William Miller would also become Chairman and Chief Executive Officer for Lockheed; Lockheed’s Chairman Daniel J. Haughton would become Vice Chairman. Lockheed was to remain a separate corporation. The arrangement provided for the release of the Federal Government from its 1971 guarantee of up to $250 million in bank loans to Lockheed. The agreement was subject to several conditions, including requirements for Lockheed to bring firm production commitments of its L-1011 TriStar aircraft to a total of 180 and to change accounting procedures. (Textron Release, 3 June 74; Witkin, NYT, 4 June 74,1)
The first domestic communications satellite service, connecting East and West Coasts, was officially inaugurated by RCA Corp. from New York City at 2:40 pm edt. Within minutes, conversations were relayed by Canada’s Anik 2 satellite (launched by NASA 20 April 1973) on a circuit leased from Telesat Canada. Sen. Jacob K. Javits (R-N.Y.) in New York, Federal Communications Chairman Dean Burch in Washington, D.C., Alaska Gov. William A. Egan in Juneau, Sen. Mike Gravel (D-Alaska) in Anchorage, and Sen. Ted Stevens (R-Alaska) in Nome exchanged congratulations. Operated by RCA Global Communications, Inc., and RCA Alaska Communications, Inc., for the parent RCA Corp., the system used earth relay stations near New York, San Francisco, Juneau, and Anchorage. These were to be joined by others in 1976, when RCA hoped to have three satellites of its own. Transmission charges for coast-to-coast messages were less via satellite than by earthbound systems; a telephone circuit rented for $1700 a month rather than the $2298 charged by American Telephone & Telegraph Co. for a similar land-based private circuit. Quality also was better because a connection could be completed with fewer relay points, one relay to the satellite and smother from the satellite to the ground, (rca Release, 8 Jan 74; W Star-News, 9 Jan 74; WSJ, 9 Jan 74,34)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified in FY 1975 authorization hearings before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that Orbiting Solar Observatory oso-i, scheduled for 1975 launch into orbit, was expected to acquire ultraviolet solar spectra of the most detailed resolution ever obtained. Spacecraft and experiment assembly was to be complete by mid-1974. A cooperative program with the European Space Research Organization, called International Sun-Earth Explorers (isee), planned three satellites to make simultaneous measurements. Two spacecraft, “Mother” built by the U.S. and “Daughter” built by ESRO, would travel close together in the same highly elliptical orbit, measuring magnetic and electric fields, energetic particles, and plasma properties. The third spacecraft, called “Heliocentric” and built by the U.S., would be placed near one of the unique points in space where the earth’s and sun’s gravity balance each other. The spacecraft would travel around the sun and close to the earth to learn what radiation was impinging on the earth’s magnetosphere. Data from the three satellites would help to untangle spatial from temporal changes in radiation fields around the earth. A cooperative effort with esro and the United Kingdom would be the International Ultraviolet Explorer (iue) scheduled for launch into geosynchronous orbit in 1976 to observe high-resolution spectra in the uv with a telescope controllable from the ground in real time. Techniques gained would be applied later to NASA’s Large Space Telescope. Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition Gerald M. Truszynski reported deactivation of NASA’s transportable tracking station in Newfoundland and closing of Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network stations at Corpus Christi, Tex., and Carnarvon, Australia. The Newfoundland station, placed in caretaker status after the Skylab missions, would be reactivated for the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission and then permanently closed. The Deep Space Network portion of the Johannesburg station was being phased out beginning June 1974; the stdn facility would be phased out following the near-earth phase of the Viking mission. The closings would leave 15 stations, adequate to handle the projected workload for the next five years and consistent with long-range planning. (Transcript)
NASA announced selection of 39 scientists to provide experiments for the 1978 Pioneer twin missions to Venus. The selection, made from 162 scientists who had submitted proposals to NASA, included one scientist each from Germany and France. The scientists would participate in a detailed study of the planet, including composition, structure, and radiation field of its atmosphere; nature of the clouds; and magnetic and radiation environment of the planet, (nasa Release 74-155) 24 June—12 July: Eight U.S. astronauts—Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, Donald K. Slayton, Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, Jack R. Lousma, Robert F. Overmyer, and Karol J. Bobko—took part in training in Star City, near Moscow, for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. A ninth, Eugene A. Cernan, took part in the first two weeks of training, representing the Johnson Space Center Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. In addition to studying Soyuz spacecraft systems, the astronauts trained with the Soviet flight crews in simulators and mockups. They also continued planning procedures and checklists for the joint mission, (jsc Release 74-121; JSC Roundup, 30 Aug 74) 25 June-19 July: The Salyut 3 research station and—nine days later—the Soyuz 14 spacecraft carrying a two-man crew were launched into nearearth orbit to establish a U.S.S.R. manned orbital workshop. Salyut 3 was launched at 4:55 am local time 25 June (7:55 pm EOT 24 June) from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam into orbit with 252-km apogee, 213-km perigee, 89.2-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced the purpose of the mission was to improve the station’s design, onboard systems, and equipment and to perform scientific research during space flight. By 30 June Salyut 3, which consisted of two cylinders more than 21 m in length and weighing some 18 500 kg, had been raised to a near-circular orbit with a 268-km apogee and 265-km perigee. Soyuz 14 was launched 3 July at 11:51 pm local time (2:51 pm EDT) from Baykonur Cosmodrome carrying Cosmonauts Pavel R. Popovich, commander and veteran of the 12 Aug. 1962 Vostok 4 mission, and Yuri P. Artyukhin, flight engineer, to rendezvous with Salyut 3. The launch was seen by Soviet citizens by delayed broadcast on Moscow TV. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 338-km apogee, 201-km perigee, 89.9min period, and 51.5° inclination. Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, chief of cosmonaut training, said during a 4 July Tass interview that the main objectives of the mission were “testing methods and systems of controlling the craft, improvement in the life-sustaining complex, [and] exploration of new possibilities of using both separate craft and groups of space objects to accomplish scientific and applied tasks in a nearearth orbit.” Tass also reported that a 4 July trajectory correction placed the spacecraft in an orbit with a 277-km apogee, 255-km perigee, 89.7min period, and 51.6° inclination. All spacecraft systems were successfully checked out and the crew was reported to be in good health. The Soyuz 14 cosmonauts rendezvoused and docked with Scdyut 3 on 5 July during their 17th orbit, successfully demonstrating techniques the Soviets would use during the July 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project maneuvers. After docking, Popovich and Artyukhin checked the station’s onboard systems and microclimate and entered the 99-cu-m three-room laboratory. During their 15-day mission the cosmonauts studied geological-morphological objects on the earth’s surface, atmospheric formations and phenomena, physical characteristics of outer space, and manufacturing techniques, as well as testing the Salyut space station’s improved design and solar-panel energy system. The crew also studied the influences of space on the human organism and exercised to prevent loss of muscle tone, using an onboard comprehensive trainer to simulate running, jumping, and weight lifting. . Tass reported 15 July that some Soviet scientists considered terminating the mission because unexpected, intense solar flares 4-8 July dramatically increased the radiation exposure. However, because the flares subsided and the space station’s orbit prevented excessive exposure, the crew’s work was not disrupted. While the cosmonauts worked in space, two Soviet researchers lived in a duplicate station on the ground, simultaneously performing the same work. All commands relayed to the orbiting Salyut 3 were first checked on the ground and alternate versions of decisions for unforeseen situations were calculated. On 8 July the U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew, in training at Star City for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. mission in 1975, telegraphed congratulations to the Salyut 3 cosmonauts on their “great success.” They said they looked forward to meeting the two after their “happy return.” By 18 July the crew completed most experiments and began transferring equipment to Soyuz 14. After checking out spacecraft systems, the cosmonauts undocked 19 July. Retrorockets were fired, parachutes deployed, and Soyuz 14 softlanded at 5:21 pm Baykonur time (8:21 am edt) 140 km southeast of Dzhezkazgan 2000 m from the planned target after 15 days 17 hours 30 min in space. The crew left the spacecraft unaided, and on-the-spot medical checks showed the cosmonauts’ health was “good.” All mission tests were reported completed. For the first time, a U.S.S.R. orbital mission had been in touch with mission control continuously because of maritime tracking. Salyut 3 was the third space station orbited by the U.S.S.R. Salyut 1 had been launched 19 April 1971. A three-man crew on Soyuz 10 docked with the station 24 April but returned to earth without entering. A second crew, launched 6 June 1971 aboard Soyuz 11, entered the orbiting station and conducted scientific experiments for 24 days. The three died during reentry when an open valve evacuated air from the spacecraft. Salyut 2 was launched into orbit 3 April 1973 but apparently an explosion or wildly firing thrusters sent the station out of control, tearing off the solar panels and making the station uninhabitable, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 20-26 June, 3—10 July 74; gsfc SSR, 30 June, 31 Aug 74; Tass, FBis-Sov, 25 June-23 July 74; UPl, W Star-News, 14 July 74; Browne, NYT, 9, 20 July 74; SBD, 9, 27 July 74; A&A 1973)
The Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee continued hearings on S. 2350 and S. 3484, bills to develop an operational Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts) system and to establish an Office of Earth Resources Survey Systems within NASA and an Earth Resources Observation Administration within the Dept, of the Interior [see 6, 8, 9 Aug.]. Frank G. Zarb, Office of Management and Budget Associate Director for Material Resources, Energy and Science, warned against immediate development of an operational erts system, citing budgeting restraints and marginal value of current erts data. Since an advanced satellite offering higher spatial resolution would increase the usefulness of erts data, Zarb contended that the third satellite, erts-c, should be experimental. His view was supported by S. Benedict Levin, Executive Vice President of Earth Satellite Corp., and by John V. Granger, Acting Director of the Bureau of International Scientific and Technological Affairs for the State Dept. (Transcript)
Comsat General Corp. announced the award of a cohtract to ScientificAtlanta, Inc., for 100 shipboard antennas and associated terminal equipment as part of the maritime communications satellite (Marisat) system to provide improved communications to commercial 'ships at sea. The contract was expected to exceed $2 million and included options to purchase up to 300 additional terminals, (comsat Gen Corp Release 74r-31) 6, 11 June: Hearings on converting solar energy into electricity by photovoltaic devices were held by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Energy as part of a continuing series of hearings on solar energy. John V. Goldsmith, Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientist, said the total annual U.S. production of photovoltaic solar cells was 50 to 75 kw, mostly for spacecraft systems. In space, solarcell systems were without parallel but large-scale applications on the earth could not be achieved until systems could be produced in adequate volume at commercially competitive prices. Goldsmith recommended a large-scale photovoltaic technology development program and said that a terrestrial photovoltaic system, with advantages of an inexhaustible energy source and minimal environmental impact, could be reduced in cost from its current $30 per watt to an economically feasible $0.50 per watt by 1985 but would require Federal funding of more than $250 million. Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, NASA Assistant Administrator for Energy Programs, said NASA was continuing investigations of orbiting satellite power stations. A microwave energy project was studying problems of processing large amounts of power. However, an orbiting power station would weigh 11 million kg and require a second-generation shuttle in addition to a nuclear-powered shuttle to put it into synchronous orbit. (Transcript)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had resigned effective 15 March to return to private industry, NASA announced. Myers would rejoin Rockwell International Corp. as president of a new aircraft group with headquarters in Los Angeles. Myers, who had headed all NASA manned space flight programs since January 1970, had received the NASA Certificate of Appreciation in 1969 for his contributions to the Apollo 8 moon-orbiting mission, the NASA Public Service Award in 1969 for his contributions to the Apollo 11 landing mission, and the NASA Distinguished Service Medal in 1971 for his contributions to the continued success of the Apollo program. Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider had been named Acting Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight. (NASA Release 74-42)
Intention to nominate Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., as Administrator of the new Energy Research and Development Administration was announced by President Ford as part of a major reshuffling of key energy posts. Dr. Seamans—former nasa Deputy Administrator, Secretary of the Air Force, and President of the National Academy of Engineering— was reported by the press as selected over former NASA Administrator Thomas 0. Paine and two other candidates to head the new agency replacing the Atomic Energy Commission. Former astronaut and Atomic Energy Commissioner William A. Anders was to be nominated Chairman of the new Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the former aec Chairman, Dr. Dixy Lee Ray, to the new position of Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs. Dr. Seaman’s nomination was sent to the Senate 2 Dec. and confirmed 12 Dec. Anders’ and Dr. Ray’s were sent to the Senate 4 Dec.; Anders’ was confirmed 12 Dec. and Dr. Ray’s 13 Dec. (pd, 4 Nov 74, 1382-3; 9 Dec 74, 1546; CR, 4 Dec 74, S20620; 12 Dec 74, S21317; 13 Dec 74, S21497; O’Toole, W Post, 16 Oct 74, A10; 30 Oct 74, Al)
The Apollo 16 command module (launched 16 April 1972) went on public display at the Alabama Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. The CM, called Casper, had carried Astronauts Thomas K. Mattingly II, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and John W. Young to the moon and back during the fifth successful lunar landing mission. (Marshall Star, 6 Feb 74, 1)
The U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 14 from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam, carrying Cosmonauts Pavel R. Popovich and Yuri P. Artyukhin to work in the orbiting Salyut 3 research station launched 25 June [see 25 June-19 July], (gsfc Wkly SSR, 3-10 July 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 5 July 74, Ul)
The X-24B lifting body successfully completed its first supersonic flight near Flight Research Center, in the joint NASA-Air Force program to develop a hypersonic vehicle for reentry from space and technology for future aircraft capable of sustained cruise at hypersonic speeds. Piloted by John A. Manke and launched from a B-52 aircraft at 13 700 m, the research vehicle reached an altitude of 18 400 m and speed of mach 1.09. The powered flight satisfied the primary objectives of obtaining stability and control data at mach 1.1 for power-off and power-on conditions, performance and longitudinal trim data at mach 0.8 and 0.9, and pressure data on both fins for identification of asymmetric flow. (NASA, X-24B Flash Rpt, 5 March 74; NASA Release 73-130; Dry den frc Release, “NASA Facts,” March 1976)
Former Mercury astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., the first American to orbit the earth, was elected U.S. Senator from Ohio by a wide margin over his Republican opponent, Ralph J. Perk. Glenn had withdrawn from a 1964 senatorial bid after a fall affected his inner ear. In 1970 he lost the Democratic primary to Howard M. Metzenbaum, who in turn lost the general election to Robert Taft, Jr. Metzenbaum, appointed to fill the vacated seat of William B. Saxhe in September 1973, lost to Glenn in the 1974 Democratic primary. (Farrell, NYT, 6 Nov 74, 37)
Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue (launched 16 Nov. 1973 in the final mission to crew the Orbital Workshop) set a new record for the longest manned ' flight time in space, completing 59 days 11 hrs 9 min at 10:10 pm edt and surpassing the time set by Skylab 3 on its 28 July-25 Sept. 1973 mission. Skylab 4 had been given a go-ahead 10 Jan. for a seven-day extension, with weekly reviews through the end of a planned 84-day mission. (A&A 73)
President Ford signed an $82.1-billion FY 1975 Dept, of Defense appropriation bill, almost $5 billion below the Administration request. The conference committee bill had been approved by the House 23 Sept, and the Senate 24 Sept. Research, development, test, and evaluation funds included $445 million for the B-l advanced strategic bomber, clearing the way for construction of a fourth developmental prototype during FY 1975. The Navy vfax fighter program was allocated $20 million for adaptation of the air combat fighter to be selected by the Air Force— either the General Dynamics Corp. YF—16 or the Northrop Corp. YF-17. Other funds included $81.4 million for six A-10 close-air-support R&D aircraft (in addition to $138 million for purchase of 25 production aircraft); $175 million for F—15 air superiority fighter R&D, and $8.6 million for Navy v/stol development. {PD, 14 Oct 74, 1250; CR, 23 Sept 74, D1125; 24 Sept 74, D1130; Av Wk, 23 Sept 74,17-8) Donald Stone of msfc’s Electronics and Control Laboratory reported a scanning laser radar for automatic rendezvous and docking had been tested for possible use on the space shuttle, space tug, and solar electric propulsion stage. Plans called for delivery of the radar to a simulator of the space tug flight system for evaluation under conditions similar to actual use. (Proceedings; msfc Release 74-182)
NASA announced the award of a $1.7-million contract to John A. Blume & Associates to study design modifications for the 40- by 80-ft wind tunnel at Ames Research Center. The modifications, which would permit full-scale testing for future aircraft, • included repowering the facility from 26.9 mw to 100.7 mw. The new test section under consideration would measure 24.4 by 36.6 m (80 by 120 ft) and increase the speed capability from the present 370 to 555 km per hr. (NASA Release 74—212)
Tass commentator Georgy Sergeyev commented on the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project: The success of Skylab and the first flight of Yuri A. Gagarin, the space walk of Aleksey A. Leonov, and the exploration of the moon by American astronauts, were only “milestones along the road of exploration of outer space.” ASTP would be another step. The joint Soviet-American mission had become possible, not only because of the efforts of scientists, but also because of the “conditions of a favorable political climate established in Soviet-American relations as a result of the fruitful . . . summit meetings.” The main task was to see that “these changes become irreversible.” astp would go a long way toward “making space exploration really internationalist.” (Tass, fbis-Sov, 14 Feb 74, B6)
Dr. William 0. Davis, Chief of the Upper Atmosphere and Space Services Office of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and a leading rocket and space expert, died in Washington, D.C., at the age of 54. Dr. Davis was a member of the interagency team that planned and coordinated NASA’s Earth Resources Satellite program. As Assistant Director of Laboratories at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base 1957-1958, he had directed Project Far Side, the earliest attempt to obtain radiation and magnetic data from outer space by launching a multistage rocket from a high-altitude balloon. {W Post, 15 May 74)
The leadership of “NASA’s other hero,” former Administrator James E. Webb, was recalled by Julian Scheer, former NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, in the Washington Post: The fifth anniversary of the 20 July 1969 Apollo 11 lunar landing would bring toasts to former astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins and others. But it had been Webb’s “incredible leadership” which had made the event possible. Webb had “fought the Bureau of the Budget for every nickel” and usually got his way. In Congress, few believed he was not a scientist or engineer. He dazzled them with his knowledge of the technical as well as his management of the vast NASA program structure. “But it was in the internal workings of NASA where his strength lay.” He had an uncanny knack for “standing back and looking at the big picture.” He never took on a problem without coming up with as many as four options and, for Webb, every option was an opportunity. Abruptly in 1968, Webb resigned. Most of the major Apollo decisions had been made. “Almost shockingly, it was less than a year away from the first manned lunar landing. Had he . . . waited just a while longer, he could have basked in the moment of tremendous glory.” (W Post, 21 July 74, C6)
Deputy Secretary of Defense William P. Clements, Jr., approved Air Force plans for initial production of the A-10 close air support aircraft. The Dept, of Defense would release $39 million in FY 1975 funds for long-lead-time items. Approval was granted to buy 52 aircraft from the manufacturer with the provision that contract options to procure a smaller quantity be kept open. Selection of the A-10 for full development followed a competitive prototype flyoff in 1972. Since that time two A—10 prototypes had flown almost 500 hrs in test flights, (dod Release 346-74) During July: Dramatic changes in a star, altering its chemistry and foretelling its death, had been observed for the first time, Dr. Robert F. Kraft, California Lick Observatory astronomer, reported in Sky and Telescope. FG Sagittae, a superstar 8000 light years away in the constellation Sagitta, was undergoing a sudden cooling, abrupt changes in color and brightness, and increases in the number and amounts of heavy elements in its atmosphere. The changes, which occurred in every star that was exhausting its nuclear fuel, might also take place in our own sun, possibly in 10 billion yrs. (Sky and Telescope, July 74, 18-22; O’Toole, W Post, 10 July 74, A3) _
