Appointment of Lt. Gen. William J. Evans as commander of the Air Force Systems Command became effective. Gen. Evans, who had been deputy chief of staff for research and development at Air Force Hq, was replacing retiring Gen. Samuel C. Phillips. AFSC had been responsible for developing Air Force aerospace technology. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug. 75)
Doctors had rechecked x-rays of Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronaut Donald K. Slayton’s lungs taken before the 15 July launch and found that they also had shown a shadow revealed by postflight x-rays, Dr. Arnauld E. Nicogossian, NASA’s ASTP physician, said at a Johnson Space Center press briefing. Dr. Nicogossian said that the spot had not been noticed before because the x-rays were difficult to read and the spot had been covered by normal vasculature and bony structure. Only a 6 Aug. tomogram [see 25 Aug.] had verified that the shadow was a lesion. Dr. Nicogossian said the nitrogen tetroxide inhaled by the ASTP astronauts during reentry [see 15—26 July] had not been shown to have caused or increased the size of the lesion. Dr. Nicogossian added that, if cancer were diagnosed during the surgery, the usual medical procedure was to remove a part of the lobe, but he did not think that would prevent Slayton from flying in the future. Slayton said that he felt “pretty damn lucky” that the lesion had been discovered when it was. “This thing could have been discovered before the flight. . . . And I could have easily gotten jerked off the flight, so that would have been bad. Secondly, if we hadn’t had the gas in the cockpit on reentry, . . . [the doctors] could very easily not have picked this thing up until my next annual physical which is 6 or 8 months off.” Then it would have been a “lot tougher” to fix. Slayton, one of the seven original U.S. astronauts, had been grounded in 1962 because of an erratic heart rate, first detected in 1959, but had been returned to flight status March 1972 in time for assignment to ASTP. He told the briefing that he hoped to be out of the hospital within 7 days and back to work in 2 wk, and on flight status again within a month. (Transcript, ASTP PC—63, 20 Aug 75)
NASA announced appointment of Gerald D. Griffin as Deputy Associate Administrator for Operations in the Office of Manned Space Flight, effective 1 Aug. In his new position Griffin would plan for the most economical and flexible operation of the Space Shuttle and Spacelab. Griffin, who was Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs before this appointfnent, would be replaced by Dr. Joseph P. Allen, an astronaut assigned to the Astronaut Office at Johnson Space Center. (NASA anno 17 July 75)
NASA announced award of a $150 000 10-mo study contract to The Boeing Co. to determine the basic design, costs, and environmental impact of potential power-generating satellite systems in space. Boeing’s Aerospace Co. would investigate solar and nuclear families of space-based power generators, studying two different energy converters for each; define the satellites; study their cost; and determine potential environmental effects. One converter was to be a thermal engine converter like a steam turbine that transformed heat into a usable form of energy. The other, a thermionic converter, would produce electrically charged particles to power a passive electrical-generation system. Power generated by either method would be transformed into microwaves and beamed to earth for reconversion into electricity. (MSFC Release 75—156) Soyuz Launch: Soyuz 19, carrying cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, was launched into sunny skies from Baykonur Cosmodrome at 5:20 pm local time (8:20 am EDT) 15 July. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 221.9-km apogee, 186.3-km perigee, 88.5min period, and 51.8? inclination. Foreign correspondents, barred from the launch site, watched the launch on color TV sets in a Moscow press center. The first Soviet launch to be televised live, it was transmitted to viewers throughout the Soviet Union, the U.S., and eastern and western Europe. President Ford watched from a U.S. State Dept, auditorium with Soviet Ambassador to the U.S. Anatoly P. Dobrynin and NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher, before Dr. Fletcher and Ambassador Dobrynin flew to Kennedy Space Center to watch the Apollo launch. On the third orbit the Soyuz 19 crew established contact with U.S. mission control in Houston, putting into operation the global Moscow—Houston —Soyuz-Apollo communications system. On the fifth orbit the cosmonauts made the first of two maneuvers to place Soyuz 19 into a circular docking orbit. New orbital parameters were 231.7-km apogee and 192.4-km perigee. The spacecraft was spin-stabilized at 3° per sec with all systems operating normally. Apollo Launch: At 3:50 pm EDT 15 July—7 hr 30 min after the Soyuz launch—a Saturn IB flawlessly lifted the Apollo spacecraft from Kennedy Space Center’s launch complex 39, carrying Apollo commander Thomas P. Stafford, command-module pilot Vance D. Brand, and docking-module pilot Donald K. Slayton. The spacecraft entered orbit with a 173.3-km apogee, 154.7-km perigee, 87.6-min period, and 51.8? inclination. The spacecraft’s launch-vehicle adapter was jettisoned at 9 hr 4 min ground elapsed time (9:04 GET, counted from the Soyuz 19 launch) and the crew maneuvered the Apollo 180° to dock with the adapter and extract the docking module. These events were videotaped and transmitted to earth later via Ats 6 (NASA’s Applications Technology Satellite launched 30 May 1974). A maneuver 2 hr later at 7:35 pm circularized the orbit at 172 km. The Saturn S—IVB stage was deorbited into the Pacific Ocean 1 hr 30 min later. A second Soyuz 19 circularization burn of 18.5 sec at 8:43 am EDT 16 July placed that spacecraft in a circular orbit of 229 km, with all systems functioning normally. Rendezvous and Docking: A series of Apollo maneuvers, with the final braking maneuver at 8:51 am EDT 17 July, put the Apollo spacecraft in a 229.4-km circular orbit matching the orbit of Soyuz 19. Afew minutes later Brand reported, “We’ve got Soyuz in the sextant.” Voice contact was made soon after. “Hello. Soyuz, Apollo,” Stafford said in Russian. Kubasov replied in English, “Hello everybody. Hi to you, Tom and Deke. Hello there, Vance.” All communications among the five crew members during the mission were made in the language of the listener, with the Americans speaking Russian to the Soviet crew and the Soviet crew speaking English to the Americans. Contact of the two spacecraft 51 hr 49 min into the mission (12:09 pm 17 July) was transmitted live on TV to the earth, and Stafford commented, “We have succeeded. Everything is excellent.” “Soyuz and Apollo are shaking hands now,” the cosmonauts answered. Hard docking was completed over the Atlantic Ocean at 12:12 pm—6 min earlier than the prelaunch flight plan—watched by millions of TV viewers worldwide. “Perfect. Beautiful. Well done, Tom. It was a good show. We’re looking forward to shaking hands with you in board [sic] Soyuz,” Leonov said. Ta9s later reported that Kubasov told Moscow ground controllers that “we felt a slight jolt at the moment of docking” but that all went according to plan. Joint Activities: At 3:17 pm hatch 3 opened; Apollo commander Stafford and Soyuz commander Leonov shook hands 2 min later. “Glad to see you,” Stafford told Leonov in Russian. “Glad to see you. Very very happy to see you,” Leonov responded in English. “This is Soyuz and the United States,” Slayton told TV viewers around the world. Both Soviet Communist Party General Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and President Ford congratulated the crews and expressed their confidence in the success of the mission. Stafford then presented Leonov with “five flags for your government and the people of the Soviet Union” with the wish that “our joint work in space serves for the benefit of all countries and peoples on the earth.” Leonov presented the U.S. crew with Soviet flags and plaques. The men signed international certificates and exchanged other commemorative items. After nearly 4 hr of joint activities, including a meal aboard the Soyuz, the Americans returned to the Apollo and the hatch was closed at 6:51 pm. An integrity check of the hatches indicated an atmospheric leak on the Soviet side. Ground controllers later attributed the indication to temperature changes in the sealed docking module that were detected by the sensitive Soviet instrumentation. Future integrity checks of the hatches would be more rigorous, however. Following a sleep period, the crews prepared for another day of joint activity. Kubasov described the mission to Soviet TV viewers while the rest of the crews performed experiments in their respective spacecraft. At 5:05 am 18 July Brand entered the Soviet spacecraft; Leonov joined Stafford and Slayton in Apollo, greeting them with “Howdy partner.” Kubasov gave American TV viewers a tour of his Soyuz, and Stafford followed with a tour of the Apollo. Then both Kubasov and Brand videotaped scientific demonstrations for transmission to earth later. Kubasov and Brand ate lunch in the Soyuz while Leonov ate with Stafford and Slayton in Apollo. During a third transfer, Stafford and Leonov went into the Soyuz and Kubasov and Brand joined Slayton in Apollo. Brand gave Soviet viewers a Russian-language tour of the eastern U.S. as seen from space. Further speeches and exchanges of commemorative items were made for both U.S. and Soviet viewers before the final handshakes at 4:49 pm EDT 18 July, when the crews returned to their respective spacecraft. The hatches were closed after Brand told Leonov and Kubasov, “We wish you the best of success. I’m sure that we’ve opened up a new era in history. Our next meeting will be on the ground.” Total time for all transfers and joint activities was 19 hr 55 min. Stafford had spent 7 hr 10 min aboard Soyuz; Brand, 6 hr 30 min; Slayton, 1 hr 35 min. Leonov spent 5 hr 43 min in the Apollo, Kubasov 4 hr 57 min. During nearly 2 days of joint activities, the five men carried out five joint experiments. Undocking and Separation: The Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft undocked at 95:42 GET (8:02 am EDT 19 July). While the spacecraft were in station-keeping mode, the crews photographed them and the docking apparatus, transmitting the pictures live on TV to earth. The Apollo spacecraft then served as an occulting disk, blocking the sun from the Soyuz and simulating a solar eclipse—the first man-made eclipse. Leonov and Kubasov photographed the solar corona as the Apollo backed away from the Soyuz and toward the sun. The two spacecraft then redocked at 8:34 am EDT with the Apollo maneuvering and the Soyuz docking system active while good quality TV was transmitted to earth. The second docking was not as smooth as the first because a slight misalignment of the two spacecraft caused both to pitch excessively at contact. Final undocking—also with the Soyuz active—went smoothly and was completed at 11:26 am. As the spacecraft separated, the two crews performed the ultraviolet atmospheric absorption experiment, making unsuccessful data measurements at 150 m and then moving to a distance of 500 and 1000 m, where data were successfully collected. The Apollo maneuvered to within 50 m of Soyuz and took intensive still photography of the Soyuz. Separation maneuvers to put the two spacecraft on separate trajectories began at 2:42 pm with a reaction-control system burn. With the maneuvers completed, Leonov told the Apollo crew, “Thank you very much for your very big job. ... It was a very good show.” Brand answered, “Thank you, also. This was a very good job.” Soyuz Orbit and Landing-. Soyuz 19 remained in orbit nearly 30 hrs after the undocking. The cosmonauts conducted biological experiments with microorganisms and zone-forming fungi. At 2:39 am EDT 21 July the Soyuz crew closed hatch 5 between their orbital vehicle and descent module and began depressurizing the orbital module. Braking burns of the descent engines began at 6:06 am when the spacecraft was 772 km from the Apollo. The 194.9-sec bum slowed the spacecraft to 120 km per sec. After another burn to stabilize the spacecraft, the orbital and descent modules separated over Central Africa. While Soviet viewers watched the first landing of a Soviet spacecraft televised in real time, the main parachute deployed at 7 km and jettisoned before the soft-landing engines fired. Soyuz 19 landed about 11 km from the target point northeast of Baykonur Cosmodrome at 6:51 am EDT 21 July, after a 142-hr 31-min mission. The rescue helicopter approached the capsule immediately and specialists opened hatch 5. Kubasov stepped out waving to rescue-team members, followed by Leonov, both cosmonauts in apparent good health and spirits. The cosmonauts returned to Baykonur for medical checks and debriefings. Apollo Postdocking Orbital Activities: Apollo remained in orbit while its crew continued U.S. science experiments begun during predocking. Searching for extreme ultraviolet radiation, the ASTP crew marked the birth of a new branch of astronomy when they found, for the first time, extreme ultraviolet sources outside the solar system; some scientists had believed that such sources could never be found. One of the newly discovered sources turned out to be the hottest known white dwarf star. The Apollo detector also revealed the existence of the first pulsar discovered outside the Milky Way. About 200 000 light years from earth’s galaxy, in the Small Magellanic Cloud, it was the most luminous pulsar known to astronomers, 10 times brighter than any discovered so far. After repairing some malfunctioning equipment, the astronauts also mapped x-ray sources throughout the Milky Way. The crew completed nearly all the 110 earth-observation tasks assigned. Coordinated investigations had been made simultaneously by six groups of scientists on the ground, on ships at sea, and in aircraft. The astronauts looked at ocean currents, ocean pollution, desert geography, shoreline erosion, volcanoes, iceberg movements, and vegetation patterns. On 23 July the command-module tunnel was vented and the crew put on spacesuits to jettison the docking module. The command and service module undocked from the DM at 3:45 pm EDT, and a 1-sec engine firing put the CSM into a higher orbit (232.2-km apogee, 219.0km perigee) so that the DM could move ahead. A second maneuver put the CSM in a 223.2-km by 219.0-km orbit. Deorbit began at 4:38 p.m. The command module and service module separated, the drogue and main parachutes deployed normally, and the Apollo splashed down at 224:58 GET (5:18 p.m. EDT 24 July) in the Pacific Ocean 163°W and 22°N, 500 km west of Hawaii. This was the last ocean landing planned for U.S. manned space flights; future flights on the Space Shuttle would be wheeled touchdowns at land bases. The CM landed in “stable 2” position (upside down) 7.4 km from the prime recovery ship, U.S.S. New Orleans. After swimmers from the rescue helicopter righted the spacecraft and attached a flotation collar, the Apollo was lifted by crane on to the deck of the recovery ship and Stafford, Brand, and Slayton stepped out to the cheers of the ship’s crew. President Ford telephoned congratulations. During the welcome, the crew was evidently experiencing eye and lung discomfort; subsequent conversations and spacecraft data revealed that, during reentry, the earth landing system had failed to jettison the apex cover and drogues as scheduled and had had to be fired manually, without first disabling the reaction-control system thrusters. With the CM oscillating, the thrusters began firing rapidly to compensate, and combustion products — including a small amount of nitrogen tetroxide— entered through the cabin-pressure relief valves. As soon as the RCS system had been disabled, fresh air was once again drawn into the cabin. The crew members told flight officials that they had put on oxygen masks once the spacecraft had landed, and then activated the postlanding vent system. Because of the crew’s discomfort, further shipboard ceremonies had been canceled and the crew had been sent to sick bay and then to Tripler Hospital in Hawaii for observation until 8 Aug. Primary ASTP mission objectives were to evaluate the docking and undocking of an Apollo spacecraft with a Soyuz, and determine the adequacy of the onboard orientation lights and docking target; evaluate the ability of astronauts and cosmonauts to make intervehicular crew transfers and the ability of spacecraft systems to support the transfers; evaluate the Apollo’s capability of maintaining attitude-hold control of the docked vehicles and performing attitude maneuvers; measure quantitatively the effect of weightlessness on the crews’ height and lower limb volume, according to length of exposure to zero-g; and obtain relay and direct synchronous-satellite navigation tracking data to determine their accuracy for application to Space Shuttle navigation-system design. The objectives were successfully completed, and the mission was adjudged successful on July 75; Apollo-Apollo-ry of the 15 Aug. (NASA MORs M—966— 75^-01, 7 July 75, 15 Aug 75;; mission transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; change of shift press briefing transcripts 15 to 24 July 75; W Post, 14 to 25 July 75; NYT, 14 to 24 FBIS—Sov, 14 to 25 July 75; NASA Release 75—118; NASA Soyuz Test Project: Information for Press, 1975; Froelich, Soyuz, NASA EP—109; Ezell, et al., The Partnership: A Histor Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; NASA SP—4209, 317— 49)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wis.) had said that NASA’s Space Shuttle program “might be on the verge of a financial breakdown,” the Washington Post reported. Citing a General Accounting Office report, Sen. Proxmire warned that the risk of cost overruns had increased and that Congress should look for “cheaper alternatives.” (AP, W Post, 6 March 75)
A theory that the moon was actually a piece of the earth broken away early in the planet’s formation 4.5 billion yrs ago was presented in a paper by Dr. John A. O’Keefe, a Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, and Professor Harold C. Urey, Nobel Prize winner from the Univ. of California. The paper, presented by Dr. O’Keefe at a meeting of the Royal Society in London, stated that although the moon had little, if any, metallic core, data from Apollo lunar-landing missions and earlier unmanned lunar flights had provided chemical evidence that lunar rocks were once a part of a mass that had included a considerable portion of molten iron. The higher proportion of molten metal in the earth supported the theory that, before the split, the iron in the earth had sunk to the center, drawing with it the gold, platinum, and other rare metals found in molten rock originally mixed with the iron. According to the theory, the moon was pushed to its present distance from the earth by interaction with the tides of the body of the earth. Other theories about the formation of the moon included the possibility that the moon had been captured by the earth’s gravitational field when it passed near the earth, or that it had been formed simultaneously with the earth. Neither of those theories explained the moon’s lack of a substantial metallic core. (NASA Release 75—171)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D— Mass.) introduced S. 397 to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to acquire and maintain for future generations the site in Auburn, Mass., on which Dr. Robert H. Goddard launched the first liquid-propelled rocket on 16 March 1926. (CR, 27 Jan 75, S884) 27 January—13 February: A joint conference of technical directors for the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project met at Johnson Space Center. Participants in the conference, held while U.S. and Soviet working groups also met at JSC (see 16 Jan. —8 Feb.), reviewed the progress of ASTP preparations and published the necessary documentation. A joint communique issued 13 Feb. stated that discussions and agreements were completed on technical questions relating to the development of new spacecraft equipment and design improvement, mission ground-support equipment, and publication of technical documentation. The communique also stated that communication lines between U.S. and U.S.S.R. centers fully guaranteed the flow of information necessary to conduct the joint mission. Both docking systems were carefully checked and were ready for flight, with final checkouts scheduled at the respective launch sites. Crew training was proceeding satisfactorily (see 7—26 Feb.) with the final joint training session scheduled for April in the U.S.S.R. Soviet ASTP Technical Director, Professor Konstantin D. Bush-uyev, had informed U.S. officials that Soyuz 16 (launched 2 Dec. 1974) had successfully completed a full test of basic flight phases planned for ASTP as well as performance of spacecraft systems and interaction with U.S.S.R. ground Control systems. Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. tracking activity during the flight had shown that the precision of tracking information was satisfactory. During a 13 Feb. press conference at JSC, Professor Bushuyev said that, in addition to changes in the Soyuz life-support systems and the addition of the docking apparatus, other design changes on the Soyuz spacecraft included the installation of a transporter for the Apollo and related antennas, a new interspacecraft communications system, an optical target to permit Apollo to target the approach and rendezvous, and some flashing beacons and orientation lights. (Joint communique text; JSC press briefing transcript, 13 Feb 75)
NASA Pilot William H. Dana made the last rocket-powered flight of the X—24B lifting body, from Flight Research Center. Although a four-chamber firing had been planned, only three chambers ignited, and a three-chamber flight plan was executed. The X—24B reached an altitude of 17 678 m and a speed of mach 1.2. Six more glide flights were planned. Objectives of the flight were to observe stability and control with rudder bias at 10°, to test handling qualities with all damper gains at zero, to survey body pressure, to perform a qualification test of a high-density reusable surface insulator, and to make a lefthand fin tuft study. The X—24B was part of a joint NASA-Air Force program to test concepts for a manned vehicle that could reenter the atmosphere from space, and to provide advanced technology for a future hypersonic cruise aircraft. (FRC X-Press, 26 Sept 75, 2; NASA Hq X—24B Fit Rpt)
A “rather exciting development” in the ability of manned spacecraft systems to navigate accurately should be available in 10 yr, General William J. Evans, Commander, Air Force Systems Command, told the 57th annual meeting of the American Defense Preparedness Assn, in Los Angeles. The NAVSTAR Global Positioning System, the “most precise and accurate positioning, velocity, and navigation assistance air or surface vehicles have ever had,” may replace as many as five separate systems now required for these functions. (AFSC Release 15 Oct 75)
The Peoples Republic of China announced it had successfully recovered an artificial earth satellite for the first time, becoming the third country after the U.S. and the Soviet Union to develop a technique for returning a satellite from orbit. The satellite, which had been launched 26 Nov., was China’s fourth; the third had been orbited in July and the first two in 1970 and 1971. Edward K. Wu, Hong Kong correspondent of the Baltimore Sun, noted that Chinese scientists and engineers apparently had solved technological problems including development of a heat-resistant alloy to withstand reentry temperatures, automatic techniques for remote control, and a trigger system to fire the satellite back to earth. (B Sun, 4 Dec 75, A4)
Goddard Space Flight Center’s Goddard News reported that the John C. Lindsay Memorial Award, given annually to a GSFC employee in recognition of an outstanding contribution to science and technology, had been presented to Dr. Norman F. Ness. Dr. Ness had received the award for his pioneering work in the investigation of magnetic fields of planetary bodies and the interaction of the solar wind with these magnetic fields. Dr. Ness, who had been a participating scientist on the Explorer Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (IMP) satellites and Mariner 10, and Pioneer satellites, spearheaded the first measurements of the earth’s distant magnetic fields and magnetic tail. He was also the first to explore the moon’s magnetic field. On the Mariner 10 flybys of Jupiter, Dr. Ness made the surprising discovery of a small, but measurable, intrinsic magnetic field. (Goddard News, June 75,1)
The lung condition of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts, who had inhaled nitrogen tetroxide fumes during Apollo reentry [see 15— 24 July], had improved, NASA Flight Surgeon Dr. Arnauld Nicogossian told reporters at a crew-status briefing. The astronauts had been transferred from the intensive-care unit of Tripler Hospital to other hospital quarters. Astronaut Donald K. Slayton’s x-rays showed a 70 to 80% improvement in the condition of his lungs; astronauts Vance D. Brand and Thomas P. Stafford had improved, but not as much. (ASTP Transcript PC—58)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.) inserted into the Congressional Record a summary of the Central Intelligence Agency’s report on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. The summary indicated that “although the Soviet have experienced many space problems the prospects for a successful mission are good.” The report continued that the Soviet preparations were more extensive and thorough than for previous efforts, and that past failures had occurred at a phase during the mission which would not jeopardize U.S. astronauts should there be a recurrence. The report did point out that the Soviets had encountered severe problems in space. (CR, 14 July 75, S12511)
Communications Satellite Corp. Chairman Joseph H. McConnell told a stockholders’ meeting that ComSatCorp was finalizing a contract with Exxon Corp. for five shipboard terminals for use with ComSatCorp’s Marisat maritime communications satellite scheduled for launch in summer 1975. McConnell also said that ComSatCorp had agreed to lease one shipboard terminal to Seagap, an oil exploration consortium led by Phillips Petroleum Co. Marisat would make available, for the first time, reliable voice, data, teletype, and facsimile communications to ships at sea and to offshore drilling rigs. McConnell said that the success of the Marisat program would depend on the Navy’s use of the system and on ComSatCorp’s ability to develop a substantial market in the commercial shipping industry. (Snider, W Star, 14 May 75, FI) 13 —14 May: More than 500 representatives from government, industry, and universities attended a 2-day conference at Lewis Research Center to review progress in aerospace propulsion. Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that high-speed performance was no longer the top priority among the propulsion researchers, emphasis having switched to quiet, clean, and fuel-conserving engines. Presentations and panel discussions included aircraft noise-reduction technology, fuel-conservative engine technology, upper-atmosphere pollution-measurement programs, and engine systems and component technology. LeRC’s John B. Whitlow reported that new technology generated by NASA’s supersonic cruise airplane research (SCAR) would develop an engine far different from the afterburning supersonic turbojet that was to have powered the first U.S. supersonic transport. A potential new engine might be a duct-burning turbofan with features such as a variable-geometry fan that allowed the engine to move as much as possible between straight turbojet and straight turbofan operational cycles. Other objectives for future NASA-developed SST propulsion systems included a 7400-km range with outstanding economy at speeds from mach 2.2 to mach 2.7, good subsonic cruise characteristics, good hold endurance and economy, and low takeoff noise. Whitlow stressed that, because of noise limitations, future SSTs would not be straight turbojets, and SCAR researchers were concentrating on low-bypass-ratio turbofans. As bypass ratio also affects engine weight, fuel consumption, drag, and cost-effective performance, no single bypass ratio of a conventional engine could meet all desired goals simultaneously. Thus SCAR researchers were developing variable-cycle engine technology that could tailor the bypass ratio and perhaps the fan/pressure ratio for optimum performance. Candidate engines included a mini-bypass turbojet, a variable-bypass supersonic turbofan, a duct-burning turbofan, and a rear-valve variable-cycle engine. (LeRC Release 75—19; Yaffee, Av Wk, 14 July 75, 46- 49) 25.5 hr into the simulated mission. With both Soviet and U.S. crewmen participating in simulators in their respective countries and control centers fully manned, the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft were “launched” and put through various maneuvers. Communications between the two control centers included voice, teletype, datafax, and TV. During the simulation, a technical problem prevented observers in Houston from hearing the two Soviet cosmonauts; NASA officials said later that that problem should not happen during a real flight. No other major problems were reported. A second simulation begun at 6:30 am CDT 15 May and continuing for 56 hr rehearsed Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, docking, crew transfers, and undocking and final separation. A third simulation, begun at 6:30 am CDT 19 May, was cancelled when the command module simulator in Houston did not work properly. The simulation, a 9-hr rehearsal of rendezvous and docking, was successfully completed 20 May. Final simulations by Houston and Moscow control centers and crewmen were scheduled for 30 June and 1 July. (NASA Release 75 — 141; Tass, FBIS—Sov, 16 May 75, Ul; Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 285; UPI, NYT, 14 May 75, 69)
Dr. John E. Naugle became Associate Administrator of NASA, a position in which he had acted since the departure of Dr. Rocco A. Petrone in April. Beginning his service with NASA in 1959, Dr. Naugle had been appointed Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications in 1967, and Deputy Associate Administrator of NASA in 1974. As Associate Administrator, he would be responsible for directing the research, development, and operational activities conducted by the Offices of Applications, Aeronautics and Space Technology, Space Science, and Tracking and Data Acquisition. (NASA anno, 23 Nov 75; SBD, 24 Nov 75, 122)
A team of four physicists—Dr. Paul B. Price and Dr. Edward K. Shirk of the Univ. of Calif., and Dr. Weyman A. Osborne and Dr. Lawrence S. Pinsky of the Univ. of Houston—reported finding evidence of a particle with only one magnetic pole. The discovery of the monopole, if confirmed, could have a major impact on physics, with practical applications such as new medical therapies, new sources of energy, extremely small and efficient motors and generators, and new particle accelerators of much higher energy than any yet built. The monopole, representing the basic indivisible unit of magnetism, would exist in two forms of opposite polarity, the north pole and the south pole. This would be analogous to the basic electric charge, the electron, which existed in the positive and negative charges, the proton and electron. Existence of the monopole had been predicted in 1931 by Paul Dirac, Fla. State Univ. professor. The four physicists detected tracks of the particle that had apparently penetrated a sandwich of more than 33 layers of plastic and emulsion photographic film suspended from a balloon floating at 39 600 m. (Sullivan, NYT, 15 Aug 75, 1; AP, B Sun, 15 Aug 75, A3; Joffee, W Post, 15 Aug 75, Bl)
Lt. Col. Michael Love successfully completed the 28th flight of the X—24B lifting body, making its second and final runway landing [see 5 Aug.] at Flight Research Center. The purpose of the flight was to land on a concrete runway, survey body pressure, study a lefthand fin tuft, check out the thermal protection system, and perform stability and control maneuvers with the rudder bias at 5° toe-out. Launched from a B—52 aircraft at 13 700 m, Col. Love ignited the vehicle’s rocket engine and the X—24B reached a speed of mach 1.53 and an altitude of 21 900 m before engine shutdown and unpowered glide and landing. Flights of the 11-m delta-shaped vehicle were part of a joint NASA-Air Force program to study transonic flight characteristics of an aerodynamic shape that could be the forerunner of future hypersonic cruise vehicles. (X—24B fit rpt, NASA Prog Off; FRC Release 25—75)
NASA and the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences had agreed on a joint tour of the U.S. and the Soviet Union by the 5 crew members of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission [see 15—26 July], U.S. astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton would join Soviet cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov on 21 Sept, in Moscow for a 2-wk tour of the U.S.S.R. Plans for the U.S. tour were not disclosed. (NASA Release 75—230) In another paper Rango reported that low-resolution meteorological satellite data and high-resolution earth-re sources satellite data had been used to map a snow-covered area over Wyoming mountains. Predictions based on satellite data of the April through June 1972 streamflow were within 3% of the actual total. Also, composite results from 2 yr of data over the mountains indicated that Landsat snowcover observations could be useful in predicting runoff and seasonal streamflow. James C. Barnes of Environmental Research and Technology, Inc., reported that the earth resources experiment package (EREP) flown aboard the 1973—74 Skylab Orbital Workshop missions had provided the first opportunity to examine reflectance characteristics of snowcover in several spectral bands from the visible to the near infrared. Results indicated that near-infrared methods could distinguish between snow and water droplet clouds and could detect areas of melting snow. (NASA Hq WB, 28 Feb 76, 2; NASA SP—391, text) The evidence was consistent with calculations made in 1971 by Canadian astronomer Dr. Michael W. Ovenden. Dr. Ovenden’s studies of irregularities in the orbits of planets, especially Uranus and Neptune, suggested that a major disruptive event had occurred in the solar system approximately 16 million yrs ago. He had arrived at this time by age-dating carbon-bearing meteorites that had fallen to earth, and theorized that the event could be explained by the explosion of a huge planet 90 times the size of earth. During the meeting Dr. Stuart Bowyer, Univ. of Calif, astronomer, surprised the 740 astronomers attending the meeting by reporting that a Univ. of Calif, telescope flown aboard the Apollo spacecraft during the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project [see 15—26 July] had picked up the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) radiation of a star. EUV, a small segment of the spectrum between normal ultraviolet and x-rays, had been considered by astronomers as practically invisible because of probable absorption by interstellar dust and gas. Dr. Bowyer said that the EUV had come from a white dwarf star 300 light yrs away in the constellation Coma Berenices. (NASA Gen Mgmt Review Rpt, 18 Aug 75, 9; Alexander, LA Times, 26 Aug 75)
NASA announced that the U.S. tour by the five Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crewmembers had been postponed to 13 Oct. because of astronaut Donald K. Slayton’s scheduled lung surgery. The crew’s tour of the U.S.S.R., scheduled to begin 22 Sept., would continue on schedule [see 15 Aug.]. (NASA Release 75—236)
Sen. John Tunney (D—Calif.) defended the nation’s space program during a tour of Space Shuttle facilities at Rockwell International Corp. in Downey, Calif. According to Sen. Tunney, the most important justification for the space program was to provide new technology in weather mapping and control, to help increase the amount of land available for food production, and to locate additional stocks of natural resources in this country. Sen. Tunney stated, “I quite frankly think without a space program. . .mankind is going to have a rendezvous with destiny which would be catastrophic. . . .” But with this kind of program, a world food supply and adequate resources can “keep this country going indefinitely.” {Pasadena Star News, 6 Aug 75)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew members Thomas P. Stafford, Donald K. Slayton, and Vance D. Brand participated in a 9-hr exercise at Kennedy Space Center to test the Apollo spacecraft’s internal systems, earth-landing systems, and instrument packages. The astronauts climbed into the Apollo, which was inside a huge altitude chamber, to test the systems at simulated altitudes of up to 61 000 m while cabin pressure was maintained at 34 474 newtons per sq m. Pressure inside the cabin was also lowered to zero to test the integrity of the astronauts’ space suits. On 16 Jan. the U.S. backup crew for the mission, Alan L. Bean, Ronald E. Evans, and Jack R. Lousma, participated in a similar exercise. (/VASA Activities, Feb 75, 11; KSC Release 5—75)
Tokyo Univ.’s Institute of Space and Aeronautics launched Scats (Taiyo)—Solar Radiation and Thermospheric Structure Satellite— from Uchinoura Space Center at 2:25 pm local time after a 10-day delay because of faulty instrumentation. The three-stage MU3C liquid-fueled launch vehicle placed the 86-kg spacecraft into an orbit with a 3130-km apogee, 247-km perigee, 120.2-min period, and 31.5° inclination. The purpose of the satellite was to observe solar and cosmic phenomena. By 25 Feb. the satellite was reported to be functioning normally, with two NASA tracking stations—one in Ecuador and one in Chile—reporting signals fromSrats. (Kyodo, FBIS— Japan, 18-26 Feb 75) Sessions were held in four areas: transportation efficiency, national defense, space applications, and frontier technologies. The more than 500 attendees of the technical sessions listened to papers on computers in aerospace, short-haul aircraft systems, advanced communications, and satellite technology. Harris M. Schurmeir, Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s manager of the Mariner Jupiter—Saturn 1977 project, delivered the von Karman Lecture 24 Feb., “Planetary Exploration: Earth’s New Horizon.” Schurmeir said that, despite American virtuosity in the unfolding drama of solar-system exploration, the never-abating high launch rate of the Soviet Union would make them competitors if the U.S. failed to exercise its mission options in the late 1970s and 1980s. On 25 Feb. Hans E. W. Hoffman, managing director of West Germany’s ERNO Raumfahrttechnik GmbH, said that the development of Spacelab was exactly on schedule, with a complete engineering model to be delivered to NASA in April 1978. The first flight unit would be delivered 1 yr later. The first mission of the Spacelab would be a joint U.S.—European venture. A call for ideas for experiments had netted 243 proposals, from which a selection would be made; the selection process for European payload specialists would begin in 1975. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, addressed the gathering 26 Feb. He noted that, although aerospace technology had been one of the “key drivers” in retaining the U. S. lead in world technology, a feeling of the importance of technology was “not universally shared.” A decline in the national emphasis on technology “has much to do with the decline in productivity in this country.” The increasing cost and complexity of applying new technology had become a vexing national problem. Finding new ways to reduce costs was a key management task that the aerospace business must face. Caspar W. Weinberger, Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, said in an address 26 Feb. that satellite-delivered services in Alaska had been so successful that the Alaskan Federation of Natives —a highly representative broad-based grassroots organization—had made them the organization’s top priority. The goal was to achieve an operational satellite service for health, education, and other communications needs. The formation of the Public Service Satellite Users Consortium, consisting of health and educational organizations, represented the first effort to organize a market of small independent users sufficient to attract private investment capital for large-scale technology to meet their collective needs. HEW was investigating the possibility of a “social service satellite” to meet the needs of various public and social service communities by means of an inexpensive ground receiver. The satellite could dramatically reduce the cost of such services while greatly increasing the quality. At the Honors Night Banquet 26 Feb., Chairman Hansen was installed as the 13th president of the AIAA. The 19 newly elected fellows included Hans M. Mark, Director of Ames Research Center, and William H. Phillips of Langley Research Center. Other awards presented at the banquet included: Award Recipient Citation (purpose) (Affiliation) Goddard Award (for contributions in propulsion energy conservation) Robert M. Losey Award (for contributions to meteorology as applied to aeronautics) G. Edward Pendray Award (for contributions to aeronautical and astronautical literature) Sylvanus Albert Reed Award (for contributions to aeronautical engineering design or aeronautical sciences) (for improvement in aerospace, aviation, or astronaut training) Louis W. Hill Award (for enterprise and ingenuity in art and science of space flight) ’ Gordon F. Holbrook (General Motors Corp.) George Rosen (United Aircraft Corp.) Paul W. Kadlec (Continental Air Lines, Inc.) Prof. William R. Sears (U. of Arizona) Prof. Antonio Feni (New York U.) Prof. Hugh H. Hurt, Jr. (U. of Southern Calif.) Dr. Rocco A. Petrone (NASA) For leadership in development of turbo-propeller propulsion systems For identifying factors indicating clear air turbulence and publications on meteorological features of high atmosphere For contributions to aeronautical and astronautical literature since 1938 For advances in air-breathing propulsion and airplane design For contributions to flight safety by development of military and civilian texts and training programs For contributions to space flight technology while Director of KSC during last 6 Apollo missions Award (purpose) Recipient (Affiliation) Citation John Jeffries Award (for contributions to aerospace medical research) Col. Malcolm C. Lancaster (USAF) For clinical research in aerospace medicine Spacecraft Design Award (for advancement in spacecraft, launch vehicle, reentry vehicle, or missile design) Dr. Herbert A. Lassen (TRW, Inc.) For conceptual design of spin-stabilized Pioneers 6-11 using high-gain antennas and communications link for attitude reference Space Science Award (for achievements in studies of physics of atmospheres of celestial bodies and dynamics and energy) Dr. Murray Dryer (NOAA) For contributions to understanding of interplanetary shock phenomena generated by solar disturbances Lawrence Sperry Award (for contributions to advancement of aeronautics) Jan R. Tulinius (Rockwell Inl’l Corp.) For development of advanced theoretical aerodynamic design methods (A&A, Feb 75, April 75; AIAA Releases 10—20 Feb 75; AIAA Bulletin, Aug 74; Fletcher speech, text)
Charles M. Duke, Jr., an astronaut since 1966 and lunar mobile pilot on the Apollo 16 lunar landing mission (16—27 April 1972), announced he would leave NASA, effective 1 Jan. 1976. He would also resign from the Air Force after nearly 19 yr of service. DuringApo//o 16, Duke logged 11 days 1 hr 43 min in space, including a 71-hr 14-min stay on the lunar surface. He and John W. Young made 3 surface explorations of the Descartes region for a total of 20 hr 15 min of lunar excursion. Since April 1973 Duke had served as technical assistant to the manager for Space Shuttle systems integration. (JSC Release 75—74)
Dr. Harold Brown, President of California Institute of Technology, announced the appointment of Dr. Bruce C. Murray as Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, succeeding Dr. William H. Pickering who was retiring after 21 yr in the position. Dr. Murray, a Caltech professor of planetary sciences for 15 yr, had also been a researcher on JPL space missions for more than 10 yr. He was completing scientific descriptions of Venus and Mercury from Mariner 10 data, gathered during a February 1974 encounter with the planet, and comparing the surface histories of Mercury, Venus, Mars, and the moon with the history of the earth. Dr. Pickering had been with JPL since 1944 and had served as its Director since 1954. As Director, Dr. Pickering led JPL in designing and building the first orbiting U.S. satellite, Explorer 1 (launched 31 Jan. 1958). Also under his leadership, JPL had designed the Ranger, Surveyor, and Mariner spacecraft that were launched to gather information on the moon and nearby planets. (NASA Release 75—179)
The U.S.S.R.’s Baykonur cosmodrome, located in the city of Leninsk near Tyuratam, was three to four times as big as Kennedy Space Center, U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project commander Thomas P. Stafford said at an ASTP press briefing at Johnson Space Center. ASTP astronaut Vance D. Brand said that 50 000 persons inhabited the launch complex. The briefing followed the crew’s return from the Soviet Union where they had participated in the final training session before the scheduled July launch [see 14—30 April]. The astronauts said that at the Soviet spaceport they had been shown “everything we had a requirement to see,” the launch pad, spacecraft, test and checkout facilities, automatic checkout equipment (ACE) rooms, and crew quarters. The one “drastic difference” between the tour received by the Soviet cosmonauts in the U.S. and that of the American astronauts in the U.S.S.R., said Stafford, was “we didn’t go to Disneyland over there.” Astronaut Donald K. Slayton described the launch pad as “relatively simple.” The spacecraft, assembled on top of a railroad car, was hauled to the pad about 4 days before launch. The stacked vehicle was jacked up and set on the pad; after checkout, the vehicle was rotated to the proper launch azimuth. The booster was held to the pad by four support arms which were popped out of the way by counterweights once the vehicle started to move. Stafford said that Leninsk was a new city built in a desert. The continued construction activity indicated that the Soviets “are not slowing down one bit in their space program.” The Soviets had told their U.S. counterparts that they would continue to have several manned flights a year operating in low earth orbit. (Transcript)
The appearance of a supernova on 5 July 1054 had been recorded in primitive art by ancient Indians on the walls of a N. Mex. cave, the New York Times reported. Goddard Space Flight Center astronomer Dr. John C. Brandt, leader of the team of astronomers who had discovered the cave art, said that the date of the pictograph—a crescent moon with a nearby object variously described as a circle, cross, or asterisk—coincided with records of the Chinese Sung dynasty. The Chinese had reported that, on the morning of 5 July 1054, a minor star in the constellation Taurus appeared to explode into extraordinary brilliance. Ancient Chinese astronomers had described the event— which modem astronomers identified/as the supernova that had created the Crab Nebula—as visible in daylight for 23 days before fading and at night for another 633 days. Although the modern astronomers could not prove that the cave art depicted the Crab Nebula supernova, “What we have is circumstantial evidence that, to us, looks pretty good,” Dr. Brandt said. No other supernova of known date had been visible from North America near a crescent moon. The supernova pictographs were not the only evidence of astronomical observations by American Indians; Navajo gourd rattles and sand paintings often depicted the Pleiades and Orion constellations, and Hopi designs included representations of the Milky Way, constellations, sun, moon, and stars. Heaps of stones strategically placed centuries ago in Wyo. hills could have been used by Indians to sight stars and to predict and confirm the summer solstice. (Rensberger, ATT, 10 Sept 75, 39)
Despite the immediate need for aircraft noise-abatement regulations, little or nothing had been done, Sen. John V. Tunney (D—Calif.) said in a speech on the floor of the Senate. The Federal Aviation Administration was considering proposals to curb jet-fleet noise by retrofitting engine nacelles of JT—3D and JT—8D aircraft with sound-absorbing material. Delay had come in part from industry, which favored an alternate NASA refan program costing five times that of retrofit and not technologically feasible for severed years. In addition, the NASA program could not quiet the JT—3D aircraft—the Boeing 707s and McDonnell Douglas DC—8s—which made up the noisiest fourth of the nation’s jet fleet. Sen. Tunney said that the potential benefits of the NASA program did not justify waiting until the technology was ready at a cost five times greater than retrofitting. If FAA was to prove responsible in the area of aircraft noise abatement, it could not “succumb to industry pressure against retrofit.” A retrofit regulation should be put into final form at the first available opportunity. (CR, 19 Feb 75, S2160)
People’s Republic of China launched its third satellite into an earth orbit with a 455-km apogee, 182-km perigee, 90.9-min period, and 69.0° inclination. PRC’s Hsinhua news agency reported 27 July that the satellite had been launched “under the guidance of Chairman Mao’s [Tse-tung] proletarian revolutionary line . . . promoting production and other work and preparedness against war.” Hsinhua also reported that the instruments on board the satellite were operating normally. The satellite was PRC’s first in 4 yr. Baltimore Sun correspondent Edward K. Wu attributed the apparent slowdown in the PRC space program to an estimated 25% cutback in military spending. PRC’s first two satellites had been successfully launched 24 April 1970 and 2 March 1971. (Wkly SSR, 25-30 July 1975; FBIS-PRC, 28 July 75, El; Wu, B Sun, 28 July 75, A4; W Post, 28 July 75, A14; A&A 70; A&A 71)
NASA expected to add 3800 contractor personnel in FY 1976, mostly for the Space Shuttle, NASA Comptroller William E. Lilly told a joint session of the House Subcommittees on Space Science and Applications and on Aviation and Transportation R&D. However, overall employment on the space program had been forecast down 68%, or 278 000 workers, from its peak of 409 000 in 1965. NASA would lose 17 more Federal positions in FY 1976 after losing 521 Federal employees in FY 1975. NASA is paying more for fewer employees, Lilly pointed out, because agency manpower expenses go up about $6 million a year, offset by only $1 million in replacing retired workers with new workers in lower grades. Total Federal employment at NASA had hit a high of 33 924 in 1966; NASA Federal employees now numbered 24 316. (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 995, 1024, 1031)
The Washington Post reported that NASA had turned down a request by Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.) to postpone the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (scheduled for launch on 15 July) until the U.S.S.R. brought back the two Soyuz 18 cosmonauts who had been docked with the orbiting Salyut 4 space station since 26 May 1975. Sen. Proxmire said that the Soviet Union would be unable to maintain ground control of two manned missions simultaneously. He had based his judgment on closed-door testimony given him as chairman of the Appropriations Subcommittee by Carl Duckett, deputy director for science and technology at the Central Intelligence Agency. The Post quoted Prox-mire as saying that the Soviet command center would be strained to handle two manned flights, particularly if one were in trouble in space. Sen. Proxmire said that it would he a simple matter to deorbit the two Soyuz 18 cosmonauts and bring them home. In a telephone interview with the Post, ASTP Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney said that the Soviet Union had two mission-control centers, one managing the Salyut flight, the other managing ASTP. Lunney said NASA had calculated that the two Soviet spacecraft would cross over the same Soviet tracking stations only twice: One overlap might last as long as 30 sec and the other 90 sec. Soviet officials had assured NASA that ASTP communications would have priority during these two short passes. (O’Toole, W Post, 3 July 75, A33)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew members Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton began a 3-wk preflight medical isolation at 12 pm CDT. Called the flight health stabilization plan, the isolation limited the astronauts to specific working and training areas at Johnson Space Center. In offhours they were being housed in special mobile homes. Only previously screened personnel, wearing surgical face masks, could come into face-to-face contact with the astronauts. (JSC Release 75—59: Ezell e£ al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 313)
Dr. William R. Lucas, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, announced the establishment of an advanced mineral-extraction task team within the Program Development Directorate. Working with the Dept, of Interior’s Bureau of Mines, the team would use NASA expertise and technology to increase the nation’s ability to extract energy and minerals at acceptable cost and with minimum effect on the environment. One of NASA’s first tasks would be to improve the efficiency of the long-wall shearer—a coal-removing machine used by miners that could leave a foot or more of unrecoverable coal along the edges of a vein—by using sensors, remote controls, and TV monitors to guide the machine. (MSFC Release 75—215)
NASA announced the appointment of Donald P. Hearth as Director of Langley Research Center, effective in September. Hearth, Deputy Director of Goddard Space Flight Center since 1970, would replace Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, who is leaving NASA to pursue other interests. Prior to being at GSFC, Hearth had served 3 yr as Director of Planetary Programs at NASA Hq. He came to NASA in 1962 from the Marquardt Corp. where he managed research on hypersonic propulsion and flight systems. Before that, he had been an aeronautical research scientist at Lewis Aeronautical Laboratory of NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. (NASA anno 11 July 75)
NASA announced appointment of William H. Rock as Deputy Director of Flight Research Center, effective 9 Nov. Rock joined NASA in 1964 and had served at NASA Headquarters, at Goddard Space Flight Center, and since 1968 at Kennedy Space Center, where he was associated with various applications and manned flight programs. (NASA anno, 30 Oct 75)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and Secretary of the Interior Thomas S. Kleppe announced the selection of Dr. William Nordberg, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, and Dr. Carlos Brockmann, director of the Landsat project in Bolivia, to receive the 1975 William T. Pecora Award. Dr. Nordberg was selected for his meteorological contributions to the Landsat program and for his management of day-to-day research operations using data from Landsat 1 and 2, launched (as Erts 1) on 23 July 1972 and on 22 Jan. 1975. Dr. Brockmann was selected for his leadership of a multidisciplinary team of Bolivian scientists responsible for the evaluation and application of Landsat images. Within 1 year, the team had produced evaluation reports covering geology, volcanology, forestry, hydrology, and land use of Bolivia; the group also published an improved national atlas of Bolivia. Given annually by NASA and the Dept, of Interior in recognition of “outstanding contributions of individuals or groups toward the understanding of the Earth by means of remote sensing,” the award would be presented at the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. 4-day symposium on earth resources at Sioux Falls, S. Dak., 28—31 Oct. (NASA Releases 75-283,-285)
Kennedy Space Center announced a reorganization to prepare for the Space Shuttle era of space operations. John J. Neilon, Director of Unmanned Launch Operations since 1970, was named Deputy Director of Technical Support; George F. Page, Chief of Operations, Div. of Manned Spacecraft Operations, would move into Neilon’s former post. The Launch Operations Directorate would be reorganized into four major second-level groups: engineering, payloads, space transportation systems processing, and expendable vehicle operations. (KSC Release 253—75)
Michael Collins, Director of the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum, and Santiago Astrain, Secretary General of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, signed an agreement to transfer three early Intelsat communications satellites to the Museum as part of its 1976 inaugural display. INTELSAT was providing the museum with a backup model of the INTELSAT’s Early Bird 1, launched 6 Apr. 1965 as the first commercial comsat. A backup model of the second-generation Intelsat II and an engineering model of third-generation Intelsat III satellites would also be sent for display. Fourth-generation satellites would not be represented because they were too large for display. The new Air and Space Museum, located in Washington, D.C., was scheduled to open 4 July 1976. (INTELSAT Release 75—9)
The appointment of Lt. Gen. Duward L. Crow (USAF, Ret.) as Associate Deputy Administrator became effective. Gen. Crow succeeded Willis H. Shapley, who retired. Before joining NASA in September 1974 as Assistant Administrator for Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs, Gen. Crow had been Assistant Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force since October 1973. He had previously been Comptroller of the Air Force. Replacing Gen. Crow as Assistant Administrator for DOD and Interagency Affairs was Lt. Gen. William W. Snavely (USAF Ret.) who had been Air Force Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems and Logistics since January 1973. (NASA Release 75— 260)
A group of 35 representatives from central Fla. planning agencies attended a 1-day workshop at Kennedy Space Center to assess the possibility of using satellite data for land-use planning. Edward J. Hecker of the KSC Office of Earth Resources told the group that the 4-cent-per-sq-mi cost of obtaining satellite data was one-third the cost of aircraft-obtained data. Data collected by “on foot” surveys cost $20 per sq mi, and the cost of using an automobile for this purpose ran about $2 per sq mi. Dr. Garland L. Thomas, coinvestigator for the earth-resources mission of Landsat 2 (launched 22 Jan.) and employee of the Brevard County (Fla.) Planning and Zoning Dept., told the group that, using satellite data and photography, planners could determine which areas were developable and which were not, produce comprehensive land-use planning maps, monitor water quality, and trace the process of eutrophication in central Fla.’s many lakes. (KSC Release 181—75) 8, 9, and 17 September: Data collected by sounding rockets, satellites, instrumented balloons, and high-flying aircraft had supported the hypothesis that fluorocarbons such as those found in aerosol spray cans might be breaking down the earth’s ozone shield, scientists told hearings of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences’ Subcommittee on the Upper Atmosphere. Ozone in the stratosphere screened the earth from harmful ultraviolet radiation that might increase incidence of cancer and other skin diseases and prove lethal to many life forms as well as damage eyes, crops, and livestock. An increase in atmospheric fluorocarbons could also have a greenhouse effect, permitting sunlight to pass freely but inhibiting the escape of heat in the form of infrared radiation. This would warm the lower atmosphere and the earth, altering aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems and environmental chemicals, and creating climate changes. An extreme greenhouse effect had been blamed for Venus’ oven-hot temperatures. Dr. Warren R. Muir, cochairman of the Interagency Task Force on Inadvertent Modification of the Stratosphere, told the subcommittee, “Based on our preliminary assessment there seems to be a legitimate cause for concern.” If additional government research—with NASA coordinating—had proved more conclusively the danger to the environment, the government should take action for “prompt enactment of toxic substances legislation.” Dr. Wilson K. Talley of the Environmental Protection Agency agreed that fluorocarbons might pose a problem to the stratosphere, and that the total effect of releasing fluorocarbons and other halo carbon compounds into the atmosphere might not become apparent for 10 yrs. But, with evidence of public danger not strong enough to stand up to a court challenge by manufacturers, government regulation of the offending substances would be unenforceable. (Transcript; Sullivan, NYT, 10 Sept 75, 1)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics presented its Haley Astronautics Award to Skylab 4 astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue at the AIAA-American Geophysical Union Conference on the Exploration of the Outer Planets, in St. Louis, Missouri. The award was presented “for demonstrated outstanding courage and skill during the recordbreaking 84-day Skylab mission.” During the mission, which had begun 16 Nov. 1973, the crew had successfully completed 56 experiments, 26 science demonstrations, 15 detailed subsystem objectives, and 13 student investigations. They also collected extensive earth-resources data and logged 338 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount data, making detailed observations of solar processes. (MSFC Marshall Star, 3 Sept 75, 4) 20 September—5 October: Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton and their families visited the U.S.S.R., joining Soviet ASTP cosmonauts Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov and their families for a goodwill tour of the Soviet Union. The two crews had not met since they said goodbye in space during their historic mission [see 15—24 July]. After greetings at the Moscow airport with wide grins, bear hugs, and back slaps, Stafford told the airport crowd in Russian, “We are very pleased to be back in the Soviet Union again. Now we can say our joint work has been fulfilled successfully. I am confident that our flight will serve progress and peace on earth.” During the welcoming ceremonies Boris Petrov, U.S.S.R. Chairman of the Intercosmos Council, told the Americans, “The Soviet people were glad to see your success and are eager to welcome you on earth and in the Soviet Union.” The astronauts, cosmonauts, and their families visited Star City on 21 Sept, to thank the Soviet space community for its work on the ASTP mission. “For 2 years Star City was a second home to us,” Stafford told the crowd of Soviet space workers. “Thank you for all your work.” The astronauts’ families laid flowers at the memorial to Yuri Gagarin, first man to fly in space. Stafford, Brand, and Slayton presented Star City with a plaque bearing the Soviet and American flags and exchanged other gifts with the Soviets. On 22 September Leonid I. Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Communist Party Central Committee, met the ASTP astronauts and cosmonauts at the Great Kremlin Palace, greeting each as “hero” and congratulating them on their historic mission, saying it would “pave the way for generations to come to go on with this work.” During the 35min reception he told the crews of his hope for a treaty to limit nuclear arms. “Both sides—the United States and the Soviet side—should make every possible effort for good, neighborly relations, really good, in all aspects, from every point of view,” he said. On 23 Sept, the two crews and their families began a six-city tour of the Soviet Union that took them to Leningrad, Kiev, Volgograd, Novosibirsk, Sochi, and Tbilisi. Everywhere the crews were swamped by enthusiastic spontaneous crowds of up to 3000 persons waiting on comers and at airports for hours to cheer the spacemen. “The hospitality is fantastic,” Stafford remarked at Volgograd. The New York Times reported that each appearance of the spacemen was greeted with applause and cheering and they responded with waves and autographs. The astronauts ended their Russian tour on 4 Oct. with a farewell press conference back in Moscow. Stafford, Brand, and Slayton praised the “enthusiastic people with warm hearts” they had met during their tour. During the press conference—held exactly 18 yr after the U.S.S.R. had launched the first manmade satellite, Sputnik 7, on 4 Oct. 1957—Stafford encouraged continued cooperation between the U.S. and U.S.S.R. in such areas as lunar and planetary exploration, space medicine, space meteorology, and earth environment. The three U.S. astronauts and their families flew to London for an overnight stay before flying back to Houston on 5 Oct. (B Sun, 21 Sept—6 Oct 75; NYT, 21 Sept—6 Oct 75)
Action by the House of Representatives to defer for 1 yr the funds budgeted for the Pioneer—Venus project [see 19 and 24 June] would “jeopardize the possible success of Pioneer—Venus,” Sen. John V. Tunney (D—Calif.) said in a letter to Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.), chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee. The House recommended the delay to permit a budget decision in 1977 between the Large Space Telescope and the Pioneer—Venus mission. Sen. Tunney’s letter said that the probe was timed for the 1978 launch window when earth and Venus would be in unusually favorable relative positions; the next favorable window would not appear for almost 2 yr, during 1980, and Venus would be considerably further away from the earth at that time than it would be during 1978. A delay in funding would postpone the program for at least 18 mo, would require design changes, and might cost $50 million more than original estimates. Sen. Tunney said that the case for continued funding was a strong one. Most scientists felt that investigation of the Venusian atmosphere would provide valuable meteorological information that might substantially enhance weather-prediction capabilities. Another reason for continuation of the program is that, in an era of high unemployment, few sectors had suffered more devastating setbacks than the aerospace industry. The Pioneer—Venus program had created more than 1500jobs, which would be threatened by termination or delay of the program. Curtailment of an ongoing scientific concept like Pioneer—Venus would severely reduce credibility of the government’s long-term commitments, with added time, difficulty, and cost for future projects as private contractors would seek to protect themselves. Sen. Tunney pointed out that the House’s juxtaposition of funding for Pioneer—Venus with funding for the Large Space Telescope was inappropriate; the programs were not competing, but complementary. Pioneer—Venus would provide information on our closest neighbor, whereas LST would collect deep-space data of unprecedented scope and detail. “Cutting one program for the sake of the other would mean sacrificing a distinguishable body of scientific knowledge which would not be replaceable.” (Text, letter, Tunney to Proxmire, 9 July 75; CR, 26 July 75, S13882— 83)
An Apollo-Soyuz Test Project flight readiness review at Kennedy Space Center was attended by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator; ASTP Program Director Chester M. Lee; and top management from NASA Headquarters and Marshall, Johnson, and Kennedy Space Centers. During the meeting Lee said that “ASTP is on schedule and ‘go’ for launch on July 15.” Top management had reviewed and closed out all aspects of flight preparations. ASTP Technical Director Glynn S. Lun-ney reported that no hardware problems remained that might interfere with an. on-time launch. MSFC Saturn Program Manager Ellery B. May reported that the 8-yr-old Saturn IB launch vehicle had been carefully checked out and all components were being monitored by periodic inspections; during one of these inspections corrosion cracks had been discovered in the fins, requiring them to be replaced [see 19 Feb.—19 March], May reported that the vehicle was ready to fly. William H. Rock, manager of the Sciences and Applications Project Office at JSC, said that modifications, including a larger, more effective lightning rod on the launch tower, had been made to the launch pad to minimize the hazards from lightning strikes. Jesse R. Gulick, KSC meteorologist, said that thunderstorm probability for launch day was 23% and that the probability of a tropical storm or hurricane winds was less than 3%. Based on previous years’ data, chances were good that, even if bad weather postponed the primary launch date, the Apollo spacecraft could be launched within 4 days. (MSFC Release 75 — 119; KSC Release 104 —75; Marshall Star, 18 June 75, 1; Ezell et al.. The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 310 — 12)
The Pentagon, checking out reports of Soviet laser devices that had blinded U.S. reconnaissance satellites, had found the reports to be wrong, said new Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld at his first press conference since taking over from James R. Schlesinger a month ago. Rumsfeld declined to say how it had been determined that intelligence reports were wrong, but said: “After examination, any implication that the activity that was reported. . . did in fact exist was not correct.” He said it was clear there was no violation of any arms control agreement, nor any evidence to support the laser report, which he sought to portray as press speculation. (W Star, 23 Dec 75,6; NY News, 23 Dec 75, 2)
Scientists believed that light flashes observed by Skylab 4 crew members during their 16 Nov. 1973 to 8 Feb. 1974 mission as they flew through the South Atlantic Anomaly—a slight asymmetry in the earth’s magnetic field where the Van Allen radiation belt dipped unusually low over Brazil—were a previously unsuspected form of radiation, Science magazine reported. The radiation seemed to consist of atomic nuclei heavier than hydrogen which, when stripped of electrons, would carry multiple positive electric charges. The astronauts had seen the flashes when the spacecraft cabin was dark and they were preparing for sleep. Scientists suspected that the flashes were stimulated within the retina of the eye by the high-energy cosmic-ray particles. Normally earth was shielded from cosmic rays by the magnetic field, but strong penetrating cosmic rays could reach as far into the field as the Skylab orbit. Because the magnetic-field shielding of the earth weakened toward the geomagnetic poles, it was possible to predict variations in cosmic-ray exposure as Skylab moved away from the poles. During two test periods, light-flash observations of Astronaut William R. Pogue showed a close correlation with exposure variations. (Pinsky et al., Science, 30 May 75, 928—930; Sullivan, NYT, 29 May 75, 10) The new space agency’s symbol was a rounded “e,” for European, on a globe representing earth, with fine lines suggesting both orbit and axis and a white dot representing a satellite in space. (ESRO—ESA Releases 20 May 75, 23 May 75, 2 June 75) 30 May—8 June: The 31st Annual Paris Air Show was held at Le Bourget Airport in France. New restrictions on flight demonstrations by high-performance aircraft, imposed by the French government after the 1973 Air Show crash of the Soviet Tu —144 supersonic transport, had placed the show’s emphasis on displays of the latest aerospace hardware and technology from throughout the world. Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that the general turndown in the economy throughout the western world had caused a decline of 20% in exhibitors from the 1973 show. France emphasized the cooperative nature of its major programs, displaying the French—British Concorde SST, the French—German Alpha Jet trainer-attack aircraft, the French—British Jaguar close-air support aircraft, and the multinational A—300B twin-engine wide-body transport. The U.S. pavilion reflected the changing environment at the show, reserving 66% of its floor space for company exhibits restricted to industry visitors; the remaining 33% contained exhibits open to the general public. In 1973 60% was exhibitor space and 40% for the general public. Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. displayed aircraft that were potential replacements for the Boeing 707 and McDonnell DC— 8 on commercial airlines. The Boeing aircraft, a three-engine member of the 7X7 family, incorporated the NASA-developed supercritical wing. “Blue Planet” was the theme of the public section of the U.S. pavilion which emphasized technological fallout and practical uses on earth of space technology. Included were full-scale models of the Viking spacecraft scheduled for launch to Mars later in the year, and of Martin Marietta Corp.’s large space telescope. The 80 participating British companies emphasized their country’s capability in avionics and equipment and aerospace technology. Among the new aircraft exhibited by the British were the BN2 Islander, a floating aircraft for service between islands; the Lock-spieser LDA— 1, for cargo and agricultural uses; and a new version of the BAC 111 fighter aircraft. West Germany’s display stressed its participation in international consortiums as a major hope for continuing growth. Messerschmitt— Boelkow—Blohm GmbH pointed out in its display that 70% of its revenues in 1974 had been derived from multinational projects. (Av Wk, 2 June 75, 14-20; 9 June 75, 12-17)
NASA awarded a 1-yr contract to Boeing Co. to study a proposed Large Lift Vehicle (LLV) made up of Space Shuttle engines, fuel tanks, and avionics. Launched without the Space Shuttle Orbiter, the LLV could carry tons of freight into space, or could rocket to the moon with a second stage attached. It would be less expensive than the Saturn V because the avionics package could be retrieved in orbit and the twin boosters were recoverable. In a 1974 interview with the Huntsville Times, John H. Disher, NASA Director for Advanced Programs, had said that no definite mission for the LLV was planned, but that NASA was looking to the future. (Casebolt, Huntsville Times, 12 Aug 74; NASA Hq Adv Progs Off, Fero, interview, 10 Aug 75) August 1975
NASA had decided to eliminate all expendable launch vehicles except Scout after the Space Shuttle became operational, NASA Associate Administrator John F. Yardley told the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, but the Air Force wanted to play it safe. AF officials wanted extra vehicles on hand after Shuttle in case problems developed, he said. NASA had planned about 20 launches of expendable vehicles a year through 1980—4 Scouts, 10 Deltas, 3 or 4 Atlas-Centaurs, and 1 or 2 Titan-Centaurs—with 17 launches in FY 1977 and 27 in FY 1978. (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 899)
NASA announced that astronaut Thomas P. Stafford would leave the NASA astronaut corps effective 1 Nov. to become commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Serving as a NASA astronaut since September 1962, Stafford made the first rendezvous in space when he flew the Gemini 6 mission (launched 15 Dec. 1965) to meet the already orbiting Gemini 7 crew. He also commanded Gemini 9 (3—6 June 1966), which rendezvoused with the previously launched augmented target docking adapter. Stafford was commander of Apollo 10 (18—26 May 1969), first lunar-orbital mission to use the complete Apollo spacecraft; during the mission he and crew member Eugene A. Cernan flew the lunar module to within 15 km of the surface while John W. Young orbited the moon in the Apollo spacecraft. In July Stafford headed the three-man Apollo crew for the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission (15—24 July 1975); he had accumulated a total of 507 hr 43 min in space and flown 6 space missions. (NASA Release 75—241) 27 August—7 September: Field operations of an ocean bathymetry expedition sponsored jointly by NASA and the Cousteau Society had been successfully completed in the Central Bahamas. Objective of the expedition was to evaluate the usefulness of Landsat satellite sensors for measuring water depth in shallow seas and for improving the accuracy of mapping ocean-bottom features. Thirteen satellites— including NASA’s Landsat 1 and 2,Smsl, and Ats 3; National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Noaa 3 and 4 and Essa 8; and six satellites of the Navy’s Transit Navigation System, plus two research vessels—Cousteau Society’s Calypso and the Johns Hopkins University’s Beayondan—recorded bathymetric data at selected sites. Scuba divers measured ocean floor reflectivity and water transparency with sophisticated underwater instruments. Participating in the expedition were Cousteau Society head Jacques Cousteau and his son Philippe; NASA Project Manager Dr. Enrico P. Mercanti and science monitor Ross McCluney, both of Goddard Space Flight Center; and Dr. Fabian Polcyn of the Environmental Research Institute of Michigan. NASA Director of User Affairs Russell L. Schweikart coordinated the project. Also participating was President Gerald R. Ford’s son Jack, who accompanied the expedition for the first phase, assisting with several underwater and onboard experiments. (NASA Releases 75— 240, 75— 257)
Dr. John L. McLucas, Secretary of the Air Force, announced the selection of the General Dynamics Corp. YF—16 prototype for full-scale engineering development as the Air Force’s F—16 air combat fighter. A $417 904 758 fixed-price-incentive contract to fabricate 15 engineering development F—16 aircraft was awarded to General Dynamics, which had been in competition with Northrop Corp. and its YF—17 lightweight fighter prototype during flight-test evaluations at the Air Force Flight Test Center. Dr. McLucas said the decision in favor of General Dynamics had been based on cost and technical engineering proposals submitted by the companies. The Air Force planned to introduce a minimum of 650 F—16 aircraft into the active inventory by the early 1980s. The Air Force also awarded a $55 500 000 fixed-price-incentive contract to United Aircraft Corp’s Pratt & Whitney Div. to produce the F100 engine used in the F—16. (DOD Release 16— 75)
Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronaut Donald K. Slayton entered Texas Medical Center to undergo exploratory surgery for a small lesion on his left lung. NASA physicians had discovered the lesion in x-rays taken during the astronaut’s postflight recovery from gas inhalation [see 25 July]. Slayton’s x-rays had shown a complete clearing of lung infiltrates but revealed a 4-mm discrete shadow. Specialized x-rays, called tomograms, taken 6 Aug. had confirmed that the shadow was indeed a lesion and not a part of the normal lung structure. NASA physicians, conferring with chest specialists at the Texas Medical Center, recommended surgery; all the doctors agreed that the lesion had not resulted from the gas inhalation. (JSC Release 75-69)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.) said in a speech on the Senate floor that he had asked the Central Intelligence Agency to assess the safety of Soviet manned space technology. “The inlaunch failure of another Soviet manned satellite last Saturday [7 April] reinforces my deep concern that the upcoming joint Apollo-Soyuz experiment may be dangerous to American astronauts. . . . The history of the Soviet-manned program shows an appalling lack of consistency. As soon as one severe problem is solved another occurs.” (CR, 9 April 75, S5527)
Astronaut Donald K. (Deke) Slayton had been appointed Deputy Director of Flight Operations for Approach and Landing Test at the Johnson Space Center, announced Center Director Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr. In the newly created position, Slayton would be responsible for planning and implementing the approach and landing test project for the Space Shuttle program. He most recently had been docking module pilot of the U.S. crew for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (NASA Release 75—314; JSC Release 75—100)
NASA announced retirement from military service of NASA Skylab 4 (16 Nov. 1973—8 Feb. 1974) astronauts Gerald P. Carr and William R. Pogue effective September 1. Carr, a Marine Corps colonel, would remain with NASA as a civilian astronaut. Pogue, an Air Force colonel and an astronaut since April 1966, would leave NASA to become a vice president of High Flight, an interdenominational evangelistic foundation founded by former astronaut James R. Irwin. As crew members on Skylab 4 Pogue and Carr, along with Dr. Edward G. Gibson, share the world record for individual time in space of 2017 hr 15 min 32 sec. Pogue’s departure would reduce the number of NASA astronauts to 31. (NASA Release 75—233)
At least five of NASA’s 25 000 employees had made use in past years of hunting facilities owned by Rockwell International, and the agency and Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wis.) had begun investigating the matter. The investigation had not been confined to entertainment at the Rockwell facility in Md., but included “receipt of other gratuities such as Redskin (football) tickets and use of hospitality suites,” the senator said. Rockwell had been prime contractor for the $6.4-billion Space Shuttle program that accounted for more than a third of NASA’s budget. Sen. Proxmire, vice chairman of the Joint Committee on Defense Production, had directed the committee staff to assist NASA in determining the full extent of “unethical or illegal lobbying by NASA contractors.” NASA had placed five inspectors on the case. (NYT, 19 Nov 75, 1)
During a panel discussion at a 4-day meeting of the Astronomical Association of Northern California, scientists rejected the idea that inhabitants of other planets would send manned spacecraft or unidentified flying objects to establish contact with earth. Such a venture would require enormous expenditures of energy and funds. The Washington Star quoted Ames Research Center scientist John Billingham as saying, “The most logical way to establish contact is radio communication.” Billingham was devoting 2 yr to the subject of intelligent extraterrestrial life, and how to reach it if it existed. He said that several persons around the globe had been constantly trying to make radio contact with outer space by aiming a radio telescope at a suitable star, hoping that an inhabited planet might be orbiting. (UPI, W Star, 11 Aug 75, A16)
NASA announced the award of a $287-million contract to Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to supply liquid hydrogen for the government’s East Coast requirements over a 12.5-yr period beginning 1 July 1975. The liquid hydrogen would be used primarily in Space Shuttle engine testing at the National Space Technology Laboratories and for Space Shuttle launches. (NASA Release 75—192) During June: Activities continued at Kennedy Space Center in preparation for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project launch in July. During the week of 2—6 June, KSC engineers and technicians checked the Apollo spacecraft for propellant leaks, filled the liquid-oxygen storage tank at the pad, loaded oxygen and nitrogen onto the docking module, and installed conax valves on the Saturn IB first stage. Spacecraft ordnance was installed 9—13 June and the command module was checked for leaks and prepared for hypergolic loading. Also during the week the liquid-hydrogen tank was filled. Prime crew members—Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton—and backup crew members—Jack R. Lousma, Alan L. Bean, and Ronald E. Evans—arrived at KSC on 10 June for command and docking-module crew compartment fit and functional checks. The crew also familiarized themselves with stowage arrangements. (Spaceport News, 12 June 75, 5; 26 June 75, 3)
Communications Satellite Corp. released its 1974 annual report: earnings during 1974 had increased to a record $44 918 000, or $4.49 per share, up from $36 299 000 or $3.63 per share in 1973. In his “Message for the Shareholders,” ComSatCorp President Joseph V. Charyk attributed the growth to the continued increase in communications traffic over ComSatCorp’s global network. Excluding the U.S. mainland-Hawaii service, the number of half-circuits leased by ComSat to U.S. international carriers increased during the year by about 20%, from 2933 at the end of 1973 to 3510 at the end of 1974. Responding to the increased demand for service, ComSatCorp and its partners in the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization had continued to improve and expand the system during 1974. A sixth Intelsat IV satellite, Intelsat IV F8, had been launched 21 Nov. Three higher capacity Intelsat IV—As were scheduled for launch during 1975, and three additional Intelsat IV—As were scheduled for launches beginning in 1977. Even higher capacity Intelsat V satellites were being planned for use in the 1980s. The ground network had been expanded to a year-end total of 104 antennas at 84 earth station sites in 60 countries. Construction of additional antennas was begun at ComSatCorp-operated stations in Maine and West Virginia. (ComSat Release 75—7; ComSatCorp 1974 Annual Rpt, 3 March 75)
Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.), a critic of the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, reported that the Soviet Union had bugged the conversations of U.S. astronauts and technicians at the Moscow space center before the July space flight. Using information received from two sources and confirmed through official channels, Sen. Proxmire said that the bugs were discovered while the astronauts and technicians were watching a televised Soviet hockey game. Wanting a closer view of the game, U.S. astronaut Robert F. Overmyer moved his chair nearer the TV screen, causing a wire leading from the chair into the floor to snap. The Washington Post quoted a spokesman for NASA as confirming the incident, but saying there was no evidence the wire “had anything to do with a listening device.” (AP, W Post, 2 Aug 75; Av Wk, 11 Aug 75, 17)
Apollo 17 Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt, the only scientist astronaut to walk on the moon, had announced his candidacy for U.S. Senator from N. Mex., the Washington Post reported. A Republican, Dr. Schmitt would oppose Democratic Senator Joseph M. Montoya, who was expected to seek reelection. (IF Post, 10 Sept 75)
The earth’s ozone layer, a shield of heavy molecules of oxygen that prevents some harmful ultraviolet radiation from reaching the earth’s surface, might be in less danger from aerosol sprays than from the increasing worldwide use of chemical fertilizers. Michael B. McElroy, professor of atmospheric sciences at Harvard University, had predicted that a projected increase in the use of nitrogen fertilizers over the next 25 yr could reduce the ozone layer 20 to 25%. Theoretically, each 1% reduction in the ozone layer could lead to thousands—as many as 15 000—additional cases of skin cancer in the U.S. alone. All life needs nitrogen to make proteins, McElroy pointed out. The earth’s atmosphere would have lost all its nitrogen long ago except for the process by which bacteria “denitrify” decayed matter in the soil; most nitrogen returned to the atmosphere in the same inert pure form in which it was taken and converted to use by earth’s plant life, which then formed a source of nitrogen for other plants and animals; however, some nitrogen returned in a form that acted as a catalyst to destroy ozone. Man had recently been extracting nitrogen from the air and putting it into plant life in the form of fertilizer on a scale rivaling nature; by the year 2000, said McElroy, the amount of nitrogen extracted from the air would be double that removed by natural causes. With a sharp increase in the natural denitrification process, more nitrogen catalysts destructive to ozone would be released. Serious effects should be evident within the next 40 yr, McElroy said. Although aerosol sprays could be dispensed with, nitrogen fertilizers were a necessity for increased world food production. Increased incidence of skin cancer concerned light-skinned humans, who were unlikely to get much sympathy from darker-skinned inhabitants of areas where the fertilizers—and increased food production—are urgently needed. (WSJ, 13 Nov 75, 13)
Dr. John F. Clark, Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, and Daniel J. Fink, Vice President of General Electric Corp. Space Div., were awarded the National Aeronautic Association’s Robert J. Collier Trophy for individual accomplishment in making the Landsat— formerly the Earth Resources Technology Satellite—program the outstanding aerospace event of 1974. The presentation was made at a dinner in Washington, D.C., jointly sponsored by the NAA and the National Aviation Club. Choice of the two officials as representative of the NASA-industry team “which abundantly proved during 1974 the value of remote sensing to space” was the unanimous decision of the selection committee of 26 distinguished leaders and authorities. The committee also paid particular tribute to Hughes Aircraft Co.’s Aerospace Group and RCA’s Government and Commercial Systems Group for their roles in the earth-resources and environmental surveys by Landsat. (NAA Release, 6 March 75; NASA Activities, April 75; Goddard News, June 75)
President Ford presented the Harmon Aviation Awards, given for outstanding feats of individual pilot skill, worthy of international recognition, and contributing to the art and science of flight. The 1974 Astronauts’ Trophy was awarded to the Skylab 2 crew who, during their 25 May to 23 June 1973 mission, became the first astronauts to successfully accomplish major repairs on a spacecraft in space. Skylab 2 commander Charles Conrad, Jr., accepted the award on behalf of himself and crewmembers Paul J. Weitz and Joseph P. Kerwin. President Ford presented the 1974 Aeronauts’ Trophy to the son of Malcolm S. Forbes for the latter’s series of 21 flights in a hot-air balloon that took him 4000 km across the U.S. from Coos Bay, Ore., to Gwynn Island, Va. The 1974 Aviators’ Trophy went to Col. Edward J. Nash, Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations of the 21st Air Force, for his 21 000-km round-trip airlift mission in a C —5 aircraft from the U.S. to Israel, and for his direction of continuous C—5 and C —141 operations from the U.S. to the Azores and on to Israel between 14 Oct. and 14 Nov. 1973. The 1973 Aviators’ Trophy was awarded to L/C Edgar L. Allison for piloting an HC—130H aircraft of the Air Force 57th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron nonstop on 20 Feb. 1972 from Taiwan to Scott Air Force Base, 111., a distance of 14 053 km, without refueling. This established a record for the longest straight-line nonstop flight in a turboprop aircraft. (PD, 5 May 75, 480—481)
Indecision and lack of a national policy had prevented the U.S. from having its own domestic communications satellite system after 9 yr of planning, a Washington Star article quoted Communications Satellite Corp. President Joseph V. Charyk as saying. In less than 10 yr a global comsat system developed under U.S. leadership was carrying more than two-thirds of the world’s transocean communications. Canada had had its own since 1972. The problem, Charyk said, was that, after the success of the global system, “everybody wanted in.” Companies, including American Telephone & Telegraph Co., Western Union Telegraph Co., Hughes Aircraft Co., RCA Corp., and Fairchild Industries, Inc., expressed interest in developing a domestic system. The Federal Communications Commission, whose job it was to decide who would operate such a system, seemed only intent upon keeping ComSatCorp and AT&T from dominating the field. Quoting Charyk, the Star said the net effect of this lack of a positive policy by the White House, Congress, and the regulatory agencies was that all the U.S. had to date were two or three earth stations using reproductions of the Canadian system. Despite the problems, Charyk said that two of ComSatCorp’s domestic programs were nearing operational stages: Marisat, a maritime comsat planned for a summer 1975 launch, and Comstar 1, scheduled for launch in 1976. ComSatCorp would also participate with several European countries and Canada in the Aerosat program to test the use of comsats for aircraft navigation. However, Charyk said that, under the “open skies” policies of the FCC , ComSatCorp had no guarantees of permanent service. “It is hard to get customers with these rules in effect.” (Snider, WStar, 20 June 75, D7)
The Central Intelligence Agency reported to the Senate Appropriations Committee on its secret monitoring of the Soviet space program and on the safety risks that might exist during the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission, the Washington Post reported. Details of the report, which was requested by Sen. William Proxmire (D—Wise.), would be made public by the committee within a few weeks. (AP, W Post, 5 June 75, A3)
Twenty-five spacecraft on twenty-four vehicles were scheduled for launch by NASA during 1975, NASA announced. The 25 spacecraft included 14 for NASA programs, 10 for other organizations, and 1 as a cooperative program with a foreign government. Highlighting the year would be the 15 July launch of an Apollo spacecraft carrying Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton as the U.S. contribution to the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Apollo would rendezvous and dock with Soyuz 19—launched 7 hr earlier than Apollo and carrying Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov—allowing both crews to exchange visits and perform joint scientific experiments. The two sets of Viking spacecraft, scheduled for 11 and 21 August launches, would journey through space for a year before arriving in the vicinity of Mars. There each set of spacecraft would separate into an orbiter and a lander to make orbital and surface investigations of the Martian environment. Other NASA spacecraft would include ERTS-B Earth Resources Technology Satellite and SMS-B Synchronous Meteorological Satellite, in January; GOES-C Geodynamic Experimental Ocean Satellite, in March; OSO-I Orbiting Solar Observatory, Nimbus-F experimental meteorological satellite, and Explorer 53 (SAS-C Small Astronomy Satellite), in May; GOES-A Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite, in June; Explorers 56 and 57 Dual Air Density Explorers, on a single booster in July or August; Explorer 54 (AE-D Atmospheric Explorer), in September; and Explorer 55 (AE-E), in December. The 10 spacecraft to be launched by NASA for other organizations included 5 comsats for Communications Satellite Corp.: IntelsatIV F—1 in February, Intelsat-IVA F—1 and F—2 in July and October, and Marisat A and B in April and July. Other reimbursable launches would include Telesat—C (Anik 3) for Canada in March, COS-B Celestial Observation Satellite in July for the European Space Agency, Symphonie—B experimental comsat in September for France and West Germany, RCA-A (RCA —Satcom 1, in orbit) comsat in December for RCA Corp., and ITOSE-2 Improved TIROS Operational Satellite in late 1975 for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Helios— B would be launched late in 1975 as a cooperative effort with West Germany. The schedule called for 18 of the 24 launches to be made from Kennedy Space Center, 5 from Western Test Range, and 1 from San Marco. For the launches NASA would use a Saturn IB, 3 Titan-Centaurs, 5 Atlas-Centaurs, and 15 Thor-Delta launch vehicles. (NASA Release 75—5; KSC Release 180—74)
Successful lung surgery performed 26 Aug. on Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Astronaut Donald K. Slayton revealed no evidence of malignancy, the Johnson Space Center Roundup reported. During the 2.5-hr surgery, doctors at the Texas Medical Center removed a triangular wedge that included the 4-mm nodule detected during postflight x-rays [see 20 Aug.] plus a small amount of normal surrounding tissue. Adjacent lymph nodes were biopsied and found normal; doctors found no signs of any other lesions. Slayton would remain in the hospital for 7 to 10 more days. (JSC Roundup, 29 Aug. 75,1)
Science magazine reported that U.S. scientists had reprogrammed NASA’s Landsat 1 earth resources satellite (formerly called Erts l, launched 23 July 1972) to photograph large areas of the Soviet Union, although not specifically requested to do so by Soviet officials. The magazine reported that the intent of the U.S. scientists was to aid Soviet scientists, after discussions at a series of 1972 joint working group meetings—convened for geological studies of comparable land sites in each country—indicated that the Soviets had nothing available to them equivalent to this kind of satellite imagery. Because the Soviet government was sensitive about U.S. satellites flying over the U.S.S.R., the Soviet scientists who were to benefit had never been directly informed about the reprogramming decision. Resulting images had never been directly handed over to the Soviet scientists lest doing so should violate the 1972 joint space agreement signed by both countries. Science quoted Goddard Space Flight Center’s Dr. William Nordberg, scientist responsible for the reprogramming, as saying, “They knew where they could buy them.” Science also reported that the Soviet scientists had ordered the Landsat images from the U.S. Geological Survey’s Sioux Falls distribution center. Dr. Nordberg denied that any of the reprogrammed imagery had been done for “economic espionage.” (Science, 8 Aug 75, 441—2)
Edward N. Cole, retired president of General Motors Corp., was designing a freight carrier, called the Huskie, twice the size of the Boeing 747, the Christian Science Monitor reported. Cole, whose plan Was still on the drawing board, envisioned a fleet of 300 Huskies carrying freight around the world, each aircraft flyihg 15 hr a day. Because fast loading and unloading Was critical to the plane’s ecohOihic success, an automated modular loading and unloading systerii was also being designed to permit the craft to take off again within 30 min Of landing. With the price tag for the fleet estimated at $13 billioh, Cole was counting on government interest to bolster his plans. CSM repotted that Dept, of Defense officials were interested in a fleet of privately built cargo plartes—with government-insured mortgages-^-that could be commandeered by the military in an emergency. (AP, CSM, 4 Feb 75, 5B)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of two 9-mo contracts for parallel design studies of a biological holding facility for Spacelab. Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. received $242 640 and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. received $177 360 to develop conceptual designs of habitats for live biological specimens supporting life-sciences space flight research programs. The habitats—consisting of the structure and the environmental-control, food and watering, waste-management, lighting, and instrumentation systems—were to be suitable for a wide variety of specimens with emphasis on the adult rhesus monkey and the adult laboratory rat. (MSFC Release 75-133) 25 June—3 July: The countdown demonstration test, a step-by-step dress rehearsal for the July Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, was successfully completed at Kennedy Space Center. The rehearsal culminated in actual fueling of the Saturn IB and a simulated launch of the Apollo at 3:50 pm EDT on 2 July. The cryogenic propellants loaded for the “wet” portion of the test were off-loaded and the final portion of the count repeated with crew members Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton aboard the spacecraft. A second simulated ignition and liftoff occurred at 2 pm EDT on 3 July. During the test, a leak detected in Brand’s spacesuit was traced to one of the pressure-sealing slide fasteners. Modifications were made and the spacesuit was successfully retested. {Spaceport News, 26 June 75, 1;KSC Release 115—75;Ezell et al., The Partnership: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, 314)
During recovery operations of the U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project astronauts, the Apollo spacecraft would not be retrieved by helicopter as usual on Apollo missions, Dr. Donald E. Stullken, chief of Johnson Space Center’s Mission Support Branch, said during a press briefing. Instead, the recovery ship would steam up alongside the command module and haul it aboard using the ship’s boat and aircraft crane. Navy personnel would open the hatch and the crew would step out on the ship’s deck. Arnold D. Aldrich, deputy manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at JSC, said that the most extensive modification required for the ASTP mission was redesigning the Soyuz spacecraft to accommodate the newly added docking system. The front end of the Soyuz had been modified with respect to structural configuration, thermal design, and the requirement to fit all the new system under the launch shroud that covered the entire Soyuz during the boost phase. John E. McLeaish, JSC Public Affairs Officer, said that NASA would provide U.S. and Soviet air-to-ground communications, air-to-air communications, and U.S.- and U.S.S.R.-originated commentary for newsmen during the mission. All Russian would be translated simultaneously into English, using a “voice-over” technique; a few communication lines would transmit raw Russian with no translation. The U.S.S.R. would provide an interpreter to assist newsmen in the U.S. with interpretation or explanation, if necessary. Questioned about the political significance of the ASTP mission, U.S. crew member Donald K. Slayton replied, “I think we’d be naive to assume that this program is going to end all conflicts between our two societies, certainly. I think . . . it’s a step in that direction, but there’s little doubt in my mind that we’re going to continue to have conflicts in many different areas. However, if we can kind of break the ground and get at least one area where we continue to work constructively on something, we’re certainly not going to end up in any major confrontation.” (Transcripts)
The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project docking system functioned well even though “conditions were not too favorable in the second docking,” spacecraft designer Vladimir Syromyatnikov said at a Moscow press conference. Although he said he was not yet familiar with all the details, Syromyatnikov said there had been a great deal of pitch between the two craft. “We know that the Soyuz system, after capture, is turned off, while the manual operation of the Apollo ship. . . should have been turned into a different mode.” At point of capture Soyuz began to turn on its axis at approximately 3° per sec, and the shock absorbers on the Soyuz “were very strained in order to absorb this strain.” All the pitch was “quelled” after about 40 sec, Syromyatnikov added. When a reporter asked why this happened, flight engineer Sergei Tsibin said, “We know that at one moment on the Apollo there was a folding of the gyroscopic system. We also know that at the moment of locking and latching the Apollo and Soyuz were rolling at approximately 1 degree a second. This should not have taken place.” The Los Angeles Times reported on 21 July that the Russians were worried about a pressure drop in Soyuz and had voiced concern over possible damage to the Soyuz by the hard docking. However, the Times quoted NASA officials in Moscow as saying that the docking had been within prescribed limits though conceding that “it may have been a little harder” than the first one. (USSR press briefing transcript, 20 July 75; Toth, LA Times, 21 July 75)
Dr. John F. Clark, Goddard Space Flight Center Director, and Dr. James W. Smith, president of Greenbelt Homes, Inc., signed a cooperative agreement to install experimental solar heating units in four four-family housing units in Greenbelt, Md. During the first phase of the project, all four of the units would be instrumented to measure heat loss and fuel-consumption characteristics, and two of the four would be fully insulated. Based on the cost-effectiveness of the first phase, the two insulated buildings would be equipped with solar heating units designed to augment existing hot-water radiator systems. The remaining two units would serve as control for comparison. The solar units, which would be designed at GSFC, would be installed in time for the 1975—1976 heating season. (Goddard News, March 75, 1—2; GHI manager’s ofc, interview, 5 Oct 1976)
Jackson M. Balch, director of NASA’s National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL)—formerly the Mississippi Test Facility—announced plans tO'retire. As bead of the test facility for 10 yrs, Balch managed testing of Saturn V rockets for both the Apollo and Skylab programs. (NASA anno, 22 July 75) 22 —23 July: Nearly 200 NASA managers, engineers, and scientists— headed by Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, Langley Research Center Director, and Viking Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr.—met at Kennedy Space Center for the Viking launch-readiness review. Those attending—including Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, and Dr. Noel Hinners, Associate Administrator for Space Science—heard status reports on the launch vehicle, spacecraft, and launch and tracking preparations. Everything was “in excellent shape” for the 11 Aug. launch of the nation’s first mission to land unmanned spacecraft on Mars, said Martin. “We still have three weeks of work ahead, but time to do it in an orderly fashion, and no significant open items.” Viking—A would be mated with the Titan— Centaur launch vehicle on 28 July, followed by specialized tests, including an operational readiness test 6 Aug. during which the entire NASA and contractor Viking team would go through the countdown and several hours of simulated flight. Problems discussed during the review included the x-band radio on the Viking—B Orb iter in which a defective coaxial cable had been replaced. A leak discovered in the Viking—A gas chromatograph mass spectrometer after sterilization was found to be so small— 0.000864 cubic centimeters per day—that it would not affect the mission. (NASA Releases 75—210, 75—216; KSC Release 156—75)
The wingless unpowered X—24B lifting body had made its first landing on a concrete runway at Edwards, Calif., to demonstrate maneuver and safe landing of an unpowered reentry vehicle on a conventional runway. After launch from a B —52 aircraft flying at 14 000 m, test pilot John N. Manke, chief Flight Research Center pilot for the X—24B project, had ignited a small rocket engine, propelling the X—24B to a speed of 1381 km per hr and altitude of 18 300 m. Manke then shut off the engine and glided to a perfect 300-kph landing on the 4600-m runway. The 11.3-m-long X—24B was a part of a joint NASA-Air Force program to study transonic flight characteristics and landing ability of a vehicle designed for hypersonic speeds. (FRC Release 24 —75; LA Times, 6 Aug 75)
NASA would store $900 million worth of surplus Apollo-Satum hardware instead of scrapping it as planned earlier, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in a letter to Rep. Olin E. Teague, Chairman of the House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology. The flight hardware would be stored in a manner to minimize costs and to permit restoration, if required, to flight condition. Dr. Fletcher also wrote that, as Space Shuttle launch-readiness schedule and program costs required, NASA would convert Launch Complex 39 and its supporting facilities to handle the Space Shuttle. As requested by the Committee during a 25 March meeting with Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight John F. Yardley, NASA would supply the Committee with a summary of options for missions that could be flown using the remaining Apollo-Satum flight hardware. Dr. Fletcher also stated that, because of the “considerable cost” to the government of storing the equipment, NASA would like to discuss the matter with the committee once again during the FY 1977 authorization hearings. (Text, letter Fletcher to Teague, 9 April 1975; UPI, NYT, 17 April 75, 7)
Estimated cost of the Spacelab being built for the first Space Shuttle flight had risen from $400 million to $500 million during the last year, and the program had fallen 3 to 6 mo behind schedule, NASA’s Space-lab program director Douglas Lord told the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications. The European Space Agency, which was developing Spacelab, was confident of delivering it in time to fly on the Shuttle. Lord and NASA Associate Administrator John F. Yard-ley said the increased development cost would not affect NASA’s cost in purchasing the modules, because NASA’s agreement with ESA precluded the Europeans from recouping development costs. NASA had been committed to buying one set of Spacelab hardware at a cost “reasonable to NASA,” although pricing proposals would not be received for 6 to 8 mo. The two officials said European cooperation on the program had been “exceptional.” (Transcript, Vol I Part 1, 889)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the formation of a solar heating and cooling task team to support requests made by the Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA). The task team, under the leadership of Donald R. Bowden, would direct MSFC’s role in ERDA’s program to demonstrate heating and cooling applications of solar energy. The team would acquire examples of existing solar heating and cooling systems and would direct additional development of these systems to increase efficiency and lower costs. ERDA had authorized approximately $50 million to MSFC for work which would cover 5 yr ana use 100 persons at MSFC. (MSFC Release 75-130).
Marshall Space Flight Center observed the 15th anniversary of the transfer of personnel, facilities, and responsibilities from the Department of Defense’s U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency to NASA. The center had been formally dedicated at a ceremony 8 Sept. 1960 attended by President Dwight D. Eisenhower; Dr. T. Keith Glennan, NASA Administrator; Alabama Governor John Patterson; MSFC Director Dr. Wemher von Braun; and Mrs. George C. Marshall, widow of the statesman, soldier, and Nobel Peace Prize winner for whom the center was named. With the transfer had gone responsibility for continued development of the Redstone and the Saturn I; soon to come would be the Saturn IY and Y launch vehicles that would carry U.S. astronauts into earth orbit and, eventually, to the moon. More than 100 000 employees in 12 000 companies across the U.S. worked during the peak of developing the Saturn family and its 31 launches with 100% launch success rate. MSFC developed the Lunar Roving Vehicle that carried moon-based astronauts several km from the landing site across rugged lunar terrain. MSFC was also responsible for the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop. Launched into earth orbit 14 May 1973, Skylab 1 carried other MSFC developments including solar-observation instruments, the docking adapter, and many experiments. Three three-man crews occupied the space station for a total of 171 days. To date, as the last Saturn booster was preparing to carry three U.S. astronauts to an earth-orbital rendezvous with two Soviet cosmonauts for the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, MSFC was heavily involved in development of the Space Transportation System, including the Space Shuttle, Space Tug, Spacelab, and related payloads. MSFC employees were also working on the development of solar heating and cooling systems and other applications projects. In a message to MSFC Director Dr. William P. Lucas, President Gerald R. Ford said that “From its inception, the Marshall center has continued in the forefront of this Nation’s tremendous advancement in the exploration of space. We look forward to more vital contributions . . . from the Marshall center in the years ahead as the United States continues to lead the way in using space for the benefit of all mankind.” (MSFC Releases 75—131, 75—140; Historical Origins of The George C. Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC Historical Monograph No. 1, Dec 1960)
At an Apollo-Soyuz Test Project crew-status briefing, Richard S. Johnston, Director of Life Sciences, told reporters that Houston control could not make voice contact with the crew during Apollo reentry [see 15—24 July]. The first medical bulletin on the astronauts’ condition, received at Houston several hours later, had informed Houston officials of the crew’s eye and lung irritation. After splashdown, astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Donald K. Slayton had noticed that fellow crewman Vance D. Brand had passed out. He had revived after about 1 min when Stafford adjusted his oxygen mask and ensured a proper flow of oxygen. Johnston also said that preliminary diagnostic procedures had indicated that the crew did not have “any apparent medical problem at that time” but that x-rays had shown increased hylar markings originating from the center of the chest. The doctors elected to move the crew to sick bay and keep them under observation. The astronauts had been given cortisone to decrease the inflammation of their lung tissue and relieve the symptoms of cough and substernal discomfort. During the briefing, word came that the astronauts had arrived at Tripler Hospital in Hawaii where they would enter the intensive care unit. “They walked in smiling and they looked happy,” said JSC Public Affairs Officer Robert V. Gordon. (ASTP Transcript PC—56)
