An unmanned ground terminal that could operate with several satellites in synchronous orbit above the earth was patented by three engineers for the Communications Satellite Corporation. Previously, a separate earth terminal was needed for each satellite. William K. Sones, Laurence F. Gray, and Louis Pollack, of the ComSat staff in Washington, D.C., invented the new facility, considered a major advance that would add reliability and reduce costs. The structure included a single reflector about 9.7m by 15.4m with enough traveling-wave tubes, transmitters, receivers, and amplifiers to handle two or more satellites, plus monitors and controls; the reliability feature was a system that switched in another tube if one became defective. Possible uses would be on offshore rigs or at oil-pipeline installations that were unmanned but required constant communication by satellite. (ATT, 10 Jan 76, 31)
Officials of the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO) threatened a slowdown at major U.S. airports in the form of strict adherence to rules on spacing of aircraft, the Chicago Tribune reported. The union, in a salary dispute with the U.S. Civil Service Commission, would use the slowdown to protest failure to raise flight controllers’ pay. Federal Aviation Administration rules would permit a separation between airplanes of from 4.8 to 8 km; if controllers spaced flights the full 8 km apart, schedules could be delayed by as much as 6 hr at busy airports such as Chicago’s O’Hare. The tactics, although inconveniencing travelers, would not affect air safety, said PATCO president John Leyden. FA A had issued a request that controllers ignore the slowdown. (C Trib, 30 July 76, 5)
NASA announced appointment of Robert A. Newman as Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, effective 26 July. Newman was vicepresident of community affairs for TRW, Inc., and president of the TRW Foundation at Cleveland, 0. In his new NASA post, he would be responsible for all information services of the space agency except for technical publications. He had received bachelor’s degrees in journalism and sociology from the Univ. of Mo., served in the USAF during the Korean War, and had been a member of the board of directors of the Air Force Academy Foundation. (NASA Release 76—131; Fletcher anno.
A federal judge ordered NASA to reinstate with back pay and benefits the federal employees who lost their jobs at Marshall Space Flight Center to private contractors, the Washington Star reported. In a suit filed in 1967 in the U.S. District Court in Washington, D.C., by the AFL-CIO American Federation of Government Employees, the union contended that 22 MSFC contracts with private companies resulted in the layoff of about 3000 federal workers. Judge Joseph Waddy agreed that the contracts were illegal and ordered that federal employees who lost jobs as a result of work going to the private companies should be rehired, and that any similar contracts be canceled. The decision upheld Civil Service Commission standards that forbid a private contractor from assuming an employer-employee relationship over federal workers. NASA attorney Sid Masri said as many as 2000 employees could be terminated as a result of the decision, which NASA was sure to appeal. (W Star, 18 Aug 76, A-2, B-2; WSJ, 19 Aug 76, 17)
Cosmonauts from 8 “socialist member-countries of the Intercosmos program” would join crews from the USSR in space beginning in 1978, the official Soviet news agency Tass announced. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, chief of training for the cosmonaut program, said that timing of such flights would depend on the readiness of technology and preparedness of the crews: the crew commander would be a Soviet flyer, and the flight engineer and research engineer would represent another participating country. Crewmembers from Bulgaria, Hungary, East Germany, Cuba, Mongolia, Poland, Romania, and Czechoslovakia would train at the Yuri Gagarin Center near Moscow where Soviet cosmonauts have trained. Intercosmos is an association of Communist nations that had already cooperated in launching 16 unmanned satellites, the New York Times noted; the only men in space so far had been either Soviet or American. (FB1S, Moscow Tass in English, 15 Sept 76; NYT, 15 Sept 76, 72; W Post, 15 Sept 76, A-14)
Edwin E. (Buzz) Aldrin, Jr., second person to walk on the moon, told an audience at Orange, Calif., that he had become an alcoholic several years before the 1969 Apollo 11 moon mission and stopped drinking only 2 days before the flight. He had resumed drinking shortly after the mission. Aldrin said that, as a West Point cadet, he had been “caught in the alcohol trap”: having decided to give up alcohol when he was sent to Korea as a combat officer, he resumed drinking when he perceived that his military image was measured by “who could drink the most.” Aldrin spoke at a hospital where he stayed during a month-long recovery program in the summer of 1975; he had not mentioned his alcoholism in his 1973 book “Return to Earth” although he did discuss his post-Apollo psychiatric treatment, confirmed by the Air Force in 1972. (W Star, 3 Aug 76, A-2; ATT, 3 Aug 76; W Post Parade, 26 Sept. 76, 6)
Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld announced that the Ford administration had decided to authorize construction of the controversial B-l bomber, under a contract arrangement that would allow the incoming Carter administration 5 mo to review the $22.8-billion program. Rumsfeld’s announcement said that B-l testing was complete and that it was “in the national interest” to proceed with production. During the campaign, candidate Carter had said he was opposed to immediate production but held out the possibility of further research on the bomber, which the Pentagon now declared completed. The unusual contract arrangement of month-by-month funding until the end of June was an extension of the 1 Feb. deadline set by Congress for commitment of funds for the program; the Air Force awarded contracts totaling $704.9 million to Rockwell Inti., General Electric, and the Boeing Company for the first three production models of the bomber, plus procurement to make eight more. The contracts, however, limited government liability to a monthly total of $87 million through June. Air Force Secretary Thomas C. Reed said at a news conference that keeping the B-l in the research state was unnecessary and wasteful, and that “it would be irresponsible not to initiate B-l production at this time” in view of the expansion of Soviet strategic forces. A manned bomber, he said, was the third part of a triad—including land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles and missile-bearing submarines—that would present “an insoluble problem” to the USSR and make it a losing proposition to attack the U.S. because of retaliation that would follow. The swing-wing B-l, although only two-thirds the size of the B-52, could carry twice the payload, was faster in takeoff and flight, and carried electronic systems more difficult to jam than those of the B-52. Opponents claimed that $ 100 million apiece was too high a price to pay for a bomber in the age of antiaircraft missiles, and suggested alternatives such as loading a commercial Boeing 747 with cruise missiles that could be fired while the plane was a safe distance from enemy defenses. (NYT, 3 Dec 76, A18; W Post, 3 Dec 76, A—1)
More than 25% of all scientists and engineers in the U.S. and the USSR were engaged in weapons work of some kind, whereas fewer than one hundredth of 1% were engaged in arms control or disarmament, said William Epstein, former director of the U.N. Disarmament Division, in a letter to the New York Times. Warning of the “terrible doomsday weapons that scientists may yet develop” in the spiraling arms race, Epstein called on scientists and engineers to establish nationally and internationally a code of conduct that would include educational work on the perils of the arms race and political efforts to achieve arms control and disarmament. “Science may be neutral and amoral, but scientists are not . . . They have a moral duty to use their capabilities for the benefit of humanity and not for its destruction.” Uniting their efforts behind a “Hippocratic oath” not to engage in means of mass murder, associations of scientists and other professional bodies could provide moral support and tangible assistance to those “even in dictatorial countries” where imprisonment or harassment would be the result of such action. (NYT, 18 Feb 76, 33)
Every ruble spent on space research had been returned many times to the Soviet national economy, said Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov in a Tass interview during observations of the 15th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin’s space flight. Leonov was one of the two USSR participants in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and had been the first man to walk in space during a Voskhod 2 flight 18 Mar. 1965. He stated that 496 spacecraft had been launched from Soviet cosmodromes in the last 5 yrs, 35 of them communications satellites, 13 Meteor weather satellites, and several Prognoz science satellites, as well as about 400 in the Cosmos series. The long-functioning Salyut stations were the main line of Soviet space activity, Leonov said, carrying out research in cartography, geology, agriculture, forestry, and hydrology as only a few of the many fields of knowledge expanded by work on orbital stations. Leonov also stressed the importance of the Soviet-American Apollo-Soyuz test project. (FBIS, Tass in English, 6 Apr 76)
Communications Satellite Corp., the international telecommunications consortium, had begun contract negotiations with U.S. manufacturers on building a new generation of comsats with a capacity of about 12 000 simultaneous telephone calls plus television, to meet growing demand for international communications expected by the early 1980s, the annual meeting of ComSat stockholders was told. Joseph V. Charyk, president of ComSat, noted that the 2 new Intelsat IV-A satellites scheduled for launch this year had a capacity of about 6250 simultaneous telephone calls, plus television; the first such satellite—Intelsat I, the 1965 Early Bird—could carry either 200 telephone calls or one TV channel. Charyk said negotiations had been held with Hughes Aircraft (maker of Intelsat IV), TRW Inc., and a division of Ford Motor Co. for construction of the new satellites. However, he said, ComSat’s share of future international satellite operations would depend on the outcome of its appeal from an FCC order of last Dec. calling for sharp reductions in rates. Had the FCC rates been in effect for all of 1975, ComSat profits would have been $1.60 a share rather than $4.62 a share, he said. (WPost, 12 May 76, D-9)
Dr. John L. Me Lucas, head of the Federal Aviation Administration, predicted that the U.S. would produce a second-generation supersonic transport, probably in cooperation with the Europeans, as a followup to the Concorde program. Speaking at a luncheon of the Air Force Association and in a subsequent interview with the New York Times, Dr. McLucas said that Congress probably would enact legislation to sharply reduce aircraft noise over the next 6 to 10 yr by modifying and replacing present aircraft. Biggest question would be how much financial help the airlines would get to carry out the plan: McLucas predicted that the airlines would have to settle for loan guarantees rather than outright subsidy. Calling the aviation industry “an endangered species,” he said it was threatened by low profits, lack of capital for new equipment, and absence of a national aviation policy; he asked for more cooperation between industry and government, and exploration of joint projects with European partners. “A joint effort to advance . . . the design of the next-generation SST would be in keeping with this new spirit of international cooperation,” he added. Dr. McLucas was secretary of the Air Force until President Ford transferred him to head the FAA. (NYT, 17 June 76, 49)
The mission of the launch of Comstar B on 22 July 1976 from the Eastern Test Range on an Atlas-Centaur AC-40 was declared successful by John F. Yardley, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, NASA announced in a postlaunch mission operations report. The spacecraft’s apogee motor was successfully fired 24 July 1976, injecting the Comstar into the desired synchronous orbit. (NASA MOR M-491-201-76-02, 13 Dec 76)
As he assumed the presidency of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Dr. William D. McElroy (chancellor of the Univ. of Calif, in San Diego, and former director of the National Science Foundation) said he planned to reorganize the AAAS journal Science, involve the association more deeply in government and industry activity, and quadruple the membership. Dr. McElroy, called the “leading world authority on the biochemistry of firefly light,” said he hoped to stop the publication of pure research papers in Science, as more specialized scientific journals could do this more efficiently, and to promote a free flow of ideas between the universities and the industrial community by Four of the comsats in NASA's 1976 launch schedule: A, Comsat General’s Marisat, launched 19 Feb.; B, NATO in—A, launched 22 Apr.; C, Comsat General’s Comstar 1A, launched 13 May; D, Indonesia's Palapa, launched 8 July. including more articles of interest to users in industry and engineering, and paying more attention to science issues in government policy. He referred to the “unfortunate separation” between industry and university after World War II when science gained new nonindustrial financial support; by increasing the circulation of Science magazine, he would expand the AAAS membership, as the magazine is available only to members. (NYT, 2 Jan 76, 10) 5 January-4 February: Permission to fly the British- and French-built Concorde supersonic transport into the U.S. was the subject of a hearing called by Transportation Secretary William T. Coleman, Jr., in Washington to help him decide the matter within 30 days. Basic arguments pro and con were not new, observers agreed, as they had all been thrashed out in a bitter 1971 congressional fight that halted U.S. efforts to build an SST after about $1 billion had been spent on the project. The case against the Concorde had been that it was too noisy and that its emissions polluted the atmosphere and depleted the stratospheric ozone shield. Spokesmen for the Concorde cited its benefits in speed of travel and technical achievement. At the hearing, representatives of the Va. state government called for approval of Concorde landings at Dulles, in view of the airport’s significance as Virginia’s international gateway; these advocates found themselves opposed to the views of the local Va. jurisdictions which did not want the SST landing there. Gov. Hugh Carey of N.Y. opposed the Concorde’s coming into JFK Airport because of the noise. On 6 Jan. the Environmental Protection Agency reversed its previous stand, calling for a total ban on commercial operations in the U.S. of the British-French SST. On 13 Jan., the Aerospace Industries Assn.—U.S. manufacturers of aerospace vehicles and components— submitted a letter deploring the cancellation of the U.S. program and supporting Concorde’s application to operate. On 29 Jan., the Am. Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, claiming to represent 22 000 engineers and scientists, called for a limited-operations trial period to collect data as the basis for a final decision on giving Concorde access to U.S. airports. The Concorde had begun regular passenger service 21 Jan. between Paris and Rio de Janeiro, and between London and Bahrain, as the climax of 14 yr of technical cooperation between Britain and France and a joint investment of more than $3 billion. DOT Secy. Coleman announced 4 Feb. that he had granted the Concorde “limited scheduled commercial flights” into the U.S. for a period not to exceed 16 mo under precise limitations. British Airways and Air France could send up to 2 flights per day into JFK and Dulles airports, but the permission could be revoked upon 4 mo notice or immediately in case of emergency. The limitations included prohibitions on landing or takeoff in the U.S. before 7 am or after 10 pm local time, and on flying at supersonic speed over the U.S. or any of its territories. In his 61-page decision with 36 pages of appendix, Coleman said the 16-mo period should be long enough to demonstrate the validity of his judgment. Upon hearing of the secretary’s decision, 2 members of the Senate Commerce Committee were narrowly defeated in an attempt to ban the Concorde from landing in the U.S. by attaching such a ban to a bill authorizing funds for airport development. The Concorde’s only supersonic competitor was the USSR’s Tupolev-144, in service since 26 Dec. 1975 within the Soviet Union as a freight plane. (NYT, 5 Jan 76, 1; Av Wk, 5 Jan 76, 26; W Star, 6 Jan 76, A-3; W Post, 6 Jan 76, A—1; AIA Aerospace News Release 76-1; text, AIAA letter to DOT, 29 Jan 76; NYT, 21 Jan 76, 16-17; WStar, 21 Jan 76, A-3; B Sun, 28 Jan 76, A-6; NYT, 1 Feb 76, 3-1; DOT Release 09-76, 4 Feb. 76; NYT, 5 Feb 76, 1, 16, 32M; W Post, 5 Feb 76, A-l, A-18; B Sun, 5 Feb 76, A14)
Dr. John F. Clark would retire 1 July after 10 yr as director of the Goddard Space Flight Center, NASA announced. His successor would be Dr. Robert S. Cooper, deputy director of GSFC. Dr. Clark had come to NASA in 1958, serving from 1963 to 1965 as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications, after which he was appointed to his post at GSFC. An authority in atmospheric and space sciences, Dr. Clark while director at GSFC had been responsible for major advances in communications, weather and climate, earth resources, space physics, and space astronomy. (NASA Release 76-71)
Dr. William Nordberg, 46, director of applications at GSFC, died of cancer after a 2-yr illness. A native of Austria, he had come to the U.S. in 1953 to work as an atmospheric geophysicist for the Army Signal Corps. As one of the scientists transferred from the Army to the newly formed NASA, he went to GSFC in 1959 as head of the physical measurement section in Satellite Applications Systems Div. and became Director of Applications in 1974. In 1975 he had received both the William T. Pecora Award and NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for outstanding contributions to applications of remote sensing of earth by spacecraft, honoring his work with the Landsat project, in which he had coordinated the work of 300 scientists from 38 countries in demonstrating satellite uses in disciplines such as agriculture, forestry, land use, marine resources and oceanography, mineral and oil exploitation, geology, and environmental impact. (Goddard News, Sept 76, 1; W Post, 5 Oct 76, C-6)
Former astronaut William A. Anders, serving as chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, was appointed U.S. ambassador to Norway by President Ford. Anders, 42, had served at NRC since Dec. 1974 and had told the President he wished to remain in the post for only a yr. Selected as an astronaut by NASA in 1963, Anders was one of the 3 crewmen of Apollo 8 to orbit the moon at Christmastime 1968. Anders left the corps of astronauts in 1969 to become executive secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, a White House post abolished by President Nixon 4 yr later; he then was appointed head of the Atomic Energy Commission (whose functions were reorganized in 1974 into the Energy Research and Development Administration and NRC). He had turned down an offer of reappointment at NRC for a 5-yr term. {WSJ, 9 Mar 76, 3; W Post, 8 Mar 76, A-20)
Dr. William H. Pickering, director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at the California Institute of Technology since 1954, retired, announcing that he would return to Caltech as a professor of engineering. He had earned all his degrees at that institution and had joined the faculty in 1936, becoming a member of the JPL staff in 1944. The staff at that time numbered a few hundred; when he became director, the total had reached 1000, and numbered about 4000 when he announced his retirement. Born in New Zealand in 1910, Dr. Pickering had become one of the world’s foremost experts in space technology. Under his leadership, JPL had designed Explorer 1, first successful U.S. satellite, and went on to develop and operate the Ranger, Surveyor, and Mariner space probes. Dr. Pickering was first president of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 1963, and president of the International Astronautical Federation in 1965-66. NASA’s announcement of his retirement said he would work on gaining worldwide scientific support for the proposed International Solar System Decade of research and space exploration of all aspects of the solar system. (NASA anno. 23 June 75; NYT, 21 June 75, 41; LA Times, 31 Mar 76, 1; Pasadena Star-News, 1 Apr 76, 1)
Eventually there will be an American SST program,” Dr. John L. McLucas wrote in a letter to the Phila. Inquirer. Dr. McLucas, Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration, agreed with an Inquirer editorial that stated, “Concorde hasn’t made it yet,” but pointed out that costs of research and development and other expenses of producing a new aircraft had virtually halted the introduction of new aircraft designs “suitable to the major airlines.” New transport aircraft would offer advantages such as greatly reduced noise, a high level of safety, and 30% improvement in fuel efficiency; however, continued development of new planes and their purchase by the carriers “is moving beyond the financial scope of private investors singly or collectively,” Dr. McLucas wrote. Some combination of government and private initiative would be needed to finance the next generation of air transports; “it’s more likely to be the result of a cooperative American-European effort,” Dr. McLucas concluded. (P Inq, 20 July 76, 1-E)
The first group of future cosmonauts from socialist countries had been welcomed at the USSR training center named for Yuri Gagarin, Maj. Gen. Georgy Beregovoy, director of the center, told a correspondent for the Tass news agency. The joint flights with Soviet cosmonauts would include representatives from Czechoslovakia, Poland, and the German Democratic Republic (the first three groups to arrive), Bulgaria, Hungary, Cuba, Mongolia, and Romania, and the joint flights were scheduled for 1978 to 1983. Beregovoy said the socialist countries had been cooperating for the past decade on the Intercosmos program, launching satellites and meteorological rockets and more than 20 experiments in various branches of science. He also mentioned the Apollo-Soyuz flight as a successful example of international cooperation in space. (FBIS, Tass in English, 24 Dec 76)
A Spacelab simulation mission known as ASSESS II would be flown jointly next spring by NASA and the European Space Agency, and the payload specialists for the 4-engine jet mission would be named shortly, NASA announced. ASSESS was the acronym for airborne science Spacelab experiment-systems simulation. Carlos C. Hagood, NASA mission manager for Spacelab 2 and ASSESS, said two U.S. candidates would be named as prime payload specialists, with a third as backup; ESA would also select prime and backup specialists. Launch date of the 10-day mission had been set for 15 May 1977. The mission would be flown in the Galileo II, a Convair 990 operated by Ames Research Center, one of several ARC flying laboratories supporting research activities internationally. The aircraft would fly 6.5 hr each day, and the payload specialists would remain in the plane and work another 6 hr on the ground; their off-duty time would be spent in a van containing living quarters connected to the aircraft. ASSESS was developed to involve individual principal investigators (Pi) in defining and operating the scientific payload; to study the investigator working-group (IWG) concept, providing Pis a means of full and direct visibility into mission management and a direct channel for making recommendations; to evaluate the concept of PI selection of payload specialists; and to validate a concept for training and cross-training Pi-selected payload specialists. MSFC was lead center for the ASSESS II mission. Dr. Anthony C. DeLoach was MSFC mission scientist; ESA mission scientist was Dr. John Beckman of the European Space Research and Technology Center at Noordwijk, The Netherlands. ESA mission manager was Johannes de Waard, based in Porz-Wahn, West Germany. NASA candidates for payload specialist would be selected by NASA members of the investigator working group, and European candidates by the ESA members; the selections would be recommeded to the ASSESS program manager, Bernard T. Nolan of NASA Hq Office of Applications. (MSFC Release 76-158)
Col. Stuart A. Roosa, 42, an astronaut since 1966, announced in Houston that he would retire from the Air Force and from NASA on 1 Feb., one day after the 5th anniversary of the launch of his only space flight, Apollo 14. Roosa had piloted the command module while Capt. Alan B. Shepard and Cdr. Edgar D. Mitchell had made the third moon landing, and had previously been on the Apollo 9 backup crew. Roosa told associates he was exploring “companies involved in new procedures.” (NYT, 30 Jan 76, 34; W Star, 30 Jan 76, A-2)
The U.S. had the smallest Air Force since the beginning of the Korean War, General, William J. Evans told a luncheon of the National Security Industrial Association in Los Angeles. Gen. Evans, commander of the Air Force Systems Command, said that the Air Force, in an effort to reverse this trend, was in the midst of the greatest modernization period of its short history, citing “the effective combination” of “land-based terminals and spaceborne satellites to provide attack warning, weather data, communication links, and positioning and navigation for American forces wherever they may be.” The U.S. was building a modern Air Force “with inefficient equipment that would be at home in a museum,” he said, calling on industry for more investment in modern equipment and advanced technology. Contractor testing had not been realistic, and performance of contractor products had failed to meet operational requirements; the government presence in contractor plants, to which industry objected, could be reduced with better designs, streamlined operations with better visibility, and measures such as greater use of computers to reduce inefficiencies. (AFSC Release OIP 152.76)
Dr. John A. O’Keefe, geophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, published a book, Tektites and Their Origin, which noted that a piece of the moon could be purchased for a small amount. Tektites, the glass pebbles that fall from the sky, are ejecta from lunar volcanoes and not debris of meteorite impacts on the moon or the earth as previously suggested. Lunar missions that discovered tektite-like glass in the dust at some sites, the study of microscopic tektites from the bottom of earth’s seas, and the volcanic appearance of some layered tektites caused the change in ideas. (Goddard News, July 76, 3)
The Enterprise—Space Shuttle Orbiter 101, described by NASA as the flagship of “the new era of space transportation” and by Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) as “probably the best investment the U.S. Congress has ever made”—was rolled out of Rockwell Intl.’s assembly facility at Palmdale, Calif., just before 1 pm EOT, to the strains of the theme from the Star Trek TV show and applause from about 2000 spectators. The audience included Sen. John B. Tunney (D-Calif.); Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology; and Rep. William M. Ketchum (R-Calif.), “representing Antelope Valley” where the Orbiter was built. Also on hand were test-flight crewmen Fred W. Haise, Joe H. Engle, Charles G. Fullerton, and Richard H. Truly, the astronaut team who would put the Orbiter through approach and landing tests scheduled for 1979. Special guests were six members of the original Star Trek cast and ST creator Gene Roddenberry [see 8 Sept.]. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher told those attending that the ceremony was “a proud moment” that would mean “the evolution to man in space—not just astronauts.” (Plans called for the Orbiter to serve as an all-purpose space trainer, carrying a crew of two or more plus up to five scientific or technological investigators working in space in a shirtsleeve environment.) Willard F. Rockwell, Jr., board chairman of Rockwell Inti., predicted “one of the most exciting chapters in American history” in the productive use of space that the Shuttle would make possible. The first Shuttle in orbit was to carry 4500 kg of instruments to measure stress, and the second, a small satellite to be left in orbit; the last of six orbital test flights would carry a payload of about 30 000 kg or as many as six satellites to be left in orbit at altitudes up to 160 km. Resembling “a space-bound DC-9,” according to Thomas O’Toole in the Washington Post, the Enterprise was more than 36.5 m long and weighed nearly 70 000 kg, having gained more than 2200 kg over the past 2 yr. Strengthening the wings, landing-gear and payload-bay doors, parts of the fuselage, and the enormous fuel tanks during Shuttle development had added to both the weight and the cost of the vehicle, meaning that its price would be more than the $5.2 billion (in 1971 dollars) estimated by NASA. One change alone, from aluminum to a boron-epoxy composite for landing-gear doors, would cost about $9000 per kg to save 112 kg of weight. Replacing aluminum castings in the fuselage with titanium would cost about $18 000 a kg to save slightly more than 200 kg of weight. Sen. Goldwater reminded those at the rollout that the first U.S. manned orbital Right (that of John Glenn in Friendship 7) had occurred 14 yr previously, in Feb. 1962, and predicted that the Space Shuttle would make manned space flight a “routine” experience. (NASA Release 76-149; NYT, 18 Sept 76, 1, 8; W Post, 18 Sept 76, A-2; fV Star, 18 Sept 76, A—1; C Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7, 2-7; Av Wk, 20 Sept 76, 12; 27 Sept 76,12; KSC Spaceport News, 17 Sept 76,1; ISC Roundup, 24 Sept 76, 1)
Blueprints for future Mars explorations, triggered by the Viking 1 landing on Mars, included not only the dispatch of roving robot vehicles to the surface of Mars but also collection and return of Mars samples by a “sailing ship”—a spacecraft carrying an onionskin-thin sail of aluminum-coated plastic measuring more than 185 m' and powered by the pressure of solar electromagnetic radiation. Space flight would become possible with less reliance on heavy and expensive rockets, said John Noble Wilford in the New York Times; a space-sailer could be launched from an earth-orbiting Shuttle, deploy landers to collect and return samples, and return to earth with larger amounts of Martian samples than possible by other methods. JPL’s plans for future missions might include a fleet of the sailers (to be called Yankee Clippers) “flying the routes from earth orbit to the vicinity of Mars, hauling supplies and portable habitats, and finally explorers, to a Mars base.” (NYT, 25 July 76, 44)
Moon rocks—prime celebrities 5 yr ago—had become has-beens, wrote reporter James P. Sterba in the New York Times. Astronauts had brought back from the six moon missions about 382 kg of lunar material; Dr. Michael G. Duke, curator of moon rocks at Johnson Space Center, claimed to know the disposition of every gram. Fragments returned from Apollo 11 went to 137 heads of state and 51 U.S. governors; chunks returned by Apollo 17 in Dec. 1972 had been dispensed to nations and states. Scientists in 15 nations, 26 states, and the Virgin Is. had been studying samples under NASA-sponsored research grants, and their findings would fill a shelf 1.5 m wide. “We know more about the composition of the moon than we do about the earth,” Dr. Duke said, although less than 20% of the lunar samples had been circulated for research and exhibits. Lately the calls for samples to exhibit had dwindled, and the number of scientists studying them had been halved. Security had remained tight because of the efforts of rock collectors to obtain samples; however, the moon rocks had lost ground in public interest compared to the Mars rocks being turned over by Vikings 1 and 2, Sterba wrote. (ATT, 11 Oct 76, 27)
The Marshall Star reported on a Bicentennial celebration at MSFC’s Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., that included planting of a “moon” tree to commemorate the 7 th anniversary of the first Apollo landing. Michoud was the place where giant Saturn moon rockets were fabricated. Participating in the program were Lt. Gov. James Fitzmorris of La.; MSFC Director Dr. William R. Lucas; and Robert Littlefield, manager of the Michoud facility. The tree was a pine grown from seed carried to the moon and back in 1971 oh the Apollo 14 mission as part of research into effects of weightlessness on seed germination. The U.S. Dept, of Agriculture had planted the returned seeds, and the seedlings had been set out in various public areas over the U.S. such as in Philadelphia’s Washington Square. As the tree was planted in front of the Michoud administration building, a time capsule was deposited to be opened during the nation’s Tricentennial in 2076. The capsule contained documents, tapes, and pictures relating to the space program. (Marshall Star, 21 July 76, 4)
Problems confronting physicists in a major effort to discover “the true nature of the most basic components of matter and the laws that govern them” were the subject of last week’s annual meeting of the Am. Physical Society’s Division of Particles and Fields, held at the Brookhaven Natl. Laboratory on Long Island, said Walter Sullivan in the NY Times. Scientists from the U.S., the Soviet Union, and other countries were considering the construction of a “world machine,” a particle accelerator that would dwarf any now in existence, measuring about 48 km in circumference and generating ten thousand billion electron volts. Its cost, estimated as 3 to 6 times that of the largest accelerator in existence, would be met on a global basis with the U.S. and the USSR “playing major roles,” Sullivan said. Although the project had been discussed at several international conferences and would not be built until the end of the century, proponents believed that groundwork should begin immediately and had asked the Inti. Union of Pure and Applied Physics to take the lead in organizing the effort. Design decisions would await the results of several machines now projected or being built, that might show how problems should be most effectively handled. The most powerful machine now operating (at the Fermi Natl. Accelerator Laboratory in 111.) had a 6.5-km ring that could boost protons to 500 Gev (one Gev equaling a billion electron volts). A modification now in progress, called the doubler, would increase the potential to i 000 Gev by the late 1970s and would cost between $40 and $50 billion. Fermi’s closest rival was a super proton synchrotron at CERN—the European Center for Nuclear Research at Geneva, Switzerland—also with a 6,5-km ring slightly less powerful spanning the Swiss-French border, deep beneath rolling farmland. According to the CERN newsletter, The Courier, the most ambitious project was a complex planned by the USSR called UNK (from its Russian name) consisting of two machines in underground tunnels at Serpukhov, south of Moscow; one tunnel, forming a ring nearly 18 km in circumference, would house a device to accelerate protons to 2000 Gev, while the other tunnel would contain a 20-Gev electron accelerator whose beam would collide with the proton beam. Such collisions, at energies higher than now available, might provide answers to puzzles that baffle the theorists, Sullivan said. The Brookhaven conference heard plans for Isabelle, a 3.2-km machine for colliding proton beams at energies up to 300 Gev, that would take 3 yr to build and cost $166 million. CERN was drawing up plans for a machine to collide beams of 100-Gev positrons and electrons; energies achieved in such collisions are lower than those from proton accelerators because the positron is less massive than the proton. A powerful machine of this type operating at Stanford Univ., Palo Alto, had been called SPEAR; a larger version known as PEP (positron-electron project), more than 2 km in circumference, would be completed there in 1980 at a cost of $78 million, and would generate beams of 18 Gev. The collision of positrons and electrons was considered a “clean” way to produce exotic particles because the collision would annihilate the primary particles in an extremely intense burst of energy, which would then form itself into new particles. Among questions discussed at the Brookhaven meeting were the nature of the basic building-blocks of matter such as quarks or maons (particles tinier than quarks, said to have been suggested as a possibility by Mao Tse-Tung when told of the quark concept by a visiting physicist). Recent work had shown “how little we understand about the internal dynamics” of particles, and the use of higher energies would be one way to solve some of the problems, Sullivan suggested. (NYT, 10 Oct 76, 7) 10-16 October: More than 1000 of the world’s top government and industry space experts assembled in Anaheim, Calif., at the wk-long 27th Congress of the Inti. Astronautical Federation. Theme of the meeting was “The New Era of Space Transportation.” Delegates would have the opportunity to hear more than 300 technical papers on topics such as safety in space, the future of space law, and the proposed moon treaty. Also scheduled for discussion were the use of direct-broadcast satellites, space rescue, and the use of solar energy in space. Chairman of the conference was Dr. George E. Mueller, president and chairman of System Development Corp. in Santa Monica and former associate administrator of NASA (1963 to 1969) in charge of manned space flight. Delegates arriving Sunday evening had a choice of Disneyland tour or a wine and cheese reception before the sessions began. At opening ceremonies on the eve of Columbus Day, Dr. Mueller read a greeting from President Ford and spoke of the Bicentennial and Columbus as symbols of international cooperation. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher joined with John F. Yardley, associate administrator for manned space flight, in sounding an optimistic note on potential uses of space. Fletcher said that mankind had “entered a new world ... in less than two decades,” pointing to the scheduling of Shuttle flights beginning in 1981 that would make space travel attainable, even economically feasible, for the conduct of previously earthbound activities. Roy Gibson, director general of the European Space Agency, said the member nations of ESA were suffering from an economic downturn and might have trouble maintaining ESA’s present funding level, estimated at $550 million a year. However, he maintained that space programs were justifiable on the basis of economic return, and that ESA would recommend no program “unless it makes good economic sense for the users.” Dr. Leonard Jaflfe, president of the IAF, told the delegates that astronautics involved all technical fields and affected all human institutions. Dr. Lubos Perek, chief of the United Nations’ Outer Space Affairs Division, brought greetings from the UN secretary general and summarized UN activities in space, from identifying objects in orbit to supporting remote sensing and telecommunications—a span of interests, he said, “from Astronomy to Gastronomy.” A panel on space transportation discussed 14 questions, from details of the Shuttle mission to clarification of payload prices and legal liability for aborted payloads. The electronic environment of the session— wireless microphones and wireless translation headsets—illustrated collateral benefits from astronautics, said Rob Weadd of the Los Angeles section, AIAA, in the convention newsletter. On Monday afternoon, officials of the Soviet and U.S. space programs reported jointly and individually on results of the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz mission. A current-events session Monday afternoon heard Boris Petrov, chairman of the Soviet Intercosmos Council, call for renewal of the 1972 agreement that led to the Apollo-Soyuz mission, after the agreement expired in 1977. Shigebumi Saito, commissioner of the Space Activities Committee of Japan, said his country hoped to participate in another Spacelab in the 1980s and looked toward cooperation with ESA as a result of the recent visit of ESA director Roy Gibson. Lawrence Morley of Canada’s Dept, of Mines and Resources said that Canada was “made for remote sensing” and would be looking for partners in the study of ocean management. On Tuesday, 12 Oct., the Inti. Institute of Space Law held its 19th colloquium in morning and afternoon sessions, continuing through the remainder of the convention. Since 1967, when an initial treaty of principles was signed, space lawyers had worked out international agreements on liability for space accidents, registration of space objects, and rescue and return of astronauts. Two current problems demanding attention were treaties to govern direct broadcasting from space and the monitoring and sensing of terrestrial phenomena. Also, a draft treaty on moon exploration and resource extraction was under way. Among papers presented, that by Dr. V. S. Vereshchetin of the Moscow Institute of State and Law proposed that the legality of each type of practical use of space should depend on its compliance with principles of state sovereignty and sovereign equality of states. Dr. Stephen Gorove of the Univ. of Miss, law school described the legal regime likely to apply to space colonies, pointing out gaps in existng law and recommending changes. In another paper, Dr. Gorove called the moon treaty a landmark in the development of space law, and cited many areas of general agreement, adding that lack of agreement was equally instructive in revealing problems in the process of international lawmaking. Dr. D. Krstic of Yugoslavia stated that the era of sovereignty was gradually disappearing, and that space activities should be a product of all mankind, not just the strong powers. On Wednesday, 13 Oct., some of the congress delegates “including a large group of Russian cosmonauts and scientists” took a bus tour and had a briefing on the Space Shuttle program at the Rockwell Inti, plant at Downey, Calif. Dr. Krafft Ehricke, scientific adviser at Rockwell Inti., described studies of Lunetta and Soletta systems that would use huge reflectors on thin plastic assembled in space to illumine areas of earth either by day or by night, lengthening agricultural activities in season or lighting polar regions for increased access to petroleum or mineral deposits in areas where nights might last for 3 mo. Other delegates went in four busloads to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena for an all-day program during which the guests in four groups rotated among exhibitions and lectures on the Viking spacecraft, the space flight operations and spacecraft assembly facilities, and future planetary missions. Speakers included Dr. Bruce Murray, director of JPL, and A. Thomas Young, deputy Viking project manager, as well as John Casani, manager of the Mariner Jupiter-Saturn project. On Thursday, 14 Oct., IAF delegate R. Gilbert Moore became the first Shuttle customer to hand over a letter of intent to purchase NASA’s “getaway special”—a 90-kg 0.14-cu-m package to be carried by the Orbiter on a space-available basis, for $10 000. Moore, general manager of Thiokol Corp.’s Astro-Met plant at Ogden, Ut., said he would buy the ticket for himself, not his company. He had been active for some time in obtaining space rides for student experiments, and said he might open his Shuttle package for students or sublet some of it to recover costs, but had not decided yet what use to make of the package, “It’s such a bargain,” he said. “You can’t get a ride anywhere else for that kind of money.” Moore handed his letter of intent to Chester Lee, director of space transportation systems operations in NASA’s Office of Space Flight, who was in charge of rounding up Shuttle customers; the letter went by Comsat satellite to Lee’s office in Washington, D.C. Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported that the Soviet representatives at the IAF meeting questioned officials about the Shuttle’s thermal protection system, its main-engine refurbishment, and its handling characteristics, being “especially interested in the use of cathode-ray tube displays.” The briefings were part of the Rockwell tour offered to IAF groups. NASA had approved Soviet inspection of the orbiter, the magazine said, because no technology transfer problems were involved and the Soviets had shown Salyut and Soyuz vehicles to U.S. personnel; however, the Soviets had never discussed or shown future vehicles to U.S. representatives, the article added. Upon questioning the Soviet representatives unofficially about any USSR shuttle plans, NASA was told only that analytical studies were under way. The Washington Star and Av Wk reported that Soviet Intercosmos chairman Dr. Boris N. Petrov and Vasily A. Sarychev, another member of the Soviet IAF delegation, were robbed at gunpoint in the lobby of then-motel and escaped when a number of people got off an elevator. Petrov and Sarychev did not understand the gunman’s demands at first, but finally surrendered $37 before the unidentified robber fled. Although local police were notified, Petrov did not register a formal complaint, and the delegation stayed at the convention two days longer, after which Petrov and other Soviet officials flew to Washington to discuss future joint space missions. Besides Petrov, the IAF delegates included Dr.Ver-eshchetin, deputy chairman of Intercosmos; V. C. Vachnadze and A. I. Tsarev, Intercosmos members; R. Z. Sagdeyev, director of the USSR Academy of Sciences institute of outer space, and his associate, Y. P. Semenov; and D. S. Chetveryakov, M. V. Sokolov, and V. P. Legostayev. As the IAF convention closed on Saturday, 16 Oct., Dr. Mueller said the panels and presentations at the meeting had demonstrated again the benefits and feasibility of international cooperation. He said it was up to the members to convince the President and U.S. Congress to provide sufficient funds for the Shuttle over the next 5 yr. (IAF news 27th Congress, text; list of abstracts; LA Times, 12 Oct 76, 11; 14 Oct 76; Av Wk, 18 Oct 76, 25; 25 Oct 76, 22, 23; W Star, 20 Oct 76, A-2; W Post, 27 Oct 76, A-2)
ERDA announced selection of Clayton, N.M., as the first municipal utility to field-test its 200-kw wind-turbine generator. The Clayton utility would operate the modern windmill for 2 yr beginning late in 1977, and would assemble test data on the performance and economics of wind-energy systems connected with conventional power plants and providing power through existing utility lines. Clayton, a 3000-inhabitant town located in an area of the Great Plains with high average wind speeds, would be the first U.S. locality in more than 30 yrs to generate electric power for public consumption through the use of wind. Its conventional utility system used both gas and oil generators. Integration of the wind-power system would be supervised by technicians from NASA’s LeRC at Cleveland, 0., who would train the municipal utility employees in operating the wind turbine. (ERDA Release 76-348) Astronautics and aeronautics, 1976 Defense Donald Rumsfeld had stated that the U.S. satellites had been damaged by the glare of natural gas fires along a pipeline in Western Russia, but did not deny that lasers might have caused the damage. Newsweek said the U.S. had already developed chemical lasers requiring no electrical power, and described a possible fleet of U.S. “dark satellites” with radar-absorbing exteriors that would be invisible to Soviet detection. It also predicted that a full-scale war in space—a science-fiction type of clash of hunter-killer satellites, manned orbital shuttles, and laser death rays—could “leap off the drawing boards” in the 1980s. Reporter Tad Szulc said in the current Penthouse magazine that the U.S. government had not publicized the attack on its satellites used to police the 1972 arms pact with the USSR for fear of endangering negotiations with Moscow on a new strategic arms pact. He said Washington was perplexed by the Soviet effort to interfere with satellites that were verifying compliance with the 1972 treaty. The NY Times noted that spokesmen for both the State Dept, and the Dept, of Defense had denied the magazine reports of interference with U.S. satellites, although DOD had verified that the USSR had been attempting to intercept its own satellites already in orbit, not always successfully. Pentagon sources told the NYT that the Soviet hunter satellites used conventional explosives, although shockwaves from an explosion would not proliferate in the vacuum of space and a hunter would have to be accurate enough to close in and destroy a target with debris. A NYT editorial 26 Nov. said the “vast sums” needed for space weapons would be more wisely spent on peace and good relations on earth. (C Trib, 23 Nov 76, 4-15; NYT, 23 Nov 76, 15; 24 Nov 76, 12; 26 Nov 76, A-22)
Sweden’s Royal Academy of Sciences announced that three more Americans had won Nobel prizes: Prof. William N. Lipscomb, Harvard Univ., for chemistry, and Prof. Burton Richter of Stanford Univ. and Prof. Samuel C. C. Ting of MIT for physics. Prof. Lipscomb won for his studies of the structures and properties of boranes, and Profs. Richter and Ting, shared the physics prize for their independent discoveries of a new type of elementary particle known as psi or J. Americans had won all four of the prizes awarded so far this year; Prof. Milton Friedman of the Univ. of Chicago had won the prize for economics, and the prize for medicine had gone to Dr. Baruch S. Blumberg of the Univ. of Pa. Medical School and Dr. D. Carleton Gajdusek of the Natl. Institute for Neurological Diseases. All the prizes carry an award of $160 000, derived from the estate of Sweden’s Alfred Nobel, inventor of dynamite, who established the prizes in 1901. (NYT, 19 Oct 76, 1, 34; 24 Oct 76, E-14)
GSFC Director Dr. Robert S. Cooper presented a Group Achievement Award to the AIDSAT team for “the highly successful international demonstrations in which leaders of over twenty-five underdeveloped countries were shown the potential benefits to be derived from the application of satellite communications and remote earth sensing.” The demonstrations had taken place over a 90-day relocation period during which the Ats 6 was moving from its position over India to a new geosynchronous position over the western Pacific. The team—led by former GSFC engineer Paul McCeney, NASA Hq Office of Applications, as AIDSAT program manager; A1 Whalen of GSFC, as project manager; and John Wilhelm of the Agency for Inti. Development, as program coordinator—undertook to produce 27 programs for broadcast to as many nations over the 3-mo period. Three technical teams carried portable terminal equipment to three clusters of nations: A, consisting of Thailand, Oman, Jordan, Sudan, Mali, Cameroon, Uruguay, Ecuador, and Jamaica; B, consisting of Bangladesh, United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Libya, Upper Volta, Central African Republic, Bolivia, Surinam, and Costa Rica; and C, consisting of Pakistan, Kenya, Morocco, Ivory Coast, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Argentina, Peru, and Haiti. Goddard engineers Dave Nace, John Chitwood, and A1 Whalen were managers of the A, B, and C clusters respectively. The high-level government officials and businessmen in the participating countries who took part in the programs included eight presidents, three prime ministers, a king, and a sultan. Each country received virtually the same 2.5-hr program format, which began with a personal taped message from U.S. President Ford and presented films on remote sensing and on earth-orbiting communications and meteorological satellites, ending with an hour of two-way direct video communications between panelists in the U.S. and the host country. Millions of viewers in the host countries watched the programs by direct or delayed broadcast over national TV networks, some seeing the first colorcasts ever received in their country. The historic experiment in telecommunications technology transfer fulfilled a promise to make U.S. technology available to developing nations, given by Secretary of State Henry Kissinger in May 1976 at the U.S. Conference on Trade and Development in Nairobi, Kenya. (Goddard News, Dec 76, 3-4)
Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, pilot of the docking module on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, had been appointed to a newly created position as Deputy Director of Flight Operations for approach and landing tests of the Space Shuttle at Johnson Space Center, the Spaceport News of KSC reported. Slayton would be responsible for planning and implementing the shuttle approach and landing test project, under the Director of Flight Operations for the Space Shuttle project. (Spaceport News, 18 Mar 76, 5)
MSFC announced the successful launch on a Black Brant VC research rocket at White Sands Missile Range, N.M., of the first containerless experiments in materials processing ever attempted on a spacecraft. NASA’s third space-processing applications rocket, SPAR III, carried a five-experiment payload, two of these using acoustic and electromagnetic suspension devices, or levitators. Materials suspended in a levitator could be melted and resolidified without touching a container, resulting in a degree of purity never before achieved in high-temperature processing, as the melt in a conventional container would be contaminated to some extent by the container itself. The rocket flight provided about 5 min of near-weightlessness for performance of the experiments, which were recovered by parachute for experimenter analysis. Experimenters were Charles Schafer, MSFC; Jerry Wouch, GE; Dr. John Papazian, Grumman Aerospace Corp.; Dr. David Lind, Rockwell Inti. Science Center; and Dr. Donald R. Uhlmann, MIT. Conclusions as to the success of containerless processing would await analysis of telemetry, inflight film, and experiment results. (MSFC Releases 76-207, 76-212)
A new device called an ultrasonic bolt-stress monitor—using ultrasonics to measure stress on a bolt—had been developed by LaRC physicist Joseph S. Heyman, the Langley Researcher announced, and would be submitted to Industrial Research magazine as a candidate for selection among the 100 most significant new products developed during the year. The bolt-stress monitor would replace equipment now in use to monitor a multitude of bolts in a facility or a piece of equipment, as it would detect a 1 —psi change in 50 000 psi in measuring stress. Heyman had invented a continuous-wave ultrasonic microemboli monitor, used to observe blood circulating outside the body during surgery and detect larger than normal particles, that was selected by the magazine as an IR 100 winner in 1974. (Langley Researcher, 5 Mar 76, 3)
In Washington, the Smithsonian Institution’s new National Air and Space Museum was opened with a speech by President Ford, in observance of the U.S. Bicentennial. The President and Vice President Rockefeller were escorted through the $41-million museum by museum director Michael J. Collins, who had piloted the Apollo 11 spacecraft. At a signal given 18 min previously by the Viking 1 spacecraft in orbit around Mars, a 3-m metal arm was activated to cut a red, white, and blue ribbon to officially open the building. “That’s the most expensive scissors in history,” the President commented as he began his dedication. The museum was “a perfect birthday present from the American people to themselves.” During the next century, he said, the best of the American adventure lay ahead; it could find out how to harness and preserve the forces of nature, explore the “uncharted frontier” of the oceans, turn space into a partner for control of pollution and improvement of worldwide communications, draw more energy from the earth and sun, develop new agricultural technologies, and conquer cancer and heart disease. The President noted that just 100 yr ago Alexander Graham Bell first publicly demonstrated his telephone. Progress, he said, can be measured “not only by the extent of our knowledge but by increasing awareness of all that remains to be discovered.” Described by Smithsonian Institution Secretary S. Dillon Ripley as “a chic hangar” and by Washington Post architectural writer Wolf von Eckardt as “a work of art” with “a beautiful, natural quality” and “a modest timelessness about it,” the museum occupied 3 blocks on the Mall, stretching more than 200 m and standing about 26 m high. The first 2 floors contained more than 10 acres of exhibit space; the third floor contained offices, a library, and a cafeteria. The design called for a structural-steel frame covered with thin slabs of the same Tennessee pink marble used for the National Gallery of Art directly across the Mall; the building was divided into 7 bays—4 marble boxes connected by 3 bronze-glass bays facing the Mall. The center entrance bay, “Milestones of Flight,” contained the only permanent displays: the Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk flyer, Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis, the Bell X-l (first supersonic plane), and the North American X-l5. The problem, said the New York Times, was to design a building that “couldn’t possibly hold” all it was meant to display; the Saturn V rocket measured 4 times as high as the building, and a Boeing 747 fuselage was longer than the building’s width. “Space Hall” in the east bay contained the full-size rockets formerly on display near the Smithsonian “castle”; a pit had been dug and the floor lowered to accommodate the 22-m missiles, and the 30-ton backup Skylab had been cut out so that visitors could walk through the astronauts' living area. The west bay was for “Air Transportation”; more than 100 spacecraft and 64 aircraft, nearly 10 times as many as were previously on display, would be exhibited in the new building. Chartered by Congress in 1945, the new museum had been quartered in temporary structures until after the Vietnam war. All the stories on the opening noted that it was constructed on time and within its budget. The Smithsonian had begun its aeronautical collection 100 yr previously with a group of Chinese kites presented for the 1876 Philadelphia centennial exposition; Its interest in aeronautics had begun even earlier. Joseph Henry, first Secretary of the Smithsonian, had sponsored a balloon ascension from the Mall in 1861 to encourage President Lincoln to use balloons for military observation. In 1916, the Smithsonian had begun its 29-year association with Dr. Robert H. Coddard, father of the liquid-fuel rocket. The museum expected 7 million visitors a year; opening date had been changed from 4 July to accommodate the Bicentennial crowds expected in D.C., and the museum lobby on Independence Ave. had been open to the public since 2 Feb. {CSM, 14 May 76; W Star, 25 June 76, C-l; 1 July 76, A—1; WPost, 27 June 76, E-l; 1 July 76, B-l; 2 July 76, A-1; NYT, 2 July 76, B12; 4 July 76, 22; C Trib, 2 July 76, 4-16; Newport News (Va) Daily Press, 25 Apr 76) A NY Times editorial mentioned “super technology” in the taking and transmitting of Mars photographs that led to selection of an alternative landing site, “an extraordinarily impressive example” of the potential of “robot explorers of the solar system.” (NYT, 3 July 76, 20) Argon gas detected by Viking 1 in the Mars atmosphere suggested that Mars had experienced major volcanic periods that might still be in progress. Carbon dioxide, the only gas previously identified in the Mars atmosphere, had obscured the presence of argon, which had a similar molecular weight. As Viking instruments had detected a reduction in atmospheric temperature approaching the south polar cap, colder than had been forecast because of pure carbon dioxide, the explanation was a dilution by another gas that would conform to the low temperatures, identified as argon. Only about 1% of earth’s atmosphere was argon, but Viking had revealed the Mars atmosphere to be as much as 8% argon above the south polar cap. (W Post, 3 July 76, A-2) The new landing space chosen for Viking 1 in the Chryse region was about 80 km north of an island formed millions of yr ago by flood waters rushing from the canyon areas near the Martian equator. (WPost, 4 July 76, A-4) New data received from Viking 1 had provided more questions than answers, such as the reason for unexpected readings of Martian temperature and atmospheric moisture. The Mars south pole proved colder than earlier believed, below the condensation point of carbon dioxide, and had as much as 40 to 50 microns of water in the atmosphere, more than expected. The newly selected landing site would contain sufficient moisture to provide ground fog, frost, or even snow. (W Star, 4 July 76, A-12) The Viking project demonstrated that man had not lost his “primal urge to explore,” said a NY Times editorial 4 July, even with little immediate prospect of economic gain or space colonization. People might worry about the expenditures and priorities of such endeavors, said Dr. Bruce C. Murray, Director of JPL, “but very few say the product itself, the discoveries, is unworthy or immoral.” On the Bicentennial Day it was proper to remember that the U.S. was a product of the urge to explore. Whatever it learned about Mars, Viking 1 proved that there was robust life on earth. (NYT, 4 July 76, 4-1) Failure to find life on Mars would mean a cut in funding for the space program, NASA biologist Dr. Harold Klein predicted. Although he estimated odds at 50 to 1 against Viking’s finding life on Mars, he noted that the issue would not be settled because the experiments had built-in limitations. Whether or not life was detected on Mars, most scientists believed life existed elsewhere in the universe, the NY Times added. (NYT, 6 July 76, 15) JPL released the best photographs to date of the “Martian Grand Canyon,” a gorge 10 times the size of Ariz.’s Grand Canyon but relatively small by Martian standards. The Capri Chasm was as much as 32 km wide and nearly 2 km deep, compared to Ariz.’s which was no deeper than 1.6 km, no more than 21 km wide, and about 350 km end to end. The length of the larger canyon of the Valles Marineris on Mars had been estimated at more than 3200 km. Rockslides detected in the Viking 1 photographs indicated either massive quakes on Mars, meteor impacts, or effects of winds reaching speeds over 480 kph, JPL scientists said. (TVPost, 7 July 76, A-10) The Viking 1 landing on Mars was put off until at least 20 July after radar observations indicated the alternative landing site was rougher than previous Viking photographs had shown. The spacecraft’s orbit would be shifted to permit examination of an area west of the previously selected landing point. (TV Post, 8 July 76, A-2) An altered orbit put Viking 1 over an area called Plateau of the Moon, third to be scouted in the search for a smooth landing site. Radar echoes, which had revealed dunes or boulders on the Plains of Chryse invisible to the Viking cameras, showed the plateau to be “twice as smooth as the plains.” (TV Post, 7 July 76, A-2) A JPL spokesman said preliminary pictures of another landing site proposed for Viking 1 showed Martian terrain as rugged as that in 2 spots previously rejected. Viking 1 was scheduled to take more photographs of a region called West-Northwest, beyond the area that controllers last wk said was too rough for a landing. (TVStar, 12 July 76, A-6) 6 July-24 Aug.: A 2-man spacecraft, Soyuz 21, was launched from the Baykonur cosmodrome at 3:09 pm Moscow time (8:09 am EST) to carry out “joint experiments” with the USSR’s Salyut 5 station in orbit, launched 22 June. Col. Boris Volynov, 41, who flew on Soyuz 5 during the first Soviet linkup in 1969, was commander, accompanied by flight engineer Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov, 39, 35th Russian to fly in space. Soyuz 21 orbital elements were: apogee, 253 km; perigee, 193 km; inclination, 51.6°; period, 88.7 min. The docking with Salyut 5 occurred 7 July and the 2 spacecraft would remain linked for 48 days, the crew returning safely 24 Aug. On board Salyut 5, the crew performed experiments on the development and behavior of fish, melting of metal and growing of crystals in weightlessness, and environmental studies. In April 1975 a Soyuz crew had failed to link with the Salyut 4 station, reportedly because of a rocket malfunction, but a second crew was successful in May and spent 63 days aboard. Although Soviet authorities offered few details on mission plans, the Salyut 5 had 2 docking ports, making it possible for 2 Soyuz craft to be docked at once. U.S. sources speculated that the mission might try to break the record of 84 days in space set by the third crew of Skylab in 1974. Tass reported 10 July that Volynov and Zholobov were using an exercise device that allowed them to “run” in the weightlessness of outer space; a report from the cosmonauts recorded on that date described a mass-meter installed on Salyut 5 to measure the crew’s weight in space through a vibration mechanism. On 28 July a report from the flight-control center said the cosmonauts were checking whether their training on the running track and other activities producing “microshocks” would affect the formation of crystals aboard the station. (FBIS, Tass in English, 6-30 July 76; TV Post, 7 July, A-22; TV Star, 7 July 76, A-2; ATT, 8 July 76, 23; Spacewarn, SPX-273, 20 July 76, 2; Spaceflight, Jan 77, 36-37)
The 12th annual meeting of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics opened in Washington with the theme “Aerospace and Public Policy,” offering 9 panel discussions beginning with one on the Space Shuttle during which John F. Yardley, NASA Deputy Administrator for Space Flight, would give the keynote address on shuttle program status and flight operations plans. Other panels would discuss domestic direct-broadcast satellites; inflation, capital formation, and the aerospace industry; national transportation policy; military aircraft selection; exporting aerospace technology; aerospace and energy; transition to the future; and the environmental impact of aerospace operations. The AIAA convention was preceded by a 2-day aerospace sciences meeting during which about 200 papers were presented at 75 technical sessions. The AIAA’s von Karman lecture would be presented by I.E. Garrick, distinguished research associate at NASA’s Langley Research Center, speaking on aeroelasticity. At the honors night banquet 29 Jan., 14 major AIAA awards would be presented; fellows and honorary fellows of 1975 would be honored; and Edgar M. Cortright—former director of LaRC and previously Chief of Advanced Technology, Assistant Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, and Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications and later for Manned Space Flight at NASA Hq—would be installed as AIAA president. Dr. Cortright had left NASA in Sept. 1975 after 17 yr to become vice president and technical director of Owens-Illinois Inc. Speakers at the honors banquet would be Clarence “Kelly” Johnson, chief of Johnson Space Center’s spacecraft design division, who would receive the spacecraft design award of the year, and astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, who commanded Apollo 11 and took the first walk on the moon. (AIAA releases 6 to 16 Jan 76)
The DOD did not really want the Space Shuttle, charged Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), and NASA had “conned Congress into buying a pig in the poke” in its efforts to obtain funds for Shuttle development. DOD had shown that it did not want the Shuttle by its actions, said Proxmire, citing DOD’s statement that it would “under no circumstance^” pay for the fourth and fifth Shuttle orbiters, and the DOD decision to go forward with a new satellite communications system (DSCS-IIl) “which will not capitalize on the unique advantages of the Shuttle . . . [but] is to be compatible with both the Shuttle and the present Titan III-C.” Proxmire charged that the DSCS decision was based not on a 9-mo wait for the Shuttle, but on the fact that “DOD has little confidence in a cost-effective operational Shuttle.” Proxmire also cited a General Accounting Office report issued in April that DOD would pay less to launch its satellites on expendable vehicles than on the Shuttle through 1990-1991, assuming that DOD did not plan to recover and reuse any of its satellites. (SBD, 24 Sept 76, 105)
Pioneer 10, on its way out of the solar system, spent 24 hr in an enormous magnetic “tail” area of the planet Jupiter, the Ames Research Center reported, registering zero on its solar-wind detector during that time because the magnetic envelope completely shut out the solar wind. Dr. John H. Wolfe, project scientist, said it was conceivable that the solar wind “could have died completely for a whole day without our being in the tail . . . But we believe we’ve found that Jupiter has a very stretched-out magnetic envelope . . .” Exact shape and size were not known, but were estimated as conical and better than 800 billion km long, spanning the distance between the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn. Earth’s magnetic tail had been measured at more than 6 billion km by previous spacecraft; the magnetic tails of the 2 planets had been shown to extend to great distances by the force of the solar wind, a supersonic charged-particle stream constantly emitted from the sun. (NYT, 26 Mar 76, 19; WPost, 27 Mar 76, A-5; NASA Release 76-55; ARC Release 76-22)
About 3000 people attended a ceremony dedicating the Space Hall of Fame at Alamogordo, N.M., honoring men and women involved in space exploration. Original inductees, numbering 35, included U.S. astronaut Neil Armstrong and Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin. Nine of the 35 were from the Soviet Union; eight each from the U.S. and West Germany; three from Austria, two from France, and one each from Great Britain, Hungary, Italy, Romania, and Switzerland. Dr. Frederick Durant of the Smithsonian Institution announced the names of the pioneers, nominated by the Inti. Academy of Astronautics in Paris with final selection by a committee appointed by the governor of N.M. for the Hall of Fame. Lubas Perek, head of the UN’s outer space affairs division, told the audience that the choice of persons to be honored “will surely reflect the grand international character of outer space research.” (W Star, 6 Oct 76, 2; NYT, 10 Oct 76, 26; Inti Space Hall of Fame, media release; Alamogordo Daily News, 3 Oct 76, dedication edition)
NASA would buy the Department of Defense’s 2 Space Shuttle orbiters if the administration would give NASA an extra $835 million or so for that purpose, Aerospace Daily reported after a meeting between George M. Low, departing NASA Deputy Administrator, and Dr. Malcolm R. Currie, DOD’s chief of research and engineering. The 2 agencies reportedly agreed that the nation needed 5 orbiters—2 more than NASA had planned to buy—and that NASA should buy them. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher and Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld were reported ready to meet to “firm up a proposal” to the Office of Management and Budget and to President Ford; 0MB might contest the need for 5 orbiters, Aerospace Daily said. (Aero Daily, 21 June 76, 22)
Dr. Donald H. Menzel, one of the world’s leading authorities on the sun and its corona, died at Mass. General Hospital after a long illness. During his lifetime, he had viewed 15 total solar eclipses, leading expeditions to distant places like the Sahara (1973) and Siberia (1936), where the Soviets provided a parlor car of the Trans Siberian Railroad for his equipment and camping gear. Dr. Menzel had taught for nearly 40 yr at Harvard; Dr. Fred L. Whipple of Harvard, a colleague and former student of Dr. Menzel, noted that many of the best-known astronomers in the U.S. had also been taught by Dr. Menzel. The Minor Planet Center of the Inti. Astronomical Union recently named an asteroid Menzel in recognition of his contribution to astrophysics. In 1938, Dr. Menzel developed the first coronagraph in the U.S. to permit study of the sun’s corona without an eclipse; in 1933, he had collaborated with J.C. Boyce in establishing the presence of oxygen in the solar corona, and in 1941 he had worked with Winfield W. Salisbury on the initial calculations that enabled the first radio contact with the moon in 1946. He had received a Ph.D. in astrophysics at Princeton in 1924, writing science-fiction stories to help pay his expenses, and had taught at the Univ. of Iowa and Ohio State Univ. before becoming professor of astrophysics at Harvard in 1939. He was director of the Harvard College Observatory from 1954 to 1966, when he was named research scientist at the Smithsonian Astrophysical Laboratory in Cambridge. He had retired from the university in 1971, but had continued to do research there. (ATT, 16 Dec 76, 50)
To prove that enthusiastic but untrained high school and college-age students can build a 5-kw solar generator,” a project called Sunfire managed by JPL’s Space Exploration Post would huild such a generator for inhabitants of Pitcairn Is. in the South Pacific about 8000 km east of Australia. In 1974, Howard Broyles of JPL became interested in using solar energy to supply power at low cost, and discovered that the Pitcairn residents could use the power; he interested a physics teacher at the local high school in the actual construction of a solar electric generator, and work began as a class project. When the site of construction became unavailable at the end of the school year, the project, under the name Seep (solar energy experimentation project), was offered to the JPL Space Exploration Post and approved by Dr. William H. Pickering, JPL Director. Sunfire—backward acronym for Energy for Remote Islands From the Sun—would be a 5-kw generator converting solar rays into electricity by using a parabolic mirror to focus the rays on a boiler that makes steam, turning a double set of turbines that run alternators to produce the power. The Pitcairn residents, fewer in number “than JPL’s Building 180 has employes,” are mostly descendants of the crew of HMS Bounty, which mutinied in 1790 and found refuge on the small remote island. (LabOmtory, 1976-4, 8) August 1976
William A. Anders, former Apollo 8 astronaut who became the first chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in 197 4, was sworn in as U.S. ambassador to Norway [see 9 Mar.]. (NRC Release 76-93)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that MSFC engineers had developed an optical processing system that could use earth pictures taken by satellites such as Landsat or Seasat to survey highway traffic. When the New Orleans, La., planning commission asked the Center if space technology could provide an automated way to conduct thorough, reliable, and inexpensive traffic surveys, MSFC responded with a technique used several years ago of scanning phototransparencies with a laser beam; the new laser scanner would sense differences in intensity of the filtered beam, recognize vehicle sizes and shapes, and store size and location data for later use. Data from an aerial traffic survey using the system could be in the hands of users within hours. The new method must start with aircraft photographs, said MSFC engineer Joseph H. Kerr, who patented the rapid survey system; present Landsat satellites passed over a target only once in 18 days, but the project gave NASA a chance to refine the method for use on satellites in the 1980s. Whereas processing of satellite data might now take months, Kerr said his system could produce data 100 times faster. (NASA Release 76-128)
An impartial “science court” to weigh Controversial national issues such as pesticide use or nuclear-reactor safety was one of several ideas under consideration by two advisory groups appointed by the President last year to give the proposed White House office of science and technology a head start in its task of making major policy decisions. Dr. Simon Ramo, chairman of the advisory group on technological contributions to economic strength, pointed out that no procedure existed for dealing with scientific and technical portions of important issues. Dr. William 0. Baker, president of Bell Laboratories, would chair the other advisory group on advances in science and technology. A 2-day meeting of the groups in Washington ended with the plan to test the science-court idea in an experiment, choosing a controversial issue in which a clearcut statement of scientific facts seemed feasible, then arguing the case with advocates and cross examinations for both sides, with an impartial panel of scientific judges to make the decision. Dr. Ramo said the experiment should teach the advisory groups about the issue they chose, help the government agency that must deal with the issue, and demonstrate whether the court idea would work. Major issues , on which the advisory groups would attempt to assist the White House included the world problem of food and nutrition, the issue of technological innovation and its effect on productivity, and the effect of government regulation on advancement in science and technology. {NYT, 16 Jan 76, 32)
Eight nations located on the equator had claimed sovereignty over the orbital locations of space satellites stationed above their territory, the Washington Star reported. The foreign ministry of Colombia listed the nations as Brazil, Ecuador, Colombia, Congo, Kenya, Uganda, Zaire, and Indonesia. (WStar, 11 Dec 76, A-4) , of the formation after an airlift to the site from the McMurdo Sound station. The body of rock in the Pensacola Mts., first reached by explorers in 1957 and first studied in the 1965-66 season, was a layered structure produced by eruptions from earth’s interior and “strikingly similar” to productive formations elsewhere in the world, such as the Bushveld complex of S. Africa, the Stillwater formation of Montana, and the Sudbury region of Ontario. A Soviet party in the Shackleton Range to the northeast, a similar area, reported findings which the leader of the USGS group, Dr. Arthur B. Ford, hoped to visit by air. Dr. Edward S. Grew of UCLA, who had spent the Antarctic winter at the Soviet Molodezhnaya base, had been working with the Russians from a temporary camp in the Lambert Glacier, near which “a mountain of iron” was reported recently. Meanwhile, a Natl. Science Foundation project that aimed at drilling a hole through the Ross Ice Shelf was proceeding with the participation of 10 nations, seeking to explore the depths below the ice for data on the Antarctic bottom water, indirectly responsible for much of the world’s oceanic food, and to learn whether the ice sheet might eventually slip into the sea, raising global sea levels by as much as 10 meters. Countries participating with the U.S. in the Ross Ice Shelf Project (RISP) were Australia, Britain, Denmark, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, the Soviet Union, Switzerland, and West Germany. The NYT commented editorially that the Antarctic continent posed a number of scientific problems still unanswered in the age of space that had seen visits to and returns from the moon; close photographs of the moon and planets; and regular reports by man-made instruments on the surfaces of Mars and Venus. The RISP—an example of “continued, steady, quiet international cooperation” in Antarctic research—was “one of the great success stories of the post-1945 world,” encountering temporary setbacks that would be overcome in time as were those of the space program, the NYT added. {NYT, 12 Dec 76, 1-1; 19 Dec 76, 26; 20 Dec 76, A-22)
NASA announced appointment of Glynn S. Lunney, manager of the Shuttle payload integration and development program office at JSC, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA Hq, replacing Dr. William C. Schneider. Dr. Schneider had been assigned as director of project management at GSFC. Lunney’s NASA career began at LeRC in 1958; he transferred to the Space Task Group at LaRC in 1959, and moved with that group to JSC. He was manager of the Apollo spacecraft program in 1972, and served as technical director of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. (NASA Release 76-183; JSC Release 76-71; JSC Roundup, 19 Nov 76, 1)
During its 3 most active yr, NASA had awarded only 19% of its procurement funding to concerns in the industrialized Northeast, according to a Library of Congress study commissioned by Rep. Michael J. Harrington (D-Mass.), whereas the Sunbelt states—ranging from Maryland to Texas—received 33% of the total awards. Of $8.7 billion spent by NASA in procurement contracts for 1968, 1971, and 1975, the Northeast received $1.7 billion and southern regions received $2.9 billion, the report said. “While the aggregate populations in these combined regions are roughly comparable,” Harrington said, “the NASA procurement contracts run almost 2 to 1 against us . . . NASA’s contract award procedures now join that long and growing list of federally funded activities which discriminate against the industrialized Northeast states.” (NYT, 2 June 76, 40)
A U.S.-European Space Shuttle project starting in 1980 would recruit 30 more astronauts—including women and participants from the USSR—for the planned 200 flights in the project, U.S spokesmen said at a Paris news conference held at the end of a 3-day meeting between NASA and European Space Agency officials. John F. Yardley, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, told newsmen that NASA was already training more than 30 astronauts for this program. Each flight, carrying 3 U.S. astronauts and up to 4 Europeans on space-science missions lasting between a week and a month, would cost between $18 million and $21 million; European scientists had expressed concern that the flights would cost so much that less money would be left for scientific experiments than they had hoped. Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA’s Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, when asked if the Soviets might be involved in the project, said, “We have made it clear in informal discussions that this would be available to them.” Those using the Shuttle would be expected to foot the bill, officials emphasized. {NYT, 15 May 76, 2; W Post, 15 May 76, A-15; W Star, 16 May 76, A-3)
Tass announced the launch of the Salyut 5 orbital scientific station “under the program of studying the outer space.” Parameters were 260-km apogee, 219-km perigee, 51.6° inclination, and 89-min period. Control posts inside the Soviet Union as well as vessels of the USSR Science Academy “sailing in the waters of the Atlantic Ocean” were tracking the flight, receiving telemetry, and controlling the station, the announcement said. Although the official announcement did not mention manned flights as part of the Salyut 5 program, the Washington Post reported that a Western specialist in Moscow had predicted the new station would be manned “sooner or later.” The Washington Star noted that 2 visiting cosmonauts—Pyotr Klimuk and Vitaly Sevastyanov, who lived aboard Salyut 4 for 63 days last summer—speaking at an international meeting in Philadelphia 2 wk ago said the new station would be able to accommodate 6 cosmonauts for as long as 3 mo, and would have 2 entry ports, so that 2 spacecraft could dock with it at the same time. The 2-mo flight of Klimuk and Sevastyanov set a Soviet record for time spent in space; however, the 84-day flight of 3 Americans (Gerald P. Carr, Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue) aboard Skylab 4 had set the overall endurance record in early 1974. A USSR manned mission would be the first launching of cosmonauts since the joint Apollo-Soyuz flight with the U.S. in July 1975; the last USSR orbital station, Salyut 4, was launched 26 December 1974 and was still performing experiments, according to official announcements. The Star said that the Soviets were directing their resources toward perfecting permanent stations in contrast to the U.S. approach of developing a reusable space shuttle. (FBIS, Tass in English, 22 June 76; W Post, 23 June 76, A-ll; WStar, 23 June 76, A-15)
Endorsed by the state of Colo, as a bicentennial project, a mobile space museum prepared by the High Flight Foundation—a nonprofit religious organization founded in 1972 by Apollo 15 astronaut Col. James R. Irwin—would tour the U.S. to give residents of 30 cities a chance to see a large exhibit on national accomplishments in space. The exhibit would include tools and photographs, miscellaneous objects and films. During the tour, various state governors participating in bicentennial celebrations would receive from the astronauts state flags that had been flown to the moon. With Col. Irwin on the board of the High Flight Foundation were astronauts Col. William R. Pogue (Skylab 3) and Col. Alfred M. Worden (Apollo 15). (Spaceport News, 18 Mar 76, 8)
The “Historic Redstone Test Site” at MSFC, neglected since the final Redstone test firing in Oct. 1961, would be restored to its original appearance as an exhibit for visitors during the Bicentennial celebration, MSFC announced. The interim test stand, as it was called, was built by the U.S. Army in 1953 and used to test moderate-range Redstone rockets. On 31 Jan. 1958, a modified Redstone renamed Jupiter-C launched into orbit the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1. Another modification of the Redstone tested on the stand was the Mercury-Redstone, one of which powered the first U.S. manned space flight—that of Alan Shepard in May 1^61. The stand was the site of 364 test firings between 1953 and 196lRafter which it was retired from a space program that had become much more sophisticated. Painted in its original colors and designs, and with a Redstone borrowed from the Army Missile Command installed on it, the site would appear much as it did 15 yr ago in its new role as an historical exhibit. (MSFC Release 76-32)
The Federal Aviation Administration would stick to its deadline for modifications to McDonnell Douglas DC-10 jumbo jets to withstand sudden depressurization, the Washington Post reported, as FAA Administrator John L. McLucas withdrew from subordinates the authority to extend a 1 Dec. 1977 deadline set at the recommendation of the Natl. Transportation Safety Board. The modification, which applied also to Lockheed L-101 Is and Boeing 747s, was ordered after the 1974 crash near Paris of a DC-10 whose cargo door blew off in flight, resulting in the death of 346 persons on board. Depressurization of the plane crushed control cables running beneath the cabin floor. An official at FAA had granted a 1-yr extension of the deadline in Oct. 1976—without Me Lucas’s knowledge—but all U.S. airlines flying DC-10s had agreed to comply with the original deadline. Compliance dates for the L-1011 and 747 were 31 March 1978 and 30 June 1978, respectively. (WPost, 30 Nov 76, A-9) During November: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, newsletter reported that, during the 69th annual general conference of the Federation Aero-nautique Internationale in Oct. in Iran, the 1975 FAI gold space medal was awarded jointly to Thomas P. Stafford, commander of the Apollo crew on the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and to cosmonaut Alexey Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz 19 crew. Stafford and his crew, Donald K. Slayton and Vance Brand, also received the De La Vaulx medal for establishing during the joint mission the world absolute records for duration, distance, and altitude in group flight, as well as the V.M. Komarov Diploma for outstanding performance in space exploration during the previous year. Their Russian counterparts also received the De La Vaulx medal and the Komarov award. Astronauts Slayton and Brand also each received the Yuri Gagarin gold medal, created by the FAI in memory of the first man in space, for their role in the conquest of space for peaceful purposes. Stafford also accepted on behalf of the U.S. ASTP team the Honorary Group Diploma for Astronautics, for the planning and execution of the first international rendezvous and docking mission in space. (NAA newsletter, Nov 76)
MSFC announced that two of its employees had manufactured a precision quartz ball that would be used by the National Bureau of Standards as a density measure. John Rasquin and Jack Reed of the Materials and Processes Laboratory in MSFC’s Science and Engineering Directorate made the precision sphere, which is 90 mm in diameter and weighs 290 g. NBS had selected quartz as the homogeneous material for its standard because it could be made with a high order of purity, had great temperature stability, and was ideal for use in an interferometer because of its precisely known optical properties. MSFC originally made two clear quartz spheres for NBS that were unsatisfactory because of their high transparency, as the interferometer required a highly reflective surface; NBS exposed the spheres to gamma radiation for 4 mo to make them opaque by changing their molecular structure, but the radiation induced minute internal stresses that altered the contour. The spheres, returned to MSFC, were reworked by Rasquin and Reed to NBS specifications of 1x10 6 deviation in radius. One of the spheres had been completed and the other was about 50% complete. (MSFC Release 76-209)
FAA Administrator John L. McLucas announced that the agency would sponsor a conference in Washington, D.C., 16 Nov. to foster the use of metrics in aviation, in accordance with national policy set forth in the Metric Conversion Act of 1975. The conference would hear presentations by FAA, other federal agencies, aviation users, and the public, and would run into a second day if necessary. Subjects to be discussed would include air-traffic control, operations, and aeronautical charts and navigation aids, as well as design of aviation products and the impact on the aviation community of a transition to the metric system. McLucas noted that FAA had already begun to use metric measurements in areas such as standards for airport design and construction. (FAA Release 76-106)
Harris M. (Bud) Schurmeier, manager since 1972 of the Mariner Jupiter/Saturn project at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, was named Assistant Laboratory Director for Civil Systems, JPL Director Bruce C. Murray announced. The new post would direct Civil Systems activities at JPL, begun in the 1960s to apply specific JPL capabilities in technical and management areas to critical problems of society, including technological transfer to energy, environment, biomedical, and transportation systems. Replacing Schurmeier as manager of the Jupiter/Saturn project that would send 2 instrumented Mariner spacecraft to the giant outer planets next year would be John R. Casani, former manager of JPL’s Guidance and Control Division. While serving as Mariner Jupiter/Saturn project manager, Schurmeier had also acted as Deputy Assistant Laboratory Director for Flight Projects for the past 6 yr; the latter position would not be filled immediately. (JPL release 5 Apr 76)
The board of governors of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) announced that, at its recent meeting in The Hague 19—27 May, it adopted a 10-m class Standard B ground station to supplement the Standard A station long the foundation of INTELSAT’s global system. Currently, 114 Standard A ground stations with 30-m antennas were operating throughout the world, as well as 29 smaller stations used for domestic service, telemetry, tracking and control, monitoring, and limited telecommunications between 2 or 3 destinations. Broadest use of the Standard B station would be in developing countries that had limited telecommunications requirements. Under study for some years, the Standard B.station would use single-channel-per-carrier (SCPC) equipment that allowed routing of traffic on a circuit-by-circuit basis instead of in large groups or bundles, minimizing the capacity loss associated with smaller antennas; it also worked with voice activation, which would be mandatory, using satellite capacity for telephone service only when activated by voice signals. Adoption of the second standard for international service would mean a 40% drop in rates paid for use of the satellites, plus ability to route traffic to any ground stations equipped to receive the user’s signals, with no restriction on the total amount of traffic. Previously, the drain on satellite power limited small ground stations to providing service to only 1 or 2 other points. (INTELSAT Release 76-17-1) Viking 1 would scan and map the surface for 2 wk; its cameras would photograph the prime landing site near an ancient rift valley, and other instruments would measure surface temperatures and search the Mars atmosphere for signs of water. The new orbit would bring Viking over the planned landing site once each 24.6-hr Mars day (called a sol). The 2 wk of photographs and measurements were needed so that scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory, where the flight had been directed since launch in April 1975, could choose the safest and most interesting spot for their 4-ton bird to alight. The landing attempt would be the first U.S. try at putting a spacecraft down on another planet; the USSR had made 5 unmanned attempts, 3 on Venus and 2 on Mars. The 2 Venera spacecraft had survived on the surface long enough to send back 1 picture each; the third crashed. One Mars spacecraft had crashed, and the other was blown over after it landed by winds clocked at more than 300 kph. After Viking’s braking engine was fired, the main job of flight directors would be to navigate it into a path where its orbit would be lowered again, with apogee reduced from about 19 000 km to 12 500 km. The firing was successful 19 June, and the Viking neared the end of a 690-million-km voyage that began 10 mo ago. William J. O’Neill of JPL said the precision of the flight could be likened to “shooting a basketball in Los Angeles and putting it through a hoop in Madison Square Garden in New York City.” Viking was following a northeasterly path around Mars that would bring it within 1450 km of the planet’s surface; flight directors planned a second maneuver to bring it still closer over an area 20°N of the equator, called Chryse, where Viking would attempt to land 4 July, selected as a good place to search for signs of life or fossilized life that thrived when a river flowed there a billion years ago. Harold S. Masursky of the U.S. Geological Survey, chief geologist for Viking, said that Chryse resembled California’s Death Valley or the water-worn dry valleys of Nevada or Wyoming, where ancient rivers overflowed their banks millions of years ago to deposit alluvial soils on the valley floors. Rock and soil in the Chryse valley appeared red from millions of years of iron oxide deposits brought down by the river overflow; Masursky and his colleagues hoped that the red soils would contain organic molecules, signs of a once-existent life on Mars. A photograph taken 19 June and released by JPL on Sunday, 20 June, showed the “awesome” Valles Marineris from about 360 000 km up— parallel canyons south of the Mars equator that, if extended together on earth, would reach from Calif, to Penna. The smaller was about 3 km deep, 64 km wide, and 645 km long; the larger was 6 km deep, 96 km wide, and more than 3200 km long. (Arizona’s Grand Canyon, largest on earth, is about 2 km deep, 21 km wide at its greatest breadth, and only 350 km long.) The northern hemisphere of Mars appeared covered with haze, which scientists said was probably from water vapor misting out of the cold surface as the sun warmed it during the longer summer days. Successful firing of the braking engine at 1:25 pm EDT Monday, 21 June, put Viking 1 into a lower orbit so that its cameras could begin to photograph steep slopes, craters, boulder fields, and other potential obstacles. On 27 June, Viking project manager James S. Martin announced that the 4 July landing was off; pictures of the primary landing area showed “too many unknowns,” and the site appeared too hazardous to risk landing without investigating other sites. As the Viking 1 cameras could not distinguish objects “smaller than a football field,” objects as yet invisible could endanger the landing. However, as there was no assurance of any hazard-free area roughly 20 km by 100 km anywhere on Mars, some scientists had wanted to go ahead with the planned landing. Previous closeups taken by Mariner 9 were not as detailed as those from Viking, and dangerous details of the primary landing site became more obvious with photos from Viking 1 coming in more clearly. The New York Times reported that the first alternative site was an area called Chryse Phoenicia, a basin about 30 km northwest of the original site; if that site appeared too rough, scientists would look at Tritonis Lacus, about 6400 km east of Chryse, although if this happened, the landing might be delayed until as late as the first wk of August. Project Manager Martin suggested delaying the Viking 1 landing, if it were not down by 25 July, until the Viking 2 (now 8 million km away) arrived in Mars orbit; possibly 2 Viking spacecraft might be orbiting simultaneously. JPL said flight tracking and control facilities there were insufficient to handle full operations of both spacecraft simultaneously, and a number of preorbital maneuvers for Viking 2 would be required starting about 27 July. John Noble Wilford said in the New York Times that the earliest possible Viking 1 landing would be 9 July, and other alternatives would take longer. Scientists, he said, were “dismayed by the rugged Martian terrain”—the primary landing area being heavily pocked with craters, steep escarpments, and a sprinkling of knoblike features probably remnants of erosion like that in the Grand Canyon. On 28 June, Viking 1 photographed a site about 300 km northwest of Chryse—the “northwest territory”—after pictures of the prime site showed it to be far more rugged than expected; the scientists wanted a landing as close as possible to the original site because they thought it offered the best chance of finding signs of existing or fossil life. The alternate site would be somewhat flatter and safer, but less interesting scientifically, O’Toole said in the Post 29 June. Photographs released 29 June at JPL showed a plateau in the Chryse valley originally picked as the Viking 1 landing site, where a curving and rugged coastline at the plateau’s base could have been formed only by an ocean-like surf. Pictures taken from an altitude of about 1450 km showed a crater with lava-flow traces more than 30 km wide, “a truly enormous scale” according to chief geologist Masursky. “The biggest lava flooding ... on earth are the basalt floods on Iceland, which are no bigger than a few kilometers across.” Temperature changes mapped by Viking were also dramatic: instruments on Viking registered differences of more than 60°C (140°F) between day and night in the same parts of the planet. Dr. Hugh H. Kieffer, atmospheric scientist on the Viking team, said that the atmosphere on Mars was almost perfectly transparent to sunlight, as little water was present to absorb it; “whatever sunlight reaches the planet gets right to the surface, which then radiates the heat back to the atmosphere to warm it up.” An instrument aboard Viking could tell when day broke on the Mars surface although it had no way of “seeing”; it measured water vapor in the atmosphere, and registered its presence when the sun warmed the permafrost that “literally pops [water] into the atmosphere when that sun hits the surface first thing in the morning,” according to Dr. Barney Farmer of JPL. Besides surveying possibilities for its own landing, Viking 1 was photographing potential landing sites for Viking 2 to give scientists an idea whether they might have to shift sites for that spacecraft also. (W Post, 12 June 76, A-12; 19 June, A-3; 20 June, A—1; 21 June, A-9; 22 June, A—17; 28 June, A-3; 29 June, C-4; 30 June, A-27; ATT, 21 June, 10; 28 June, 17; Av Wk, 28 June 76, 14)
Secretary of Transportation William T. Coleman, Jr., proposed a $ 1 billion program to muffle noisy jet engines and replace older planes with quieter new ones, the Washington Post reported. The proposed program, part of a comprehensive aviation-noise policy submitted to the Office of Management and Budget, would be paid for by a surcharge on airline tickets—probably 2%—that would go into an escrow fund to be used by the nation’s airlines over a 6- to 8-yr period. The “retrofit” program—most controversial part of the noise-abatement policy— would consist of modifying older 2- and 3-engine jets (such as the McDonnell-Douglas DC—9 and Boeing 727) by surrounding them with sound-absorbent materials to make them quieter. The fund could be used as part of the cost of replacing older 4-engine jets (the Boeing 707 and the McDonnell-Douglas DC-8) with newer, quieter planes. Although the Air Transport Association (ATA) representing most U.S. airlines had long favored replacement of the 4-engine planes, the Post said, it had vigorously opposed retrofit of 3-engine planes because the cost would outweigh the benefits. Retrofit had been advocated by the Environmental Protection Agency, the Federal Aviation Administration, and many citizens’ groups to reduce noise levels around airports and take advantage of the useful life left in many of the older planes; however, the Post noted that opposition to retrofit in the administration had been based on expense, its possible contribution to inflation, and the fact that newer quieter planes would eventually solve the problem anyway. The Post quoted “no better than 50-50” chances that Congress would go along with providing public financing to help privately owned airlines make their planes quieter, according to a Capitol Hill source. Under Secretary Coleman’s proposal, the 8% surcharge on airfares now going into a trust fund for improving terminal and navigational facilities would be reduced by'2%, which would go into the retrofit fund, so that no actual increase in ticket prices would occur. (WPost, 15 June 76, A-3)
Sen. John Glenn (D-0.), first American to orbit the earth in Mercury 6, said he would be available as a running mate for Jimmy Carter in the national elections but would not pursue the vice-presidential nomination. Glenn said Carter was clearly front runner in the Ohio primary scheduled for 8 June, and that his “ship is already in.” (NYT, 11 May 76, 13)
Commercial supersonic transatlantic transport service began with the arrival of Concorde aircraft from London and Paris at Dulles airport near Washington, D.C. The Anglo-French plane had been barred from New York’s John F. Kennedy airport under a ruling by the Port Authority of N.Y. and N.J. after Transportation Secretary William T. Coleman, British Airways Concorde rolling out at Dulles Airport near Washington, D.C., after first touchdown 24 May 1981. (Photo courtesy British Airways) Jr., granted limited scheduled flights into the U-S, for a trial period not to exceed 16 mo [see 5 Jan.-4 Feb.]. The Concordes arrived at Dulles 2 min apart, British Airways arriving at 11:54 am EDT and Air France at 11 ;56, taxiing into a nose-to-nose position in front of the main terminal building. About 8000 persons were on hand for the landing, many of them leaving their cars and walking in on the limited-access highway because of the traffic backup; of the crowd, airport officials estimated that only about 20 were there to protest the Concorde landings. The French flight carried 80 passengers, the British flight 75; both Air France and British Airways had limited passenger payloads to 80 on Concorde flights until they gained more experience with the aircraft’s fuel consumption. The two carriers had selected Monday for the inauguration of North Atlantic service because neither would ordinarily offer a Washington-bound flight that day. Air France planned 3-per-wk flights, leaving Paris on Sunday, Wednesday, and Friday and returning to Paris on Monday, Thursday, and Saturday. British Airways would offer 2 trips per wk, leaving London’s Heathrow on Thursday and Saturday and returning on Friday and Sunday, One-way fare London to Washington would be $633.60; Paris-Washington, $827. The difference would arise from fluctuations in currency exchange. The trip took 3 hr 50 min for the Air France plane, spending 2 hr 53 min at supersonic speeds on the way. The British plane timed on its return flight took 3 hr 57 min. The Federal Aviation Administration had instrumented the Dulles airport with 8 permanent and 5 portable recorder units to measure the perceived noise in decibels (pndh) for a data base on all airport noise and especially Concorde noise. {NYT, 25 May 76, 1; W Post, 25 May 76, A-1, Av Wk, 24 May 76, 27; 31 May 76, 22) universities were resource persons for 4 news briefings per day, each scheduled for an hr or more, and 5 science workshops, meeting in the morning and afternoon each day, with a wrapup session the afternoon of the third day. Topics discussed were Jupiter’s atmosphere and weather; magnetosphere and radiation belts; origins, characteristics, and composition of the planet and its moons; origin of life on the planet; and Pioneer 11 targeting toward Saturn upon its departure from the vicinity of Jupiter. Pioneer findings about Jupiter—characterized by low density and high mass, 318 times that of earth, containing three quarters of the planetary material in the solar system—included discovery that Jupiter’s Great Red Spot, three times the size of earth, was not the only such spot; several smaller ones detected in the atmospheric flow around Jupiter moved in and out of the area occupied by the Great Red Spot without losing their own identity. Pioneer measurements of Jupiter properties— internal heat, composition of its moons—permitted the first detailed calculations of the process that formed the planet. Its history was apparently that of a failed star: it went from a gas cloud to a body heated red-hot by gravitational contraction, then to a 4.5-billion-yr cooling, still in process, that made it resemble a “white dwarf.” The four planet-size inner moons—Jupiter’s “Galilean” satellites—proved scientifically the most interesting; they exhibited a regular density gradient and composition that constituted the best direct evidence for Jupiter’s history. The protostar phases deduced for both Jupiter and Saturn indicated that the outer solar system underwent 2 different periods of relatively high temperature. Jupiter had retained for 4 billion yr its primordial heat, which could be neither radiated nor conducted away because of the planet’s composition. A “new metal”—liquid metallic hydrogen, simplest of the alkaline metals—identified only inside Jupiter is thought to constitute the planet’s interior, beginning about of a quarter of the distance from the surface to the center. As the substance has low thermal conductivity and is opaque to radiated energy, the heat cannot be dissipated, and the temperature at Jupiter’s center is about 30 000°, 6 times that of the surface of the sun. As Jupiter’s liquid regions are too hot for life, living organisms would have to exist in its gaseous atmosphere. Between the temperatures for freezing and boiling water, Jupiter’s atmospheric pressure increases with depth from 5 times earth’s atmospheric pressure to 10 times. Pioneer data suggest slow atmosphere-turnover times of months or years that would permit survival of atmosphere-borne life, said Dr. Cyril Ponnamperuma of the Univ. of Md. Jupiter was 1000 times as large a region for forming complex organic molecules as earth, and a wide variety of environments would be available. The origin of life on a planet would depend less on huge time periods than on how often nature mixed the proper ingredients in the proper environment, Dr. Ponnamperuma said; enough billions or trillions of attempts could produce a highly complex molecule able to replicate itself. The fact that Jupiter’s atmosphere might provide hospitable sites for life raised the problem of contamination of that atmosphere by earth organisms riding on atmosphere probes launched by the U.S. and other countries. Pioneer also found that Jupiter acted as a giant vacuum cleaner, sucking small dust particles from a vast region of space (comparatively little dust was present in the Asteroid Belt), and 170 times as many meteoroids were striking Jupiter’s atmosphere as struck the earth in areas of similar size. Concentrations of these particles at Jupiter would be the result of the planet’s enormous gravity field. Jupiter’s magnetosphere—a million times the volume of earth’s—was found to leak high-energy electrons; Jupiter was the major source of such electrons in the solar system, and the sun and Jupiter were the only known important sources of high-energy particles in the solar system. The energy of these particles was constantly increased by recirculation through the planet’s radiation belts, said Dr. James Van Allen of the Univ. of Iowa. Earthorbiting satellites and other spacecraft had detected Jupiter electrons as far away as Mercury, said Dr. John Simpson of the Univ. of Chicago; an input of more than 100 billion watts would be needed to maintain the observed energies. Jupiter was also known to be the strongest radio source in the sky, except for the sun; the massive radio bursts were caused by the moon Io moving through the Jovian magnetic field, said Dr. David Morrison of the Univ. of Hawaii. Scientific detective work revealed that the bursts occurred every 21 hr—half of Io’s orbital period—and one of 3 places on Jupiter’s visible surface had to face the earth, which Pioneer data proved to be true. (NASA Releases 76-80, 76-91; NYT, 31 May 76, 14)
Prompted by the crash of a TWA flight near Dulles Airport that took 92 lives in Dec. 1974, the Federal Aviation Administration hired 6 veteran airline pilots to analyze air traffic-control procedures, but the findings were so scathing that the report had not been released, said an editorial in the Washington Star. The National Transportation Safety Board this week issued its findings in the case with a “rare dissent” in assigning blame for the Crash. The Star pointed out that, although the Air Line Pilots Assn, disagreed with the majority finding of pilot error and the Professional Air Traffic Controllers disagreed with the minority finding of ground-control error, leaders of both groups—and members of the board—all questioned FAA handling of its responsibilities. The Star called on new FAA administrator John McLucas, sworn in in Nov., to make air safety his highest priority. (W Star, 26 Jan 76, A-14)
President Ford proclaimed 20 July as “Space Exploration Day” to coincide with the date 7 yr ago when U.S. astronaut Neil Armstrong became the first man to set foot on the moon. NASA’s Viking 1 lander was expected to touch down on the surface of Mars about 8 am 20 July,, reported nationally on network television; transmission of the first picture from the lander should be completed before 9 am. In his proclamation, the President said, “We begin our third century with ... the most ambitious of all deep space explorations . . . Wherever we reach, we will have come in peace for all mankind.” In an accompanying statement to NASA employees, Administrator James C. Fletcher said “the President has in effect commended all of you who work (for) the national space agency.” (Text; NASA Release 76-133; Fletcher anno, 20 July 76) First panoramic view of Mars surface from Viking 1, 20 July 1976: upper half of picture is Left half of view, lower photo joins it on the right. Upper view shows housing for Viking sampler arm; lower view shows (at right) high-gain antenna for direct communication with earth. (NASA 7§-H~557)
Images from Landsat had reinforced the theory that mankind had created his own deserts through overgrazing of livestock, according to Joseph Otterman, a Landsat data user at Tel Aviv University. Satellite and other data had shown that overgrazed land on one side of the fence along the Israel-Egypt armistice line consistently measured several degrees cooler than the other side; the denuded land, reflecting more sunshine, retained less heat than vegetated land. The warmer land heated the overlying air, causing it to rise, form clouds, and rain; lack of this “heat mountain” effect over the denuded land encouraged formation of deserts. (CSM, 15 Dec 76)
Veteran astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, Apollo commander of the U.S.-Russian Apollo-Soyuz mission of July 1975, received the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1975, the Natl. Geographic Society announced. Gen. David C. Jones, USAF Chief of Staff, presented the award, honoring the late Air Force Chief of Staff and given annually to the member of the Air Force, military or civilian, who contributed most significantly in the preceding yr to U.S. progress in aerospace. Maj. Gen. Stafford’s citation noted “outstanding contributions ... by his participation in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project . . . [He] was instrumental in establishing the necessary rapport and spirit of cooperation vital to the success of the mission. Under his leadership, the Apollo crew laid the basic groundwork for future international technological achievements in space and proved that the United States is the acknowledged leader in space exploration.” Attending the ceremony with Stafford’s Air Force colleagues and officers of the Natl. Geographic Society were former astronaut Michael Collins, now director of the National Air and Space Museum, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, formerly Secretary of the Air Force and Deputy Administrator of NASA, now Administrator of the Energy Research and Development Administration. (NGS release, 30 Sept 76) During September: Ames Research Center’s Astrogram published an interview with the center’s first female aircraft mechanic: a co-op student, Maria-Elena Sanchez, enrolled in a airframe and power mechanics course at the College of San Mateo. She was one of four females in the program, whose total enrollment was about 200. As a mechanic at ARC, Ms. Sanchez was performing general maintenance and upkeep on Lear jets and the Cessna 402; for her work at Ames, she was receiving both monetary compensation and college credit. The college program required a student to attend for about 30 mo a school approved by the Federal Aviation Administration, then pass a written, oral, and practical test to receive a license in Airframe and Power Plant Mechanics. Ms. Sanchez, who held a commercial pilot’s license and had been flying since 1971, said she hoped to complete the program and obtain the A&P license within a yr. (ARC Astrogram, 9 Sept 76, 1)
Clocks around the world would be set back one second this New Year’s Eve, because the earth’s spin was that much longer in 1976 than it was last year. The backward move would be the sixth in the last 5 yr because of a slowing in the earth’s spin, the Washington Post explained; the changes were made twice in 1972 and once in each of the last 4 yr, each time on New Year’s Eve. The standard U.S. timepiece (at the Natl. Bureau of Standards Laboratory at Boulder, Colo.) would be reset at midnight GMT (7 pm in Washington, D.C.), and similar atomic clocks would be reset at the same moment in more than 80 countries including the Soviet Union and the Peoples Republic of China. The earth’s spin had been slowing for at least 250 yr, when it was first noticed, except for a 10-yr period before 1900 when the rotation speeded up by 25 sec. In 1878, Simon Newcomb, then chief astronomer at the Naval Observatory, first systematically observed a fluctuation in the rate of rotation, which still is verified by 80 observatories around the world who send their findings to the Inti. Time Bureau in Paris, established in 1972 (the year the clocks lost 2 sec). Scientists attributed the slowdown to the moon’s pull on the tides, braking the motion of the earth’s mantle. (W Post, 31 Dec 76, A2) During December: The Air Force Systems Command announced that former astronaut Maj. Gen. Michael Collins had been appointed mobilization assistant to the AFSC commander. The position was the top Air Force Reserve post in AFSC. Collins, who was confirmed by the U.S. Senate as a reserve major general 10 Mar. 1976, would continue to serve as director of the National Air and Space Museum. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 76, 10)
“An impressive record of cost-cutting that could well set an example to many agencies” had been achieved by NASA since the midsixties, said Sen. William A. Proxmire (D-Wis.), one of the agency’s severest critics. Chairman of the Senate Appropriations subcommittee that handles NASA’s appropriation, Proxmire said that NASA had made its tight budget go farther by acting as its own prime contractor when construction bids were too high; buying electronic parts from a standardized list; providing reimbursable launches to private industry and other outside organizations on an “accelerated” basis, although not— according to Proxmire—charging enough for them; and, in general, making “one dollar do the job that it took two dollars to do in the free and easy money days.” {Today, 1 Jan 76, 1)
NASA studies in the year past had shown that 5 of 6 types of products considered for space processing could be expected to become profitable, Dr. William R. Lucas, director of Marshall Space Flight Center, told the subcommittee on aerospace technology and national needs of the Senate’s Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. NASA’s spaceprocessing program had deliberately pursued a policy of performing experiments on available missions and sponsoring formal experiments by members of the scientific community, Lucas said; the experiment program had been “reasonably representative” of the scientific potential that scientists foresaw for materials processing in space. Although available mission capabilities had severely restricted what could be done, the program had included demonstrations of crystal growth, solidification of homogeneous mixtures of immersible materials, processing biological materials for medical application, and other phenomena relating to physical metallurgy and fluid physics. Potentials identified with glasses and ceramics had not yet undergone experimentation. Citing the success of experiments in electrophoretic separation and crystal growth on the Skylab and Apollo-Soyuz missions, Lucas emphasized the necessity of developing novel techniques for virtually every experiment; experience so far had justified the early interest in materials processing in space, although many lines of investigation had not been completed because of the program’s operational constraints. Wide response to the program both in the U.S. and abroad was evidence of the scientific community’s interest, he said. Next steps in development would be to finalize payloads for early Shuttle missions, then proceed with design and development; “We expect to proceed with research . . . both through the SPAR [rocket] project and through an expanded program of ground-based research,” he added. “We shall need to reemphasize the ground-based program ... to replenish the fund of new ideas in space processing and build a base of technical support with the breadth that Shuttle experiment operations will need.” (MSFC Release 76-112)
William Allan Patterson, pioneer of many firsts in the airline industry, would receive the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy at an annual dinner in Dec. sponsored by the Natl. Aeronautic Assn., announced NAA President John P. Henebry. The 77-yr-old Patterson, who retired as board chairman of United Airlines in 1963, had joined Boeing Company in 1929 and in 1934 was elected president of United (created in 1931 by Boeing’s merger with 3 other airlines to form a transcontinental system), a position he held for 29 yr. Patterson had declared himself most proud of establishing in 1930 the occupation of air stewardess; he had been instrumental in passage of the Federal Aviation Act in 1958, establishing a single federal agency with full authority for air traffic control, and in obtaining appropriation of federal funds for installation of landing and navigation aids at major airports across the U.S. The trophy, a miniature silver copy of the plane flown by the Wright Brothers at Kitty Hawk in 1903, had been awarded yearly by the NAA for significant public service of enduring value to aviation in the U.S. (NAA release, 21 Sept 76)
Bicentennial year 1976 also marked the 50th birthday of scheduled-airline service in the U.S., the National Aeronautic Association reported. On 13 April 1925, Henry Ford had started an air-freight service between Detroit and Chicago, first such' commercial flights on a regular schedule. Upon passage of the Air Commerce Act of 1926, one of NAA’s founding members, William P. MacCracken, Jr., took office as the first U.S. Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Aeronautics. By 1931, airlines were spanning the country; by 1950, U.S. airlines carried 19 million passengers 16 billion km, and in 1975 they carried more than 200 million passengers 263 billion km—amounting to almost 80% of intercity public passenger travel in the U.S. Airlines also accounted for 93% of travel to overseas destinations. In 1976, the U.S. scheduled-airline fleet included 2200 jet aircraft serving communities nationwide with 13 000 daily flights. (NAA News, Apr 76, 3) May 1976
Dr. Michael Duke, curator of lunar samples at NASA’s Johnson Space Center, returned from Moscow with two half-gram samples of moon soil brought to earth in Aug. 1976 by the USSR’s Luna 24 spacecraft. The samples were part of a 2-meter-long core of lunar material obtained by a hollow drill from the surface of Mare Crisium, a region of the moon from which the U.S. had not had any samples. This was the third time U.S. scientists had obtained a Soviet sample in exchange for material collected by Apollo astronauts from other places on the moon. Other members of the U.S. scientific delegation to Moscow this week were Dr. Charles Simonds, Lunar Science Institute, Houston, Tex., and Prof. Gerald J. Wasserburg of the Calif. Institute of Technology. The small size of the sample would not detract from its usefulness, according to Dr. Bevan French, chief of NASA’s program of research on extraterrestrial materials; methods routinely used for extracting information from samples of meteorite or deep-sea basalt could produce hundreds of chemical analyses from a single tiny crystal or determine the age of a fragment smaller than an aspirin tablet. (JSC Release 76-75)
The 50th anniversary of Dr. Robert Goddard’s successful launch of the world’s first liquid-fueled rocket at his aunt’s farm near Auburn, Mass., was observed in a re-enactment at the launching site—now marked by a granite monument—and in 15th anniversary ceremonies at the Goddard Space Flight Center, which also launched a commemorative rocket. Dr. Goddard had written on space navigation while still in high school; his early theoretical writings prompted the New York Times to print an article on its editorial page in 1920 saying that Dr. Goddard was ignorant of elementary physics if he thought a rocket would work in the vacuum of space. The Times ran a correction on 17 July 1969, the morning after the Apollo astronauts were launched toward the first lunar landing. The original rocket launched by Dr. Goddard in 1926 was about 3 m high, traveled a little more than 12 m upward, and attained a speed of 56 m in 2.5 sec. powered by a combination of gasoline and liquid oxygen. By contrast, the Saturn V rocket with its Apollo payload stood over 110 m tall and could cover 25 km in 2.5 sec powered by a mixture of kerosene and liquid oxygen, a fuel remarkably similar to that used by Dr. Goddard. Although, as GSFC Director Dr. John F. Clark pointed out at the Center re-enactment, “Not a line appeared in a single paper about the Auburn flight ... In fact, the attention he did get in the early 1920s was adverse . . .,” Dr. Goddard continued his work in New Mexico in the 1930s and flew his rockets to heights over 3 km and at speeds up to supersonic. Of Dr. Goddard’s concepts, Wernher von Braun said: “Goddard did most of the basic research and development that made possible rockets such as the Saturn V.” Dr. Goddard had died in 1945, but his widow had attended the dedication of the Center when it opened in 1961; she had planned to attend the re-enactment in Auburn, but a heavy snowstorm swept New England 16 Mar. and seriously curtailed attendance at the event. Astronaut Eugene Cernan, principal speaker at the Mass, ceremonies, had reached Boston’s Logan Airport only an hour before it was closed down by the storm, and was taken by car to the scene as the scheduled helicopter could not fly. (ATT, 16 Mar 76, 16; W Post, 17 Mar 76, C-2; GSFC News, Mar 76, 1; Worcester Telegram, 17 Mar 76, 1; report of commemorative committee, Auburn Rotary Club, 19 Mar 76)
A slowdown ordered by the 14 000-member Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization 25 Aug. had caused disruptions in air travel nationwide, airline officials told the New York Times. Eastern Airlines experienced 1-to 2-hr delays in rush-hour traffic at La Guardia Airport, and similar snarls were reported by other carriers at other airports, the most severe at Los Angeles. Union president John F. Leyden had asked members to start handling traffic “by the book” and adhere rigidly to rules that required planes to stay about 5 to 10 km behind aircraft ahead of them, omitting efforts to expedite traffic flow as is normally done. The controllers were protesting delay in completion of a Civil Service Commission study of controller job classification, which held hope of higher pay levels, and a CSC announcement that its investigation had found both undergrading and overgrading in the jobs. (NYT30 Aug 76, A-9)
Test pilot William H. Dana had been chosen to receive the AIAA 1976 Haley Space Flight Award, the DFRC X-Press announced. Dana would receive the award at the IAF conference banquet 15 Oct. Named for Andrew G. Haley, one of the founders of the Am. Rocket Society, the award is for “outstanding contribution ... to the advancement of the arts, sciences or technology of astronautics.” Dana would be honored for his service as test pilot on the HL-10, M2-F3, and X-24B lifting bodies, and his 16 flights as project pilot of the X-15 rocket-powered research aircraft. (DFRC X-Press, 8 Oct 76, 2; LA Herald-Examiner, 12 Oct 76, 3; Lancaster, Calif. Ledger-Gazette, 7 Oct 76, 10)
Launch complex 14 at KSC—used for John Glenn’s orbital flight in Feb. 1962 and other manned launches untd 1966—was blown up with plastic explosives by an Army demolition team after the Air Force decided the rusty and obsolete towers constituted a hazardous area and should be demolished. The scrap metal would be sold to the highest bidder. News reports noted that a stainless steel memorial would remain to mark the place where the seven original astronauts took their first steps into space. (WStar, 2 Dec 76, A-3; CBS News transcript, Cronkite-Dean, 1 Dec 76; NBC Nightly News, Brinkley, 1 Dec 76)
Dr. William H. Pickering, who retired as director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory at CalTech 31 March, was named to receive a 1975 National Medal of Science, reported Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine. The medal is the U.S. government’s highest award for distinguished achievement in science and engineering. (Av Wk, 28 June 76, 11)
NASA announced that Robert N. Lindley, director of project management at GSFC, would begin a temporary assignment in Paris 24 Oct. as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight (European Operations), serving as senior NASA adviser to ESA for the Spacelab program. During this assignment, Dr. William C. Schneider, currently Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA Hq, would act as director of project mangement at GSFC. Both officials would return to their original positions at the end of the ESA assignment. (NASA anno 13 Oct 76)
Lt. Col. Michael A. Love, test pilot of the successful NASA lifting-body program, was killed in the crash of an F-4C fighter on a dry lake bed at Edwards AFB, Calif., shortly after takeoff in a proficiency flight. Love’s navigator, Maj. E.B. Underwood, Jr., ejected from the plane before it crashed and was hospitalized in stable condition. Love, 37, was chief AF pilot assigned to the X-24B program that tested a wingless aircraft to develop a space vehicle that could be flown to earth and landed like a plane. After serving in the lifting-body program as a chase pilot for various M-2 and X-24A flights, Love made his first X-24B flight on 4 Oct. 1973 and had piloted the plane to its fastest speed—better than 1860 kph—before terminating the program 20 Aug. 1975 with a hard-surface landing of the X-24B on the runway at Edwards. (WStar, 2 Mar 76, A-5; W Post, 3 Mar 76, A-20; NASA X-Press, 12 Mar 76, 2)
The flight of NASA’s Pioneer 11 into unexplored space above the plane of earth’s orbit had confirmed the structure of the sun’s magnetic field for the first time, NASA announced. Dr. Edward J. Smith of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory—magnetometer experimenter for Pioneer 11 —reported to the meeting of the Am. Geophysical Union that observations conducted from Feb. to Nov. 1976, while the spacecraft was four times farther from the sun than the earth, showed that the solar magnetic envelope had a simple north pole-south pole structure split into northern and southern portions at the magnetic equator by a “warped” sheet of electric current. This warped sheet had appeared to move as the sun rotated, up and down relative to the earth’s orbital plane. As the solar magnetic field extended several billion miles over the north and south solar poles, well beyond the orbit of Saturn, earth spacecraft traveling in earth’s orbital plane had passed through the warped electric current and detected contradictory motions, the field in the northern solar hemisphere being carried outward by the solar wind and the field in the southern hemisphere reversing back toward the sun. Earlier spacecraft therefore reported reversals in the direction of the solar magnetic field each time the current sheet was encountered, reports that led to a variety of interpretations. When Pioneer 11 had passed close to Jupiter in Dec. 1974, the gravitational effect had thrown the spacecraft 62 million km above earth’s orbital plane, allowing it to measure solar phenomena at a point 16° above the solar equator—9° higher than previously possible—where it discovered a uniform solar field, pointing away from the sun. The present solar model would exhibit the warped current sheet about 15° each side of the solar equator, accompanied by small-scale random magnetic fields of varying intensity and direction; the north polar region would generate a well-ordered magnetic field in a single direction, and the south pole a similar field in the opposite direction. The solar wind would carry the magnetic field out until it met the interstellar gas, perhaps near the orbit of Pluto, where the outgoing north-polar field would link with incoming south-polar field to “close the magnetic loop,” Dr. Smith suggested. (NASA Release 76-199; ARC Release 76-85; NYT, 1 Dec 76, 1)
Two engineers working for Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had reported that windmills could supply up to a fifth of U.S. energy needs by 1995, the Washington Post said. The engineers, Michael Dusey and Ugo Coty, reporting on a year-long investigation funded by the Energy Research and Development Administration, said that large wind-turbine generators could save 2 billion barrels of oil a year; construction of 54 000 generators with rotor blades more than 160 m end-to-end could furnish 1 trillion kw hrs of electricity annually. Other benefits would include reduction of air pollution and creation of a new industry that would employ thousands, they said. The Lockheed researchers put no price tag on their findings, but an earlier study by the University of Hawaii had said such windmills could cost up to $50 000; the price would be regained within 7 yr and the windmills could remain in operation up to 50 yr, according to the 1974 report by Hawaii’s Donald Grace. A professor from the Univ. of Mass.—William Heronemus—had proposed some years ago a network of 957 windmills each about 113 m high just to meet the needs of the state of Vermont. (W Post, 22 May 76, F— 1)
A select committee of the National Academy of Sciences, named 2 yr ago at the request of four federal agencies, recommended a 2-yr delay before banning aerosol sprays containing fluorocarbons. The group advised three “urgent” measures: drafting of legislation to regulate fluorocarbon usage when the need arose; action to require labeling of products containing fluorocarbons, so that consumers could stop using them if they wished to do so; and a campaign by public health agencies to reduce people’s overexposure to sun and the resulting malignant melanoma, incidence of which had been increasing by 10 to 15% a year, about a third of the current 8500 yearly cases being fatal. An international conference on threats to the stratospheric ozone, meeting at the State Univ. of Utah, heard Dr. James G. Anderson of the Univ. of Mich, report findings from a 28 July balloon flight of chlorine and chlorine monoxide at 35- to 42-km altitudes in quantities twice as abundant as predicted by theorists. The results had not been available when the NAS findings were issued. The NAS had said that a selective ban on fluorocarbon spray-can propellants would be necessary within 2 yr. The international conference also heard a report that nitrous oxide in the air was increasing steadily as a result of many factors (including fuel combustion and bacterial digestion of fertilizers), becoming as serious a threat to the stratospheric ozone as the Freons, with a 20% ozone reduction possible by the end of the 20th century. Bags of exhaust gases obtained from a federal test center for auto emissions had shown that the catalytic converters designed to remove hydrocarbons from exhaust had permitted considerable release of nitrous oxides. Dr. R. J. Cicerone of the Univ. of Mich, had estimated that automobile contribution of nitrous oxide to the atmosphere within a yr was about a million tons. Researchers from the Univ. of Calif. Livermore Laboratory at Lawrence had told a meeting of the American Chemical Society that better methods of analysis were needed to permit accurate predictions of the effects of contaminants on the stratospheric ozone. Supersonic transport operations, for instance, were known to affect the stratosphere but not enough was known about the forty-odd possible chemical reactions at high altitude to say if or how the ozone layer was damaged. William H. Duewer, a chemist on the Livermore team, added that, even if all the chemistry were pinned down, the effect of SST operations could not be determined precisely until meteorological factors were fully accounted for. The next 1 or 2 yr should provide new insights into these stratospheric processes, the team said. (NYT14 Sept 76, 1; 17 Sept 76, A14; W Post, 14 Sept 76, A-l; Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 49) The biology experiments, which did receive soil samples, were progressing with their tasks. The gas-exchange experiment had already indicated a slower response to oxygen leaving the soil in its test chamber than was shown by a similar Viking 1 instrument at Chryse, where a high oxygen count had been considered a possible indication of life activity. Scientists had decided the reading probably resulted from “an exotic chemistry.” Dr. Harold P. Klein, chief biologist on the project, said the lower readings at Utopia might simply indicate “less oxidizing substances at the Viking 2 site.” The other two biology instruments were incubating their soil samples; both were transmitting data on background radiation for use as reference points later in the experiments, which would use radioactive counts to determine the presence of microorganisms. After seeing a picture of the lander’s arm, showing that it had rotated 180° instead of 45° as it should have, flight directors diagnosed the problem as failure of a switch. Project Manager Martin said it would be possible to override the switch and get the arm moving again by Friday, 17 Sept., when flight directors would order the arm to continue delivery of a soil sample to the x-ray instrument. At a news conference 16 Sept., project scientists reported that the first measurements from the labeled-release experiment showed 33% more radioactive gas count from the Utopia sample than had come from the Chryse soil: 10 000 counts per minute (compared to 7500) or 20 times the amount of gas that would be registered in the absence of metabolic activity. The scientists still refused to say the activity was proof of life, noting that, if organisms were picking up all the nutrients in the instrument, it should record up to 15 000 counts per minute. The gas-exchange experiment, which had detected some signs of activity in the Utopia sample but less than Viking 1 found in the Chryse sample, apparently provided an argument against the “exotic chemistry” theory because of the prolonged increase of carbon dioxide in the test chamber. Dr. Vance I. Oyama of Ames Research Center said of this result, which might be attributed to chemical reaction, “if it persisted and was accompanied by other changes, we can ascribe it to biological changes.” No decisive report had come from the pyrolytic-release experiment, considered the least ambiguous of the detectors. Project geologists meanwhile were scanning the photographs from both Viking orbiters and landers, noting especially the enormous scale of Martian topography. “Everything we see is ten times anything on earth,” said Dr. John Guest of the Univ. of London, adding that earth in comparison was almost as smooth as a billiard ball. Most prominent features on Mars were the volcano Olympus Mons whose base on earth would reach from New York City to Montreal, and a canyon long enough to stretch from New York to Salt Lake City. The plateau on which the Mars volcano rested stood more than 9 km high, taller than Everest, earth’s highest mountain. Dr. Michael Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey suggested that the outsize features of Mars existed because of the lack of plate movement on the planet. Mars, like earth, appeared divided into two “provinces” geologically, one area heavily cratered and higher, therefore assumed to be older; the other area was lower and smoother, considered to be younger. This division might be typical of all bodies of the inner solar system, as a similar distribution of “provinces” appeared on the moon and on earth. {WStar, 13 Sept 76, A-5; 15 Sept 76, A-2; WPost, 14 Sept 76, A-12; 16 Sept 76, C-l; 17 Sept 76, A-4; ATT, 17 Sept 76, A14; C Trib, 18 Sept 76, 1-7)
The Apollo lunar scientific experiments package (ALSEP) set up on the moon in Feb. 1971 by astronauts Alan B. Shepard and Edgar D. Mitchell during the third manned exploration of the moon ceased transmission, probably because of failure of electronic components, engineers at Johnson Space Center said. The Apollo 14 instrument, one of five stations on the moon, had provided scientists with lunar seismic data in combination with stations set up during the Apollo 12, 15, 16, and 17 missions. Originally designed with a 1-yr lifetime, the ALSEP 14 was first of the stations to fail completely, although it had lost its ability to receive commands a year previously. The remaining stations continued to provide data on the moon’s seismic activity, heat flow, interactions with earth’s magnetic field, and the solar-wind and cosmic particles that continuously bombard the lunar surface. Findings based on ALSEP data included measurement of moonquakes, mostly at about 4 on the Richter scale; indications of a lunar core at or near the melting point; a thick lithosphere that probably prevented mountain-building on the moon; and a tenuous atmosphere deriving from solar-wind particles. The seismic instruments on the ALSEPs were the most sensitive in existence, and the remaining stations were estimated to last for another 3 yr. (JSC Roundup, 13 Feb 76, 1)
Dr. Harrison H. (Jack) Schmitt, astronaut on Apollo 17, was the victorious Republican candidate for the U.S. Senate from New Mexico, defeating Democrat Joseph M. Montoya, who was seeking a third term. Now a consulting geologist, the 41-yr-old Schmitt had a 3-to-2 lead in the returns. CBS commentator Walter Cronkite noted in a news broadcast at 10:25 p.m. EST on 2 Nov. that astronauts constituted only 2 ten-millionths of the U.S. population, yet there would now be two U.S. senators who were astronauts—Schmitt and John Glenn (D-Ohio)—which was “representation out of all proportion.” (W Post, 3 Nov 76, A-17; broadcast, 2 Nov 76)
NASA’s cancellation of a mission to Uranus by withholding funds in a severely restricted budget for FY 1977 had produced a “Uranus option” plan, sponsored by engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, that would take a spacecraft destined for Saturn and give it the ability to go the extra distance to Uranus as well. In an interview with the New York Times, John R. Casani—deputy project manager of the Mariner project at JPL—said the necessary trajectories had been plotted, and modification of the spacecraft remote-sensing instruments to use at Uranus was already under way. Of the two Mariner missions scheduled for launch in Aug. and Sept. 1977, to fly by Jupiter in 1979 and Saturn in Nov. 1980andjan. 1981, the first mission would remain unchanged. The second Mariner, trailing the first by 9 mo, would fly a lower speed trajectory to allow a bigger slingshot effect from Saturn’s gravity for propulsion toward Uranus; the slower speed would also allow flight controllers to decide on the basis of the first Saturn flyby whether to use the second Mariner for a closer look at Saturn or to go for Uranus. The second choice would mean that, by 1985, U.S. spacecraft would have looked closely at all the planets of the solar system except Neptune and Pluto; a Mariner flyby of Uranus between Nov. 1985 and Jan. 1986 would take the spacecraft further out into the solar system, toward Neptune. Obtaining data on Neptune would take “a miracle,” Casani said, although the JPL engineers would not rule out the possibility. The infrared spectrometer on the second Mariner would be improved in sensitivity to detect the temperature of Uranus, twice as far from the sun as Saturn is, and 20 times as far as earth; also, the spacecraft would be able to photograph Uranus, 4 times the diameter of earth, and gather data on its magnetic field, atmosphere, and other physical properties. The Mariner missions to Jupiter and Saturn would cost about $305 million; addition of the trip to Uranus Would add about $21 million to the cost of the mission. (NYT, 1 Mar 76, 11)
Both the United States and the USSR were working on ways to shoot down enemy satellites in earth orbit, reported Henry S. Bradsher in the Washington Star. Commenting on a Department of Defense disclosure of “aggressive basic technology research efforts” to protect U.S. satellites from a potential Soviet threat, Bradsher noted that the DOD previously had refused to comment on U.S. work on so-called satellite killers [see 27 July] and had tended to play down any Soviet danger. With the DOD announcement came word that the USSR had conducted 3 satellite-destruction tests this year; it had conducted 5 tests of such systems between 1968 and 1971, but had dropped them, leading Pentagon officials to think the program had been halted in accordance with 1972 agreements that limited strategic defense armament (SALT l) and antiballistic-missile systems. The agreements had been based on each side’s ability to monitor the other’s compliance by means of reconnaissance satellites; however, recent reconnaissance photographs had been interpreted as showing Soviet launch pads carrying satellite-killer systems. Secretary of the Navy J. William Middendorf had stated 25 Sept, that the Soviet Union was presumed to be working on guidance systems that could destroy targets such as over-the-horizon naval warfare missiles, greatly heightening the threat to U.S. warships. Asked if the U.S. were developing satellite-killers, Middendorf replied, “We’re working in that direction.” The Pentagon at first refused to comment on a satellite-destruction program, but released a statement when pressed about Middendorf s answer. (WStar, 26 Sept 76, A—1)
The European Space Agency announced plans for a NASA presentation on current status of the Space Transportation System to be held in Paris 12 to 14 May, for about 250 representatives of governments, national institutes and agencies, and industry of the ESA member states. Opened by Roy Gibson, director general of ESA, the program would be introduced by Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA’s Assistant Administrator for International Alfairs. Other NASA speakers would be John F. Yardley, Associate Administrator, Office of Space Flight; Chester M. Lee, director of space transportation system operations; and Harold E. Gartrell, deputy manager of the Shuttle payload integration'office. The Space Transportation System would include the U.S. Space Shuttle and the ESA Spacelab, as well as a new upper propulsion stage and a U.S.-developed tracking and data system. ESA representatives scheduled to present the Spacelab portion of the 3-day program would include Bernard Deloffre, director of the Spacelab program for ESA; Heinz Stoewer, Spacelab project manager; Jan J. Burger, Spacelab payload adviser; and Jacques Collet of ESA’s planning directorate. (ESA release 10 May 76)
Responses of Presidential candidates Ford and Carter to questionnaires submitted by U.S. physicists and engineers emphasized their “differing viewpoints,” wrote Walter Sullivan in the NY Times. One set of l6 questions was from 24 professional engineering societies claiming a combined membership of one million; the other, dealing with three broad issues, was submitted by the American Physical Society’s president, Dr. William A. Fowler. To a question regarding overseas sales of nuclear fuel and equipment, President Ford replied that the U.S. must maintain the role of major supplier “for peaceful purposes—so that we can influence others to accept controls to minimize the threat of proliferation.” Candidate Carter replied that it was “absolutely essential” to halt such sales “even with safeguards” to prevent use of the materials in producing nuclear weapons. Physics Today, publishing the replies to Dr. Fowler’s questions in the Oct. issue, noted editorially that both candidates were committed to more support for basic research and “a strong voice for science in the Administration’s decision-making.” (NYT, 5 Oct 76, 33)
Proponents of the B-l strategic bomber, “vigorously opposed for years by people inside and outside of government,” seemed likely to win their struggle to get approval for the $ 22-billion program, said Science magazine. A House-Senate conference committee voted in mid-June to spend $960.5 million in procurement funds for the first 3 B-l planes, although the Senate had passed an amendment delaying spending of the money until a new administration should take office. This year’s fight to procure the B-l was the culmination of a 15-yr effort that began with the shooting down of a U-2 plane over the Soviet Union in 1960; the USAF projected the building of a low-flying manned bomber, the ideas converging in 1969 with A MSA (advanced manned strategic aircraft), a project opposed by then Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara. In 1969, when Melvin Laird became President Nixon’s Secretary of Defense, AMSA studies were concluded and the final design “metamorphosed into the B-l,” Rockwell Inti. Corp. becoming prime contractor. At the same time, other Pentagon planners were backing a strategic armed cruise missile decoy system (SCAD), assuming that Congress would not approve both programs. At the urging of the USAF, Secretary Laird canceled the SCAD program in July 1973, but the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee (Sen. Thomas McIntyre, D-N.H.) ordered it reinstated. Both the bomber and the cruise missile had encountered development problems and increased expenses; internal Rockwell documents from Jan. 1974 showed company concern about “competitive threats in the form of the standoff missile and . . . the launch aircraft” that other companies might seek to build. A massive public-relations campaign was mounted to protect the B-1; ultimately, Science said, the B-1 would win but the cruise missile would also have its day, quoting John B. Walsh, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering (DDR&E) at the Pentagon, as saying “you need both bombers and cruise missiles.” (Science, 23 July 76, 303)
Recently published criticism by columnist John Keats of “a modest NASA effort to provide meals for elderly people” not only “managed to misunderstand just about every aspect of what we are doing” but also “put down the elderly and [raised] my ire in the process,” astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin wrote in a letter to the New York Times. Kerwin pointed out that the NASA program was^a response to the Texas Governor’s Committee on Aging, which had asked the agency for help in developing good-tasting easy-to-prepare and easy-to-deliver meals for people not reached by programs such as Meals on Wheels or group meals sponsored by Congress in various city centers. Kerwin said NASA’s engineers “know a little about packaging and shelf life,” and “we care because we have relatives who are old, and because we’ll be old ourselves soon—if we’re lucky.” The technology being used to do a job for the old was good, Kerwin concluded, “but it’s the caring of which I am most proud.” (IVYT, 1 June 76, 34)
The B-l bomber was vital to U.S. security, said Gen. William J. Evans, commander of the Air Force Systems Command, in a speech to the Rockwell Management Club at Los Angeles, Calif. As part of a strategic triad—SLBMs, ICBMs, and bombers—constituting three distinct types of retaliatory weapons, the B-l would help complicate defense efforts of potential enemies. Although the U.S. now had “a rough equivalence” of strategic strength, Gen. Evans noted that the Soviet Union was engaged in an effort to upset “the present equilibrium” and gain military advantage. Along with deterrent value, the B-1 should be considered a flexible, reusable, appropriate weapon in a conventional tactical role as well as in a nuclear strategic role. A future conflict might start not through “a surprise storm of nuclear missiles,” but through “daring but limited acts of provocation” to which the U.S. should be able to respond with at least a show of force or be “perceived as a paper tiger.” Gen. Evans congratulated Rockwell and other contributors to the development of the B-l and urged continuation of the program. (OIP Release 231.76)
The three U.S. astronauts who participated in last summer’s Apollo-Soyuz project—Thomas P. Stafford, Vance Brand, and Donald K. Slayton—left Saudi Arabia after a 2-day visit in Riyadh and headed for Abu Dhabi, capital of the United Arab Emirates, on a goodwill tour of the Middle East. {NY News, 12 Feb 76, 96)
MSFC announced it had completed a critical design review for part of a heavy-nuclei experiment scheduled to go into space aboard the third High Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO-C) in 1979. The experiment, called C-3, would characterize cosmic-ray flux from detailed measurements of charge and energy spectra, study propagation of cosmic rays, and search for superheavy elements. Principal investigators were Dr. Martin Israel, Washington Univ.; Dr. Edward Stone, Calif. Inst, of Technology; and Dr. Cecil Waddington, Univ. of Minn. The HEAO-C, whose objective would be to map the sky for gamma-ray and cosmic-ray flux, would carry two other experiments besides the C-3. A design review for the experiment hardware would be held in Feb. 1977. (MSFC Release 76-199)
Dr. John F. Clark, scheduled to retire 1 July as Director of Goddard Space Flight Center, had been selected to serve after that date at NASA Hq as special assistant to the Associate Administrator, according to an announcement by Dr. Robert S. Cooper, GSFC deputy director and Dr. Clark’s successor. Dr. Clark agreed to stay at GSFC through 14 August to review actions needed to finalize design activities associated with a stability problem in the Delta second-stage engine, Dr. Cooper said, and would also serve as adviser on the Delta’s readiness for the Palapa and Itos launches later in 1976. (GSFC announcement 1997)
Dr. Bruce C. Murray, professor of planetary science at California Institute of Technology and geologist by training, succeeded Dr. William H. Pickering as director of Caltech’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory. After earning bachelor’s, master’s, and doctor’s degrees at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Dr. Murray became a geologist and later served in the Air Force. At the USAF Cambridge Research Lab., trying to expand knowledge of the earth’s shape and gravity field by the use of earth satellites, he became interested in space technology. First faculty appointee at Caltech in the field of planetary astronomy in 1960, Dr. Murray and Prof. James Westphal were in 1962 the first observers of infrared emission from an object outside the solar system (a star) and did infrared mapping of the moon, Venus, and Jupiter. Dr. Murray was the author or coauthor of 4 books and more than 60 scientific papers, including the recent book “Navigating the Future.” (Pasadena Star-News, 1 Apr 76, 1; Glendale News-Press, 1 Apr 76, 1; Montrose Ledger, 1 Apr 76, 1)
