The Natl. Space Club announced that Dr. John E. Naugle, appointed NASA chief scientist Nov. 8, would speak at its Dec. meeting and present awards to Washington-area high school students in American Univ.’s 19th summer research program. Dr. Naugle had been NASA associate administrator since 1975 in charge of much of the agency’s R&D work. (NSC newsletter Dec 77)
U.S. interplanetary spacecraft had confirmed that the planet Jupiter was emitting high-energy electrons over a vast region of space, Walter Sullivan reported in the NY Times. The spring meeting of the Am. Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C. heard Dr. John A. Simpson of the Univ. of Chicago and others describe the Jupiter emissions as similar to pulsars—electromagnetic radiation appearing as pulses sweeping through space like airport beacons—but carrying the “signature” of the planet’s spin rate, picked up every lOhr as a rotation was completed. Dr. Simpson said Jupiter was not a direct analogy of pulsars but would offer common features that might provide clues to an understanding of both. Observations of the Jupiter emissions had come from Pioneer 10, which had passed Jupiter in Dec. 1973 and was now beyond the orbit of Saturn, and from Pioneer 11, which had first passed Jupiter in Dec. 1974 and was scheduled to approach Saturn in Sept. 1979. The volume of Jupiter’s magnetosphere had been estimated as 5 times that of the sun’s; lo, innermost moon of Jupiter, had an orbit within the magnetosphere and its radiation belt (a greatly intensified version of earth’s Van Allen belt), and the unusual brightness of lo on emerging from Jupiter’s shadow had been attributed to particle activity. The 2 Voyager spacecraft to be launched this yr toward Jupiter and Saturn would be programmed to investigate further when they arrived nearby in March and July of 1979. (NYT, June 2/77, B4)
The Natl. Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., counted its 7 millionth visitor, Mrs. Elizabeth Weber of Queens, N.Y. However, she and many other visitors exemplified the fading public interest in space: none of them recognized the date as the 16th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin’s historic feat, man’s first spaceflight. A NY Times article contrasted the festive feeling at the museum (the capital’s largest tourist draw) and the almost melancholy mood at NASA Hq across the street. NASA employees had cause for despair, said the article, with a space program rarely in the public eye and funding that had delayed long planned projects. Even President Carter, during a cursory 30-minute inspection of the museum, omitted mention of the space program or the space agency. (NYTApr 13/77, D-10)
NASA and ESA announced that 6 U.S. and 4 European candidates were finalists in the competition for 2 payload specialist positions, 1 U.S. and 1 European, on the first flight of ESA’s Spacelab scheduled to go on the Space Shuttle in 1980. For the U.S., Byron Lichtenberg of Natick, Mass., Ph.D. candidate at MIT, and MSFC’s Ann Whitaker, M.S. at the Univ. of Ala., were the only non-Calif, finalists. The others were Craig L. Fischer, M.D., of Indian Wells; Michael L. Lampton, Ph.D., of Berkeley; and Robert T. Menzies and Richard J. Terrile, both Ph.D.s from CalTech (Terrile employed there and Menzies at JPL) and both from Pasadena. ESA’s 4 were electronics engineer Franco Malerba of Italy; physicist Ulf Merbold of West Germany; and 2 from the Netherlands, astronomer Claude Nicollier and physicist Wubbo Ockels. (NASA Release 77-255; MSFC Release 77-229; ESA Release Dec 22/77)
NASA announced that Skylab 4 commander Gerald P. Carr would leave JSC June 25 to join a Houston firm, Bovay Engineers, Inc. Carr, one of 19 astronauts selected in Apr. 1966, had shared a spaceflight-duration record of 2017hr (84 days) with Dr. Edward G. Gibson and William R. Pogue, and had retired from the U.S. Marine Corps in Sept. 1975 to become a NASA civilian employee. His departure left 27 astronauts on the active list at JSC. (NASA Release 77-129)
LaRC announced it would dedicate on July 19 the site of a new wind tunnel, the National Transonic Facility, scheduled for completion in 1980 at a cost of about $85 million. The only facility of its kind in the world, the tunnel would use cryogenic nitrogen to test aircraft models in a realistic flight environment; cooling the medium to - 300°F would permit accurate simulation of Mach numbers and atmospheric-density ratios. Although NASA and DOD would be principal users of the tunnel, the schedule would be shared by other federal agencies, private industry, and the scientific community. Speakers at the dedication would be Dr. John J. Martin, assistant secretary of the Air Force for research and development; Donald F. Hearth, LaRC director; and Oran W. Nicks, LaRC deputy director. A display of aircraft developed from LaRC transonic research would include a B-747 freighter; a wide-bodied DC-10 passenger plane; USAF fighters F-14, F-15, and F-106; a Learjet business aircraft; LaRC’s B-737 flying laboratory; a T-38 jet trainer; and a UH-1H helicopter. (NASA Release 77-144; LaRC Release 77-29)
In its year-end issue, the Lewis News described the relationship between U.S. Army and NASA activities at the center. Civilian employees of the Army Propulsion Laboratory had been working among LeRC employees since 1970, as 1 of 3 Army air-mobility research and technology labs working jointly with NASA centers: Ames Research Center housed the aeromechanics laboratory and the research and technology lab headquarters, and LaRC included the Army’s structures laboratory. The only AMRT lab complex not on a NASA installation was the applied technology lab at Ft. Eustis, Va. LeRC and the Army pursued R&D activities under a unique agreement, with the Army providing funds for programs of mutual interest and adding about 40 persons (mostly engineers, scientists, and technicians) to the LeRC staff, all of them supervised by Lewis personnel. Army interests included the joint aeronautical research group, working on compressors, turbines, bearings, seals, and gears, with special attention to Army needs in small-engine technology; the technical support group of scientists and skilled technicians, set up to help with the inhouse workload created by Army activities at the center; and a small staff of engineers called the Army aeronautical research group, using LeRC facilities to pursue investigations of interest to the Army specifically. An instance was the engine test cell in Bldg. 14 recently activated and primarily operated by the Army, with help from LeRC experts and resources, said Propulsion Laboratory director John Acurio. Aiding Acurio in lab operations and efforts to improve aircraft propulsion were Curtis L. Walker, chief of the Army aeronautical research group, and administrative officer Gus Gold. (Lewis News, Dec 23/77,4)
MSFC announced selection of William A. Brooksbank, Jr., as manager of the solar heating and cooling project in the center’s special projects office. MSFC director Dr. William R. Lucas said that Brooksbank, most recently deputy manager of the Spacelab program office, was well qualified for the position by his background in engineering and management. Brooksbank had come to the Redstone Arsenal at Huntsville in 1958 as atomic energy project engineer for the Army’s ballistic missile agency; he had worked at MSFC since its establishment in 1960. (MSFC Release 77-218) •
LaRC reported it had held a luncheon Aug. 11 to recognize the contributions of 26 inventors on the center staff to NASA’s patent program. Director Donald P. Hearth and Patent Counsel Howard J. Osborn presented awards, including one to Richard T. Whitcomb as 1976 coinventor of the yr for his patent “Airfoil Shape for Flight at Subsonic Speeds,” shared with Robert T. Jones of ARC. (LaRC Release 77-38)
The Shuttle orbiter Enterprise made its second free flight at Edwards AFB in Calif., a 5min unpowered glide from about 24 000ft altitude, during which it reached a speed of more than 330mph and performed several maneuvers to test its handling before air brakes slowed it to a landing at 250mph. Separation from the Boeing 747 carrier was delayed 3min because a power failure at DFRC made mission control in Houston lose radio contact; the delay caused no problems. For about 50min before separation, pilots Joe Engle and Richard Truly took turns at the controls and the computer to monitor the orbiter’s behavior at various speeds. Pilots of the 747 were Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., and Thomas C. McMurtry. The flight had been postponed from Aug. 30 because of a tropical storm [see Sept. 1]; a third test was set for late Sept. (Postflight rpt, free fit 2, SpSh orbiter ALT; WPost, Sept 14/77, A6) September 13-November 9: NASA announced that the Delta vehicle on which it had launched ESA’s orbital test satellite OTS at 7:21pm Sept. 13 from ETR had exploded 54sec after liftoff. The booster and 5 strap-on motors [see Sept. 7] had performed properly before the explosion. On Sept. 14 John F. Yardley, NASA’s associate administrator for spaceflight, had appointed a failure review board whose investigation concluded from flight data analysis, photo records, and “substantial” vehicle debris recovered near the launch site that the no. 1 strap-on motor had failed from causes unknown. NASA had scheduled an OTS backup launch for April 1978. (MOR M-492-210-77-01 [postlaunch] Nov 9/77; NASA newsrm rept Sept 14/77; W Post, Sept 14/77, A9; NASA Release 77-193)
JPL reported that Donald Lynn and Jean Lorre of its image processing laboratory had shared in a scientific investigation of the Shroud of Turin, preserved in Italy since 1578. At the request of groups in N.Y. and N.M., Lynn and Lorre had used advanced NASA techniques (mathematical and contrast enhancement) to obtain a noticeably clearer image from negatives and color slides taken at a 1973 display of the cloth and the image appearing on it. (JPL Universe, July 1/77, 1; Natl Inq, July 19/77, 4)
JSC reported on the medical evaluations of astronaut applicants for which the center’s Flight Medicine Clinic had been responsible. The evaluation had four parts: the medical history (illness, injuries, surgery, etc.); a thorough physical exam; specialty evaluations (neurology, otorhinolaryngology, ophthalmology, etc.); and special tests such as the treadmill, pulmonary function test, and audiometry and body chemistry examinations. (JSC Roundup, Dec 9/77, 1) 4:19am Moscow time Dec. 10 in what Tass described as a mission “jointly with the Salyut 6 space station.” The 300ton “ferry vehicle” carried 2 cosmonauts, flight commander Lt.Col. Yuri Romanenko and flight engineer Georgy Grechko, into an orbit with 329km apogee, 267km perigee, 90.2min period and 51.6° inclination. Tass reported that the crew would rest for 12 to 21 hr while the spacecraft was beyond radio contact with Soviet territory, during which time two research vessels would receive and relay telemetry from the satellite. The Soyuz 25 mission launched in Oct. carrying Vladimir Kovalenok and Valery Ryumin had failed to link with Salyut 6, although it had come within 393ft of the orbiting station [see Oct. 9-12]. The crew returned safely 48hr after liftoff. The “deviation” causing the cancellation was never explained. Tass reported Dec. 11 that Soyuz 26 had docked successfully with Salyut 6 at 6:02am Moscow time. The news agency noted that Salyut 6 had been equipped with 2 docking ports, 1 on the transfer compartment of the station and the other opposite it in the equipment bay, to allow 2 spacecraft to service the manned station. The Soyuz 25 had made its unsuccessful approach from the transfer-compartment side, but Soyuz 26 had docked with the unit on the other side. “The presence of two docking units on orbital stations considerably expands the opportunities and possibilities of future space flights,” Tass said. “In particular, this allows two ships to dock with a station, which is important for replacing crews, for carrying out rescue operations, and delivering foodstuffs and equipment to an orbital scientific laboratory.” Tass said the 2 crewmen had crossed into the space station. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, training chief for the program, said on TV that during the docking he had watched it “with greater excitement than my own, which I performed in 1969.” Press reports called it “an important recovery” for the Soviet space program, after the failure of the previous docking attempt which was to have marked the 60th anniversary of the Russian revolution. Grechko’s outside assignment would be to inspect the docking device on the “main entrance,” and some press reports speculated that the cosmonauts might be preparing for the docking of a second Spacecraft. On the following days the cosmonauts “changed into light working clothes” and began to “mothball the onboard systems of the transport” Soyuz 26, according to Tass. They had also begun reactivating the space station, where they would live on a time pattern “as close as possible to that of Moscow.” Tass emphasized the added comfort of being able to communicate through the research vessels instead of staying up to make contact while oyer their home territory, besides being more convenient for “the hundreds of specialists who support the flight here on earth.” The cosmonauts were the first to call “ready” for the first communications session with the control center Dec. 12. The next day was a rest period to prepare for a “complex experiment” scheduled in the next few days. Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov in an interview described “great changes” in both the external structure and the flight control and life support systems of the space station, aimed at increased reliability, length of service, and better conditions for the cosmonauts. Scientific equipment for astrophysics and earth monitoring had been improved on the basis of previous experience. Feoktistov emphasized the addition of another docking port as a safety device, citing the possibility of accident to the ferry craft (failure of the engine or some automatic device, or encounter with a meteorite) and the risk necessary in undocking it for inspection. Having two ports would permit sending up another craft for rescue and return to earth, as well as access for additional equipment or supplies. He also noted that the water-regeneration unit labeled experimental on Salyut 4 was now standard equipment, and that the new design includes an “experimental place for washing,” no easy matter under conditions of weightlessness: “If water is let into the chamber it will immediately spread all around and get into the respiratory organs.” Another improvement was incorporation of a “Delta” autonomous system for navigation that would permit the station to determine its orbit without participation of earth-based radio equipment. Other automatic instruments to monitor the area around the station had detected “micrometeor particles” in quantities confirmed by earth radar observation. On Dec. 20 the cosmonauts donned semirigid full-pressure spacesuits and left the space station to check the transfer compartment and its docking unit and to carry out any necessary repairs. In addition to the special tools for the docking unit, Grechko carried a mobile TV camera that he used to send views of the docking elements to earth. No damage was visible, and Grechko reported the equipment in full working order. Tass said the men spent most of the 88min in space depressurizing and repressurizing the airlock leading to outer space, again suggesting the possibility of further visits. Grechko’s spacewalk was the first by a Soviet spaceman in 9yr. The new spacesuits were said to be more flexible than previous models, with a small instrument panel in front and a door-like entrance hatch in back. In a Dec. 20 recorded interview, Gen. Shatalov described the lengthy training in a special simulator apparently resembling the neutral-buoyancy tank at JSC, where the cosmonauts had practiced their extravehicular activity, and the orbital-station mockup on “flying laboratories” where they had learned to put on the new spacesuits in conditions of weightlessness. Ensuing days saw performance of experiments in medical research, earth resources monitoring (during which they reported forest fires on the African continent), and distortions caused by the optical properties of porthole surfaces. On Dec. 24 Tass reported that tadpoles had hatched out of frog eggs brought from earth in the same vessel with tadpoles born on earth; the earth-born tadpoles had reacted to weightlessness by “swimming disorderly,” not distinguishing top from bottom, but the newborns were swimming in spirals. For the remainder of Dec., the crew proceeded with a schedule that each research center had helped to establish, with each center “looking forward to its hour.” The cosmonauts reported a burning meteorite flashing past the station Dec. 27; one that struck a window had left a tiny scratch. On Dec. 28 Tass reported that so far the crew had not used any of the onboard recreation facilities (chess, a small library, a videotape recorder). The time allocated for leisure was occupied by Romanenko in checking the control systems, and by Grechko with camera and sketchbook near the transfer-compartment portholes. Tass reported a New Year tree was in place, “packed for the journey by friends from the Star Town together with toys.” At year’s end the cosmonauts reported that onboard systems were working normally, they were feeling well, and the planned program of research and experiments was being “completely fulfilled.” A motor on Soyuz 26 had been used Dec. 29 to correct the Salyut 6 flight trajectory. (W Post, Dec 11/77, A-36; Dec 20/77, A-7; Dec 21/77, A-28; WStar, Dec 10/77, A-4; Dec 12/77, A-4; FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 10, 12, 13, 20, 21, 23, 24, 28/77; Tass Inti Svin Russ, Dec 11/77; Moscow in Engl to Afr, Dec 28/77; Mosc Dom Sv in Rus, Dec 13, 15, 19, 20, 30)
NASA reported that the fifth and final free flight of the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, testing its braking on a concrete runway, had successfully made a landing on concrete at Edwards AFB—although it had a bumpy finale when the orbiter touched down and bounced twice before stopping. At a postflight press conference, pilots Fred W. Haise and C. Gordon Fullerton said the craft had reached speeds higher than expected after separating from its Boeing 747 carrier. Shortly after 8am local time the 747 had taken off with the orbiter attached to the top of its fuselage, climbing during the next 50 minutes to about 20 000ft altitude, where it nosed over and began to dive. At about 17 000ft the orbiter separated and came straight down without the turns made in previous flights; the dive angle was 25-22° compared with a commercial jetliner’s descent slope of about 3°. Touchdown, which came lmin 55sec after separation, overshot the 5000ft mark on the concrete runway by about 1000ft. The rear landing gear had touched, but the craft hopped back into the air, bounced, and tipped slightly before the pilots steadied it and stopped it with 2000ft of runway remaining. Approach speed had reached 330mph on the indicators, and the pilots described “oddities in the way the speed dropped” during the descent. Donald K. Slayton, in charge of the landing tests, said engineers this week would check out the airspeed indicators and the vehicle’s calculated energy profile, but further tests were not probable. Plans for future or-biter landings would change on the basis of data from the fifth test, modifying the aim point to allow for higher lift/drag coefficients with the tailcone off and the slower bleed-off of airspeed. (NASA Release 77-224; postflt rept free flight 5, SpSh orbiter ALT NYT, Oct 27/77, A-18; LA Times, Oct 27/77, 2; W Post, Oct 27/77, A10, B-3; JSC Roundup, Oct 28/77, 1; AvW/c, Oct 31/77, 16)
NASA announced it had scheduled the first free flight of the Shuttle orbiter for 8am PDT Aug. 12 at Dryden Flight Research Center. Briefing the press Aug. 11 would be Deke Slayton, ALT program manager at Johnson Space Center, and John Young, chief of the JSC astronaut office; Chet Lee, Hq director of Space Transportation Systems operations, speaking on payloads, pricing policies, and users; and Aaron Cohen, manager of the orbiter project at JSC, on orbiter systems. (NASA Release 77-158; DFRC Release 26-77)
JSC and the Lunar Science Institute announced plans for the 8th annual lunar science conference in Flouston, March 14-18. More than 600 scientists from around the world would discuss new data about the moon, derived from studies of lunar samples and from Apollo surface and orbital experiments, as well as new interpretations of previous models of lunar origin and history. Several Soviet scientists would attend, to give NASA materials from the Luna 24 mission for analysis. Dr. Michael G. Duke, acting chief of JSC’s Lunar and Planetary Sciences Division, and Dr. Robert Pepin, outgoing director of the Lunar Science Institute, would cochair the conference. The conference would also be the second meeting on “planetary” science, continuing the practice of the 1976 conference, where planetary interests were discussed for the first time as a result of the accumulation of data from NASA and USSR missions to Venus, Mercury, Mars, and the outer planets. The assembled data on planetary origin and evolution had proved of primary interest to lunar scientists. (JSC Release 77-09)
NASA announced that the next launch of an Atlas Centaur rocket from KSC would be no earlier than Jan. 6, 1978, carrying an Intelsat IVA commercial comsat. Originally scheduled for launch in Nov., the mission was first delayed for investigation of a previous Atlas Centaur launch that failed Sept. 29. That investigation was almost complete; the associate administrator for transportation systems, John Yardley, was to receive a report in early Dec. The postponement to Jan. was not caused by the investigation, NASA said, but by discovery of faulty feedback transducers in the Atlas engine-control actuators during routine testing. The new date would allow removal and replacement of components from that manufacturing batch and revalidation of the engine systems. (NASA Release 77-241)
NASA announced appointment of Dr. John R. Carruthers as first director of a new division in the Hq Office of Applications that would manage materials processing in space. Dr. Carruthers, formerly of Bell Labs, had headed crystal-growth and glass research in developing optical fibers for lightwave communications. (NASA Release 77-67)
KSC reported that an experimental homemade airplane built by John Murphy of the center’s Technology Utilization Ofc. had used a NASA-developed winglet set to increase its efficiency by about 8%. Murphy had begun work on the plane in Dec. 1976 from plans by a California designer and had completed it on June 12. Except for the engine and engine mount, the plane consisted entirely of fiberglass and styrofoam and weighed only 6301b. Its lOOhp Continental aircraft engine could carry two passengers at 200mph, requiring 1000ft for takeoff and about 2000ft for landing. Murphy, a graduate of Georgia Tech, had been flying for 30yr and owned another aircraft that he had built himself. He had completed 24 of the 50hr flying time needed for Federal Aviation Administration approval, so that he could fly it to the annual meeting of the Experimental Aircraft Assn, in Wisconsin later this summer and show it off to the designer. (KSC Release 128-77)
NASA announced a new way to control the flight of its sounding rockets and point their instruments more accurately in astronomical and other scientific studies: a small TV camera in the nose cone would allow an operator on the ground to remotely aim the onboard attitude-control system precisely at the desired stellar object. In the first use of “manned” rocket observation Apr. 15 at the White Sands Missile Range, N.M., scientists from Johns Hopkins Univ. had made the first sighting of a quasar in the ultraviolet spectrum. The quasar (quasi-stellar object, a celestial source resembling a star but probably a galaxy) was 3 billion light-yr from earth; it was the faintest and most remote object observed from above earth’s atmosphere. Dr. Arthur Davidsen of JHU’s department of physics had operated the rocket controls while watching the TV screen; his colleagues were Professors William G. Fastie and George Hartig. Observations in the ultraviolet range would let scientists compare properties of relatively near and more distant quasars. (NASA Release 77-131)
Marshall Space Flight Center director William R. Lucas announced that the teleoperator retrieval system project assigned by NASA to the center would be headed by John H. Harlow, who had been deputy manager of the Space Shuttle main engine project since 1976 and served previously as assistant manager in the Shuttle Projects Office. (MSFC Release 77-206)
NASA announced it would hold a briefing at Hq Aug. 4 on the scientific studies to be conducted by the Voyager spacecraft scheduled for launch later this year toward the giant planets Jupiter, Saturn, and possibly Uranus. Participants in the briefing would be Dr. Noel W. Hin-ners, NASA’s associate administrator for space science; Dr. Edward Stone, Calif. Inst, of Technology, project scientist; John Casani of JPL, project manager; Dr. Bradford A. Smith, Univ. of Ariz., leader of the imaging science team for the Voyager project; and Dr. James W. Warwick, Univ. of Colo., principal investigator for planetary radioastronomy. (NASA Release 77-155)
Two main items in NASA’s $4 billion budget request for FY 1978 — the Jupiter-orbiter mission and the Space Telescope—had met with strong opposition in Congress, John Noble Wilford reported in the NY Times. The items were two of three major new starts sought by the agency; the third, a new earth resources monitoring spacecraft (Landsat-C), had not been opposed, nor had additional funding for Space Shuttle development. NASA officials had not expected opposition to the Jupiter project, which had the endorsement of numerous scientists and the White House and had been authorized for eventual development by both houses of Congress. However, Rep. Edward P. Boland (D-Mass) had persuaded the House appropriations subcommittee on independent agencies, which he chaired, to block funds for the Jupiter project in view of charges by many astronomers that NASA had spent “a disproportionate level” of its funds on planetary science rather than on deep-space astronomy, which would be the aim of the Space Telescope. The House Appropriations Committee had followed suit and the full House was expected to vote accordingly. NASA had concentrated its Jupiter appeal on the Senate appropriations subcommittee headed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis), longtime critic of NASA spending, who had nevertheless been impressed by JPL officials who argued that the Jupiter project should receive immediate funding because of a favorable launch situation due in 1982 when Jupiter would be relatively close to earth, which would not occur again until 1987. Without the new start, JPL would have to lay off 300 to 400 scientists and engineers because it would have no missions beyond the launch of two Voyagers this summer. If the Senate should approve the Jupiter project and reject the telescope, a conference committee would have to settle the matter; NASA might have to choose between the two projects, or to start both with greatly reduced first-year funding, Wilford noted. (NYT, June 10/77, A-17; Nature, June 23/77, 659)
NASA announced plans to develop a prosthetic urinary sphincter for patients losing control of bladder functions because of injury or disease. Patients now used external collection devices, implanted catheters, or prosthetics difficult to operate. John Richardson of MSFC’s technology utilization office said NASA’s biomedical applications office had recommended MSFC for this job because of its expertise in design, manufacture, assembly, and operation of miniature valving. MSFC would have a contractor design and test the device and prepare documents for Food and Drug Administration approval, as well as manufacture the device commercially. A successful device would permit safe and quick emptying of the bladder and avoid infection, the prime source of fatal kidney failure among those without bladder control. (NASA Release 77-184; MSFC Release 77-163)
Today reported that Congress had approved June 20 the largest NASA budget in nearly lOyr, including new starts on three major programs. In conference committee, the House (which had cut $20.7 million requested by NASA to begin work on an unmanned 1982 Jupiter probe) had agreed with the Senate on $17.7 million for the project, which NASA said was enough to start with. The budget also contained $36 million for the large orbiting telescope, a frequently delayed major scientific project, and $26.6 million for Landsat-D, fourth of a series of earth monitoring satellites. The newspaper said the only real disagreement was over the Jupiter mission, which Rep. Edward P. Boland (D-Mass) wanted to kill [see June 10] because of its eventual cost, estimated to reach $435 million by the time it was scheduled for launch in 1983. The House conferees had finally accepted the Senate’s figure. Planned to take advantage of a favorable alignment of the earth with Jupiter in 1982, the mission would not only be the first to orbit Jupiter but would also drop a probe into the planet’s atmosphere. During its 20mo in orbit, the mission would also view Jupiter’s moons at close range. [Today, July 21/77, 20A)
Comsat General, wholly owned subsidiary of the Communications Satellite Corp., announced that former FAA administrator Dr. John L. McLucas had been elected president and a member of the board of directors. ComSatCorp. president Dr. Joseph V. Charyk said the subsidiary would benefit from Dr. McLucas’s “long and distinguished career as administrator, engineer, and scientist.” Holding a Ph.D in physics and electrical engineering from Penn. State Univ., Dr. McLucas had been president of the Mitre Corp. before serving as assistant secretary general for scientific affairs of NATO, undersecretary and secretary of the Air Force, and FAA administrator before April 1977. Programs engaged in by Comsat General included Marisat (maritime satellite communications), Comstar (domestic satcoms), and Satellite Business Systems, in which it shared with IBM and Aetna Casualty plans for a U.S. domestic satcom system. (CGC Release 77-2)
The W Post said that the U.S. had “quietly decided” to build a device for destroying enemy satellites in space: a small (ft-Iong, 8in-dia) heat-sensing vehicle “resembling a tomato can” without explosives but relying on collision at thousands of mph to accomplish its purpose. The Post said the USAF had “carefully camouflaged” this step in a Sept. 8 release announcing award to Vought Corp. of a $58.7 million contract “for development and test of hardware in support of the Space Defense Technology Program.” A 1967 treaty between the U.S and USSR had prohibited both nations from orbiting any object “carrying nuclear weapons or any other kinds of weapons of mass destruction. . both sides had apparently decided this did not outlaw shooting at their own target satellites. U.S. military officials deduced that certain USSR launches were tests of hunter-killer satellites with non-nuclear charges to blow up on approach to a target. William J. Perry, DOD research chief, told the Post that the U.S. could either build antisatellite weapons also, or provide more protection for U.S. satellites. The DOD had begun on defensive measures such as making satellite wiring less vulnerable, but had also decided on offensive measures as shown in the Vought contract. The small highly maneuverable U.S. device would have sensors allowing it to home in on slight temperature variations between a target spacecraft and its surroundings; it would be so light that a single launch vehicle could carry several into effective orbit. (WPost, Sept 23/77, Al)
NASA reported that its data-analysis facility at KSC had been using a GE multispectral image analyzer developed for screening Landsat imagery to detect early stages of breast cancer, where diagnosis would normally be difficult and rapid multiplication of cancerous tissue would require massive surgery. The only solution previously available had been repeated diagnoses by x-ray, itself a health hazard. Radiological examinations of x-rays had been limited by the range of intensity detectable by the human eye, which was unable to distinguish more than 32 shades of gray, meaning that much of the data would be effectively invisible. However, the microdensitometer on the GE analyzer was able to differentiate 256 shades of gray with great accuracy. The computerized output of the densitometer would enter the analyzer with orders for enhancement, so that data previously invisible to a doctor’s eye could be available for earlier diagnosis. Robert L, Butterfield, electronics engineer at the KSC data-analysis facility, "had worked with radiologist Dr. William L. Walls of Titusville, Fla., for 2yr on a process for automatic enhancement of mammograms to detect early stages of breast cancer before radical surgery would become necessary. The aim of the study had been to differentiate women at low risk of breast cancer from those at high risk, based on the rate of change in the gray shades of the enhanced images, to reduce the need for repeated x-ray diagnoses. (NASA Release 77-102; KSC Release 105-77)
MSFC reported that its homemade Shuttle orbiter [see Nov. 23] had made its practice run through the center and had played stand-in during practice hoists into the 430ft (131m) test stand where the Enterprise would be mated to the other Shuttle components for the first time. Werner H. Rubel, supervisor in MSFC’s product planning branch, said the idea and design for the stand-in orbiter had originated in his group, where Jerry B. Bennich and John L. Ransburgh had done the engineering work; the mockup and prototype assembly branch had performed final assembly. (MSFC Release 77-232) MSFC announced successful completion of the first loading test of the Space Shuttle external tank to ensure that tne test article, test facility, and hardware could handle the super cooled propellants (liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen) to be used by the Shuttle main engine. (MSFC Release 77-234)
The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, announced that the Federation Aeronautique Internationale (FAI) would present the gold space medal, given yearly as the world’s highest award for spaceflight, to former astronaut Michael Collins, director of the Natl. Air and Space Museum, at ceremonies in Rome Oct. 3. The award would recognize Collins’s total contribution to manned spaceflight; he had been command module pilot during the Apollo 11 mission that first landed humans on the moon. The U.S. would also receive 11 other international aviation awards at the world aviation body’s 70th annual conference: 3 USAF pilots had set records last yr, giving the U.S. 5 of 6 possible absolute world records. Capt. Eldon W. Joersz achieved top speed over a straight course of 2193mph; Maj. Adolphus H. Bledsoe achieved speed over a closed circuit of 2092mph; and Capt. Robert C. Helt set an altitude record in horizontal flight of 85 068ft, all using a Lockheed SR-71 twin-engine aircraft. (The USSR held the altitude record of 118 897ft.) Other U.S. award recipients would include Paul E. Yost of S.D. for a world-record balloon flight of 2475mi from Maine to the Azores, lasting 107hr, and Bruce Comstock of Mich, for being the only person to win the U.S. national hot-air balloon championship twice. Associate NASA Administrator Dr. Noel W. Hinners would receive a group diploma of honor awarded to the Viking project team, LaRC, JPL, and Martin Marietta for the first significant scientific information on Mars and its environment. The FAI, formed in 1905, was the world governing body for aviation records; NAA was its U.S. representative. (NAA release Sept 30/77) During September: INTELSAT announced it would award Hughes Aircraft Co.’s electron dynamics division a $126 099 contract to identify traveling-wave tube structures in the 4GHz frequency range with high reliability and uniform performance for use in future INTELSAT comsats. (Intelsat Release 77-24-M)
Newspapers and news services reported the death June 16 of Dr. Wernher von Braun, 65, former director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, whose name had become synonymous with “America in space” when the team he headed used a Jupiter-C rocket developed by him for the U.S. Army to launch Explorer 1, the western world’s first earth satellite, on Jan. 31, 1958. Dr. von Braun had undergone surgery in 1975; he had spent most of his time since Oct. 1976 in the hospital. Dr. von Braun, an enthusiast of space travel and astronomy from his childhood in East Prussia (now part of Poland), in his early teens came across a picture of a rocket traveling to the moon that illustrated an article by Hermann Oberth, pioneer rocket theorist who later was part of the von Braun team at Huntsville, Ala. When von Braun obtained Oberth’s book on rocketry, he realized he would need mathematics to progress in his studies, and went on to obtain a doctorate in physics from the Univ. of Berlin in 1934 at the age of 22 with a thesis on rocket engines. He had continued his interest in the amateur Society for Space Travel (Verein fur Raumschiffahrt, VfR) whose rocket experiments impressed the German army seeking weapons not forbidden by the Treaty of Versailles that ended World War I. Employed by the ordnance department after 1934, von Braun had continued his work with rockets, up to the success of the V-2 used against Britain, until 1945. The von Braun team at Peenemunde then decided to go south and surrender to U.S. forces rather than be captured by the Soviet army. About 120 of von Braun’s associates were taken with him to the U.S. in Operation Paperclip to demonstrate their achievements with captured V-2 rockets. The group went to the U.S. Army’s Redstone Arsenal in 1950 to work on a ballistic rocket called Redstone. When Sputnik 1 went into orbit in 1957 and the Navy’s Vanguard rocket blew up on its pad, a version of von Braun’s Redstone called Jupiter-C (Juno 1) put Explorer 1 into orbit for the U.S. in 1958, and another version carried Alan B. Shepard, Jr., on the first U.S. suborbital flight in 1961. Weeks later, when President Kennedy called for a moon landing within the decade, von Braun got the task of creating the rocket; his Saturn V won the race to put a man on the moon’s surface in 1969. When NASA was established in 1958, Dr. von Braun and his team had transferred to that agency from the army and he had become director of the Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala. After the moon landings, Dr. von Braun went to NASA Hq in 1970 as deputy associate administrator to promote post-Apollo space activities for the U.S. But public interest and support had declined, and Dr. von Braun resigned in May 1972 to become vice president for engineering and development at ORIGINAL PAGE IS OF POOR QUALITY Dr. Wernher von Braun, director of MSFC, photographed in 1969 near the actual Saturn V rocket AS-506 that would launch the first U.S. astronauts to the moon. (MSFC 9-00841) Fairchild Industries, Inc. In 1975 he founded and became first president of the Natl. Space Institute, a private group to increase public understanding and support of space activities; in 1976, when illness overtook him, he remained chairman and was active: in formulating policy. He had resigned from Fairchild late in 1976, effective in Jan. 1977. At a memorial service June 22 in Washington Cathedral, tributes came from former astronaut Michael Collins; Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, longtime associate of von Braun in development of rockets; and Dr. James C. Fletcher, former NASA administrator. An editorial in the W Post that described Dr. von Braun as “an American national hero in the 1960s after being an American national enemy in the 1940s” said that his life should be judged “as one of the new breed of international scientists . . . You can think of him as a hired gun if you like. But you can also think of him as he apparently thought of himself—as a man indentured only to a dream . . . And, unlike most of us, he saw a large part of it come true.” (MSFC Release 77-111; AP wire service obit, June 17/77, nos. 17 & 20; WStar, June 17/77, A-l; NYT, June 18/77,1; WPost, June 18/77, A7; June 23/77, Cll, A24 (ed); C Trib, June 18/77, 1; Today, June 18/77, 1A; June 23/77, 8A)
The Carter administration would not request government funds to develop a supersonic airliner, OMB Director Bert Lance assured Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis). The Chicago Tribune story noted that Prox-mire, who had worked to defeat the U.S. supersonic transport program in 1972, was concerned because the House Committee on Science had asked NASA to do a feasibility study on advanced supersonic aircraft. (C Trib, Apr 6/77, 1-5)
JSC announced that three life sciences specialists would begin a 7-day simulation of a typical Spacelab mission planned for the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. Living aboard a high-fidelity mockup of the Spacelab and Shuttle-orbiter crew deck would be physician Dr. William E. Thornton, mission specialist, and Dr. Carter Alexander, payload specialist, both of JSC, plus payload specialist Dr. Bill A. Williams of ARC. Dr. Thornton would perform medical monitoring and health services for the simulation crew. ARC had shipped a rack of 20 life sciences experiments to JSC for the simulation, and JSC had provided 6 other experiments. Life sciences payloads like the simulation experiments would be flown on the Spacelab missions to show the effects of space on living organisms, improve health care for the crews of actual missions, and help in designing life-support systems for space and earthbound clinical research and health care. (JSC Release 77-32) May IS: NASA announced the expected arrival of a USSR research ship off the Virginia coast near Wallops Flight Center about June 1 to participate in a series of rocket launches to investigate ionization sources in earth’s upper atmosphere. The research ship Professor Vize would operate offshore as the Soviet launch platform. The joint American-Soviet particle intercalibration (JASPIC) project would compare techniques used by both nations to measure the intensity of electrons and protons entering the lower ionosphere, and to define the role of these particles in nighttime ionization of the lower ionosphere in the midlatitudes, thought to cause high-latitude auroras. The researchers would base comparisons on results of 4 sounding-rocket launches from Wallops and 5 Soviet MF-12 rocket launches from the ship. One of the NASA rockets would release a chemical cloud that might be visible over the east coast. A similar joint activity in Aug. 1976 had launched 22 pairs of rockets over a 2wk period. U.S. and Sov et scientists had decided in 1975 that discrepancies shown by the scientific literature in measurements of ionosphere energetic particles might arise from instrumentation differences, and had agreed to joint measurements and subsequent comparisons at the same time and place. (NASA Release 78-71)
ERDA announced that the world’s largest aircraft would airlift one of the heaviest loads ever transported by air June 19 when a USAF C-5 Galaxy carried a U.S.-built 40-ton magnet from Chicago to Moscow for tests of an experimental magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) process for generating electricity. The USSR’s U-25 facility near Moscow, operated by the Soviet Institute for High Temperatures, was the largest MHD test facility in the world. Dr. William D. Jackson, head of ERDA’s MHD program, said that using the Soviet plant would speed commercialization of the process in the U.S. at reduced cost to the American public. The magnet would aid in tests conducted jointly for about 2yr under the U.S.-USSR Energy Agreement of 1974. (ERDA Release 77-100)
Distant planets Uranus and Neptune had turned out to have spin rates similar to earth’s, so that their days correspond to earth days and they had probably come from the same debris that earth did, reported Kitt Peak astronomers Michael J.S. Belton and Bethanne Hayes. Using the observatory’s just-over-400cm telescope, world’s second largest, the astronomers found that (contrary to previous theory) spin rates of the outermost planets (except for Pluto) resembled not those of Saturn and Jupiter but rather those of earth and Mars. The discovery indicated they were solid ice-like bodies, not big balls of gas, Dr. Belton said. Using a smaller telescope at Kitt Peak, a separate 4-member team of scientists had reported the first observation of weather patterns in the upper atmosphere of Neptune. Dr. Richard Joyce and 3 scientists from the Univ. of Hawaii had found a marked increase in Neptune’s reflectivity between April 1975 and March 1976, suggesting the presence of thin transient clouds high in that planet’s atmosphere. Astronomers had been using the planet as a standard measure of brightness, thinking that it experienced no atmospheric changes. (W Post, Feb 20/77, F16)
Launch preparations had begun for the 2-spacecraft mission to outer planets Jupiter and Saturn scheduled for late summer 1977, KSC announced. The center described them as “almost a replay” of the Mars Viking launches in 1975. Launch date for the first Mariner Jupiter/Saturn (MJS) at complex 41 would be Aug. 20, with the second scheduled 10 days later. Preparation for two major launches within a 10-day timeframe had required “the choreography of an intricate ballet,” the center said. Checkout of the Titan Centaur rockets 6 and 7 was in progress; operations personnel expected arrival Apr. 11 of a pathfinder spacecraft to be used for pad tests, along with 2 flight craft expected Apr. 25 and May 23. The MJS spacecraft would weigh 3 times more than the Pioneer 10 and 11 that reached Saturn in 1973 and 1974, respectively, and would carry additional instrumentation such as narrow- and high-resolution wide-angle TV cameras, cosmic-ray detectors, and infrared spectrometers and radiometers to study the outer planets and satellites. John Noble Wilford reported in the NYT that the new vehicles would have a new name—either Voyager or Discovery—fitting the new design for outer planet environments characterized by pale sunlight and great radio distances. The new craft looked like “a giant round ear,” Wilford said, consisting of a dish antenna with struts and booms resembling spider legs. The powerful lightweight radio-transmitter tubes that had been the major problem in building the spacecraft had arrived from the contractor a year behind schedule, reducing the time for “life tests” of their durability and performance. Each of the spacecraft would also carry a 3-computer system to handle failures during flight, in view of the 2.5hr required for round-trip radio signals between earth and Saturn. Trajectories chosen should provide data on particles and magnetic currents (magnetosphere) around Jupiter and Saturn, and if possible Uranus; on the atmospheres of those planets, believed to have gaseous rather than solid surfaces; and on the surfaces of any solid moons of the outer planets. The Uranus encounter would occur in Jan. 1986, nearly 8.5yr after launch from earth. (KSC Release 65-77; NYT, Feb 22/77, 15)
MSFC announced that Roy Gibson, director general of the European Space Agency, had visited the center for the first time to discuss the NASA/ESA Spacelab and other NASA programs with MSFC director Dr. William R. Lucas and his staff. Thomas J. Lee, manager of MSFC’s Spacelab program office, said the visit would familiarize the ESA official with NASA capabilities and programs “in which the Europeans might be interested as potential areas for future cooperative ventures.” (MSFC Release 77-167)
The Natl. Geographic Society announced that Gen. William J. Evans would be recipient for 1976 of the Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy given annually since 1961 to the USAF member, military or civilian, contributing most significantly to U.S. aerospace progress. Gen. Evans, commander of the Air Force Systems Command at Andrews AFB from Sept. 1975 to Dec. 1976, had played a key role in developing defense space systems. (NGS Release Nov 7/77)
DFRC announced that employees John G. McTigue and Stanley Markey would share a $5000 award for working out a way to truck the Shuttle orbiter overland from the Rockwell plant in Palmdale, Calif., to DFRC rather than use the Boeing 747 carrier, eliminating the need for a mate/demate device costing $2.53 million and saving the Shuttle program nearly $800 000. The two men used their knowledge of local terrain, geography, and manpower to set up a ground route with relatively minor problems. (DFRC Release 30/77)
A lack of sunspots during the past yr and a half might have caused recent unusual cold weather and drought in the U.S., Dr. John A. Eddy of the Natl. Center for Atmospheric Research told the 143rd meeting of the Am. Assn, for the Advancement of Science. Dr. Eddy, an astronomer who had studied the complex relation between solar activity and historic and climatic events, had traced short- and medium-term effects over several thousand yr in history records and as far back as 7000yr by measuring carbon-14 levels in tree rings. The theory was that sunspots increased the solar wind (solar particles and radiation that fan the earth) which determined the amount of cosmic and galactic radiation striking the earth. Tree-ring studies echoed abnormal conditions of cold weather and drought when the rings exhibited high levels of carbon-14 resulting from reduced solar-wind activity, resulting from fewer sunspots. “. . . The record of climate [has] a one-to-one correspondence that’s so good I don’t want to believe it,” Dr. Eddy told the Denver meeting. History reported the reign of King Louis XIV of France (1643-1715) as a time of high carbon-14 levels; Eddy said the most severe temperature drops on earth in the last thousand yr occurred in that period. Crops failed in the British Isles, a Norse colony in Greenland perished of cold, and Spanish conquistadors had ridden their horses into Mexico across a frozen Rio Grande. The aurora borealis produced by solar particles striking earth’s magnetic field did not appear during that period; astronomer Edmund Halley was 60yr old when he first saw northern lights in 1715, when the “little ice age” ended. “The fact is, we should have been into a rise of solar activity in the autumn of 1975,” Eddy noted, “and here we are a year and a half overdue into getting that rise.” (W Post, Feb 22/77, A-3; NYT, Feb 22/77, 13)
MSFC officials had said the Space Shuttle main engine might cost nearly twice the original estimate, Today reported. In 1972 when Rockwell’s Rocketdyne Division got the contract to build the engine and deliver 24 units, the estimated cost was $500 million; latest estimate was $450 million more. Project director James R. Thompson and his deputy John Harlow said the increases had resulted not only from design problems and inflation but also from delays and changes ordered by NASA and Congress. {Today, June 25/77, 6A)
A new $1.6-million infrared telescope with a 92-in-dia. mirror (the world’s largest) to be installed soon in an observatory atop 9656-ft Jelm Mt. in Wyo. would be sensitive enough to measure the heat of a warm iron on the moon, according to Today newspaper. Professors Robert Gehrz and John Hackwell of the Univ. of Wyo. had supervised design of the telescope, which would incorporate a sensor also of then-design: a computerized device sensing heat energy collected by the large mirror and converting it to an infrared contour chart depicting heat intensity as a topographical contour map would depict terrain. Jelm Mt. was considered the best site for the observatory because of the low water vapor in the area, a requirement for good IR reception. The two scientists had persuaded the state legislature of Wyo. in 1975 to appropriate $975 000 for the project; remaining funds had come from the Natl. Science Foundation. (Today, June 12/77, 12A)
The NY Times reported that a team of two Soviet crewmen, accompanied for a time by a woman plant expert, had completed a 4mo stay in an isolation chamber to test an artificial environment designed for long interplanetary space missions. The team had breathed oxygen and consumed water and food produced by miniature wheatfields and vegetable gardens occupying about half the space of their 1260ft2 test chamber called Bios 3. The plants, grown by hydroponics (mineralized solutions rather than soils), had exuded enough moisture for drinking and household needs and had provided a third of the proteins and fats and half the carbohydrates in the crew diet, supplemented with dehydrated rations of animal fats and proteins stored for the mission. The Times quoted an Izvestia story describing the experiment and reporting “no significant changes in the physiologic, biochemical and psychological functions of the subjects. Their weight has also remained virtually the same.” Dr. G. Lisovsky, head of the Controlled Biosynthesis Laboratory of the Krasnoyarsk Physics Inst, in Siberia, said that earlier experiments in the series begun shortly after the Gagarin flight of 1961 had tried chlorellas (green single-cell algae) as a source of protein and B-complex vitamins for long space trips. The algae had yielded sufficient oxygen and water but did not provide a balanced diet; researchers had then used early-maturing wheat and vegetables. Agronomist Mariya Shulenko had done the cooking while checking out the hydroponics; after she left, Gennady Asinyarov and Nikolay Bugreyev had shared the job. (NYT, June 30/77, 28) During June: John F. Yardley, NASA’s associate administrator for space flight, was one of 92 persons honored by election to membership in the Natl. Academy of Engineering. His citation was for “contributions to engineering theory and practice and leadership of organizations that pioneered major space programs.” (NAS News Report, June/77, 7)
NASA announced publication of a “space photo album”: an atlas-size book containing 400 images of earth’s natural and cultural features taken by the Landsat earth resources satellite, most of the pictures in full color and near full-page size. Authors were three scientists from GSFC (Drs. Nicholas M. Short, Paul D. Lowman, and Stanley C. Freden) and Dr. William A. Finch, Jr., from San Diego State Univ. Designed as a reference, a textbook, a teachers’ guide, and a supplemental tool for research specialists, the book devoted 40% of its content to images of the 50 United States but included images from all over the world, and repeated some standard views to show seasonal changes. The pictures had a grid-number system for quick location of geological and geographical features described in the captions. The book included sections telling the story of the Landsat program, its systems, applications, and accomplishments, and a supplemental teacher’s guide with glossary and suggestions for classroom use. (NASA Release 77-14)
MSFC announced that four of its engineers had received awards conferred by the Soviet Union for participating in the Apollo-Soyuz test project of 1975. Dr. William R. Lucas, director of MSFC, presented the S. Korolev medal to Harold Ledford (now of the Shuttle projects office) for “outstanding management and technical proficiency as chief engineer for science and engineering” from beginning to end of the ASTP. The USSR also sent Yuri Gagarin diplomas for “exemplary leadership” to three engineers who had chaired stress-corrosion review teams after prelaunch inspection of the long stored Saturn IB launch vehicle revealed a cracked fin. The teams had investigated all launch stages and associated hardware, independently assessing use of corrosion-susceptible materials. Jewel W. Moody’s review team and a Chrysler Corp. team assessed flightworthiness of the Saturn IB; Charles E. Cataldo’s team, with personnel from McDonnell Douglas and the Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell, investigated the S-IVB stage and rocket engines used on the various launch stages to assure they were flightworthy; and Paul H. Schuerer’s team, with personnel from IBM and the Bendix Corp., assessed flightworthiness of the Saturn instrument unit and inertial-guidance platform. (MSFC Release 77-13)
AvWk reported that the seismometer carried on the Viking 2 lander might have recorded the first seismic event since the spacecraft touched down Sept. 3, 1976, on the Utopia Planitia area of the planet Mars. Beginning about 7pm local time for the lander, on Sol 60 (Nov. 7, 1976), the activity continued for about 30min. Viking project observers said the data seemed to have the “proper signature” of a seismic event, similar to data recorded on the lunar surface during seismic events. Donald Anderson, leader of the Viking seismology team, said rough estimates put the center of the activity several thousand km from the lander, but cautioned against labeling the activity a “marsquake” until further studies were done. (AvWk, Jan 10/77, 21)
LaRC announced it would hold the 33rd annual completion exercises Oct. 28 for 34 engineering technicians trained at the center. James P. Mitchell, deputy administrator of the Dept, of Labor’s Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training, would be keynote speaker. LaRC Director Donald P. Hearth would preside at the ceremony and give special recognition to honor graduates. Woodrow W. Midgette, Jr., top honor graduate, would be speaker for the class of 1977, consisting of 7 electrical engineering technicians; 7 electronics technicians; 2 engineering draftsmen; and 18 engineering technicians in the areas of aerospace models, facility operations, materials processing, mechanical development, and systems environments. (LaRC Release 77-51) •
A television relay satellite 22 000 miles in space was the focus of an experiment Jan. 25 in using TV transmissions to conduct judicial proceedings, reducing the travel time and cost of witnesses and lawyers, and to increase the efficiency of the courts, the New York Times reported. The project, result of a yr’s planning between the Univ. of Maryland law school in Baltimore and that of Ohio Northern in Lima, was only partly successful because the yr-old communications technology satellite Cts orbiting over the equator south of Denver repeatedly sent to Baltimore the jagged horizontal lines of TV “snow” during the closing arguments of the mock hearing at Lima. Also, the voice-activated TV cameras, two at each location to cover the two pairs of lawyers and judges, would take over the projection screen whenever anyone wearing a lapel microphone coughed or cleared his throat. The Maryland Center for Public Broadcasting, which sponsored the experiment, had paid nothing for use of the system, and the Cts project leader (Herbert Nunelly of Westinghouse Electric Corp.) operating the teleconference for NASA said he could not compute the cost of an hour’s or day’s use of the satellite. The American Bar Assn, had approved the mock appeals hearing before Judge Joseph F. Weis, Jr., of the U.S Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, and three lawyers before whom law school students were arguing the case. Judge Weis’s ABA project director, Howard Primer of Chicago, cited several actual trials conducted with TV assistance. (NYT, Jan 26/77, B-l)
NASA announced appointment of Maj. Gen. Kenneth R. Chapman, USAF (Ret.), as assistant administrator for its Hq Office of DOD and Interagency Affairs, effective Apr. 1. He would replace Lt. Gen. William. W. Snavely, USAF (Ret.), who left NASA in Sept. 1976 to accept a position in Saudi Arabia. Chapman, a nuclear chemist, was formerly director of the Office of Nuclear Material Safety and Safeguards at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). (NASA Release 77-50)
Aviation^Week reported that a controversy within the U.S. intelligence community had kept the U.S. National Security Council and the president from learning that the USSR had developed a directed-energy weapon designed to destroy U.S. intercontinental and submarine-launched ballistic missile nuclear warheads. (Directed-energy weapons was a term coined to include both laser beam weapons and high energy lasers.) Events that convinced some U.S. analysts that USSR weapons were nearing prototype test stage included: —	Detection by a USAF early-warning system of large amounts of gaseous hydrogen in the upper atmosphere with traces of tritium, considered relics of charged particle beam device tests carried out since 1975 at Semipalatinsk. —	USSR ground tests of a small high energy laser destined for spacecraft launch, possibly related to manned space station activities. —Tests of a new magnetohydrodynamic generator to provide power for a charged particle beam system near the Caspian Sea, monitored by a TRW early-warning satellite stationed over the Indian Ocean. —Establishment of a new test site at Azghir, the Caspian Sea location, under direct control of the USSR national air defense force. —Confirmation by a USAF-sponsored team of U.S. physicists and engineers that the USSR had achieved success in 7 areas of high energy physics needed to develop a beam weapon. —Admission by previously unconvinced U.S. physicists that the USSR could have developed the technology for a charged particle beam device. —Hints by a visiting Soviet physicist last summer that the USSR was far ahead of the U.S. in controlling fusion by compression of small pellets of thermal nuclear fuel, and thus in potential weapons based on fusion technology. The information given by Leonid I. Rudakov during his visit to the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory had later been classified top secret by DOD and ERDA. Maj. Gen. George J. Keegan (USAF, Ret.), former head of Air Force intelligence, had in 1975 reported to CIA head William Colby on Soviet beam technology; the CIA’s nuclear intelligence panel had written a report, no copy of which was ever given to USAF intelligence. AxWk said Colby just before a meeting on strategic arms limitation had notified then Secretary of State Henry Kissinger of a Soviet facility “related to nuclear functions that were unknown”; except for that, no mention of the beam weapon potential had ever been made to the president, the secretary of state, or the National Security Council. AxWk also charged that influential U.S. physicists had sought to discredit Gen. Keegan’s report, their general attitude being that “if the U.S. could not successfully produce the technology to have a beam weapon, the Russians certainly could not.” (AxWk, May 2/77, 16) The next issue of AxWk quoted President Jimmy Carter’s reply to a query from the Washington Post's Dave Broder on the report of a Soviet breakthrough in high energy weapons: "... Is there any such development and does it threaten the U.S. strategic deterrence?” Carter replied: “We have no evidence, Dave, that the Soviets have achieved any major breakthrough in the kind of weapon described ... the assessment of the report in (he aviation magazine has been exaggerated.” (AxWk, May 9/77, 13)
Central Florida officials who had counted on Space Shuttle employment to stimulate the local economy hoped it would differ from the boom-and-bust cycle of the Apollo program, the NY Times reported. The Apollo program had brought about 26 000 employees to KSC, but the economy declined with layoffs when the missions ended. NASA had estimated an 11 000-employee strength at KSC for the first Shuttle mission; the Shuttle program should continue for at least 5yr, agency officials said. (NYTApr 26/77, 13) April27: A series of Stanford Univ. experiments had apparently verified the existence of quarks, hypothetical fundamental pieces of matter possessing fractional electric charges, the NY Times reported. Dr. William Fairbank, professor of physics at Stanford, described the findings—first evidence of quarks since their theoretical exposition in 1964—at the Am. Physical Society annual meeting in Washington, D.C. If matter consisted of protons, electrons, and neutrons (carrying charges of +1, -1, and 0, respectively), quarks—the building blocks of these particles—would have fractional charges of +1/3, -1/3, +2/3, and -2/3. Fairbank emphasized that the results were not final, and that the university had scheduled follow-up tests. (NYT, Apr 27/77, A18)
The Washington Post reported that NASA had asked Congress to let it use $100 million of Space Shuttle production funds to pay for higher costs and delays in developing the first two Shuttles. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA Administrator, told the appropriations subcommittee headed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) that $65 million would bring production up to schedule and the other $35 million would go into contingency reserves that had run between $100 and $150 million; they were “down near zero right now,” Frosch said. Associate Administrator John ip. Yardley said the rocket to put the Shuttle into orbit was 5mo behind schedule; also running behind were computer controls and fuselage parts. Asked why NASA requested a fund shift that might cause problems in the future, instead of a supplemental appropriation, Frosch noted that twice when NASA had asked Congress for supplemental budget increases, it had had to wait until the next fiscal year for approval. (W Post, Dec 2/77, A-2) •
NASA announced the return to Johnson Space Center of former astronaut Dr. Edward G. Gibson, science pilot on the 84-day Skylab 4 mission in 1973-74, after a yr with ERNO of Bremen, W. Germany, prime contractor for Spacelab (a future Space Shuttle payload). Gibson, a Ph.D. in physics and engineering, had left NASA in 1974 to become senior staff scientist at Aerospace Corp., El Segundo, Calif. Gibson would be working in JSC’s Mission Specialist Office, now headed by astronaut Joseph P. Kerwin, M.D. (NASA Release 77-43)
Fifteen yr almost to the day after the U.S. placed its first man in earth orbit, NASA would begin flight tests of the Enterprise-first Space Shuttle orbiter off the assembly line—to be carried piggyback on a Boeing 747 on Feb. 11, 1977, for its first trip through earth’s atmosphere. The flight of Marine Lt. Col. John H. Glenn on Feb. 20,1962, lasted less than 5hr; since that flight, the U.S. had accumulated 22 504 man-hours in space by using 43 astronauts on 31 separate manned missions that included 9 trips around the moon, 6 moon landings, and 3mo earth-orbital missions on Skylab. Glenn’s Mercury spacecraft Friendship 7 weighed only 1315kg, with barely enough room for the pilot and a few instruments, and had parachuted into the Atlantic after its one-time use. The orbiter would weigh 67 500kg empty, could carry up to 7 crew members, and was designed to land on a runway and be prepared for another flight within weeks. In contrast to Glenn’s 3-orbit flight, Spacelab missions carried by the Shuttle might last from 7 to 30 days. First of 6 orbital tests of the Shuttle was set for 1979, and operational flight for 1980. (NASA Release 77-21; NASA pre-ALT rept Feb 11/77)
ASSESS 2 (airborne science/Spacelab experiment-system simulation), scheduled on May 16-26 at ARC, would simulate a Spacelab mission using NASA’s flying laboratory Galileo 2 (a converted Convair-990 jet transport) to acquire data on earth resources, atmospheric pollution, and infrared astronomy. A mobile van would isolate the crew (mission specialist Karl Henize of JSC and four payload specialists: Robert T. Menzies and David S. Billiu of JPL, and Claude Nicollier and Michael Taylor of ESA) when they were not flying. ASSESS 2 would also serve to rehearse Spacelab’s joint NASA-ESA management. (NASA Release 77-80; ARC Release 77-21; MSFC Release 77-67)
The initial phase of Shuttle approach and landing tests (ALT) that began Feb. 18 at DFRC might end ahead of schedule, DFRC announced, if the 4th and 5th flight of the combined 747-and-orbiter vehicles continued to meet program objectives. Donald K. Slayton, ALT program manager, said that if performance measured up to previous successful flights, the 6th test (now scheduled for Mar. 4) would be dropped. Program officials had praised the performance of the 747 and its piggyback passenger, Slayton said; flight data had verified preflight wind-tunnel test results and simulations conducted by Boeing. Early completion of inert tests with an unmanned orbiter would put the orbiter in its hangar a week ahead of schedule to prepare for its next flight, in the captive-active phase. Five flights scheduled in this phase would carry astronaut crews to perform systems checks and go through crew procedures as the 747 went through maneuvers up to, but just short of, actual release of the orbiter. Tests later in the summer would release the orbiter for an unpowered landing on DFRC’s dry lakebed. (NASA Release 77-36; DFRC Release 8-77)
The U.S. superconducting magnet flown to a USSR magnetohydrodynamic facility near Moscow [see June 13] had been bolted into place June 20, ERDA reported. The successful installation, said Dr. William D. Jackson, head of ERDA’s MHD program, was comparable to the 1975 linking of the Apollo and Soyuz spacecrafts. Final leg of the magnet’s journey had been a 10-mile trip on a U.S. truck flown in with the magnet on a USAF C-5 Galaxy aircraft, escorted to the facility by Soviet police. Operation of the system would begin in Oct., and about 20 U.S. scientists and engineers would take part in the 2yr experiment. (ERDA update, June 27/77)
Aviation Week reported that NASA had chosen “key missions” for the six orbital flight tests of the Shuttle and had assigned payloads as well as the weight and volume available for additional experiments. Chester M. Lee, director of Space Transportation System operations, would give Associate Administrator John E. Naugle a list to begin assigning experiments on the basis of the key payloads. For the first mission (tentative schedule, March 1979) the Shuttle would carry only a developmental flight-instrumentation unit that would also ride on other flight tests. On the second mission (July 1979), the first true Shuttle payload would be an instrumented pallet for scientific research amounting to only a small weight in the payload bay but offering the NASA program office a first research opportunity on the Shuttle. On subsequent missions the Shuttle would carry (Sept. 1979) a remote manipulator built by Canada to maneuver a payload on the end of a jointed arm, plus a scientific payload; (Dec. 1979) a large spin-stabilized upper stage to boost an undetermined spacecraft payload into a higher orbit; (Feb. 1980) an interim upper stage for attachment to Skylab, to boost it into a higher orbit, or an alternate payload such as the long-duration exposure facility; (March 1980) a possible classified payload (such as the USAF Teal Ruby system for detecting and tracking aircraft from space) plus a GSFC-designed multimission spacecraft. The seventh orbital mission set in May 1980 would probably be a NASA-ESA Spacelab launch, unless another flight test was needed. NASA noted that unforeseen circumstances could change the key-payload schedule for the first orbital flight tests. (AvWk, May 16/77, 13)
LaRC announced that NASA Administrator Robert A. Frosch would speak at the center’s annual awards ceremony Nov. 29, presenting awards for outstanding leadership, exceptional service, group achievement, and 45-yr service. LaRC Director Donald Hearth would present 4 awards for 40-yr service and 83 for 35-yr service. An award for outstanding volunteer service would go to 4 employees, and 3 would receive the center’s highest honor, the H.J.E. Reid Award, named for the man who had headed the center for 35yr, starting as engineer-in-charge in 1926 and retiring as director in 1961. The center would also make an award for technology utilization for the first time. (LaRC Release 77-55)
NASA announced that simulation of a 1980s Spacelab mission using the Galileo II (a Convair 990 jet transport converted to a sophisticated flying laboratory) would begin May 16 with the first of nine daily 6hr flights from ARC carrying four payload specialists and a mission specialist. Known as ASSESS (airborne science/Spacelab equipment-system simulation), the flights would rehearse NASA and ESA personnel in the roles they would perform in actual Spacelab missions, giving the managers practice in coordinating payload management between experiment operators on Spacelab and investigators on the ground [cf. Apr. 19]. The actual missions would be the first chance for scientific personnel without astronaut training to obtain in orbit data on earth resources, infrared astronomy, medicine, and atmospheric pollution. The Spacelab program that began in 1972 had included 6 simulations to gather data on Shuttle-Spacelab operations; the first set of flights, called ASSESS 1, had consisted of 5 simulations on Galileo over 6 days in June 1975. The new series, ASSESS 2, would fly a different route each of the 9 days, ranging over the Pacific and to the northern and southern borders of the United States, as far east as the Dakotas, and would end May 26. The Galileo II would fly to Paris May 30 for exhibition at the Paris Air Show, then fly to Cologne in West Germany where the ESA experiments would be removed. Mission specialist on ASSESS 2 would be astronaut Karl Henize of JSC with astronaut Robert Parker, also of JSC, as backup. NASA payload specialists on ASSESS 2 would be David S. Billiu and Robert T. Menzies of JPL, with Leon Weaver of MSFC as backup to both; ESA payload specialist would be Claude Nicollier of Switzerland, with Juergen Fein of West Germany as backup. The other payload specialist position would be shared by Michael Taylor of England (on 6 flights) and Klaus Kramp of West Germany (on 3 flights). The simulation would confine the crew to the aircraft and an adjacent mobile van containing living quarters similar to those available on the Shuttle. (NASA Release 77-94; ESA anno May 10/77)
MSFC reported it had established a project office responsible for managing all Space Telescope activities. Manager and deputy would be William C. Keathley and James C. McCulloch. (MSFC Release 77-38)
Soviet news agency Tass reported the death at age 82 of Sergei V. Ilyushin, designer of more than 50 planes from dive bombers of World War II to modern passenger jets. The report did not give the date or cause of death. Mobilized into the czarist army in 1914, Ilyushin had begun as a sweeper in an airplane hangar, became a mechanic, and graduated from flying school in 1917. Shortly after the Russian revolution, he entered the Soviet army and rose to be a lieutenant general. After graduating from the air force engineering academy, where he had designed and built gliders, he was put in charge of airplane construction and after 1931 devoted himself exclusively to aircraft design. His most famous design was the II-2 attack plane called the Stormovik, one of the first to prove the effectiveness of small single-engine craft operating near ground level. The II-2, a two-seater carrying a rear gunner behind the pilot, was the first close-support plane to fire rockets to any degree and was known to the German forces in WWII as the “flying death.” The 11-62, a 4-jet passenger plane, had begun Aeroflot passenger service from Moscow to New York in July 1968. Ilyushin was fourth of the “big six” Soviet aircraft designers to die: A.A. Mikoyan, who with M.I. Gurevich designed the MiG series of fighter planes, died in 1970; A.N. Tupolev, father of the Tu-144 supersonic transport, in 1972; Gurevich in Nov. 1976. Survivors were O.K. Antonov, designer of An-12 and An-22 cargo planes, and Ilyushin’s close associate A.S. Yakovlev, whose Yak fighter usually teamed with the 11-2. Ilyushin’s son Vladimir, a test pilot, might have beaten Yuri A. Gagarin into space in 1961 by several days; officials denied this. (NY Times, Feb 11/77, A24; W Post, Feb 11/77, C6)
LaRC announced that Alex Haley, author of Roots, would be the speaker Feb. 7 at an LaRC colloquium and at an “Our Future in the Cosmos” public lecture. Demand for tickets to the lecture, part of a series sponsored by LaRC and the College of William and Mary, was so great that LaRC had shifted the Haley lecture from the Hampton high school to the Hampton Coliseum. Title of Haley’s talk was “A Saga of Black History.” (LaRC anno Jan 31/77)
JSC announced selection of John C. Stonesifer as head of the center’s new life sciences experiments program office, which would manage planning, development, and operation activities at JSC, ARC, and KSC for all such experiments to be carried on the Space Shuttle and other missions in the future. Stonesifer would continue to act as chief of JSC’s bioengineering systems division until designation of a replacement. He had joined NASA at LaRC in 1957 and transferred in 1962 during the Mercury project to the space task group; he had been chief of JSC’s recovery branch before becoming head of bioengineering systems. (JSC Release 77-72)
