The NAA newsletter reported that competition had become more intense for world-record flights in general aviation. Robert Mucklestone was attempting to regain his around the world title in Class C-l.c Group 1 (2204 to 38581b) that he had first captured in 1975 from Dr. Alvin Marks, who in 1969 had beaten the record of British aviatrix Sheila Scott, who had traveled a 33 OOOmi route in 33 days with a total average speed of 36.15mph, including ground time. In 1977 Harold Benham and Jack Rood in a Beechcraft Bonanza Model 35 had bested Mucklestone’s record. Whatever the outcome of Mucklestone’s current flight, two Texans (William Wisner and Frank Haile) had planned a flight in July 1978 to break the record in that class. (NAA newsletter, June 78, 7)
NASA reported that President Jimmy Carter had named six astronauts to receive the Congressional Space Medal of Honor, first such medal ever awarded by the UlS. The six were Neil Armstrong; Frank Borman; Charles Conrad, Jr.; John Glenn; Virgil Grissom (posthumous); and Alan Shepard, Jr. The President would present the medals Oct. 1 during a visit to KSC on the 20th anniversary of NASA’s establishment. Congress had authorized in 1969 the award “to any astronaut who in the performance of his duties has distinguished himself by exceptionally meritorious efforts and contributions to the welfare of the Nation and of mankind.” Citations were as follows: —	Neil Armstrong, for actions during Gemini 8 in Mar. 1966 to overcome problems and land his spacecraft safely, and for “steady cool professionalism, repeatedly overcoming hazards” on the Apollo 11 mission in July 1969, when he became the first person to walk on the moon. —Frank Borman, who had commanded Gemini 7 in Dec. 1965 and Apollo 8 in Dec. 1968, both of which “significantly hastened and facilitated achievement of the manned lunar landing objective.” On Apollo 8 he had commanded the first manned spacecraft to escape the earth’s gravity. —	Charles Conrad, Jr., who from Aug. 1965 to June 1973 had participated in four spaceflights of increasing duration, complexity, and achievement. His contribution had culminated in the first manned Skylab mission in May and June 1973, when he commanded the crew that performed “lengthy, dangerous, and strenuous activities that were necessary to repair damage inflicted on the orbital workshop during launch and thereby save the two-billion-dollar program.” —	John Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the earth in the third manned mission of Project Mercury in Feb. 1962, when his professional handling of extreme difficulties with the spacecraft “demonstrated the value of the human pilot in space. ... He returned to a nation and a world that seized on him as a major hero. This difficult role he handled with the same polite dignity that he brought to all his assignments.” —Virgil Grissom (posthumous), second American in space who from July 1961 to Jan. 1967 had participated in Mercury and Gemini spaceflights and had lost his life during preparation for the first Apollo flight. Experience gained from the first manned Gemini flight in March 1965, which he commanded, led to “procedures necessary for the support of subsequent long-duration and rendezvous missions.”
Soyuz 29 cosmonauts Vladimir Kovalenok and Alexander Ivan-chenkov had set a space endurance record in Salyut 6 Sept. 20 after more than 96da aloft, the Washington Post reported; the USSR had not indicated how much longer their flight would last. At 9:17am Moscow time (2:17am EDT), the two had surpassed the previous record of 96da lOhr, set by Soyuz 26 cosmonauts Georgy Grechko and Yuri Romanenko Feb. 11 aboard the same spacecraft. The two missions had been similar, consisting of scientific experiments and maintenance activities. Grechko and Romanenko had broken the 84day lhr 16min endurance record set in 1978 by Skylab 4 astronauts Gerald Carr, Edward Gibson, and William Pogue. (W Post, Sept 21/78, A-16; W Star, Sept 20/78, A-13; FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 20/78; AvWk, Sept 25/78, 13)
The Washington Star reported that, despite Soviet efforts to suppress news of the incident, western sources said that in Feb. a Soviet cosmonaut had narrowly avoided hurtling off to his death in space. The near-mishap had occurred during an unauthorized spacewalk by cosmonaut Yuri Romanenko on the record-breaking 96-day orbital flight aboard the Salyut 6 space station. Only cosmonaut Georgy Grechko had been slated to make a spacewalk; however, both cosmonauts had been wearing a new type of spacesuit that included a radio and an hr’s supply of oxygen, with only a simple tether to the spacecraft to keep the cosmonaut from drifting away. During the Grechko spacewalk, after the Salyut had passed over the western Pacific and was out of range of Soviet ground stations, Romanenko (who was untethered) had jumped out of the open hatch. Why he did this remained unknown, although a U.S. space official speculated he might have gotten “space rapture.” Grechko had been able to grab the end of Romanenko’s safety line just before it passed out of his reach. (W Star, June 28/78, A4)
Noise levels of Concorde departures at New York’s John F. Kennedy Inti. Airport continued to be lower than those measured at Dulles Inti. Airport near Washington, D.C., according to the FAA’s February monitoring report. On approach, average Feb. measurement was 98.7db at Cedarhurst on Long Island, compared with a cumulative average through Jan. of 100.4db. Vibration tests conducted by NASA during Feb. had shown the relationship between structural vibration and aircraft noise to be the same for Concorde as for other jet aircraft; the relatively higher levels of structural vibration measured during Concorde operations resulted from overall higher sound levels rather than from any unique characteristics of the Concorde. The FAA’s monitoring equipment had recorded no sonic booms for the 103 Concorde operations during Feb. (FAA Release 23-78)
NASA announced it had officially designated Space Shuttle orbital flight tests (OFT) as Space Shuttle 1 (SS-1), Space Shuttle 2 (SS-2), etc. Following orbital flight tests, the same designation system would continue for Space Transportation System operational flights. For example, if the OFT phase had consisted of six flights, the next flight (first flight of the STS operational phase) would be Space Shuttle 7 (SS-7). John Yardley, associate administrator of STS, had requested that emphasis be placed on a gradual conversion to the new official designation system. (NASA anno Aug 22/78)
NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch and Dr. John Keys, assistant deputy minister of Canada’s Dept, of Energy, Mines, and Resources (EMR), had signed an agreement Sept. 19 in Ottawa to establish a Canadian ground station at Shoe Cave, Newfoundland, to receive SeaSat data and to study data use, NASA announced. Under the agreement, Canada would build and operate a ground station to collect from SeaSat’s five sensors the data needed to support their own surveillance satellite project (SURSAT) and to furnish SeaSat data and related surface-truth information to NASA at no cost. NASA would be responsible for SeaSat data transmission to the station and for necessary technical information. Data from SeaSat would support a number of Canadian experiments to assess the usefulness of its synthetic aperture radar and other sensors for oceanographic research and coastal management. (NASA Release 78-143)
INTELSAT announced appointment of 3 deputy directors and 4 division directors. New deputy director generals were Andrea Caruso, administration; Reginald Westlake, finance; and H. William Wood (former NASA deputy associate administrator for networks, OSTDS), operations and development. New division directors were Francis Latapie, procurement; Emeric Podraczky, engineering; William Geddes, operations; and NandKishore Chitre, systems planning. After INTELSAT’s contract with ComSatCorp for management services expired in Feb., INTELSAT would assume responsibility for all technical, operational, and procurement functions previously performed by ComSatCorp, which would continue to provide certain technical tasks under two service contracts. (INTELSAT Release 78-4-1)
NASA announced it had appointed two U.S. scientists to an international group of five seeking to become payload specialists on the first Spacelab mission scheduled for late 1980. One American and one European would be selected to fly on the laboratory to operate the science instruments. The investigators, working group (IWG), composed of scientists representing all investigators, had selected Dr. Michael Lampton of Berkeley, Calif., space physicist at the Univ. of Calif., and Byron Lichtenberg of Natrick, Mass., vestibular researcher at the Mass. Inst, of Technology. The three payload specialists not chosen to fly would be backup specialists and would particpate in ground-based mission activities at Johnson Space Center. In a similar screening program, ESA had selected its payload specialists from among thousands of applicants from its member states. The Spacelab 1 mission would investigate stratosphere and upper atmosphere physics, materials processing, space plasma physics, life sciences, astronomy, solar physics, earth observations, and space technology. Marshall Space Flight Center had been responsible for payload-specialists training as part of its overall management responsibility for the Spacelab mission; ESA’s Spacelab Payload Integration and Coordination in Europe (SPICE) had managed training in Europe. (NASA Release 78-76; JSC Roundup, June 1/78, 4; DRFC X-Press, June 1/78, 3)
LaRC announced that Dr. Donald “Deke” Slayton would be guest speaker Oct. 5 at a NASA-LaRC colloquium and a public lecture to commemorate NASA’s 20th anniversary. Slayton, one of the original seven astronauts selected in 1959 for Project Mercury and the only one still active in the space program, was orbital flight test manager for JSC’s Space Shuttle Project Office. He had been chief astronaut and director of flight crew operations before going into space in July 1975 with the ApolloSoyuz Test Project. Title of Slayton’s colloquium lecture would be “The Space Shuttle”; his public lecture, “Manned Space Flight: Past Triumphs, Future Challenges.” (LaRC Release 78-47; Langley Researcher, Sept 22/78, 2)
General Electric Co. and Comsat General had presented to the convention of the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association divergent views on whether DOD should have its own satellite communications systems or should lease service from other organizations, AvWk reported. Lee Farnham, vice president of General Electric, said his company, as a hardware manufacturer, would evaluate a number of considerations before entering into any lease arrangement. Joseph O’Conner, vice president for finance and administration of Comsat General, said his firm, as a telecommunications common carrier, had been structured to establish system and lease communications services. At the insistence of Congress, the Navy had issued an RFP for a Leasat system based on a leasing arrangement. Comsat General might submit two bids, one for a dedicated Navy system and one for a system to serve merchant shipping as well as the Navy. GE’s Farnham said a manufacturer would have to consider (in addition to matters such as user requirements and hardware complexity) three factors in making a bid decision: financing, corporate impingement (corporate credit rating), and length of the lease. (AvWk, June 26/78, 23)
NASA announced it had selected four 2-man crews to begin training for Space Shuttle orbital flights. Those chosen were John Young, commander, with Robert Crippen, pilot; Joe Engle, commander, with Richard Truly, pilot; Fred Haise, commander, with Jack Lousma, pilot; and Vance Brand, commander, with Charles Fullerton, pilot. Young and Crippen would crew the first orbital flight test (OFT-1) scheduled for launch in spring 1979 from KSC, with Engle and Truly as backup.	, NASA had planned 6 orbital flight tests increasing in complexity to check out the first U.S. reusable spacecraft. On the first 4 flights, the 75-ton orbiter would make an unpowered landing on a dry lakebed at DFRC; thereafter, it would return to a specially constructed runway at the KSC launch site. NASA had also considered an OFT mission to boost Skylab into a higher orbit; prime and backup crews to implement such a plan would be selected from those already named. (NASA Release 78-44; JSC Release 78-15; DFRC X-Press, Mar 24/78, 4; JSC Roundup, Mar 31/78, 1)
NASA reported that John Yardley, associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, had testified before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications on Space Shuttle status. Yardley said a detailed program review of cost, schedule, and performance had indicated substantial progress that year. He cited successful completion of approach and landing tests of Orbiter 101 (Enterprise), which had been shipped to MSFC for mated ground-vibration tests; mission-duration test firings of the main engines at the rated power level; and completion of the first phase of the 3-engine main-propulsion configuration testing. A review of the Shuttle schedule had shown that all program elements could be ready for a Sept. 28, 1978, first manned orbital flight (FMOF), if all planned tests were successful and if adjustments to the orbiter’s maneuvering-system pod and the solid-fuel rocket motors were complete. Unforeseen problems or unsuccessful tests could delay the schedule; however, NASA believed the probability of flying the FMOF during CY1979 was high. Significant Shuttle problems disclosed by the review had been in the main engine and in vehicle weight. Engine development, although slower than desired, had produced a design that, if tests went well, could be flight-certified by Sept. 1979. The weight problem had not affected early flight tests, but might hamper both the Galileo mission to Jupiter and certain USAF missions. Measures to reduce weight in the orbiter and external tank could satisfy all mission requirements until mid-1984, and performance augmentation options now under study could meet Shuttle mission requirements after that time. NASA would need additional funding to support the revised FMOF schedule, and to complete the Shuttle design and development test and evaluation program. Funding requirements had arisen not from any single program element but from several items (including the main engines, solid-fuel rocket boosters, external tank, and thermal-protection system), on which more work was needed than had been estimated. Shuttle development costs in FY79 and FY80 had exceeded previous plans, and current estimates of total Shuttle development costs were 8 to 9% higher than the earlier estimated $5.2 billion (1971 dollars). NASA had discussed Shuttle funding with OMB .as it affected the FY80 budget, and had reviewed with DOD the potential impact if additional Shuttle development funds were unavailable in FY79. Preliminary assessments had shown the first FMOF would be delayed an additional 6 to 9mo beyond the Sept, date, and delivery of production orbiters would be delayed up to lyr. (NASA Release 78-145; NASA testimony, US Sub-comm on Sp Sci & Appl, Sept 28/78; JSC Roundup, Sept 29/78, 1; Marshall Star, Sept 27/78, 1)
GSFC reported that faint radio signals from 10 million billion miles away had given astronomers the first proof of the long suspected presence of methane (natural gas) outside the solar system. GSFC scientists had detected methane in three locations in deep space: in the Orion A gas cloud, and in gas clouds surrounding variable star RX Boo and carbon star IRC-plus-10216. “The discovery of methane outside our solar system could have an important role in determining the abundance of carbon in the universe,” noted Dr. Kenneth Fox. Methane previously had been detected only on earth, Jupiter, Saturn, and its moon Titan, Neptune, and Uranus. The discovery had confirmed that interstellar space was not devoid of complicated molecules; at least 40 types of molecules had been discovered suspended in space, and the findings were important to scientists attempting to construct models of the origin of the universe. Dr. Fox and Dr. Donald Jennings had searched for the emissions for 3yr using radiotelescopes at the Natl. Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green-bank, W. Va., Kitt Peak near Tucson, Ariz., and the Haystack observatory in Westford, Mass. “Methane now appears to be one of the most abundant molecules in Orion A, perhaps second only to hydrogen [the most abundant gas in the cosmos],” Fox said. Fox and Jennings planned to map the source of methane in Orion A for its precise location and any associations with stars or stellar objects. (Goddard News, Aug 2/78, 2)
NOAA announced it had developed a technique that would permit national weather centers around the world to monitor rainfall over agricultural areas, detect potential flash-flood situations, and predict rainfall from hurricanes while they were still at sea. Once the technique had been perfected, automated, and put into operation, scientists could use earth-orbiting satellites to estimate rainfall from convective (vertically-developed) clouds and to monitor the movement and distribution of precipitation over the planet’s entire surface. Dr. William Woodley and Cecilia Griffith of the Commerce Department’s National Hurricane and Experimental Meteorology Laboratory had adapted the experimental method from a similar system of estimating rainfall from convective, weather systems in the tropics, applied successfully during cloud-seeding experiments in southern Fla. The imagery had revealed a difference between young rain-producing clouds and dying rainless systems, both of which had appeared in bright shades on satellite images. NOAA’s National Weather Service had already made quasi-operational use of a similar method, applied by flood forecasters in predicting flood potential of approaching hurricanes and large thunderstorms. Woodley and Griffith had begun to use the technique in a real-time warning mode to detect potential flash flood situations. (NOAA Release 78-94)
Payload specialist candidates had begun training at MSFC for the late-1980 first Spacelab mission, the Marshall Star reported. The first 5-day session had covered training approach and plans. Trainees were Michael Lampton of the Univ. of Calif., Berkeley; Byron Lichtenberg of the Mass. Inst, of Technology; Ulf Merbold of W. Germany’s Max-Planck Inst.; Claude Nicollier, a Swiss, from the European Space Technology Center; and Wubbo Ockels of Groenigen Univ. in the Netherlands. One American and one European would fly on the mission; the others would assist on the ground. Later in the training cycle, NASA would select those to fly. (Marshall Star, Aug 9/78, 2)
Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) said he would try his best to do away with $5.7 million in “federal pork” for lunar-rock analysis and “to force scientists to compete for lunar sample support with other basic research proposals in the geological sciences,” Defense/Space Business Daily reported. Proxmire said that NASA had spent a total of $41.2 million on lunar-sample analysis and had requested another $5.7 million for FY79. Although the House had approved the request, the Senate had adopted Proxmire’s recommendation to delete the funds, leaving the issue to be resolved in conference during Sept. Proxmire had maintained that lunar-sample research should not enjoy privileged status over other basic research in geology, geochemistry, and geophysics, but should “compete with all other research in these areas, preferably at the National Science Foundation—our principal basic research agency. If the lunar samples have the value claimed for them when the curatorial facility was built, this should be no problem.” Proxmire said the Senate Appropriations Committee had directed NSF to seek proposals for lunar analysis next year as NASA phased out its research program. His correspondence had charged that the primary purpose of lunar analysis appeared to be training graduate students and keeping university laboratories well equipped. “I do not in any way mean to show disrespect for these motives or the participants in the lunar sample program,” Proxmire noted. “However, we have programs for training graduate students. We have programs for providing research equipment to universities. NASA’s moonrock program should not be used for these purposes.” (D/SBD, Sept 6/78, 4)
LaRC announced it would hold a conference on safety, occupational medicine, and environmental health May 15-18, with about 60 representatives from all NASA centers attending. Welcoming remarks by Fred Bowen, LaRC technical manager for management operations, would cover audiometric testing, types of hearing loss, rehabilitative techniques, noise protection equipment, and computerized treadmill data. LaRC Director Donald Hearth’s remarks on the second day would include discussion of workmen’s compensation, disability, continuation of pay status, and LaRC’s occupational medicine and environmental health and safety programs. The May 17 agenda would cover space suit testing, new approaches in workplace health standards, fire protection, Space Shuttle safety challenges, the kinetic method of lifting, and system safety in wind-turbine generators. On May 18 participants would discuss nuclear safety in space systems, Space Shuttle occupant safety, and new firefighting equipment. (LaRC Release 78-28)
LaRC announced that James Patton, Jr., head of the pilots’ office, would receive the Iven C. Kincheloe award at the annual symposium of the Society of Experimental Test Pilots in Los Angeles Sept. 30. The award would honor Patton’s professional accomplishment in initiation, formulation, and conduct of the NASA comprehensive general aviation stall/spin flight research program. John Reeder, chief of LaRC’s TCV program office and a Society fellow, had nominated Patton for the award. In his nomination Reeder noted, “During the (stall/spin) program formulation, Mr. Patton provided invaluable leadership and technical guidance to establish flight safety procedures and ensure a rational and productive flight research program. As a result of his efforts, Langley Research Center has established a stall/spin flight test facility, procedures, and equipment which provide the most sophisticated system to date for general aviation stall/spin research.” Patton had been -in his present position since 1968; he had started as a research pilot with NASA in Apr. 1966. (LaRC Release 78-46)
The National Academy of Engineering elected 100 engineers to membership in the academy, including astronaut Neil Armstrong, the NYT reported. Election honored persons contributing to engineering theory and practice or pioneering in new or developing fields of technology. (NYT, April 2/78, 35; Bridge, Spring 78, 2)
NASA announced it had given David Johnson, director of DOC’s National Environmental Satellite Service (NESS), the 1978 William T. Pecora award for his work in applying satellite remote sensing to monitoring weather and the environment. NASA and DOI had presented the award annually since 1974 for outstanding contributions by individuals and organizations to remote sensing. The 1978 award citation, presented to Johnson Oct. 11 in Sioux Falls, S.D., as part of the fourth annual Pecora memorial symposium on remote sensing, said that Johnson “has devoted a major portion of his scientific and managerial life to the development and implementation of remote sensing systems designed to observe weather patterns, impacts of weather and man on our environment, the climatological trends of the earth, and in the process eliminated or alleviated loss of property and life as a result of natural disasters.” Dr. Pecora, who died in 1972, had been undersecretary of the Interior and a motivating force in NASA’s Landsat earth-resources survey satellite program and in DOI’s EROS (earth resources observation systems) program. (NASA Release 78-155)
GSFC reported that its astronomers believed they were about to confirm for the first time the presence of gold on a star, perhaps as much as 100 billion tons of it. That amount of gold would indicate the star contained one part per 100 000, comparable to earth’s one part per million. William Heacox and David Leckrone of GSFC’s Stellar and Cosmic Astronomy Branch had planned additional observations to confirm the first signs of gold on Kappa Cancrii, a blue-white star visible to the naked eye in the constellation Cancer. The astronomers had found the gold traces on the star while using the IUE satellite to look at chemically peculiar stars rich in exotic elements. (Goddard News, July 19/78, 2)
MSFC announced that the American Inst, of Astronautics and Aeronautics (AIAA) had installed Dr. William Lucas, MSFC director, as a fellow at the 14th AIAA annual meeting Feb. 8. AIAA had selected Dr. Lucas “in recognition of your many outstanding contributions and acknowledged leadership in the professional aerospace community,” according to a letter from AIAA president R. H. Miller. Others named AIAA fellows were former astronauts Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) and David Scott, Dr. Donald Hearth of Langley Research Center, and Harvard Lomax of ARC. Elected an honorary fellow was former NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. {Marshall Star, Feb 15/78, 1)
Alan Shepard, Jr., first American in space aboard a Mercury spacecraft in May 1961, which “demonstrated that his country lacked neither the courage nor the technology to compete in the new arena of space.” He also was cited for showing in Feb. 1971 “the highest qualities of leadership” as commander of Apollo 14, the third lunar landing mission. (NASA Release 78-146)
NASA announced that LaRC physicist Dr. Joseph Heyman had received his third IR-100 award given by Industrial Research magazine for one of the 100 most significant new technical products of 1978. Presentation of the award to Dr. Heyman at a banquet in Chicago Sept. 21 marked the first time the magazine had selected one person three times for the honor. Dr. Heyman’s previous awards had been in 1974 and 1976. His 1978 device, jointly developed at LaRC and Washington Univ., St. Louis, was an acoustoelectric transducer that used very high-pitched sound waves to improve accuracy in measuring deviations in structural properties. Unlike conventional transducers, the new device was insensitive to the shape of sound waves, and would allow researchers to identify and evaluate more accurately material flaws and to characterize biomedical specimens and tissue. Heyman’s first IR-100 award had been for a continuous-wave ultrasonic microemboli monitor, which traced impurities in a patient’s blood during open-heart surgery. His 1976 award had been for an ultrasonic bolt stress monitor to indicate changes in bolt strain of less than one part in 10 000. (NASA Release 78-147; LaRC Release 78-48; Langley Researcher, Sept 22/78, 5)
FBIS reported the answer of Konstantin Petrovich Feoktistov, USSR pilot-cosmonaut, when queried on the future of orbital stations. Feoktistov said they would develop as multipurpose scientific laboratories for extra-atmospheric astronomical observations, and for technological experiments to produce materials unobtainable under earth conditions. Orbital stations could seek out the most effective systems to develop methods for research and development and the design of scientific instruments and equipment. He went on to say: “Very broad prospects are opened up for manned stations if they are examined above all as the basis for industrial construction in space. Not everyone shares this view, but I personally believe that within the next few decades the development of technology will make it possible to actually set the task of creating power plants in space.” Feoktistov noted that such technology would mean putting millions of tons of diverse equipment into space to assemble enormous and complex structures. Such work could never be fully automated, he pointed out, and would require many people to control the equipment and carry out installation work. This would not happen quickly, he concluded, but it should not be relegated to the realm of fantasy. “After all, 17yr ago Yuri Gagarin’s flight also seemed a fantastic achievement.” (FBIS, Moscow Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya in Russian, Apr 12/78)
Mstislav Keldysh, Soviet scientist and mathematician who had been spokesman for the USSR’s space program as head of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, died June 24 at the age of 67, the Washington Post reported. Soviet news agency Tass described the death as sudden. Dr. Michael DeBakey had traveled to the Soviet Union 5yr ago to operate on Keldysh’s circulatory system. Recognized in a wide range of scientific and mathematical disciplines bearing on aviation and rocketry, Keldysh had proved his administrative ability by rising to the top of his country’s scientific establishment. President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences from 1961 to 1975, Keldysh had been not only USSR science spokesman but also a key figure in organizing and developing scientific research throughout the Soviet Union. He had won the Stalin Prize in 1942 for “The Theory of Calculating and Developing Methods of Reducing Various Types of Vibrations in Aircraft,” and in 1946 for “The Front-Wheel Shimmy of the Tricycle (Aircraft) Landing Gear.” In 1943, Keldysh had become head of a top secret aircraft-development institute with increasing administrative responsibilities. As head of the Academy of Sciences, he announced in Oct. 1969, shortly after the U.S. had put men on the moon, that the USSR had abandoned plans to do likewise and would concentrate on putting manned space stations into orbit around the earth. He acknowledged that the Soviet Union had been debating space expenditures, and said, “My personal view is that, when a man has taken his first step into space, you cannot stop further development.” (WPost, June 27/78, B6; FBIS, Tass Inti Serv in Russian, June 26/78)	•
Aerospace Daily reported that John Yardley, NASA’s associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, had addressed the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. Nov. 28 on the importance of Congress’s role in an aggressive space program, contrasting the cautious approach of the Carter Administration. He cited the 1978 introduction of national space-policy bills by Sen. Adlai Stevenson (D-Ill.) and Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.). On the House side, Rep. Ronnie Flippo (D-Ala.) had introduced, and the House overwhelmingly passed, a bill authorizing an unrequested $25 million to broaden and accelerate R&D for a solar power satellite system, including a hardware flight-demonstration phase that the administration had opposed as “premature.”	. The staff of the House Science and Technology subcommittee on space science and applications, chaired by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), had been working on ways for Congress to facilitate “the space industrial revolution,” Yardley noted. He added that “if Congress does all these things, it will be in their tradition,” including taking the lead in developing the nation’s railroad system and passing the Homestead Act in the 19th century. “The same kind of action will be needed soon for the space industrial revolution,” he said; the industrial activity required will “be brought to bear if the climate is correct. It’s up to the government to provide the environment to stimulate growth.” Whether this occurred, he concluded, “may be the difference in the next 50 years as to whether the United States continues to be world leader not only in space but economically—or becomes a second-class power.” (A/D, Dec 1/78, 137)
Researcher William Bainbridge, who had polled registered voters in the Seattle area about attitudes on the space program, reported widespread enthusiasm for the knowledge and practical benefits derived from the space program, Astronautics and Aeronautics magazine said. Bainbridge had offered his poll sample a set of 49 statements as “not good,” “moderately good,” or “extremely good” reasons for continuing the space program: communications satellite benefits had received most positive responses; scientific knowledge attained through space exploration ranked second. The unconventional idea that ranked highest—communication with extraterrestrial intelligence—was approved by 53% of those polled. Bainbridge felt his results showed public appreciation of the practical and scientific results of the space program, and an anticipation of more benefits from new projects. (A&A, June 78, 60)
NASA announced appointment of Neil Hutchinson, Charles Lewis, and Donald Puddy, all of JSC’s Flight Operations Directorate, as flight directors at JSC for the first manned Shuttle-orbital flight, to plan and direct activities of the Mission Control Center during real-time Shuttle operations. They also would be responsible for integrating inputs from all elements of NASA, contractors, and the scientific communities. Hutchinson would manage all activities associated with the Shuttle-ascent phase; Lewis, the on-orbit phase; and Puddy, the orbiter reentry phase. All had served as flight directors during Apollo and Skylab missions. (JSC Release 78-16; JSC Roundup, Mar 31/78, 1)
If the flight of Soyuz 26 cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Georgy Grechko aboard Salyut 6 space station continued to go well, they would establish a new space-duration record in the early morning of March 13, announced the Natl. Aeronautic Association, the organization maintaining official aviation and space records. The cosmonauts would surpass the previous record of 84 days set by U.S. astronauts Carr, Gibson, and Pogue aboard Skylab 4 in 1973. The Soviets had not indicated when the mission would end. On Feb. 10 the Soyuz 26 team equalled the previous USSR manned-spacecraft record of 63 days set by Soyuz 18. (NAA Release Mar 10/78)
The gondola of Double Eagle II, first balloon to successfully cross the Atlantic, remaining parts of its balloon, and some of its equipment would soon become an exhibit at the Smithsonian’s Air and Space Museum, the Washington Star reported. The U.S. embassy in Paris had notified the museum that the three balloonists wanted the Air and Space Museum to be the repository of their craft. They had planned also to present documents and onboard equipment that had not been jettisoned, as well as the balloon envelope (the shell containing the gas). While the balloon was still aloft, Melvin Zisfein, acting director of the museum, had cabled the U.S. embassies in London and Paris to approach balloonists Maxie Anderson, Larry Newman, and Ben Abruzzo on the Smithsonian’s behalf. When Lindbergh was still in the air on his historic flight, Paul Garber had sent a cable to the airfield at Le Bourget asking for the plane, the Spirit of St. Louis, which had become one of the museum’s premier exhibits. “I thought it would be nice to continue in that tradition,” Zisfein said. (WStar, Aug 25/78, A-6)
Space station Salyut 6 would complete a thousand orbits on this date, Tass announced. During the day, cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Georgy Grechko had installed and switched into operation a new life-support-system air filter delivered by Progress 1. Of great interest to Soviet scientists were the crew’s regular reports on natural calamities: dust storms, forest fires, and volcanic activity. Orbital complex Salyut 6/Soyuz 27 would continue its flight. (FBIS, Tass in English, Feb 12/78)
NASA announced signing of an agreement with the National Eye Institute (NEI), Bethesda, Md., for laboratory and clinical tests of a new surgical instrument to remove hard cataracts. Lewis Research Center had developed the instrument jointly with Cleveland ophthalmologist Dr. William McGannon. The NASA-NEI program would include refinement of surgical techniques using the cataract instrument, and design and implementation of clinical trials. The new instrument consisted of a surgical handpiece, a regulated flow system for infusing fluid, and a peristaltic outflow pump with necessary controls. The handpiece would use a high-speed air-turbine drive to power an auger-type cutter capable of both end and side cutting, rotating at speeds between 300 000 and 270 OOOrpm. The control system had a flow-sensing pressure regulator to maintain intraocular pressure under widely varying flow conditions. Use of the rotary cutting instrument would require only a small opening in the cornea, and should apply to the full range of cataract hardness. As part of the joint agreement, NASA and NEI announced that interested companies might apply for a nonexclusive patent license to manufacture and market the flow-sensing pressure regulator, which might be applicable to other types of eye surgery. (NASA Release 78-66; Lewis News, May 12/78, 1)
JSC reported it had begun a new procedure for receiving and processing rare and pristine meteorite samples. Such a program had not been necessary previously because available meteorite fragments had been contaminated by reaction with the soil where they fell, by weather, and by often unsterile handling conditions. The new meteorite facility would contain a near-pristine meteorite collection found in the winter of 1977 near McMurdo Station in Antarctica; the first two meteorite samples were 200- to 300-gram (baseball-size) fragments believed by NSF to be rare carbonaceous chondrites that might include primordial matter from the solar system. Dr. William Cassidy, Univ. of Pittsburgh geologist working under an NSF grant, who had found the samples on an Antarctic ice shelf, had hypothesized that large accumulations of meteorites might exist in areas of the Antarctic, where ancient “blue ice” rose to the surface. Meteorites that fell on Antarctica centuries ago might appear on the surface along with the ice. Although the movement of the ice to the surface was not well understood, within 2 mo (last Dec. and Jan.) Cassidy had found 310 fragments believed to represent between 20 and 50 different meteorites, the most concentrated find known so far. Because of the exceptional preservation possible in the extreme cold and dry environment, Cassidy’s find of 310 samples was probably the least contaminated near-pristine meteorite group ever collected. To ensure proper handling, the NSF and NASA’s Lunar Curatorial Facility in Houston had equipped Cassidy with special sterile equipment to safeguard his collection. Researchers at the meteorite-processing facility, using glove boxes first used to handle material from the moon, would document the samples and make initial characterizations before freeze-drying them to remove any trapped water-ice and making a mold, finally storing the samples in dry nitrogen gas. A special committee representing the NSF, the Smithsonian Museum of Natural History, NASA, and Dr. Cassidy’s team would plan systematic examination of the samples. {JSC Roundup, Feb 17/78, 1)
NASA announced it had made several personnel changes. Richard Smith, deputy director at MSFC, had been appointed deputy associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems at NASA Hq for a one-yr tour of duty beginning August 15. Smith had transferred to NASA in 1960 from the rocket research and development team at the Army’s Redstone Arsenal, when the development operations division of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency had become the nucleus of MSFC. He had managed the Saturn program, and in January 1974 had become director of science and engineering, and later deputy director, of the center. Smith had received NASA’s exceptional service medal for contributions to the Apollo and Skylab programs as well as the medal for distinguished service. (NASA Release 78-112; NASA anno July 19/78) NASA had named Harry Sonnemann deputy chief engineer at Hq, responsible to the chief engineer for managing program assurance, safety and environmental health, and the systems engineering divisions. Sonnemann had come to NASA in October 1977 from the office of the assistant secretary of the Navy, where he was special assistant for electronics and special assistant for antisubmarine warfare and ocean control from 1968 to 1977. He had also worked on the development of large seismic arrays as assistant director for field engineering in DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency’s nuclear test detection office from 1964 to 1968. (NASA anno July 20/78) Scientist-astronaut Dr. Joseph Allen had returned to active flight status at JSC’s astronaut office. From August 1, 1975, until his return to JSC, Allen had been director of the office of legislative affairs at NASA Hq; and he would continue those duties in addition to his astronaut duties until a replacement was named. He had returned to JSC as senior scientist-astronaut and was eligible for selection as a Space Shuttle crewman. NASA had selected Allen as a scientist-astronaut in 1967; he had completed the initial academic training and a 53-wk course in flight training at Vance AFB, Okla. Allen had been mission scientist as a member of the astronaut-support crew for Apollo 15, and was staff consultant on science and technology to the President’s Council on International Economic Policy. (NASA Release 78-33) NASA announced it had appointed Dr. Edward Ifft chief of international programs policy at Hq. Dr. Ifft had been a U.S. Foreign Service reserve officer, whose last assignment was director of the State Department’s office of disarmament and arms control. While a graduate student, Ifft spent a yr at Moscow State Univ. under a U.S.-USSR cultural exchange program doing research on low-temperature physics. He had joined the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1967; then moved to the State Department where he had been deputy chairman of the U.S. delegation that negotiated the threshold test-ban treaty in Moscow in 1974; and had participated in negotiations with the U.S. and USSR for a comprehensive test ban. (NASA Actv, July 78)
NASA reported the U.S. Postal Service would commemorate the Viking missions to Mars by issuing a special postal stamp Thursday, July 20, second anniversary of the Viking 1 landing on Mars. LaRC and the Postal Service would hold a First Day of Issue ceremony in LaRC’s activity center, and Dr. Donald Hearth, center director, would buy the first stamp. Robert McCall, whose two large murals were on display in the National Air and Space Museum, had designed the stamp. NASA had launched two Viking spacecraft toward Mars in Aug. and Sept. 1975; the Viking 1 lander had touched down on Mars at 8:12am EDT July 20, 1976, and the Viking 2 lander arrived at 6:59pm EDT Sept. 3, 1976. During the mission ending in Nov. 1976, the landers and their partner, the orbiter spacecraft, had conducted experiments in 13 scientific disciplines. NASA had extended a reduced Viking mission until May 1978 to gather more information on Mars’s weather, seasonal variations, and soil characteristics; a further reduced mission controlled by JPL would continue through Feb. 1979. The Viking high-resolution photographs of the planet from the surface and from orbit, numbering more than 30 000, had mapped most of Mars and had provided scientists with valuable information. (NASA Release 78-106; LaRC Release 78-34; Langley Researcher, July 14/78, 1)
JPL’s Edward Divita would be featured speaker at a meeting on nuclear waste disposal in Los Angeles Apr. 18, sponsored by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Nuclear and Plasma Sciences Society. Divita, a professional nuclear engineer who had performed several radiation studies of nuclear and space systems, analyzing and assessing the various disposal options, would speak on “Technical Status of Salt Bed, Sea Bed, and Space Waste Disposal.” (JPL Universe, Apr 14/78, 1)
The Natl. Academy of Sciences released a report of the ad hoc committee for review of the Space Shuttle main-engine development program. This review was requested by Senators Adlai E. Stevenson (D-Ill) and Harrison L. Schmitt (R-NM) in Dec. 1977 as an independent assessment by Natl. Research Council of the safety of the main engine during both orbital-flight and operational phases of the Shuttle program. The review was to be completed by the end of Feb. 1978 for consideration during FY 1979 NASA authorization hearings. The committee reported that it saw “no reason to suggest that a safe and reliable main engine cannot be developed ultimately for the manned orbital flight tests and the later operational flights,” but submitted a number of recommendations: first, since the flight schedule was not ready yet, the critical milestones should be reviewed later in 1978. Other recommendations included allowance of “adequate time to analyze root problems . . . rather than selecting technical ‘fixes’ to sure symptoms,” as well as a complete tear-down inspection of the main engine after the first and sixth flights (which had not been envisioned in the schedule). At a March 31 hearing before the Senate subcommittee on science, technology, and space, with Sen. Stevenson as chairman, Dr. Eugene E. Covert of the NRC described the ad hoc committee’s activities and the reasons for its recommendations, expressing appreciation for the cooperation of NASA and its contractors during the review. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, then summarized “the NASA reaction” to the report and its recommendations; Sen. Stevenson commended NASA’s prompt and positive response, but proceeded with further questions on schedule and funding. In addition to NASA staff (including associate administrator John Yardley, MSFC engine project manager J.R. Thompson, Shuttle program director Dr. Mike Malkin, and deputy director Roy Day, and comptroller William Lilly), the Rocketdyne engine project manager Dominic Sanchini was on hand to explain administrative and technical problems encountered with the main engine. The Senate committee report would contain all the testimony, the text of the ad hoc committee report, and further information on specific questions asked by Sen. Stevenson. (Text, hearing report 95-87, Sen Comm Cmte Mar 31/78; “Technical Status of the Space Shuttle Main Engine,” Natl Res Cncl, March 78)
The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology reported that Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.) had called for hearings on the current status of NASA programs. Convened by the subcommittee on space science and applications and chaired by Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), the hearings would review NASA projects, with particular emphasis on the Space Shuttle and the tracking and data relay satellite system. Fuqua said it had been subcommittee practice to hold hearings in the fall before considering NASA requests for new and continuing work in the next year’s budget. John Yardley, associate administrator for space transportation systems, and William Schneider, associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, would testify Sept. 25. Dr. Anthony Calio, associate administrator for space and terrestrial applications, and Dr. Noel Hin-ners, associate administrator for space science, would testify Sept. 26. Dr. James Kramer, associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology, and Raymond Kline, associate administrator for management operations, would both testify Sept. 27. (H Comm on Sci & Tech Release 95-114) The USSR had launched Venera 12 Sept. 14 with a design and purpose similar to those of Venera 11, Tass announced. Onboard systems were functioning normally, and trajectories of both stations were close to original calculations. Venera 12 would also reach the vicinity of Venus in Dec. 1978. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 14/78)
Langley Research Center announced it had selected Frank Godfrey, contract specialist, to participate in the Education for Public Management program of the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard Univ. As part of a.federal government effort to develop promising mid-careerists’ talents and abilities for management in the public sector, the program would train individuals identified by their agencies as having potential to assume increased responsibility for agency programs and policies. Godfrey, who had been at LaRC since 1974, had served as a loaned executive to the 1977 Peninsula United Fund Campaign and was on the adjunct faculty of St. Leo College. (LaRC Release 78-35)
JPL reported it would participate in tracking and data acquisition as well as in navigation during the upcoming Pioneer Venus mission. Hughes Aircraft Co.’s Space and Communications Group had designed 2 spacecraft and 4 probe vessels for the mission, and General Electric Co.’s Systems Division would provide a probe-entry system. R. B. Miller would be tracking and data systems manager at JPL, with William Kirhofer responsible for the navigation phase. First would be an orbiter carried in the nose cone of an Atlas-Centaur scheduled to go aloft from KSC May 20; the multiprobe vessel would be launched Aug. 7, also on an Atlas-Centaur. The flight to Venus would be relatively short, about 6mo for the orbiter and about 5mo for the multiprobe. The orbiter would study the atmosphere and other characteristics of Venus for 243 days. In the multiprobe phase a large entry probe would make a detailed sounding of the lower atmosphere and clouds of Venus, and 3 smaller probes would measure widely separated areas of the planet’s atmosphere. To conserve energy, JPL trackers and navigators would turn on the battery-powered radio transmitters of the probes only about 20min before entry into the atmosphere; ground controllers would not be able to check frequencies between launch in Aug. and shortly before entry in Dec. The orbiter-and-multiprobe mission would carry about 30 instruments for gathering scientific data on Venus. (JPL Universe, Apr 28/78, 1)
Aerospace Daily reported that the Senate Appropriations Committee had approved a FY79 $4,359 billion funding bill for NASA, restoring $20.5 million cut by the House-passed companion bill for development of the teleoperator retrieval system (TRS) that NASA wanted to use to reboost or deorbit Skylab. Although the full committee had not changed the NASA funding approved earlier by Sen. William Proxmire’s subcommittee, Proxmire indicated that when the omnibus bill reached the Senate floor, he would move to cut all its appropriations, including NASA’s, by 2%. The Appropriations Committee also approved a second FY78 supplemental funding bill that included $58.7 million to acquire the Navy’s fourth and fifth Fleet Satellite Communications (FltSatCom) spacecraft, as recommended earlier by the defense subcommittee. (A/D, Aug 2/78, 138)
NASA announced it had decided not to reboost or deorbit the Skylab space station in orbit around the earth because success was unlikely. Uncertainties that had developed in Skylab systems, Skylab lifetime, Space Shuttle schedule, and teleoperator-retrieval system (TRS) delivery had made further planning for a rescue mission impractical. Factors leading to the decision included deterioration of systems aboard Skylab (recurring control-moment gyro anomalies, marginal power conditions, and minimal attitude-control impulse gas); high sunspot activity that was accelerating decay of Skylab’s orbit; and reviews showing that a Skylab-rescue mission would be difficult to arrange before April 1980. Skylab, currently orbiting at about 426km (265mi) altitude, was being maintained in a low-drag attitude and would be continually monitored while NASA assessed the possibilities of damage on reentry, now predicted to occur between mid-1979 and mid-1980. Most of the vehicle would burn up during reentry, but some fragments probably would reach earth’s surface. Skylab’s flight path was 75% over the ocean; the probability of injury or damage from it was less than that from meteorites, according to estimates. (NASA Release 78-191) At a press conference following the announcement, Bill Haines of the Chicago Sun Times asked: “Way back in the olden days I remember that there was a lot of talk about space rescue, and one of the philosophies seemed to be that if we got into trouble or the Russians got into trouble, the other side would come to the rescue. Have you made any approaches at all to the Russians to see if they could do anything about this? If not, why not? And do you intend to?” John Yardley, associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, answered: “This is a little different from the space rescues that we had talked about. As you know, part of the ASTP program was to design docking equipment that could be prototypes of that. And we still have a long-range plan with the Russians, albeit rather fuzzy, to some day have this capability. “With respect to Skylab: After our ASTP, working with the Russians, of course, we had a fairly good working knowledge of the capabilities, at least that we knew of that were done in that program. And at least a year ago we got our own heads together and talked about whether or not they could do anything that we couldn’t do. We concluded that there are many problems that we won’t go into that it probably is not feasible, so we did not ask them. However, they are being informed of what we are doing here and if they make any proposals that we haven’t thought of that could be useful, we will certainly entertain them.” (NASA press conf Dec 19/78)
NASA announced 3 key personnel changes during April: Dr. William Schneider would become associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, responsible for planning, development, and operation of global tracking networks, facilities, and systems for communications and data acquisition and processing for all NASA spaceflight programs. Dr. Schneider had joined NASA and the Gemini program in June 1963, after 2yr as director of space systems at ITT’s Federal Laboratories. He had been mission director for 7 of the 10 manned Gemini missions, and had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal for his service as deputy director of the Gemini program. He had also been mission director and program deputy director for the Apollo mission, and had received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal for his contribution to the success of the Apollo 8 mission. At the end of Apr., Clarence Syvertson had become director of ARC, where he had served as acting director and deputy director. Syvertson had begun with the NACA at ARC in 1948 as a research scientist and assistant branch chief, then chief of the Hypersonic Wind Tunnel Branch, and later was director of the Mission Analysis Division. In 1966 he had become ARC’S director of astronautics, a position he held until appointed deputy director. Syvertson had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal for leadership of the joint DOT-NASA Civil Aviation R & D Policy Study, and in 1976 had been named a fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. R. D. “Duff’ Ginter, assistant associate administrator for energy programs in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, had announced he would retire in June after 28 years of government service with NASA and the U.S. Navy. Ginter’s contributions to space solar power, photovoltaic developments, wind energy systems, and automotive propulsion had placed him in the forefront of advanced technology applications. Ginter had begun his career with NASA in 1960 as chief of the Scout vehicle program. He later held several positions including director of the Centaur program, for which he received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal; director of the Technology Applications Division; director of the Energy Systems Division; and assistant administrator for energy programs. (NASA anno April 3, 10, 26/78; NASA Release 78-57, 78-65, 78-52; ARC Release 78-16)
JSC researchers confirmed that a meteorite found by Dr. William Cassidy last winter on an expedition sponsored by NSF to the Antarctic [see Feb. 17] had proved to be one of the rarest types ever seen. A team of JSC meteorite experts using a binocular microscope had examined the fragment inside a lunar-type glove box flushed with dry nitrogen gas, and had sent an 0.4-gram sample to Dr. Brian Mason at the Smithsonian Institution for petrographic analysis of thin sections. The fragment, 4.5 to 4.6 billion yr old, had been a Type II carbonaceous chondrite (so called because of its high carbon content) of which only 15 other samples had been found, though not in so clean a condition or so well-preserved. These chondrites had been shown to contain amino acids of nonterrestrial origin, suggesting chemical formation of complex organic molecules in other regions of the solar system. The fragment would next be characterized, sectioned, and fully documented; subsequent analysis would then continue. (JSC Release 78-26; JSC Roundup, June 9/78, 1; June 23/78, 1)
KSC reported that Joseph Malaga, center director of administration and management operations, had accepted appointment as vice chairman of the 16th Space Congress to be held Apr. 25 — 27,1979. Sponsored annually by the Canaveral Council of Technical Societies, the congress had originated as a weekend seminar for engineers and technicians and had evolved into an event drawing speakers and delegates from technical communities throughout the world. Malaga would also be NASA’s senior representative to the Congress. (Spaceport News, Aug 18/78, 1)
NASA announced it had appointed Dr. John Klineberg deputy associate administrator in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (OAST), where he would be responsible under the OAST associate administrator for general management and direction of OAST programs. Klineberg had come to Ames Research Center in 1970 from CalTech; while at ARC, he had done fundamental research on transonic flow, particularly on viscous effects and boundary-layer separation. After joining the OAST Aerodynamics and Vehicle Systems Division at Hq in 1974, Klineberg had managed aeronautics research on short- and reduced-takeoff-and-landing (STOL), vertical-takeoff-and-landing (VTOL), and rotorcraft vehicles. Appointed in 1976 to the OAST Aircraft Energy Efficiency Office, he had been responsible for aerodynamics and active-controls elements of that program. (NASA anno Feb 6/78)
NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch had announced establishment of a $250 000 Center Director’s Discretionary Fund to support innovative ideas in research and technology at NASA centers, the Marshall Star reported. Funds would be used exclusively for pursuit of research and technology tasks, not for facility, personnel, travel, or R&D project problems. Priority would be given to support of in-house activities as opposed to studies or research by contractors. Dr. William Lucas, director of Marshall Space Flight Center, said he considered establishment of the fund a significant and favorable step, and he intended to be personally involved in all facets of the use of the fund and to retain direct control of all fund allocations. A small advisory panel of center personnel would assist the director in evaluating proposed fund uses and the progress of approved activities. (Marshall Star, Nov 1/78, 1)
LaRC announced that Dr. Donald “Deke” Slayton would present a portrait of Virgil (Gus) Grissom on loan from NASA to the Grissom Library, Newport News, Va. The library, opened in 1961, had been named in honor of Grissom in Aug. 1961 after his historic flight as pilot of the Mercury-Redstone 4 (Liberty Bell 7) suborbital mission. Grissom, who had lived in nearby Stoneybrook Estates from 1959 to 1962, had kept in touch with the library by working with the children’s summer reading program. He had been killed in Jan. 1967 with Edward White II and Roger Chaffee in an Apollo spacecraft fire during tests at KSC. Grissom and Slayton, who were among the original seven astronauts selected by NASA in 1959, had trained and worked at LaRC during the Mercury program. (LaRC Release 78-52)
Dr. Christopher Kraft, Jr., JSC director, had invited 31 former astronauts to take part in technical briefings and updates on the status of NASA programs at JSC Aug. 21-22, NASA announced. NASA Administrator Dr. Robert Frosch would address the group; John Yardley, associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, would review the Shuttle program. Others giving briefings would be Robert Thompson, manager of the Space Shuttle program; Aaron Cohen, manager of the Orbiter project; Glynn Lunney, manager of the Shuttle payload integration and development program; Lt. Gen. Thomas Stafford, former astronaut now deputy chief of staff for research, development, and acquisition, on the USAF Shuttle program; John Young, chief of the astronaut office; and flight crews of the orbiter approach and landing tests (ALT). Those attending would take conducted tours of the crew systems area, remote manipulator system, full-scale orbiter mockup, and the orbiter aeroflight simulator/Shuttle mission simulator. Astronauts invited were Edwin Aldrin, Jr.; William Anders; Neil Armstrong; Frank Borman; M. Scott Carpenter; Gerald Carr; Eugene Cernan; Michael Collins; Charles Conrad, Jr.; L. Gordon Cooper; Walter Cunningham; Charles Duke, Jr.; Donn Eisele; Anthony England; Ronald Evans; John Glenn; Richard Gordon, Jr.; James Irwin; James Lovell, Jr.; James McDivitt; Edgar Mitchell; William Pogue; Stuart Roosa; Walter Schirra, Jr.; Harrison Schmitt; Russell Schweickart; David Scott; Alan Shepard, Jr.; Thomas Stafford; John Swigert, Jr.; and Alfred Worden. (NASA Release 78-128; JSC Release 78-37)
NASA announced that it had appointed Dr. John McCarthy director of LeRC, effective Oct. 1, 1978. Currently director of Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Center for Space Research and a professor of aeronautics and astronautics, Dr. McCarthy had been widely recognized as an expert in systems engineering and vehicle design. He had served as a member of the Air Force Scientific Advisory Board and chairman of the Aeronautical Systems Division Advisory Group, Air Force Systems Command, and had been a member of the Joint Strategic Target Planning Staff Scientific Advisory Group for the Joint Chiefs of Staff. (NASA Release 78-16)
LaRC reported NASA had appointed astronaut Donald Slayton to manage the orbital-flight test (OFT) program for Space Shuttle at JSC. One of the original 7 Mercury astronauts and a member of the U.S. crew of the Apollo-Soyuz test project, Slayton would be responsible in his new position for all mission-unique activities associated with the 6 Shuttle orbital-flight tests scheduled to begin in the spring of 1979. He would represent program manager Robert Thompson across the total program to ensure timely and appropriate resolution of all OFT mission-unique issues. (LaRC Release 78-12)
NASA announced it had selected 15 Space Shuttle pilot-astronaut candidates and 20 mission-specialist candidates as its eighth group of astronauts, including 6 women, 3 blacks, and an American of Japanese descent. The first women and minority astronauts could be in orbit within 3yrs. Selection criteria for the more than 8000 applicants had been motivation, educational background, and work experience. All but one of the 15 pilot candidates and 7 of the 20 mission-specialist candidates had come from the U.S. military services. Of the 35 selectees, 10 were from the Air Force, 9 from the Navy, and 1 each from the Marine Corps and the Army. The mission specialists selected had come from medical, biological, earth sciences, physical and chemical sciences, and engineering disciplines. The number of selections had been keyed to the expected need for Shuttle crews to supplement the 17 pilot and 10 scientist astronauts now on flight status in Houston. The new astronauts would begin 2 years of training July 1 at Johnson Space Center in Houston. ' Selected to train as mission specialists were Anna Fisher, Shannon Lucid, Judith Resnick, Sally Ride, Margaret Seddon, Kathryn Sullivan, USAF Maj. Guion Bluford, USMC Capt. James Buchli, USAF Maj. John Fabian, Navy Lt. Dale Gardner, Terry Hart, Steven Hawley, Jeffrey Hoffman, Ronald McNair, USAF Capt. Richard Mullane, George Nelson, USAF Capt. Ellison Onizuka, Army Maj. Robert Stewart, Norman Thagard, James Van Hoften; as pilot astronauts, Navy Lt. Cdr. Daniel Brandenstein, Navy Lt. Cdr. Michael Coats, USAF Maj. Richard Covey, Navy lt. Cdr. John Creighton, Navy Lt. Robert Gibson, USAF Maj. Frederick Gregory, Stanley Griggs, Navy Cdr. Frederick Hauck, Navy Lt. Cdr. Jon McBride, USAF Capt. Steven Nagel, USAF Maj. Francis Scobee, USAF Capt. Brewster Shaw, Jr., USAF Capt. Loren Shriver, Navy Lt. Cdr. David Walker, and Navy Lt. Cdr. Donald Williams. (NASA press conference Jan 16/78; Marshall Star, Jan 17/78, 1; W Star, Jan 17/78, A-5; AvWk, Jan 23/78, 19)
The Senate had cut $5 million from NASA’s $3.87 billion R&D budget for FY79 before passing a package appropriations bill that included the agency, Aerospace Daily reported. The Senate had first rejected by 44-43, then accepted by 45-42, an amendment offered by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) to cut NASA’s budget and reduce budgets of five other departments and agencies by $805 million. Proxmire’s move might have spared NASA a far deeper cut, because Sen. William Roth (R-Del.) had proposed a 2% across-the-board cut for all agencies and departments covered by the bill (which, for NASA, would have been $80 million). Proxmire had offered his more selective amendment as a substitute, to which Roth had agreed. The amendment did not specify where NASA should cut its R&D. (A/D, Aug 9/78, 169)
Dr. Donald Hearth, LaRC director, had accepted an invitation to serve on the board of governors of the Natl. Space Club, the Langley Researcher reported. The club, a nontechnical nonprofit organization, had been founded in 1957 “to stimulate the advancement and application of space flight and related aerospace technologies for the benefit of all mankind.” It had sponsored luncheons with speakers from the aerospace community and had granted scholarships for postgraduate and doctoral studies in the aerospace sciences. The board of governors would offer advice and counsel and annually nominate and elect the recipient of the Goddard trophy, premier award of the aerospace community. (Langley Researcher, Aug 25/78, 3)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan Lovelace announced appointment of John Boyd as deputy director of DFRC effective Jan. 1, 1979. Since 1970 Boyd had served as deputy director of aeronautics and flight systems at ARC, where he had worked since 1947. Author of many technical reports, Boyd had received several honors for his work, including NASA’s exceptional service award. (NASA Release 78-163; DFRC Release 20-78)
NASA announced that 11 of its 16 launches scheduled for 1979 would be reimbursables (launched by NASA for other agencies or corporations). Paying customers included DOD, NOAA, the United Kingdom, Western Union Corp., ComSatCorp, and RCA. As in 1978, most of the 1979 launches would emphasize use of space for the direct benefit of people: communications, environmental, and meteorological information. Activities in 1979 would include the first launch and orbital flight of the Space Shuttle; Jupiter and Saturn encounters by two Voyager spacecraft; and the Pioneer 11 flyby of the rings of Saturn. NASA would launch the Space Shuttle from KSC into its first orbital flight Sept. 28 with astronauts John Young and Robert Crippen as crew. They would land 53hr later at DFRC. The 1979 schedule would begin with two launches Jan. 25: DOD’s spacecraft charging at high altitudes. (SCATHA) from Cape Canaveral, and a stratospheric aerosol and gas experiment (SAGE-A) from Wallops Flight Center. In April NASA would launch NOAA-A for NOAA and Navy-20 for DOD from Vandenberg AFB. It would launch in May FltSatCom-B from Cape Canaveral, and UK-6 for the United Kingdom from WFC; Westar-C in July and Intelsat V-A in Aug., both from Cape Canaveral for ComSatCorp; in Sept., its third high-energy astronomy observatory HEAO-C from Cape Canaveral, and its Magsat-A from Vandenberg; in Oct., the solar maximum mission (SMM-A) from Vandenberg. NASA would launch Intelsat V-B from Cape Canaveral for ComSatCorp in Nov.; in Dec., NOAA-B for NOAA from Vandenberg, and RCA-C for RCA from Cape Canaveral. (NASA Release 78-196)
NASA announced that the governors of Washington, Idaho, and Oregon had unanimously agreed to participate in a 3yr program demonstrating the use of NASA-supplied satellite data for natural-resources management in their states. Governors Dixy Lee Ray, John Evans, and Robert Straub, together with federal representative Pat Vaughan, constituted the Pacific Northwest Regional Commission. They voted $480 000 from commission funds to support first-yr activities beginning in Apr. 1979. The 3-yr plan would be a follow-up of the Land Resource Inventory Demonstration Project launched by the commission in 1975 during which more than 45 state and local agencies in the 3 states had used satellite data for surveys and inventories of various landcover types. Continuing the program would provide the state agencies doing planning and natural-resource management with an operational capability of extracting and using information from NASA’s Landsat satellite system, and would aid them in using the more sophisticated data from Landsat-C after its launch. The Pacific Northwest program would join others across the U.S. sponsored by NASA’s Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications demonstrating the use of space technology by state and local governments, businesses, and universities. (ARC Astrogram, Mar 23/78, 2)
The Congressional battle over President Carter’s efforts to delete funds for B-l bomber aircraft 5 and 6 would resume after Congress reconvened in Jan., said Aviation Week. The outcome would depend on a Senate rescission move led by Sen. John Stennis (D-Miss.), chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, to uphold the administration’s stand against B-l funding. Last year the House had voted to oppose the Senate rescission stand after Senate-House conferees failed to resolve the issue. Senate B-l proponents led by Sen. Alan Cranston (D-Calif.), Senate majority whip, had joined forces to sustain the House action and return the question to the conference. The administration might move quickly to win endorsement of the Stennis move to rescind while many senators were still away from Washington. (AvWk, Jan 16/78, 15)
Langley Research Center announced it had presented to Thomas Blackstock its first major award for an energy-saving proposal. LaRC Director Donald Hearth had presented Blackstock with a check for $1245, largest monetary award ever given at the center for a suggestion. Blackstock’s idea was to upgrade the high-pressure air-supply system in the continuous-flow hypersonic tunnel so that it would run in an intermittent short-duration-flow blowdown test rather than in the longer duration continuous-flow mode. The tunnel, which represented LaRC’s only large-scale Mach 10 aerothermodynamic-test capability, had been important to the Space Shuttle testing and would aid in developing low-cost advanced space-transportation vehicles. Blackstock’s suggestion could save $30 000 the first yr without compromising the tunnel’s research capability; LaRC’s wind tunnels had consumed one-third of the electrical energy purchased by the center. (LaRC Release 78-24; LaRC Researcher, May 5/78, 1)
NOAA announced that the American Water Resources Assn, would sponsor the fifth annual William T. Pecora memorial symposium June 11-15, 1979, in Sioux Falls, S. Dak. The Dept, of Interior’s U.S. Geological Survey EROS data center would host the program, to focus attention on satellite remote sensing for observing the hydrosphere as a means of averting water shortages and of water management. Participants — scientists from NOAA’s Natl. Environmental Satellite Service, the U.S.G.S., NASA, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, universities, and private industry—would present papers on applications of space technology to all phases of hydrology and water resources. New satellites such as Landsat 3, Nimbus 7, the heat capacity mapping mission satellite, and SeaSat 1; new or improved sensors, including the scanning multifrequency microwave radiometer and synthetic-aperture radar; improved resolution on Landsat and HCMM thermal scanners; and new thermal bands on the advanced very high-resolution radiometer had affected hydrological technology and would be the subject of papers describing these improvements and capabilities. (NOAA Release 78-119)
