Columbia, first Shuttle orbiter destined for launch into space, landed with its Boeing 747 carrier at 11:03 local time on & 15,000-foot runway built for this and future landings at KSC. Among the 3,000 persons awaiting the arrival were astronauts John W. Young and Robert L. Crippen, scheduled as crew on the maiden flight set for November 9. NASA officials said “a series of minor snafus” might delay the first launch until 1980. (W Star, Mar 25/79, A-3; W Post, Mar 25/79, A-6; NY Times, Mar 26/79)
Neil Armstrong, “America’s reluctant space hero,” said the United States should develop a permanent manned orbiting space station for long-duration exposure of people and equipment to the space environment. At an interview about the 10th anniversary of the moon landing, the University of Cincinnati engineering professor who in 1969 had been the first man to walk on the moon said that, if the United States had an ongoing manned space program, “we could have solved the problems” with Skylab. {Today, June 12/79, 16A)
NASA announced creation of a new Headquarters program office called Space Transportation System Operations, headed by an associate administrator not yet appointed, to be responsible for Shuttle operations including scheduling, pricing, launch-service agreements, the Spacelab program, and expendable launch vehicles (except Shuttle upper stages). Dr. Robert A. Frosch said the move would centralize Shuttle services in a user-oriented organization. The former Office of Space Transportation Systems (STS) was renamed Office of Space Transportation System Acquisition; John Yardley would continue as associate administrator for STS development and acquisition, including the Shuttle and its upper stages, associated ground facilities and equipment, and system improvements. (NASA Release 79-127)
The May 25 crash of a DC-10 aircraft killing 275 was predictable in view of previous problems with that plane, Rep. John L. Burton (D-Calif.), chairman, told a House subcommittee on transportation June 11. He asked Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Administrator Langhorne Bond why the FAA had twice previously grounded the DC-lOs for inspection and twice sent them into the air again. After the accident, the FAA waited for 13 days to ground the DC-lOs, “and then only because a federal judge.. .acting on a suit brought by the Airline Passengers Association ordered them to do it,” Washington Star columnist Mary McGrory noted. Engine-mounting pylons, which an FAA memo from California not seen by Bond had called a design fault, apparently caused some of the problems. Bond said that what McGrory called “the worst plane tragedy in U.S. history” was “a single, severe event” when “that pylon experienced an overload of that wing and those fasteners,” insisting that FAA’s actions were proper at the time. Rep. Burton said that since 1974 the FAA had had many pylon problem reports; Bond said they did not form a pattern, as they concerned “individual and random defects in an entire area. . .there was no trend.” In 1975, McDonnell Douglas had suggested some remedies for problems with the pylons; Bond told the subcommittee that manufacturers’ suggestions were not mandatory, and the FAA did not make the airlines follow them. (W Star June 12/79, A-2, A-4)
NASA announced a number of personnel changes. —Eldon D. Taylor, formerly of the NASA Headquarters Office of Space Science and Applications, most recently assistant director of administration for the NSF was approved by the president July 30 as NASA’s first inspector general. He had also been deputy assistant administrator for resource management at the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) before going to NSF. (NASA anno Aug 3/79) —Dr. Lee R. Scherer, director of KSC since January 1975, would become associate administrator for external relations at NASA Headquarters September 2, succeeding Arnold W. Frutkin, who retired June 22. Scherer, who retired in 1964 from the Navy as a captain, was program manager for the lunar orbiter manned spacecraft while on assignment from the Navy in 1962 and was director of DFRC 1971-1975. (NASA Release 79-106; NASA anno Aug 8/79) —Succeeding Scherer as KSC director would be Richard G. Smith, the deputy director since 1974 of MSFC who had been on detail to Headquarters as deputy associate administrator for STS (the Shuttle program). Smith had been in charge of operations during the Skylab reentry. At MSFC, he had been program manager for the Saturn 5 rocket engine that made Apollo possible. (W Post, Aug 9/79, A-ll; NASA anno Aug 8/79) —Dr. Walter B. Olstad, chief of space systems division at LaRC since July 1975, would become deputy associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology at NASA Headquarters effective October 1, succeeding Dr. John M.	Klineberg, who became deputy director of LeRC July 1. Olstad had begun as a research engineer at the NACA Langley laboratory in 1954, working first with transonic tunnels, then in reentry physics. (NASA Release 79-110) —JSC announced that Clifford E. Charlesworth had become acting deputy director August 10, succeeding Sigurd A. Sjoberg, who retired May 18. Charlesworth for three years had been deputy manager of the Shuttle payload integration and development program office, responsible for coordinating JSC technical management and Shuttle users. He was deputy manager of the Skylab program 1970-1972, then manager of JSC’s Earth-resources program office. He joined JSC as a flight controller in 1962, working on Gemini and Apollo missions and was one of the flight directors during Apollo ITs 1969 Moon landing. (JSC Release 79-51)
The $220 million requested by the President as an amendment to NASA’s Space Shuttle program was “essential to allow the... program to proceed in a reasonable manner,” Dr. William J. Perry, undersecretary of defense for research and engineering, told the Senate subcommittee on science, technology, and space. Noting that NASA’s launch predictions were based on the supplemental funding, Perry said DOD was concerned about the adequacy of the Shuttle fleet to meet traffic demands sure to build rapidly “once the Shuttle is operational.” DOD planned to transfer “several programs important to our national security” to Shuttle launch by 1983, and delays in orbiter delivery would mean further use of expendable launch vehicles, with “adverse operational and economic impact.” A House appropriations subcommittee PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED had dropped $70 million for construction of Shuttle facilities at Vandenberg Air Force Base from FY80 budget requests, and the full committee was not likely to ignore the subcommittee’s recommendation. (Text, June 4/79; Today, June 6/79, 1A)
NASA declared the launch of Comstar C on June 29, 1978, to be successful. Put into a transfer orbit by an Atlas Centaur at the Eastern Test Range (ETR), the spacecraft on July 1 successfully fired its apogee motor to go into the desired synchronous orbit. The assessment was signed January 12 by Joseph B. Mahon, director of the expendable launch-vehicle program in the Office of Space Transportation Systems, and by John F. Yardley, associate administrator for space transportation systems. (NASA MOR M-491-201-78-03 [postlaunch] Jan 16/79).
Wire services reported that an explosion that damaged a Space Shuttle engine during test firing at Bay St. Louis, Miss., on December 27 might delay the first Shuttle launch, now scheduled for the end of September. Further tests would await determining the cause of the accident—apparently failure of a valve in a high-pressure pump feeding oxygen to a combustion chamber. The engine had completed 255 seconds of a 52-second test firing when the pump exploded, damaging the engine, and NASA would also need 3 to 4 weeks to repair damage to the test stand. Last September, when NASA announced delay of the first launch, originally scheduled for March, Associate Administrator John F. Yardley warned of further delays “if unforeseen problems arise or the tests are not entirely successful.” {NY Times, Jan 2/79 [UPI], A-13; W Post, Jan 4/79 [AP], A-2)
The Washington Post reported that technicians at Cape Canaveral had lost touch with Satcom 3 December 10 after firing a small engine at 1:57 p.m. to put it on station over the Pacific. RCA spokesman John Williamson said that no one knew what had happened and “there is certainly cause for dismay.” Launched December 6, the 1-ton communications satellite designed for television and telephone relay was in a temporary elliptical orbit at the time of loss. (W Post, Dec 11/79, A-6) —On CBS Evening News, Walter Cronkite and Charles Osgood broadcast a “Night Before Christmas” parody on the loss of Satcom 3, concluding with, “And from somewhere in space comes the seasonal call: Merry Christmas. Good night. And you can’t win ‘em all.” (Text, Dec 11/79) —The Washington Post December 12 ran a feature story about cable television companies that planned to use Satcom 3 for alternative programming, such as Ted Turner who wanted a 24-hour news “superstation” (channel 17 in Atlanta), and two religious networks (“I guess they didn’t pray hard enough,” said an RCA spokesman). NASA had charged RCA $19.9 million to launch Satcom 3, most of it already paid, but RCA. had insured the spacecraft with Lloyds for more than its $50 million market value. (W Post, Dec 12/79, C-D
NASA held a press conference on the launch of Magsat, scheduled for the end of the month from the WTR. Pitt Thome, director of space and terrestrial applications, described the mission as an effort to obtain a global picture of Earth’s magnetic field, data previously available mostly from ground or aerial surveys and therefore both fragmentary and unreliable. A series of satellites (POGO) in the 1960s and 1970s had done some magnetic mapping, and this would be the first update of that information, used for navigation and for locating natural resources. Magsat would carry both scalar and vector magnetometers, so that it could measure not only the extent but also the direction of magnetic forces in Earth’s crust. Variations in the data from those in previous studies would also shed light on tectonic plate motion, the constant though small movement of rigid plates forming the Earth’s crust. The project scientist, Dr. Robert A. Langel of GSFC and John Denoyer of the U.S. Geological Survey described potential use of the Magsat data. Denoyer said he had been in southeast Asia recently with officials interested in oil prospecting, who would use the data in the next few years to look for petroleum as well as minerals. (NASA Release 79-129 (press kit); briefing text, Oct 22/79)
NASA declared successful the May 4 launch of FltSatCom 2 from ETR on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit. An apogee kick motor fired May 6 had put the spacecraft into the desired synchronous orbit. All spacecraft systems were operating normally. John F. Yardley declared November 1 that NASA objectives had been accomplished. (NASA MOR M-491-202-79-02 [postlaunch] Nov 5/79)
JSC said that Columbia, first Shuttle orbiter, would undergo a first major simulated-flight all-systems test on or about December 15 at KSC. Astronauts and ground-support teams would conduct a 24-hour 5-day critical operations test including five launch-and-ascent flight profiles; on-orbit operations; and one entry simulation. John W. Young and Robert Crippen, crew members for the first flight, would take part in the test along with the backup crew, Joe Engle and Richard Truly. First actual launch was scheduled for June 30, 1980. (JSC Release 79-73; KSC Release 246-79)
George C. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that the five “payload specialists” selected last July to operate experiments on the first Spacelab mission in 1981 would begin training January 9 at seven cities in the United States and two in Canada. Selection and training of non-NASA scientists to fly in space was a “famous first” for NASA; the scientists chosen by their colleagues having experiments aboard the Spacelab would be the first noncareer astronauts and would include the first Western Europeans and the first non-U.S. citizens to fly on a U.S. space mission. Three payload specialists were Europeans: Ulf Merbold of West Germany, representing Max-Planck Institute of Stuttgart; Claude Nicollier of Switzerland, representing Europe’s Space Technology Center (ESTEC); and Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands, representing Groenigen University. U.S. selectees were Michael L.	Lampton of the University of California at Berkeley and Byron K. Lichtenberg of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Since October 1978, the five had been in Europe learning to operate experiments designed by European scientists. Two of the selectees would actually fly on Spacelab 1, and the other three would operate the experiment equipment on earth. Spacelab 1 would carry 40 instruments, about equally divided between NASA and European Space Agency (ESA) experiments in terms of weight, volume, and power requirements; fields of investigation would include solar physics, space plasma physics, stratosphere and upper-atmosphere physics, biology, medicine, astronomy, earth observation, materials processing, and technology areas, such as thermodynamics and lubrication. After leaving MSFC, the trainees would visit Redondo Beach (Calif.), the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Philadelphia, Boston, and Montreal (Quebec) and Toronto (Ontario) in Canada; return to JSC in Houston; visit Palo Alto, Calif; and be back at MSFC in Huntsville on March 22. (MSFC Releases 79-1, 79-4)
A United Airlines newsletter reported the first solar-powered flight of an aircraft: Larry Mauro’s Solar Riser, a homemade tailless biplane with about 600 solar cells in upper-wing panels, generating about 60 pounds of thrust to turn a 3-foot fiberglass propeller, enough to carry a 165-pound pilot and 125-pound craft aloft. Mauro flew his plane about a mile at a height of 40 feet during the annual experimental-aircraft convention in Oshkosh, Wise. Astronaut Neil Armstrong had watched assembly of the craft, now in a Wisconsin museum. (UA rept Dec 79)
NASA reported a number of personnel changes during May. —Dr. John E. Naugle, longtime associate administrator currently serving as chief scientist, announced plans to retire June 29, 1979. After receiving a doctorate in physics in 1953 from the University of Minnesota, where he worked before joining the Convair scientific research laboratory, he began his NASA service at GSFC in 1959 as head of the nuclear emulsion section. Naugle served in 1961 as chief of physics in Physics and Astronomy Programs, Office of Space Science; as director of physics and astronomy programs in the Office of Space Science and Applications from 1962 to 1966; as associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and as deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974, becoming associate administrator in 1975. In a reorganization of 1977, he assumed the duties of chief scientist. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, said Naugle was “an effective proponent for space, an international negotiator of distinction, a leader and a guide to a generation of managers.” (NASA anno May 9/79; NASA Release 79-63) —Dr. Robert S. Cooper, director of GSFC since July 1, 1976, announced he would resign June 1 to become vice president for engineering at Satellite Business Systems. Cooper came to GSFC from DOD, where he was assistant director for defense research and engineering, beginning in 1972. He was a research engineer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Lincoln Laboratory and, before that, a professor at MIT. He attended the University of Iowa and Ohio State University and received a doctorate in 1963 from MIT in electrical engineering. (NASA Release 79-60) —JSC announced retirement May 18 of deputy director Sigurd A. Sjoberg after 37 years of service with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). He joined NACA in 1942 as an electrical engineer and went to Houston when his group was relocated from Hampton, Va. He became director of flight operations in 1969 and deputy director of JSC in 1972. He would manage Houston operations for OAO Corporation (JSC Release 79-24; NASA Release 79-58) —NASA announced appointment of Dr. Thomas A. Mutch as associate administrator for space science, effective July 1. Mutch, professor of geological sciences at Brown University, received a doctorate in geology from Princeton University in 1960 and had been a member of NASA's lunar science review board from 1969 to 1973, leader of the Viking project’s lander imaging science team, and chairman of several NASA committees planning post-Viking exploration of Mars. A mountain climber, he had visited the Himalayas twice, most recently in 1978 with a group from Brown University. (NASA Release —NASAreported that astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., would resign at the end of June to become vice president for space programs at Grumman Aerospace. He began as a NASA research pilot at LeRC in 1959, followed by three years at DFRC, and was one of 19 astronauts selected in April 1966. As pilot of Apollo 73’s lunar module, he assisted in converting it into a “lifeboat” for the crew after an explosion in the service module about 55 hours after launch. He had been technical assistant to the manager of the Space Shuttle orbiter project and commanded one of the two crews piloting the Enterprise in approach-and-landing tests in 1977. (NASA Release 79-79) —MSFC announced appointment of Dr. Mathias R Siebel as manager of the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, La., succeeding Robert C. Littlefield, who died May 12. (MSFC Release 79-52) —KSC announced retirement of Dr. Walter J. Kapryan, director of Shuttle operations, and appointment of George F. Page to fill that position, effective June 1. Kapryan began in 1947 at the Langley laboratory when it was NACA headquarters and went to Cape Canaveral as project engineer for Mercury Redstone 1. In 1963 he established the Gemini program office at KSC; he was deputy director of launch operations until September 1969. He had assisted with KSC’s transition from Apollo to the Shuttle era. (KSC Release 100-79)
Photographs of Jupiter’s moon Io taken by Voyager 1 had revealed a strange “blue snow,” identified as volcanic gases released by continuous eruptions in the equatorial region, the New York Times reported. Dr. Laurence A. Soderblom of the U.S. Geological Survey told the American Geophysical Union spring meeting in Washington, D.C., that wisps of the gas appeared in Io’s south polar area along faults or fractures in the crust; this was the first finding of erupting volcanoes anywhere except on Earth, and the intense volcanic activity was “endlessly repaving [Io’s] surface with volcanic material.” Dr. Edward C. Stone of the California Institute of Technology (CalTech), chief Voyager mission scientist, said that a change in the Voyager 2 plan would include time-lapse photography of Io to pinpoint the nature of the volcanic activity. Dr. John C. Pearl of GSFC said Voyager 7’s infrared detectors showed that the main constituent of the gases was sulfur dioxide, also found in Earth’s volcanic eruptions. Dr. Norman F. Ness, also of GSFC, said Jupiter’s magnetic field extended far beyond Io’s orbit, creating a “big power station in the sky.” (NY Times, May 31/79, B-16) During May: NASA reported that the X-ray telescope on Heao 2 had photographed for the first time an X-ray “burster,” a “bizarre” phenomenon occurring when compact celestial objects less than 50 kilometers (30 miles) in diameter increase suddenly and intensely in X-ray brightness. Such a burst, releasing more X-ray energy in 10 seconds than the Sun does in a week, was first discovered by a Netherlands/U.S. cooperative satellite carrying Harvard-Smithsonian detectors in 1976. Scientists had not defined the nature of the bursts, which might result from explosions similar to a helium bomb on the surface of a neutron star or from violent instabilities in gas flow down a black hole. Heao 2’s picture, said Jonathan Grindlay of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, established the presence of a “steady” X-ray source in a “globular cluster” called Terzan 2, bringing the number of such clusters known to harbor X-ray sources to at least eight, six of these being bursters. The cores of globular clusters (oldest objects in the galaxy, consisting of round swarms of about 100,000	stars) were under study as possible precursors of black holes or of compact binary systems containing either neutron stars or black holes being formed to produce bursting X-ray sources. (NASA Release 79-65)
ComSatCorp announced that it was considering a system to provide subscription television service directly to homes by satellite. For a monthly fee, the service would offer programming over a number of channels simultaneously, broadcast by satellite to small antennas on subscribers’ roofs. Programming “without commercials” would include first-run movies, sports events, educational and cultural programs, transmissions of data or text, and other formats. Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, chief executive officer of ComSatCorp, said technology for such a system already existed and was being tested in Japan; Canada and the United States had already tried it, and ComSatCorp had demonstrated use of Canada’s CTS satellite with a ComSat-developed antenna. The new service could begin as early as 1983, but would require approval by the FCC. (ComSatCorp Release 79-32)
Enterprise, the first Space Shuttle orbiter built, began its last trek across the United States from KSC to DFRC, where “its flight log books will be closed,” said the Marshall Star. DFRC said the craft, which served as prototype in all Shuttle tests to date, would be trucked to Rockwell’s Palmdale facility, where parts would be removed for additional testing and possibly used in constructing future orbiters. Enterprise had made eight captive and five free-flight approach-and-landing tests at DFRC in 1977; it then was ferried to MSFC for ground vibration tests, then to KSC in April this year to check out facilities for handling Columbia, first Shuttle scheduled for launch. JSC Roundup later reported that 750,000 people had crowded airports during the return to California and that Enterprise was a two-day front-page story in area papers at each of the six stopovers and a lead story on television and radio. Donald “Deke” Slayton, now program manager for Shuttle flight-test operations, piloted the T-38 chase plane flying with Enterprise and was spokesman for the Shuttle program during press briefings. (DFRC Release 29-79; Marshall Star Aug 8/79, 1; JSC Roundup, Aug 24/79, 1)
NASA’s Pioneer 11 had encountered Saturn’s bow shock (where the solar wind—a stream of electrified particles from the Sun—bent around Saturn’s magnetic field), project manager Charles Hall reported from ARC, adding that solar storms during the past few days had played havoc with Pioneer’s radio signals. Pioneer was not designed in 1967 to fly to Saturn; that mission arose only after a successful Jupiter flyby in 1974, calling at first for Pioneer to fly through Saturn’s rings on what the Washington Post called a “kamikaze mission.” The most dangerous moment of the 6.5-year 2-million-mile journey would be crossing September 1 through belts of unknown material beyond the ring systems around Saturn that had been visible from Earth, during which Pioneer would risk a potentially fatal collision. Because of intense radiation (solar-particle interference was degrading the quality of Pioneer images), mission controllers at ARC had reduced the data transmission rate by half. Solar storms had occurred late in July and in midAugust, and high-energy particles from the second storm had reached Saturn at the same time as slower particles from the first storm. Reducing the transmission rate would diminish effects of interference and also the quality of the images. Pioneer would enter the dangerous area outside the visible ring system at 10:44 a.m. EDT, but scientists would not know for 86 minutes whether it had survived (the time the signals needed to reach Earth). No one knew the composition of the 2 minute-wide third ring; if it consisted of boulders, Pioneer could probably get past it safely, but a ring of dust particles could riddle the fast-moving craft and end its career. Project scientist Dr. John Wolfe said chances for survival were half and half; pictures already transmitted by Pioneer were better than any yet taken from Earth telescopes. The Washington Post reported September 1 that solar storms had increased the noise level in space to 10 times normal. In early afternoon, Pioneer had flown into a detectable magnetosphere, showing that Saturn was surrounded by a strong and sizable magnetic field estimated at 700 to 1,000 times the size of Earth’s but roughly equivalent in strength. The New York Times reported September 2 that, as of 12:31 p.m. EDT September 1, Pioneer 11 had survived a hail of fine particles to get within 13,000 miles of Saturn for a 4-hour first encounter. During the approach, scientists were keeping watch on the plane of the visible rings through which Pioneer was descending: Dr. James Van Allen of the University of Iowa was first to note Pioneer’s approach to “dangerous ring debris” in its path. However, the 10:30 a.m. crossing at a speed of 48,000 mph had taken only a second, though ARC had to wait until 2:02 p.m. to learn what had happened; when the radio signals continued past that moment without interruption, “a cheer went up.” LaRC’s Donald H. Humes said that Pioneer 11 might have had a close call, as the micrometeoroid detector had registered two impacts during the crossing: this was the limit of the instrument’s counting ability, and more impacts might actually have occurred. The impacts apparently caused no damage. The sharp rise in radiation encountered by Pioneer before it flew under the rings had fallen as abruptly as it rose, and by the time Pioneer was under the rings (closer to the planet) the radiation reading had disappeared completely. Dr. John Simpson of the University of Chicago said the rings were big enough to “scour out” nearly all the radiation trapped by the planet’s magnetic field. (The New York Times quoted Dr. Van Allen as saying that the radiation count while Pioneer flew under the rings was even lower than while the spacecraft was sitting on its launching pad at Cape Canaveral, Fla., 6.5 years ago. Saturn’s radiation, although it would be lethal to an unprotected human, posed no hazard to spacecraft, Van Allen added.) After its close approach, Pioneer swung behind the planet, out of radio contact for 78 minutes, during which its on-board instruments recorded data for later transmission. Upon reemerging, the spacecraft had to cross the ring plane again on its outward journey; the outbound crossing came at 2:32 p.m., and controllers again had to wait for indication that the spacecraft was safe. At 3:55 p.m. the signals affirmed that Pioneer 11 had survived another crossing. This was the last predicted hazard for the spacecraft, which would continue past Saturn to the outer edge of Earth’s solar system and enter interstellar space in 1993, by which time its radio would no longer be audible. The safe passage meant that Pioneer could spend September 2 and 3 photographing Titan and measuring Saturn’s rings from the dark side of the planet; also, that the two Voyager spacecraft following Pioneer could approach without fear of damage. In its two-hour passage, besides recording impacts, Pioneer had photographed a new ring previously undetected by Earth telescopes, called the F ring: scientists already knew of four rings called A through D (in order of discovery, not location), three of them bright enough to be seen from Earth telescopes, and a fifth (or E) ring had been suspected close to the A ring although Pioneer did not report it. Pioneer had also tracked what might be a new Saturn moon orbiting about 70,000 miles out; some thought it might be a known moon, Janus, but it was in a position indicating that it was an entirely new satellite that would bring Saturn’s count to 11, one short of Jupiter’s 12. Pioneer 11 photos of Saturn showed dark blue and green stripes across it just below the north pole; the colors, not so vivid from Earth, probably came from sunlight scattering in upper-atmosphere clouds. Jet streams like those seen on Jupiter appeared to whirl around Saturn at speeds of 300 mph. Pioneer images could give a better idea of the dimensions and composition of the rings when compared with Earth-based photographs. In the six years it had taken to reach Saturn, Pioneer 11 had reported a space-particle strike only once every two months or so, LaRC’s Humes recalled. Once past Saturn, Pioneer was to photograph Titan from about 221,000 miles, record its temperature and atmospheric methane, and try to detect “life chemicals”; as no life was evident on Venus or Mars, this might be the last chance to find extraterrestrial biology in the Earth’s solar system. First images of Titan had shown a fuzzy ball of light indicating a stratospheric layer of orange smog with blue streaks that might denote an atmosphere beneath the smog and clouds. The closest approach at 2:04 p.m. September 2 was 220,000 miles, and Pioneer had taken the first pictures at 260,000 miles. The pictures would be enhanced by computer before scientists could make detailed analysis. On September 3, Pioneer was already more than a million miles from Saturn, relaying no ill effects from the planet’s rings or radiation belts. Early on the morning of September 2, NASA reported loss of about two hours of Titan data from Pioneer transmissions to the Madrid station; ARC controllers did not know whether the loss occurred between spacecraft and station or between Spain and the control center about 40 miles south of San Francisco. A loss between spacecraft and station would be irretrievable: Pioneer had only the one opportunity for Titan observations after its close approach. It was not sending images at the time, but about 15 minutes of a CalTech infrared sensor’s readings on Titan temperature were lost. The cause might have been electrical storms in space or on Earth, or passage of the signals close to the surface of the Sun on their way to the Earth, any of which would make it difficult or impossible for the Madrid station to lock on to the signals. A dramatic difference in day-night Titan temperatures would suggest a thin atmosphere; a thicker, warmer atmosphere might be more hospitable to life forms. Project manager Charles Hall reported September 4 that the Titan data loss previously attributed to radiation disturbances was now thought to result from radiofrequency interference by a Soviet satellite. Both Pioneer 11 and three USSR satellites had been operating on a frequency reserved for scientific use. The Soviet Union had twice agreed to shut down during Saturn encounter, and Hall said NASA had “no doubt the Soviets would have acted” if they had been asked; “we did not request them to turn off their satellite on Monday,” U.S. scientists did not realize at first that signals from a recently launched Soviet satellite might interfere with reception of Pioneer data, being “between 100 and 1,000 times stronger than the signals we were receiving from our spacecraft.” Aerospace Daily said September 6 that the three Soviet satellites that had stopped transmitting September 1-2 for the benefit of Pioneer’s Saturn flyby were early-warning satellites designed to detect U.S. ballistic missile attacks on the Soviet Union. Cosmos 1024, 1109, and 1124 had suspended transmissions September 1 and 2 at NASA’s request; however, no request was made regarding September 3, and Cosmos 1124 had operated as usual. Western analysts questioned, Aerospace Daily noted, “whether the U.S. would suspend communications with any of is early-warning satellites if the Soviets made such a request” during a planetary mission. Pioneer project officials told a September 6 news briefing that the loss of Titan data was not the fault of the Soviet satellite, which was broadcasting before but not during the lost transmission. Poor data had resulted from the combination of solar storm and poor transmission from Madrid. Some data had in fact reached ARC, but was so “noisy” as to be useless. Scientists said the moon discovered by Pioneer was inside the orbit of Janus, previously the innermost known satellite of Saturn; the new ring (labeled G) was between the orbits of Rhea and Titan, beyond the rings visible to Earth telescopes. (NY Times, Sept 2/79, 1; Sept 3/79, A-l; Sept 4/79, C-l; Sept 7/79, A-l; W Post, Sept 1/79, A-3; Sept 2/79, A-l; Sept 5/79, A-10; W Star Sept 1/79, A-4; Sept 2/79, A-l; Sept 7/79, A-l; A/D, Sept 6/79, 17; Today, Sept 1/79, 4A; Sept 2/79, 1A)
NASA announced a short-term research program using the human-powered Gossamer Albatross 2, sister ship of the craft that flew over the English Channel this summer, powered by a pilot pedaling a bicycle-like system to drive the propeller. The study, funded jointly by DFRC and LaRC, would fly a lightweight data system on the aircraft to measure its stability, control, and performance characteristics in human-powered flight; under tow (in propeller-off flight); and under electric-motor in steady-state conditions. NASA would use results of the study in future low-speed lightweight aircraft flying at extreme altitudes. (NASA Release 79-141) During October: NASA reported personnel actions. —Dr. Lee R. Scherer, associate administrator for external relations at NASA Headquarters and former director of KSC, received for a second time the agency’s highest honor, the distinguished service medal, from Dr. Robert A. Frosch in a Headquarters ceremony October 4. Scherer previously received NASA’s exceptional service medal and exceptional scientific achievement medal. (KSC Release 169-79) —L. Michael Weeks, formerly with General Electric, would be deputy associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems Acquisition under John Yardley at Headquarters effective November 5. (NASA Release 79-138; NASA anno Oct 29/79) —The AP reported the death October 22 of Dr. Hans Gruene, 69, KSC director of launch vehicles from 1964 to his retirement in 1973. Born in Germany, he entered the United States in 1945 with a group headed by Wernher von Braun assigned to launch V-2 rockets captured from the German army. He had come to Cape Canaveral in 1952 to set up a joint long-range proving ground that became the ETR. He had concluded his career with the four Skylab launches in 1973. (WStar, Oct 25/79, B-5; Spaceport News, Oct 26/79, 1)
NASA reported that pictures taken by Voyager 2 in July during its trip through the planet Jupiter’s system had revealed a new moon in the ring plane. CalTech researchers David Jewitt and G. Edward Danielson, the latter a member of the Voyager imaging-science team, had found a starlike object in pictures of the ring plane taken less then 24 hours before the closest approach to Jupiter. When exhaustive search found no star to account for the trace in the photograph, the searchers examined another higher resolution image showing the same portion of the ring, trails of known stars, and the same unidentified object. The presence of a moon was shown by differing angles and lengths of actual star trails compared with the trail left by the object. Jewitt and Danielson would make a further study of pictures taken four months earlier by Voyager 1 in an effort to identify the same object. (NASA Release 79-132)
NASA set June 30, 1980, as the date of the first Shuttle launch, depending on several milestones: Columbia rollout from the orbiter-processing facility to the vertical-assembly building in late March 1980; rollout of the complete Shuttle stack (orbiter, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and external tank) from the VAB to launch pad 39A in mid-April; and a flight-readiness (20-seeond) firing of the Shuttle’s main engine on the launch pad in mid-May. Also needed to make this schedule was certification of the Shuttle main engine by June 30, 1980. Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch said that “some time in August or September” would be a much more likely date as unforeseen problems could delay the launch. NASA planned nine unmanned launches in 1980, eight of them reimbursable by other organizations. (NASA Release 79-162) During November: NASA announced appointment effective immediately of Glynn S. Lunney, manager of JSC’s Shuttle payload and integration development program, as acting associate administrator for STS operations at Headquarters. Lunney would set up the new office that resulted from NASA’s decision to separate STS acquisition from operations, reporting to Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan M. Lovelace. Lunney had been with NASA since 1959, serving at LeRC and LaRC and going to Houston when the MSFC was created. There, he was technical director of the Apollo-Soyuz test project 1972-1975 and was deputy associate administrator for space flight at Headquarters before taking the position at JSC in August 1977. (NASA Release 79-156; NASA anno Nov 16/79) —NASA announced’appointment of A. Thomas Young as director of GSFC, succeeding Dr. Robert Cooper, who left government service in June. Young, deputy director of ARC since February 1979, had been with NASA since 1961 and had worked at LaRC as mission director for the Viking mission to Mars and mission-definition manager for the lunar orbiter project. Before assignment to ARC, he had headed the Headquarters Office of Space Sciences planetary program. (NASA Release 79-164; NASA anno Nov 30/79) —NASA announced that John W. Boyd, on detail as deputy director of DFRC since January 1, would return January 1, 1980, to his post as associate director of ARC. He had begun working at ARC in 1949 as an aeronautical engineer, becoming research assistant to the director of ARC in 1966 and deputy director for aeronautics and flight systems in 1970, serving in that position until his detail to DFRC. He was named associate director of ARC in July 1979.	(NASA anno Nov 19/79) —DFRC announced that Robert R Johannes would become deputy director of DFRC, effective December 1, replacing John W. Boyd. Formerly with the U.S. Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory, Johannes joined NASA in 1979 and had been director of engineering at DFRC. (DFRC Release 79-40)
