The Soviet Union launched a redesigned spacecraft, Soyuz 13, carrying three cosmonauts in what the New York Times called a possible bid to break the 185-day endurance record set in October. Launch at 5:18 p.m. Moscow time was from the cosmodrome at Baykonur in Soviet central Asia; Tass reported that all systems were working well. The pilot of the flight was Lt. Col. Leonid Kizim, 39, a first-time flyer in space; flight engineer Oleg Makarov, 47, had flown on Soyuz 12 in September 1973 and Soyuz 27 in January 1978, as well as the “anomaly” of April 1973. Research engineer Gennady Strekalov, 40, also a rookie, had worked for 20 years in spacecraft design. This was the first three-person flight launched by the Soviet Union in nine years, since the crew of Soyuz 11 died during reentry in June 1971 when their capsule sprang a leak and lost pressure. The cosmonauts had not worn their space suits because of crowded conditions on the capsule. Vladimir Shatalov, head of cosmonaut training, said that Soyuz T3 had “all the latest accomplishments of science and technology” including a fast onboard computer to free the crew “to the maximum from . . . .routine operations.” The system was said to perform all calculations needed to dock with another craft such as Salyut 6. However, Radio Moscow did not say how long the flight would last, and Moscow media did not say whether Soyuz T3 would link with Salyut 6, which had been in orbit three years—only that the crew would test a new spacecraft. Soyuz T3 was first of that type to carry a three person crew, 39th in the Soyuz series, and sixth manned craft to be launched in 1980. Two tests of the new design had been successful: an unmanned Soyuz 7"had docked with space station Salyut 6 in December 1979, and Soyuz T2 carrying Yuri V. Malyshev and Vladimir V. Aksyonov had joined the Soyuz 36 crew (record-holders Valery Ryumin and Leonid Popov) there in June of this year. Salyut 6, designed to last only 18 months, had supported four expeditions over its three years in orbit. When Ryumin and Popov left it six weeks ago, after a thorough overhaul of its equipment, they said that it was fit for further use. (NY Times, Nov 27/80, A-3; W Post, Nov 28/80, A-28) During November: MSFC announced that Dr. William R. Lucas, center director, had appointed Thomas J. (Jack) Lee deputy director, effective December 1. Lee had worked at the center and its predecessor since 1958 and for the past six years had managed the Spacelab program, working with ESA on this Shuttle payload. John W. Thomas, Lee’s deputy, would succeed as manager of the Spacelab office. Lucas named John S. Potate, associate director for management, to a new position as associate director. Potate had come to MSFC in 1973 from the Apollo lunar-landing program at KSC and at Headquarters. (MSFC Release 80-149)
Tass reported that Soyuz 38, launched September 18, carried a Cuban cosmonaut and a Soviet mission commander to join cosmonaut Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin, who were within two weeks of breaking a space-endurance record on the orbiting Salyut 6 space station. Armando Tamayo Mendez, 38, was the seventh non-Soviet citizen to fly in the USSR’s Intercosmos program. His companion on Soyuz 38 was veteran cosmonaut Yuri Romanenko. (W Post, Sept 19/80, A-30)
NASA noted the 20th anniversary of the first research of the X-15 rocket plane that opened up the realm of hypersonic flight and contributed significantly to the U.S. space program. The X-15 made 199 flights in a joint NASA-U.S. Air Force-Navy research program between 1960 and 1968, during which it set the standing records for altitude and speed of winged aircraft: altitude of 1,796 kilometers (354,200 feet, more than 67 miles), and on another flight 7,274 kilometers per hour (4,520 miles per hour), or 6.7 times the speed of sound. X-15 pilots included Scott Crossfield, the first; astronaut Joe Engle; and Neil Armstrong, first man on the Moon. In 1954, at the beginning of the X-15 program, hypersonic flight had many unknowns: effects of weightlessness, high heat rates, steep reentry angles, attitude control in space—questions that only actual flight could answer. The program would also explore capabilities and limitations of a human pilot in an aerospace vehicle; analysis of the first 44 flights showed that 13 would have failed without a human pilot. Positive result of the program was the finding that human capabilities of sensing, judging, coping with the unexpected, and using a variety of acquired skills remained undiminished in all key problems of aerospace flight. A significant X-15 contribution to the space program was to demonstrate that simulators could be used for crew training: no X-15s had two seats, so the pilots had to train in simulators. Success of this method led to all-out use of simulators for the space program. Total cost of the program, including construction of three X-15 aircraft, was about $300 million. (NASA Release 80-37; NASA Actv, May 80, 8)
NASA reported that Voyager 1 would approach closest to Saturn November 12, third episode in a 10-year multibillion-mile trip to the outer planets. A briefing on the encounter would take place October 28 at Headquarters with Andrew Stofan, associate administrator; Angelo Guastaferro, director of planetary programs; Dr. Edward Stone of CalTech, project scientist; Ray Heacock of JPL, project manager; and Dr. Bradford Smith, University of Arizona, of the imaging team. (NASA Release Oct 20/80; LaRC Release 80-77)
LaRC said that it would close the Environmenul-Quality Projects Office (EQPO) set up in 1972 to lead NASA’s programs in that area and would turn over future work to the Office of Space and Terreslrial Applications at NASA Headquarters. LaRC was chosen for its experience in remote-sensing research and in developing advanced instrumentation. Other centers worked on particular problems: JSC, Earth-resources study; GSFC, meteorological research; and ARC, aircraft flight problems. EQPO head John Mugler said LaRC’s leadership had helped that center build a growing atmosphere and water-quality program. (LaRC Release 80-28)
.The longest spaceflight in history ended at 12:50 Moscow time when cosmonauts Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin landed near Dzhezkazgan in the. descent module of Soyuz 37 after 185 days aboard the Salyut 6 space station. A previous record of 175 days was set last year by Ryumin and Vladimir Lyakhov; shown on Soviet television immediately after landing, they seemed to have trouble walking and talking. The Soviet Union did not have television coverage of the Ryumin-Popov landing, but the two appeared on television at 9 p.m.. local time in recliners, being interviewed. A Reuters report from the landing, carried by the New_ York Times, said that the two men appeared well when they climbed from their capsule in the rain, Ryumin noting “it’s always pleasant to have a soft landing.” He joked with journalists and insisted on walking two yards unaided “almost without staggering,” said Trud, a trade-union newspaper. Doctors said that neither man seemed to show the physical deterioration suffered by other long-mission crews; Popov had gained 6.5 pounds, Ryumin almost 11. They had kept up their strength in space with exercises. (The New York Times noted that the new record far outdistanced the longest U.S. space mission, the 84-day mission of Skylab 4 with Gerald Carr, Edward Gibson, and William Pogue, that ended in 1974. In the absence of U.S. space exploits since the Moon landings, Western observers said that the new Soviet feat might indicate that the Soviet Union had regained the lead in space; coupled with the delay in the U.S. Shuttle program and public awareness of growing Soviet military might, the Salyut accomplishment might translate into political advantage.) Salyut 6 had been orbiting for three years, being manned for about half that time. Four main and eight visiting expeditions had been working there, backed by automatic cargo craft bringing fuel and supplies. Tass said that the preventive maintenance and resupply procedures carried out by the crews were a big step toward “lasting manned complexes for scientific and national economic purpose.” (FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 11/80; NY Times, Oct 12/80, 23; Oct 13/80, A-13)
ComSatCorp announced that it would dedicate its new ground station on Saipan in the Marianas in November [see During June]. At the ceremony would be Carlos Camacho, governor of the Northern Marianas; ComSatCorp head Joseph V. Charyk; officials of the U.S. Department of the Interior and of U.S. communications carriers; and dignitaries from several Pacific nations. The Saipan station working with an Intelsat 22,300 miles over the Pacific could offer a wide range of services: in addition to more reliable telephone calls, residents would have access to television, telex, data, and facsimile, “an era of modern and improved communications,” the organization said. (ComSatCorp Release 80-38)
Bolted nose up to crawler-transporter, Shuttle orbiter Columbia arrived at its KSC launch pad for final tests before launch into space in 1981. The transporter made the 3.5-mile trip over a rocky road at 1 mph or less, completing the operation about 8:00 p.m. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, told a “shivering crowd” that turned out to watch the journey that “we are now at the threshold of a new capability to investigate the universe.” Richard G. Smith, KSC director, and George Page, Shuttle launch director, said that test firings, simulated countdowns, and other work at the pad would probably delay liftoff to the end of March or early April. Navy Cdr. John W. Young, who had gone into space four times and would command the first flight, told reporters that delays in the program resulted from the concern for safety: more than a year went into attaching, replacing, and strengthening thermal tiles designed to protect the Shuttle astronauts from the heat of reentry. (B Sun, Dec 30/80, 4)
The New York Times reported that Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins would resign effective January 28 as undersecretary of the Smithsonian Institute, an office held since 1976, to become vice president for field operations of Vought, Inc., in Washington, D.C. Collins had joined the Smithsonian in 1971 as director of the National Air and Space Museum. (NY Times, Jan 15/80, C-16)
ComSatCorp announced the formation of a new organization, ComSatCorp World Systems Division, to handle all matters of global telecommunications through the INTELSAT system and global maritime services through the INMARSAT system. John L. McLucas, most recently ComSatCorp vice president for international communications and technical services, would head the new division. Joseph V. Charyk, president and chief executive of ComSatCorp, said that the change responded to FCC concern expressed in a study of ComSatCorp organization, as it would let FCC regulate rates and costs within an organization segment. (ComSatCorp Release 80-34)
ESA reported that European and U.S. astronauts scheduled to fly with the first Spacelab on the ninth Shuttle flight would attend a training session May 27-30 on using an infrared-grill spectrometer to check the composition of the stratosphere to monitor the effect of human activity on its evolution. Besides a commander and copilot of the Shuttle, the Spacelab crew would include two payload specialists (one each from ESA. and the United States) and two mission specialists in charge of the interface between the Shuttle and Spacelab. Two of the five payload specialists attending the training session would be selected six months before flight: physicist Ulf Merbold of West Germany; astronomer Claude Nicollier of Switzerland; physicist Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands; physicist Michael Lampton, University of California at Berkeley; and biomedical engineer Byron Lichtenberg, Massachusetts Institute of Technology. NASA mission specialists attending the training session would be atmospheric physicist Owen Garriott and astronomer Robert Parker. (ESA Info 13)
ComSatCorp announced that it would reduce its charges for international satellite communications by 11.8%. FCC was concerned over the increase in international carrier earnings for these services and had begun a formal rate procedure against ITT WorldCom for the same reason. ComSatCorp president Joseph V. Charyk said that the reduction could save its members about $19 million in 1981 and asked FCC to see that the savings reached the public. (ComSatCorp Release 80-39)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported the death of John A. (Shorty) Powers, 57, who joined NASA as a U.S. Air Force lieutenant colonel to help manage the original seven Mercury astronauts and became known as “the voice of Mercury control.” Powers, who retired from NASA in 1964, was found dead of natural causes January 1 at his home in Phoenix, Ariz. (AvWk, Jan 7/80, 21)
LaRC announced that four of its top managers left NASA February 29. They were deputy director Oran W. Nicks; associate director Dr. John E. Duberg; Richard R. Heldenfels, director for structures; and James E. Stitt, director for electronics. The latter three, who began their federal service in the 1940s with NACA (Dr. Duberg in 1943, Heldenfels and Stitt in 1947), would retire. Nicks, who since 1970 had been deputy director at LaRC, began at NASA Headquarters 1960 working on unmanned programs; he would become executive director of the research foundation at Texas A&M University. (LaRC Release 80-14)
Press reports said that the U.S. Air Force wanted to spend about $1.4 billion to replace the wings of 81 “trouble-ridden C5A cargo transports.” In 1965, Lockheed Corporation had decided to reduce the weight of C5A wings by 5 tons each, so as to underbid Boeing on a contract for building aircraft capable of carrying outsized loads. Robert B. Ormsby, Jr., president of Lockheed-Georgia, which built the planes, told a congressional hearing that the company’s sole objective was to reduce wing weight to “the absolute minimum within the design requirements” and denied any company plan to replace the wings later when they should prove unsatisfactory. The 10,000-pound weight reduction apparently caused cracks in the aircraft calling for wing replacement: “Ormsby did not explain why Lockheed did not know that the modification would reduce the effective life span of the wing from the 30,000	hours specified by the Air Force to an estimated 7,100 hours,” the Washington Star noted. Principal focus of the hearings was on whether the 30,000-hour service life presented by Lockheed and the U.S. Air Force as justification for the $1.4 billion wing-replacement program was really necessary. Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.), chairman of the subcommittee on priorities and economy in government of the House-Senate Joint Economic Committee, said Lockheed’s $2 billion cost overrun on the contract, discovered in 1968, was the largest in defense procurement history. He said the $1.16 billion Lockheed-Georgia would get for wing replacement would be “the biggest cost in history to correct a mistake.” When Ormsby said that his firm would make a $140 million profit on the contract, Proxmire said “a lot of businessmen would love to make a mistake like that.” The subcommittee heard David Keating, legislative director of the National Taxpayers Union (NTU), charge that such a profit would set up “a terrible incentive system.” The message to defense contractors would be, “The more inefficient you are, the more profit you make. Build failures into the system and you’ll be rewarded.” Ormsby responded that, in terms of the critical need for the C5A in the nation’s defense, the $1.4 billion was a “bargain” for taxpayers. Paul C. Paris, director of the center for fracture mechanics at Washington University (St. Louis), said that the U.S. Air Force set up a Structural Information Enhancement Program (SIEP) after receiving a 3-volume report from Rand Corporation suggesting that C5As could serve under “present constraints on operational use” until the year 2000 without significant modification. The U.S. Air Force had put “severe restrictions on the C5A to prevent it from being flown in accord with its design specifications,” Paris said, or it would have lasted “fewer than 3,000 flight hours”; it was “absolutely incredible” that.a major aircraft producer would miss the fatigue life of a wing by a factor of more than 10. He said the SIEP assumed “since the [wing replacement] was going to be done, other less expensive options were not to be considered.” (Paris was the only member of the SIEP steering committee not an employee of Lockheed or the U.S. Air Force.) The Rand report recommended appointing a panel of independent specialists to assess the situation; Proxmire, Paris, and the NTU wanted the assessment done by the congressional Office of Technology Assessment. (W Star, Aug 26/80, A-8; W Post, Aug 26/80, A-8)
FBIS carried Tass reports on the continuing flight of Salyut 6 with its international crew, Bertalan Farkas of Hungary and Valery Kubasov, working with longtime occupants Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin. Preparing Soyuz 35 for return to Earth, the cosmonauts carried into it containers of materials on which research had been completed: exposed rolls of film, space navigation charts, flight logs, biological objects, and substances produced in materials experiments. Used-up equipment would be taken into the “living compartment.” The crew had shot a film about their joint operations, including development of plants in weightlessness and production of metal alloys and castings. Tass reported June 3 that the descent module of Soyuz 35 had landed safely near Dzhezkazgan and that the Intercosmos crew were well. The Soyuz 36 that took them to Salyut 6 was still attached to it; on June 4, the Salyut 6 crew moved Soyuz 36 to the other docking port to make room for another craft. On June 5 at 1719 Moscow time the Soviet Union launched Soyuz T-2 carrying Lt. Col. Yuri Malyshev and, as flight engineer, veteran cosmonaut Vladimir Aksyonov, tenth crew to visit Salyut 6 since its launch. An unmanned Soyuz T launched in December 1979 had docked with Salyut 6 and remained for more than three months, testing new automated features. Before docking with Salyut 6, the crew turned the Soyuz toward the Sun to test its solar batteries, one of the new features. On June 6 Soyuz T-2 docked with Salyut 6 at 1858 Moscow time. Tass said that the approach was automated up to within 180 meters, after which it was controlled by the crew. Konstantin Feoktistov explained that “earlier, during manual approach the station was.. .automatically aligned with the ship and was always directed toward it with its docking unit. .. [the crew] regulated the longitudinal speed and made sure that it went in straight. This time the station was immobile: the craft approached from the side... A quarter turn was made around the station and it came on to the axis level. The manual control system worked well. We think the crew was even better.” Later reports mentioned a malfunction of some automated part and the need for an unplanned manual docking. The visiting cosmonauts performed “dynamic operations” including a photographic turn around the station, which had not been possible before. After a four-day mission, Malyshev and Aksyonov undocked Soyuz T-2 June 9 and returned to the spot near Dzhezkazgan where the previous Soyuz crew landed. Popov and Ryumin remained in Salyut 6, which logged its thousandth day of flight June 24. Progress 10 was launched June 29. (FBIS, Tass in English, June 1-29/80; NY Times, June 10/80, C-2; A/D, June 10/80, 219; AvWk, June 23/80, 18)
MSFC reported signing a $2,271,391 contract with a small business, OAO Corporation of Beltsville, Md., for design, assembly, delivery, test, and checkout within 18 months of a database management system to handle an “immense volume” of instrument data transmitted at “extremely high rates” by spacecraft during missions between 1985 and 1995. The system would accept data at rates tip to 50 million bits per second (44,650 pages of computer printout per minute). “Firsts” to be included in the system would be a data bus of fiber-optic cabling for use in a computer configuration and use of lasers to transmit and receive data at the high rates required. (MSFC Release 80-141) During October: NASA appointed Dr. Jack L. Kerrebrock, head of MIT’s aeronautics and astronautics department, as associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology as of June 1, 1981. Replacing Dr. James J. Kramer who retired in October 1979, he would be responsible for aeronautics, space and energy research, and technology programs. Dr. Walter B. Olstad would act as associate administrator in the interim. (NASA Release 80-156) —JSC announced that Dr. Edward G. Gibson, scientist-astronaut, would leave October 31 to become advanced systems manager for TRW Defense and Space Systems Group. The science pilot on the record 84-day Skylab 4 mission in 1973-1974, he had left NASA in 1974 to work for Aerospace Corporation and for ERNO but had rejoined the agency in March 1977. (JSC Release 80-057) —C.A. Syvertson, ARC director, named Angelo Guastaferro of the Headquarters Office of Space Science as his deputy, replacing A. Thomas Young, recently named director of GSFC. John Boyd, associate deputy director, would remain acting deputy director for six months. (ARC anno Oct 31/80; NASA Release 80-165) —The NAA newsletter reported that Maurice Bellonte, copilot of the first east-to-west transatlantic nonstop flight in 1930, was guest of honor at the National Air and Space Museum on the 50th anniversary of his flight from Le Bourget airfield near Paris to Curtiss Field, NY. In 1929 Bellonte and his copilot Dieudonne Coste had set a world record for longest nonstop flight, 4,788 miles from Paris to Manchuria in 51 hours, 39 minutes. The Atlantic crossing had taken 37 hours, 18 minutes. (NAA nsltr Sept-Oct 80, 2) —The New York Times reported that after long service in orbit and “a galaxy of discoveries” the astrophysics observatories Copernicus and Galileo were nearing the end of their useful lives. Copernicus (Oao 3, launched in August 1972 and named to honor the 500th birthday of the Polish astronomer) carried the first UV telescope above Earth’s atmosphere and made precise measurements of the amount of deuterium in the universe. Galileo (Heao 2, launched in November 1978) carried the only imaging X-ray telescope ever orbited and mapped X-ray emissions from every known quasar. (NY Times, Oct 31/80, A-19) —INTELSAT announced that its Italian signatory member, Telespazio, had set up an award of U.S.$10,000 for contributions to the field of satellite communications. Established on the 10th anniversary of the death of Dr. Piero Fanti, first general manager of Telespazio, the award would go every two years to a researcher or student in an INTELSAT member country who made a contribution of significant value to the field. (INTELSAT Release 80-22-1)
NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch conducted a press briefing on the FY81 budget, assisted by Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, deputy administrator; C. Thomas Newman, deputy comptroller; and Dr. Anthony J. Calio, associate administrator for space and terrestrial applications. Warning the reporters that the information was “embargoed” until President Carter formally gave his budget address to Congress January 28, Robert J. Shafer, NASA deputy director of public affairs, cited the releases on Frosch’s recent trip to China as “not embargoed.” Frosch said that, although NASA’s budget was increasing at a slower rate (9.8% for research and development [R&D] and 11.5% for space science), he considered it a “good start” for the decade, compared to last year when extra costs of the Space Shuttle had precluded new space science program starts. The figures included an extra $300 million requested as a 1980 supplement for Shuttle development expenses, which Frosch said were increased by delays last summer that threatened mission schedules. NASA’s 1981 request included new-start money for the National Oceanic Satellite System (NOSS), to be funded jointly with DOD and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), as well as a gamma-ray observatory to explore the most energetic form of radiation known, exploiting the discoveries of the small astronomy satellite Sas 2, ESA’s Cos B, and the first high-energy astronomy observatory Heao 1. Frosch replied to a question that NOSS would be the first scientific satellite shared with DOD and said its cost would be split among DOD ($13.9 million) and NOAA and NASA, which would pay about $6.4 million and $5.8 million, respectively. NASA’s total budget request was $5,736 billion, including $4,569.5 billion for R&D, $120 million for facilities construction, and $1,047 billion for program management. (Briefing text, Jan 26/80; NASA Releases 80-7, 80-11, 80-13; W Star, Jan 28/80, A-7, B-2; Nature, Jan 31/80, 416)
Newspapers reported NASA’s selection of 19 astronaut candidates for Space Shuttle training, the second group of pilots and scientists specifically picked for that purpose. Those chosen in the 1978 group of 35, including the first women and blacks among civilian astronauts, received astronaut wings at JSC in August 1979. In the new group was Dr. William F. Fisher, husband of Dr. Anna Fisher, who was selected two years ago; the Seabrook, Tex., physicians were the first married couple chosen by the United States. The 8 new pilot candidates (one black) and 11 mission specialists (two women and one Hispanic) would, if successful, join the 62 astronauts now on duty with NASA. The Shuttle was scheduled to fly 30 or 40 missions a year with up to seven astronauts on a mission. Pilot selections were Lt. Col. John E. Blaha, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Charles F.	Bolden, Jr., U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Col. Roy D. Bridges, Jr., U.S. Air Force; Maj. Guy S. Gardner, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Ronald J. Grabe, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Brian D. O’Connor, U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Cdr. Richard N. Richards, U.S. Navy; and Lt. Cdr. Michael J. Smith, U.S. Navy. Mission-specialist selections besides Dr. William Fisher were Dr. James P. Baglan, anesthesiologist; Dr. Franklin R. Chang, physicist; Dr. Mary L. Cleave, research engineer; Bonnie J. Dunbar, JSC flight controller; Capt. David C. Hilmers, U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Cdr. David C. Leestma, U.S. Navy; John M. Lounge, JSC flight controller; Capt. Jerry L. Ross, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Sherwood C. Spring, U.S. Army; and Maj. Robert C. Springer, U.S. Marine Corps. (NY Times, May 30/80, A-ll; W Post, May 30/80, A-8; NASA Release 80-78; JSC Release 80-038)
Joseph B. Mahon, director of NASA expendable launch vehicles program, said that NASA would use such vehicles in 18 missions through the end of September 1981. Of these, 7 would be flown on Deltas, 7 on Atlas Centaurs, 3 on the solid-fuel Scout, and 1 on the Atlas F. Two flights would carry NASA science satellites; NASA would launch the other 16 (for which the energy would be reimbursed) for other government agencies or private firms. The latter would include three weather satellites for NOAA; five DOD payloads; and eight commercial geosynchronous communications satellites for SBS, RCA, Comsat General Corporation, and the INTELSAT consortium. The Office of Space Transportation Systems Operations would run the program. (NASA Release 80-140)
ESA announced it would undertake a new scientific project called Hippar-cos, an astrometric satellite to measure positions, proper motions, and parallaxes of celestial bodies and define the position and displacement velocity of about 100,000 stars. The data would help solve fundamental problems in astronomy. The 376-kilogram advanced-design satellite with a 2.5-year lifetime would be launched into a geostationary orbit by Ariane in mid-1986. (ESA Info Bltn 7) March 7; Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) reported that test pilot John Manke had made test flights in the Gossamer Albatross, part of a joint DFRC-LaRC program using the humanpowered vehicle to collect data on large lightweight craft. Manke’s first flights were human powered, as he pedaled a bicycle-like arrangement to turn the propeller; for later flights, under the direction of veteran Albatross pilot Bryan Allen who had flown it over the English Channel, he used small battery-powered samarium cobalt motors providing about 0.7 horsepower. Manke reached an altitude of 15 to 20 feet, more than he “ felt comfortable with,” and reported that the Albatross was nothing like anything he had flown before, requiring concentration to keep it going straight. Short flights did not require an extra amount of legpower to keep it gomg, but longer flights would be “an exercise in exercise.” (FRC X-Press, Mar 7/80, 3)
KSC reported that Shuttle orbiter Columbia, mated with other elements on a mobile launcher in the VAB, was ready for its first major test as a unified system. On November 24, Columbia moved 300 yards from the VAB to the orbiter-processing facility where solid-fuel rocket boosters and external tank had been assembled on the mobile platform. A Shuttle-interface test running more than two weeks would check electrical and mechanical connections between elements and on-board flight systems. Interface tests originally scheduled earlier this week were delayed by problems including failure of a device providing umbilical link with the orbiter. This was the first flow of flight hardware through KSC processing facilities: the orbiter Enterprise, not built for spaceflight, served as “pathfinder” through the facilities in 1979 but lacked many of the systems installed in Columbia. Individual Columbia systems had passed checkouts in late 1979 and early 1980, but the,upcoming test would check the entire Shuttle system as a unit with the prime and backup crews taking part in simulations of ascent to orbit, abort, and descent to landing. William H. Shick, chief of prelaunch test operations, noted that this would be the first time the astronauts had occupied the cabin with the vehicle in a vertical position; they would “get a feel of what they can and can’t reach,” he added, to assess crew comfort while awaiting launch. (KSC Release 206-80)
NASA announced that Dr. John E. Naugle, its former chief scientist, would return December 1 on a temporary basis as acting chief scientist, principal scientific adviser to the NASA administrator, and continuing member of the Advisory Council responsible for planning long-range solar system exploration and other long-range goals for the agency. Naugle had joined GSFC in 1959 as head of its nuclear emulsion section and retired from the agency in June 1979. During those 20 years, he had been chief, physics and astronomy programs, at Headquarters Office of Space Sciences in 1961; director of physics and astronomy programs, Office of Space Science and Applications, from June 1962 to May 1966; associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974. He became acting associate administrator in April 1975 and associate administrator in November 1975. He was appointed chief scientist in the 1977 reorganization. (NASA Release 80-175; Hq anno Nov 21/80)
NASA reported that it and NSF had found a promising new meteorite source in the Antarctic, two fields known as Recking Peak and Elephant moraines, three or four times as large as the Allen Hills area covered by meteorite hunters during the past four years—also “more promising. . .and more dangerous,” said curator John Annexstad, one of the discoverers. The finds had been handled like the lunar samples brought to Earth by Apollo astronauts; the unusual preservation aspects of the ice shelf kept the meteorites as they had been when entering Earth atmosphere hundreds of thousands of years ago, providing evidence of organic history predating their arrival on Earth. The search for meteorites on the ice shelf had begun with the Japanese, who found large amounts in the Yamato mountains of Queen Maud Land. Dr. William Cassady, University of Pittsburgh, theorized a transport system explaining the Antarctic icefield concentrations, and several seasons of hunting tended to confirm the theory. The total of Antarctic meteorites found topped 1,600, many of them rare or unique types. (NASA Release 80-28)
The Soviet Union launched Lt. Col. Yuri V. Malyshev and Vladimir V.	Aksyonov toward the orbiting station Salyut 6 in Soyuz T2, an “improved model” of its manned capsule. An uncrewed Soyuz T1 tested in December 1979 docked automatically with Salyut 6 and remained for 99 days. A U.S. expert on USSR space activity said that T2 was “a new ship” except in appearance: the main change was an on-board computer that for the first time let cosmonauts navigate independently of ground control. Launched from Tyuratam, the T2 arrived June 6 to join Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin. (WStar, June 5/80, A-12; June 6/80, A-10; June 7/80, A-12; WPost, June 6/80, A-22; NY Times, June 6/80, B-6)
The Wfashington Star carried a Tass report that cosmonauts Vladimir Aksyonov and Yuri Malyshev had soft-landed in Central Asia after a visit to orbiting space station Salyut 6. The two were launched June 5 in a new transport vehicle called Soyuz T-2. Salyut 6 had been occupied since April 9 by Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin, who would probably remain in orbit to greet visitors to the Moscow Olympics, the dispatch said. (WStar, June 10/80, A-8)
July 7NASA said that it had agreed with ESA to let two European scientists enter the mission-specialist training program for Shuttle astronauts at JSC [see May 30]. The Europeans, Claude Nicollier of Switzerland and Wqbbo Ockels of the Netherlands, were both ESA employees and, as Spacelab 1 payload-specialist candidates, had undergone a screening and selection process like that of U.S. candidates. NASA agreed to train them in view of Spacelab delay and in recognition of ESA’s contribution to the STS in funding Spacelab development; ESA would reimburse NASA for the cost of training the two. (NASA Release 89-106; ESA Info 19) July S.WFC observed the 35th anniversary of the launch on July 4, 1945, of its first research rocket, a 17-foot Tiamat. Since it became a rocket range, Wallops Island had seen the launch of about 12,000 research vehicles of from 1 to 7 stages, sent as high as 19,000 miles above the Atlantic at speeds over 38,000	mph, and the launch of 19 satellites. From Wallops, rhesus monkeys Sam and Miss Sam rode into space on a Little Joe booster in 1959-60 to test the Mercury spacecraft before Alan Shepard took it into space; first test of the Echo balloon also occurred here. Early research at Wallops collected aerodynamic data at transonic and low supersonic speeds as part of the push to break the sound barrier; today, the launches gathered data on space, aeronautics, and characteristics of aerospace flight and tested ideas and devices for future spaceflight. NASA’s predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), put its Pilotless Aircraft Research Station on Wallops Island under the direction of LaRC; its mission was aeronautical research to supplement wind-tunnel and laboratory work at LaRC. When NASA came into being in 1958 and took over LaRC and other field centers and research facilities, it put the Wallops station directly under NASA Headquarters and renamed it Wallops Flight Center in 1974. (WFC Release 80-8)
The Earth 34 million years ago might have had a ring like those that circle Saturn today, said Dr. John A. O’Keefe of GSFC’s Laboratory for Astronomy and Solar Physics. A sudden event 34 million years ago, known to geologists as the terminal Eocene event, caused dramatic climate changes in Earth’s temperate zones, dropping northern-hemisphere winter temperatures about 35 °F (20 °C). Botanical studies revealed that the temperature change, the most profound climatic event between 65 million and 2 million years ago, occurred at the end of the Eocene, but it had no acceptable explanation as yet. O’Keefe noted that the changes coincided with a massive fall from outer space of tektites (glass meteorites) possibly from an eruption on Earth’s Moon; studies of these tektites showed similarities to rocks brought from the Moon. Whatever the source, the tektites that hit Earth made a path around the globe from the eastern United States across the Pacific to the Philippines. Tektites that missed the Earth would have formed a ring like the rings around Saturn; such a ring in the winter would block the Sun’s rays in the northern hemisphere when the Sun was below the equator, and the shadow cast by the ring would lower winter temperatures. The ring disappeared when forces (such as pressure of sunlight or drag of the atmosphere) pulled it either into the atmosphere, where some particles burned and others fell to Earth, or upward into space away from the Earth. (NASA Release 80-86)
NASA held a press briefing on the solar maximum mission slated for launch February 14. Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, associate administrator for space science, said that exploration of Earth’s nearest star was significant both scientifically and technologically. Dr. Harold Glaser of NASA’s solar terrestrial division noted that the Sun, dominant energy source for the Earth, was a variable star in that its energy output varied in periods running from 10 minutes to ll years (the so-called solar cycle) as well as over periods of centuries. The solar variations causes variations on Earth; for instance, the solar flares known to have a periodicity of 11 years. In short time periods, a flare is the most energetic manifestation of solar changes, with significant effects: Earth suffers communications problems along with atmospheric heating and other phenomena, and the trillion kilotons spewed into the solar system would affect almost all the planets. The focus of the Solar Maximum Mission (SMM) would be to understand more about solar flares in order to predict their occurrence. The magnetic field of the Sun had also been found to vary with a 22-year periodicity, strongly correlated with drought in the U.S. western plains. During the 17th century, solar activity apparently ceased for about 80 years, a period called the Maunder Minimum which featured a “mini-ice Age” documented in northern Europe. This seems to have happened more frequentBLANK NOT FILMED ly than previously realized. Space research during the last 20 years had produced these data, Glaser said, including evidence that the Sun might be changing sides, with a corresponding increase of luminosity or incident radiation. Also, the Sun appeared to oscillate rather like a fluid, probably because of interior activity whose nature was as yet unknown. Joseph Purcell of GSFC, standing in for project manager Peter Burr who was ill, described the spacecraft and its planned retrieval by the Space Shuttle, and the modular design that would allow it to be serviced in orbit if necessary. The SMM would be the first NASA satellite designed for retrieval and first to include the tracking and data-relay satellite capability; at 5,000 pounds, it would also be the heaviest payload launched by a Delta. Purcell explained the 24-hour computer watch on the SMM, calling it an operation with “very intense man-machine relationships.” Kenneth J. Frost, also of GSFC as SMM project scientist, described the payload as essentially one experiment to determine the nature of solar flares, using seven instruments and a “very detailed scientific game plan.” Investigators needed a 24-hour watch to evaluate the plan’s progress and to react to targets of opportunity on the Sun. For instance:, a flare on the Sun’s west limb would be observed on Earth and by a series of spacecraft in orbit around the Earth, so that the quality and completeness of the observations would “far outstrip anything we’ve ever had before.” The SMM spacecraft would have a productive lifetime of about two years, Frost said, and the scientific group at GSFC would consist of investigators prepared to spend that much time away from their home institutions. In response to a question, he pointed out that the broad range of the electromagnetic spectrum to be investigated by SMM could not penetrate Earth’s atmosphere. (Text, Feb 8/80; NASA Release
NASA announced that Dr. William C. Schneider, associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, would retire from federal service February 29. He joined the Gemini program in 1963 after two years at International Telephone and Telegraph’s (ITT) federal Laboratories as director of space systems, having also worked for the U.S. Navy and for NACA. He received NASA’s exceptional service medal for his work as mission director for 7 of 10 Gemini missions. From July 1967 to December 1968 he directed Apollo missions beginning with Apollo 4 and won NASA’s distinguished service medal for the success of Apollo 8, first manned flight around the moon. He directed the Skylab program from December 1968 to July 1974, and with the three Skylab crews received the Collier Trophy in 1973. He would become a vice president of Computer Sciences Corporation. (NASA anno, Feb 22/80; NASA Release 80-27)
The White House issued a statement on President Carter’s presenting the Goddard Trophy of the National Space Club to NASA’s Voyager team, for the “outstanding achievement in advanced spaceflight programs contributing to American leadership in space.” NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch would accept the trophy on behalf of the Voyager team for its successful planetary mission to Jupiter. The award was established in 1958 to honor Dr. Robert Goddard (1882-1945), considered the father of modern rocketry; receipts in previous years included Wernher von Braun, John Glenn, the Apollo 11 crew, the Skylab astronauts, and the Viking project team. (WH Anno, Mar 24/80)
JPL Director Bruce C. Murray announced appointment of Dr. Freeman Dyson, theoretical physicist and leader in studies of new systems for spacecraft propulsion, as a distinguished visiting scientist. A professor at Princeton University’s Institute for Advanced Study, Dyson participated in Project Orion at the General Atomic Laboratory, San Diego, from 1958 to 1965, studying the potential use of atomic explosions to propel crewed spacecraft. In 1977 he led a laser-propulsion study for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and was later active in studies of solar sailing and NASA’s SETI (research for extraterrestrial intelligence) project. Author of “Disturbing the Universe,” Dyson would join Jacques Blamont of France, Klaus Hasselmann of Germany, Giuseppe Colombo of Italy, Michael Longuet-Higgins of the United Kingdom, and Richard Goody and Gene Shoemaker of the United States as a JPL distinguished visiting scientist. (JPL anno Sept 22/80)
JSC reported that it would conduct a 30-hour mock mission of Space Shuttle Columbia beginning at 8 a.m. Wednesday, January 23, running through orbital operations to landing. Flight directors and their teams of controllers would monitor system performance, carry out navigation and targeting, and watch support-crew adherence to mission timelines. Simulation specialists would spring problems on the controllers and on the orbiter crews going through routine duties in the Shuttle simulator and another orbiter mockup. About 500 persons would participate in the “flight,” including prime crew John Young and Robert Crippen and backup crew Joe Engle and Dick Truly. Flight directors would be Neil Hutchinson for the launch team, Chuck Lewis for the orbit team, and Don Puddy for the landing team. This simulation would check out operational procedures over an extended period; previous simulations had not lasted as long. More 30-hour practice flights would occur every six weeks to two months in preparation for the real thing. (JSC Release
