John Young and Robert Crippen, the crew of Columbia’s maiden flight, told of their experience at at 75-minute JSC press conference carried on closed-circuit television to NASA Headquarters and other centers. They said that the orbiter was an incomparable flying machine, surprisingly easy to control, and that the mission was “what NASA calls nominal, although I think you’re going to have to call it phenomenal,” Young reported. Neither crewman expressed concern over the loss of tiles from the aft end of the vehicle, detected shortly after launch. Young said that he was impressed by the fact that the metal under the tiles did not heat up during reentry as much as expected: he said “a lot” of the thermal tiles on the topside could probably be eliminated in future missions, lowering spacecraft weight and increasing the limit on payload weight, now set at 65,000 pounds. Young said that he went immediately upon landing to look at the underside of the orbiter, which had encountered the most heat. “People had been telling us it was impossible that some of these tiles wouldn’t fall off. Well, none of them fell off, and those tiles went through some of the roughest ascent and reentry you can imagine.” “Nothing failed. Statistically, I didn’t think that was possible,” Crippen added. “We’ve been working 3 years to learn how to handle catastrophes, and all we did the whole time was sit back and enjoy it.” The cruise was not perfect, the astronauts agreed: the craft was cold to the point of discomfort some of the time, and the toilet shut down near the end of the flight. The crew kept getting tangled in communications lines, and Columbia “landed long” instead of at its prescribed touchdown spot. Young said the chill could be avoided by putting interior temperature sensors nearer to the crew than to heat-emitting electronic gear. Cordless microphones would solve the problem of tangled cords, and engineers were already working on the toilet program. Young said that he had landed Columbia farther down the 7-mile long runway than he was asked in order to test the Shuttle’s wings and tail for lift; he said that the lift he got at landing was “remarkable.” “We hardly used our brakes. I tell you that was quite a performance, taking 99 tons out of orbit and getting it back down all in one piece.” A reporter asked Crippen if his pulse rate of 130 at liftoff, compared to Young’s 90, meant that he was more excited. “You betchum I was excited,” he replied. “What you don’t understand is, I was excited too,” Young added. “I just can’t make it go any faster.” (Young is 50, seven years older than Crippen.) The mission was so successful that Columbia might fly again as early as September 23, with a third test in December and a final test in April 1982. With that schedule, NASA might begin operational flights carrying cargo into space as early as September 1982. Young said they had been given 135 flight objectives and had completed all 135. “You really should be proud of this vehicle,” he told the JSC audience. (NASA Text, postflight brfg, Apr 23/81; NYTimes, Apr 24/81, A—12; WPost, Apr 24/81, A-6; W Star, Apr 24/81, A—12; B Sun, Apr 24/81, A-6)
DFRC reported on a dress rehearsal of Shuttle first-mission landing and postlanding activities on the dry lake bed at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. The crew that would act as recovery convoy used an orbiter mock-up, fitted with interfaces for ground connections, to practice postlanding safety and servicing procedures: simulated activities included testing for the presence of toxic or explosive vapors and gases and cooling the orbiter by circulating freon through its pipes and cool air through its ducts. To simulate the landing, a NASA .T-38 jet descended along the planned flight path from 40,000 feet up, while test manager Deke Slayton kept in touch with the recovery convoy and with the flight director, Don Puddy, at JSC. Meanwhile, astronauts John Young and Robert Crippen at JSC completed a full-scale flight rehearsal, going through the 54.5-hour mission in a computer-operated simulator. Flight directors monitored the mock mission as if it were the real thing. (DFRC Release 81-8; W Star, Feb 27/81, A-9) During February: Nature magazine reported that the Franco-Soviet mission to Halley’s comet in 1986 entailed “a substantial cutback” for a planned joint mission to Venus in 1984. Assignment of two of the original four Venus probes to Halley was a reminder that Soviet space-program resources, though vast, “are not infinite.” Pravda had published several articles aimed at putting the Soviet effort in a favorable light; the Communist party congress would be asked next week to approve another 5-year plan including space exploration. However, the Soviet Union had never revealed the costs of the program. Nature said hints of increasing financial constraints had appeared recently: no further Intercosmos flights were in view after those with Mongolia and Romania, and Bulgaria had been offered two unmanned probes instead of a manned flight to replace the failed trip of its cosmonaut to the orbiting Salyut 6. (Nature, Feb 26/81, 741)
ESA announced that Drs. Claude Nicollier and Wubbo Ockels, two ESA payload specialists in astronaut training at JSC since July 1980, had completed training and were now officially European mission specialists. Ockels would rejoin the crew readying the first Spacelab mission in Europe, at MSFC and at JSC; Nicollier would stay at JSC to continue training as mission specialist for future missions carrying European payloads. The third ESA representative, Dr. Ulf Merbold, had been working with the European experiments selected for first Spacelab flight and would remain as European payload specialist. The two U.S. candidates for the Spacelab crew, Drs. Michael Lampton and Byron Lichtenberg, had been in a hiatus from training because of delays in the launch date. One each of the U.S. and ESA candidates would be chosen to fly; the others would provide ground support. (MSFC Release 81-119; FSA Info 20) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED Mg.INTIMDQNALLE ffcANtav
NASA Headquarters held a press briefing on scientific results of Voyager 7’s Saturn encounter in 1980. On hand were project scientists Dr. Edward C. Stone, California Institute of Technology (CalTech); imaging-team leader Dr. Bradford Smith, University of Arizona; and project manager E.K. Davis, JPL. Initial results included discovery of a ring system vastly more complex than imagined and a thick nitrogen atmosphere around Titan, Saturn’s major moon. Voyager 1 took 17,500 photographs of Saturn and its satellites between August 22 and December 15, 1980. The closest approach was November 12—126,000 kilometers (78,000 miles) from Saturn’s cloud tops. From the spacecraft, as from Earth, the atmosphere of Saturn looked grossly similar to Jupiter’s, with alternating light and dark zones, circulating storm regions, and other distinguishable cloud markings. Unlike Jupiter, however, Saturn’s markings were blurred by thick haze above the visible cloud tops; the haze layer at Jupiter was not as optically dense as Saturn’s. Wind speeds were substantially higher than on Jupiter and did not appear closely tied to belt-zone boundaries. Highest winds, blowing eastward at the equator, were four times stronger than on Jupiter; velocity decreased to near-zero at about 40° latitude north and south. Saturn’s atmosphere consisted mostly of hydrogen, helium accounting for only 11% of atmospheric mass above the clouds compared to 19% at Jupiter. The difference was consistent with separation by gravity of helium and hydrogen in Saturn’s interior and could explain the excess energy radiated by Saturn over that received from the Sun. Voyager 1 found that the A, B, and C rings visible from Earth consisted of hundreds of small ringlets, a few of them elliptical; the classical gaps also contained ringlets. Intertwining (“braiding”) of the rings was not explainable, although it might stem from electrostatic charging of their dust-sized particles. Voyager 1 discovered three new satellites, photographed the D and E rings, and confirmed the existence (2.8 Saturn radii from planet center) of a new ring postulated on the basis of Pioneer 11 findings. The flyby observed all of Saturn’s known satellites except Phoebe; Mimas, Enceladus, Tethys, Dione, and Rhea, all appeared roughly spherical and composed mainly of water ice. Titan was the most interesting from an Earth viewpoint because of its atmosphere, similar to what would have evolved on Earth had it formed at Titan’s distance from the Sun. Previously considered the largest satellite in the solar system, Titan was found to be slightly smaller than the largest satellite of Jupiter (Ganymede). Both are larger than the planet Mercury. Titan’s atmosphere consisted mostly of nitrogen, the main constituent of Earth’s atmosphere; pressure near the surface was 60% greater than Earth’s. The surface was not visible in photographs from Voyager 1 because of the haze layer, though the southern hemisphere was slightly brighter than the northern, possibly a seasonal effect. Titan’s density seemed about twice that of water ice, indicating that it, like Ganymede, was made of equal amounts of rock and ice. Voyager 1 was now headed out of the solar system, and its platform instruments were turned off December 19. Most fields-and-particles instruments on Voyager 1 were still monitoring the solar wind and its changes with distance and time; exact location of the heliopause (outer edge of the solar wind) was unknown, but might be reached around 1990, Voyager 2 would reach Saturn in August 1981 and proceed on a trajectory to Uranus. (NASA Releases 81-41, 81-44)
ARC announced that John A. Manke, famed test pilot, would head a new directorate of flight research after consolidation of ARC and DFRC, effective October 1. Manke, who made the first supersonic flight of a lifting body and the first landing of a lifting body on a hard-surface runway, had joined DFRC as a research engineer in 1962 and later became a research pilot, testing advanced designs like the wingless craft that were forerunners of the Shuttle. He was project pilot on the X-24B and also flew the M-2, HL-10, and X-24A lifting bodies. Most recently he had been director of flight operations and support at DFRC, where he would remain responsible for on-site management as well as for aircraft operations at both centers. (ARC Release 81-32)
Columbia, flagship of U.S. Space Shuttles, “proved that at long last it is ready to carry astronauts into orbit,” said the Washington Star, describing “a successful and spectacular firing of its three powerful engines.” At the end of the practice countdown, 8:45 a.m. EST, the three engines at the base of the delta-wing spaceship “flashed to life, spewing torrents of almost invisible flame, steam, and smoke over the launch pad” and sending a thunderclap of sound across KSC. “All engines are up and running,” the control center announced. The world’s most sophisticated rocket machine had generated 1.1 million pounds of thrust for 20 seconds, while the 122-foot-tall orbiter with fuel tank and boosters remained fixed to the pad by eight 3-foot steel bolts. In actual launch, explosive charges would sever the bolts, releasing the orbiter, and the solid-fuel boosters would help lift it to orbit. During the final countdown, 526,000 gallons of fuel were pumped into the external fuel tank. Technical, weather, and procedural difficulties had postponed the firing, a first test of all shuttle systems combined, three times this week. Minor problems had delayed today’s test another hour. The Washington Post said that a labor walkout at KSC immediately after the 8:45 a.m. firing might threaten the April 7 date set for the actual launch of Columbia. About 800 aerospace workers, members of the International Association of Machinists employed by Boeing in spaceport support work, had struck in a pay dispute. Richard Smith, KSC director, said that the strike might jeopardize remaining operations; however, he noted that the union had a legal right to strike because its contract with Boeing had expired some time ago. Columbia crew members John Young and Robert Crippen, who had waited out 2Vi years of delays, viewed the test firing from the air; Young in a Shuttle training jet at 4,000-foot altitude, and Crippen in an identical craft about 1,900 feet higher. (W Star, Feb 20/81, A-l; W Post, Feb 21/81, A-7)
Pravda, the official Communist Party newspaper, marked the fourth anniversary of orbital laboratory Salyut 6 with a report of planned space activity. A “lull” was being used for an overhaul of the ground-control center in the Crimea. Employees were on long-awaited vacations, and a skeleton staff was monitoring Salyut 6, orbiting without a crew since May 26. After orbiting for nearly two months of unspecified tests, a Cosmos craft launched April 25 had linked with the Salyut in June to form a 34-ton complex. A flight-test manager said that the complex would help in designing future space stations and was being monitored to see how such a heavy system behaved in space. Since docking with the Salyut the Cosmos had used its engines twice to raise the orbit of the complex. (NY Times Oct 7/81, B—11) During September: William F. Lilly, named NASA comptroller in 1973 and the only person so far to hold that position, announced that he would retire in October after 37 years of service to the federal government, the last 21 with NASA. (NASA Release 81-148; Sp anno Sept 22/81) —Isaac T. Gillam IV, director of DFRC since June 1978, would become special assistant to the NASA administrator October 1, detailed to the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy to participate in a space-policy review. (NASA Release 81-151; DFRC Release 81-30; NASA anno Sept 15/81) —Abraham D. Spinak, acting director of Wallops Flight Facility, would leave government service in December after nearly 33 years with NASA and NACA, its predecessor, which he joined in 1948. He had actually retired September 1, 1980, but stayed on to help in the consolidation with GSFC. (WFC Release 81-14) —Edwin C. Kilgore, associate administrator for management operations at Headquarters, would retire in October after 37 years of service with NASA and NACA. After graduation from Virginia Polytechnic Institute in 1944, he went to work at Langley, joined Headquarters in 1970, and was named deputy associate administrator for center operationas in 1974. As head of management operations, he had been in charge of agencywide institutional management. (NASA Release 81-139; LaRC Release 81-67) —Ann P. Bradley, deputy associate administrator for management operations, who had been acting associate administrator and acting executive officer at NASA Headquarters pending the retirement of E.C. Kilgore, would return to her duties in management operations with the appointment of A.B. Virkler Legate to the office of the administrator as NASA's executive officer. Legate had been associate deputy undersecretary for intergovernmental relations at the Department of Labor since February 1971: he had previously been a congressional special assistant and executive secretary of DOT from 1969 to 1977. He had also been a congressional administrative assistant. (NASA Spl anno, Aug 28/81, Sept 21/81)
The Shuttle orbiter Columbia came to a “flawless” landing on a dry lake bed in the Mojave desert at Edwards Air Force Base, California, at 1:21 p.m. EST before a crowd that included NASA employees, 20,000 VIPs, and about 250,000 spectators who had camped out all night to watch Columbia’s return. Millions of people around the world also watched the return on television. The astronauts got a wakeup call from mission control about 4 a.m. on their 30th orbit, with a special message for Robert Crippen: “You’ve waited 12 years for this. If you don’t wake up, you’ll miss the whole thing.” Before eating breakfast, the crew took time to check flight systems, guidance and navigation instruments, and the 44 reaction-control thrusters used during reentry. On 36th orbit, the crew received “final go” for deorbit firing. Columbia’s payload-bay doors were closed four hours before the scheduled landing time, and the astronauts put on their pressurized space suits in case of emergency. Over the Indian Ocean at 12:22 p.m., an hour before landing and while out of contact with any tracking stations, Commander John Young turned Columbia tail-first and fired two on-board maneuvering rockets to brake the spacecraft; then, turned it nose-first again, tilting it slightly to permit full exposure of underside insulation. Reentry into the atmosphere at more than 17,000	mph took place at 12:48 p.m., 400,000 feet over the Pacific at Wake Island. The few tiles missing from tail areas after liftoff did not affect reentry at heats up to 2750°F. The 80-ton 122-foot long vehicle landed at 215 mph, twice the usual jet speed. As Columbia’s wheels touched down, flight-control chief Don Puddy at Houston told his jubilant team to “Prepare for exhilaration,” allowing them about 15 seconds of celebration before resuming their jobs. For the first time, a splashdown or landing did not immediately end a manned spaceflight. “Welcome home, Columbia,” Houston greeted the craft landing on the center line of the California runway. “Do you want us to take it up to the hangar, Joe?” Young radioed, and mission control responded “We’re going to dust it off first.” A NASA official said that Columbia would probably begin its return flight to Cape Canaveral in seven or eight days, riding piggyback on its Boeing 747 carrier. An “optimistic” estimate was that the orbiter would fly again under its own power in less than six months, on a four-day flight from which it might be able to “turn around” and be ready to fly again in four months. (NYTimes, Apr 15/81, 1, 21; W Post, Apr 15/81, A-l; W Star, Apr 15/81, A-l; WSJ, Apr 15/81, 2)
NASA said that the principal investigators for the plasma-wave instruments on the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL)-managed Voyager 2, heading for rendezvous with Saturn in August 1981, discovered that the spacecraft had encountered the magnetic tail of Jupiter almost two years after leaving that planet, confirming a theory that the huge magnetosphere might extend all the way to Saturn. Dr. Frederick L. Scarf, scientist at TRW Inc., and his colleagues, Dr. Donald Gurnett and Dr. William Kurth of the University of Iowa, found plasma-wave phenomena from February 1981 identical to those of July and August 1979, when Voyager 2 had left Jupiter but was still in that planet’s magnetosphere. Scarf had published in 1979 in the Journal of Geophysical Research his idea that Jupiter’s magnctotail might reach as far as Saturn and that the rare alignment of outer planets that permitted the successive Jupiter-Saturn encounters might put Voyager 2 and Saturn simultaneously into Jupiter’s far-flung influence. Inside the Jovian tail, Saturn could experience unusual conditions observable by the Voyager when it arrived in August. The next Saturn encounter might differ widely from the two previous. (NASA Release 81-73)
NASA said that investigators at GSFC and the University of Maryland had discovered a natural infrared laser on Mars, a find that could help detect new planets in the universe and require rewrites of books on general physics of the planetary atmosphere. Members of the team were Dr. Michael J. Mumma, Dr. David Buhl, Dr. Gordon Chin, Dr. Drake Deming, Fred Espenak, and Dr. Theodore Kostiuk, all of GSFC, and Dr. David Zipoy of the University of Maryland. The discovery was reported in Science magazine. Optical lasers since their 50-year-ago invention had proved extremely useful not only in scientific laboratories but also in everyday life; for example, as price scanners in supermarkets. However, the investigators said, no naturally occurring laser had ever been reported, although “the extreme variety of physical and chemical environments of extraterrestrial objects.. .arguefd] that natural lasers must exist.” In theory, “natural” lasers would occur whenever atoms or molecules were stimulated to release photons in transition from higher to lower energy states. A Goddard-developed device (an infrared heterodyne spectrometer) used with the McMath solar telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona had detected such a process in the Mars atmosphere (made up almost entirely of cabon dioxide) between January and April 1980. The new device let the scientists confirm occurrence of a molecular-population inversion, necessary for lasing. The natural laser on Mars, identical in principle to man-made lasers with commercial, scientific, and military applications, had a total continuous power output of more than a million megawatts, equivalent to that generated by a thousand large hydroelectric-power projects; in fact, the Mars laser generated more than five times the total power output of the United States. The investigators said orbiting satellites might eventually be able to extract power from the natural laser and beam it wherever needed. (NASA Release 81-78)
The Soviet Union launched Soyuz 39 from the Baykonur cosmodrome at 5:59 p.m. Moscow time to link with the orbiting Salyut 6/ Soyuz T-4 complex. Tass said that the Progress 12 cargo ship had undocked March 19 after being filled with discarded equipment to replace the supplies it brought and on March 20 had entered the atmosphere over the Pacific where it “ceased to exist.” The crew of Soyuz 39 were veteran cosmonaut Vladimir Dzhanibekov as commander and the first citizen of Mongolia to fly in space, Jugderdemidyn Gurragcha, as researcher and “101st spaceman of the world.” They would join Vladimir Kovalenok and Viktor Savinykh already aboard the orbiting complex. Tass said that the launch commemorated the 60th anniversary of the revolution of the Mongolian People’s Republic, 10th nation to participate in manned spaceflight. United Press International (UPI) said that it was in honor of the 20th anniversary of launching Yuri Gagarin, first man into space, on April 12, 1961. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 22/81; UPI, in W Star, May 23/81, A-8)
NASA appointed Maj. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, deputy chief of staff for systems at Air Force Systems Command headquarters, Andrews Air Force Base, as associate administrator for the Office of Space Transportation Systems. Abrahamson, former test pilot and manager of the development program for U.S. Air Force’s F-16 fighter, would succeed John F. Yardley, who left NASA in May to become president of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Corporation. In 1979, Abrahamson was one of five on a special panel selected by NASA to assess STS management; he began his job at Andrews in July 1980. He had been an astronaut in the Air Forces’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL) program from August 1967 until the program was canceled in June 1969. He then served on the staff of the National Aeronautics and Space Council in the Executive Office of the President. A command pilot with more than 3,000 flying hours in jet and conventional fighter aircraft, he was promoted to major general May 1, 1978. (NASA Release 81-159; NASA anno Oct 2/81; NY Times, Oct 3/81, 15)
Press reports on the Space Shuttle Columbia’s launch noted the loss of some insulating tiles from engine-pod coverings visible, television viewers from an aft-facing cockpit window when astronaut Robert Crippen opened the payload-bay doors to dissipate heat into space as a way of cooling the orbiter. The areas lacking tiles, nine on the right-hand engine pod and four to six on the left-hand pod, had undergone the greatest stress during blastoff and ascent. Astronaut John Young relayed the view to Earth so flight directors could estimate the damage. The two astronauts evinced so little concern about the missing tiles that, during a six-minute telecast late on Monday, neither mentioned the subject. As flight directors wanted to know whether the underside of the fuselage was intact, Deputy Operations Director Eugene F. Kranz announced that supersecret U.S. Air Force cameras in Hawaii and Florida would photograph the orbiter in an attempt to discover further areas of damage. His statement hinted at the highly classified capability of DOD cameras: photographing areas lacking tiles of a moving craft 170 miles up would be like reading license plates in a Moscow parking lot from orbit, the Washington Post commented. The fuselage’s underside housed Shuttle electronics and hydraulics systems that would navigate the craft on its return; move the elevons, keeping it on course during the last 1,000 miles; and lower the landing gear. Should loss of tiles expose the surface to reentry heat that could burn through the fuselage and the underlying systems, the orbiter without its landing gear lowered would have to crash-land at more than 200 mph. If photography showed underside tiles missing, Kranz said the crew would handle the reentry “to avoid a possible catastrophe,” not specifying the alternatives. Officials said that the areas known to be missing tiles were not critical to reentry; all visible edges of tail and wings appeared intact, suggesting that tiles v/crc lost during the stress of launch only on the engine pods. (W Post, Apr 13/81, A-l, A-20, WSJ, Apr 13/81 3; NYTimes, Apr 13/81, 1; W Star, Apr 13/81, A-l)
Some 40 astronauts were on hand at the White House as President Reagan awarded John Young and Robert Crippen, the crew of Space Shuttle Columbia’s first flight, the Distinguished Service Medal. Young also received a Space Medal of Honor for his five spaceflights in two decades as an astronaut. The guest list of 160 included present and former space officials and astronauts, including six of the original Mercury seven: Alan B. Shepard, first American in space; John H. Glenn, Jr., first American to orbit the Earth; L.	Gordon Cooper, M. Scott Carpenter, Walter M. Schirra, and Donald K. Slayton. (Virgil L. Grissom, the seventh, had died 14 years ago in a launch-pad fire.) The group included the crew of Apollo 8 that orbited the Moon at Christmas in 1968: Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. Also on hand were the Apollo 11 moon walkers, Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and the third pilot on their mission, Michael Collins. This was the first time so many former astronauts from the Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab projects had come together. They did so at the invitation of the president to honor the reusable Shuttle, most recent U.S. space effort, and the men who flew it into orbit for the first time last month. The president described the Shuttle as “the world’s first true space transportation system,” saying it would affect American life in both subtle and dramatic ways, “bringing energy and excitement to our national reserve.” The Columbia crewmen presented the president and vice president with American flags they had carried on the Shuttle’s first flight. They also gave the president a gold spaceflight jacket with the presidential seal, and Reagan responded: “You won’t mind if I only wear this in Earth’s atmosphere.” Reagan also awarded the presidential citizen’s medal to Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, acting head of NASA, who had been in charge of the Shuttle’s first flight. Lovelace was the fourth recipient of the medal, established in 1969. (Text, WhHs remarks, May 19/81; NASA Releases 81-70, 81-71 NYTimes, May 20/81, A-22, W Post, May 20/81, A-2; W Star, May 20/81, A-3)
MSFC said that the Spacelab 1 payload crew was in Japan for a week, practicing the use of instruments scheduled to fly on the First mission in 19S3. A NASA-sponsored package, SEPAC (space experiments with particle accelerators), would study the interaction of Earth’s magnetosphere with the upper atmosphere. Professor Tatsuzo Obayashi of the University of Tokyo would be the principal investigator. Before leaving Japan December 15, the crew would be trained on the actual flight hardware at Japan’s National Space Development Agency. The crew— civilian scientists called payload specialists and two NASA mission-specialist astronauts—were Drs. Byron Lichtenberg and Michael Lampton of the United States, Dr. Ulf Merbold of West Germany, Dr. Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands, and NASA mission specialists Drs. Owen Garriott and Robert Parker. Two payload specialists would actually fly on the mission with the mission specialists; the other two would support the mission on the ground. (MSFC Release 81-146) —NASA said that one of Japan’s major newspapers, Asahi Shibmun, had signed an agreement to fly a “getaway special” experiment on the Shuttle, possibly in late 1982, using the weightlessness of space to make pure artificial snow crystals directly from a gaseous substance while the Shuttle was in orbit. A Japanese physicist, the late Dr. Ukichiro Nakaya, had made the first artificial snow-crystal experiments in 1936. The Shuttle experiment, a first try at creating artificial snow in a weightless environment, would contribute significantly to crystallography, especially growth of semiconductor crystals or other items from a vapor source. The idea, suggested by two Japanese students, was chosen for 17,000 suggestions by the newspaper’s readers. To date NASA had accepted 321 getaway specials—privately funded experimental payloads—for flight on the Shuttle on a space-available basis, beginning with the fifth mission in 1982. (NASA Release 81-191)
NASA said that astronaut Alan L. Bean, fourth man to set foot on the Moon, would resign effective June 26 to devote full time to his career as a painter. Bean, selected in the third group of astronauts in the fall of 1963, flew on the second moon-landing mission, Apollo 12, in November 1969, exploring the Ocean of Storms with Charles (Pete) Conrad, Jr., as Richard F. Gordon circled in the command module. He captained the second Skylab mission in July-September 1973 and was backup spacecraft commander for the 1975 U.S.-USSR Apolio-Soyuz mission. He noted that in his 18 years as astronaut he had seen sights no artist had ever viewed firsthand, and he hoped to record his experiences through his art. Bean’s time in space—1,671 hours 45 minutes—made him first among active U.S. astronauts and fourth of all in total spaceflight time. He was currently head of astronaut-candidate operations and training. His resignation would leave in the corps only one of the 12 U.S. astronauts who had walked on the Moon: John Young, chief of the astronaut office and commander of shuttle Columbia’s first flight last April. (NASA Release 81-87)
Press reports said that two the cosmonauts who occupied orbiting space station Salyut 6 for 75 days had returned safely at 4:38 p.m. Moscow time in Soyuz T-4 to a landing site in Kazakhstan. Col. Vladimir Kovalenok, flight commander, and flight engineer Viktor Savinykh had two sets of visitors during their mission: Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Mongolian cosmonaut Jugderdemidyn Gurragcha of Soyuz 39 in March and Leonid Popov and Romanian cosmonaut Dumitru Prunariu of Soyuz 40, just a week ago. The New York Times said that this was the final mission for Salyut 6, which would probably be abandoned. Launched in 1977, it had been the base for nearly four years of record-setting tests of human endurance. Last week, Popov said that the Soviet Union would also retire the old-model two-person Soyuz spacecraft used for the past 14 years in favor of the Soyuz-T, a three-man version more maneuverable and sophisticated, with four successful flights, including the one just ended. (NYTimes, May 27/81, A-l; W Post, May 27/81, A-14) During May: The National Aeronautic Association (NAA) reported unofficial records set by Columbia’s first flight, pending review for world certification. As the official U.S. certification authority for aerospace records since 1905 and sole U.S. representative of the Federal Aeronautique International (FAI), NAA gave the following figures: duration, 54 hours, 20 minutes, 52 seconds; maximum altitude, 209 kilometers; distance, 1,144,709 kilometers; mass carried into orbit, 95,201 kilograms; payload mass to altitude, 4624 kilograms. NAA said that Columbia was “the world’s first and only aerospacecraft.. .capable of operating in space or in the atmosphere.” NAA had awarded the Voyager mission team represented by Dr. Edward C. Stone the Collier Trophy, oldest U.S. aviation award, for space exploration achievement peaking in the close examination of Saturn after a comparable visit to Jupiter the previous years. Established in 1911 and first presented to Glenn Curtiss for development of a seaplane, the Collier Trophy was awarded yearly for achievement demonstrated by actual use. (NAA newsletter, May 1981)
NASA announced that it had postponed to August 31 Columbia’s move to KSC’s launch complex 39A, scheduled for August 26, but did not say what effect the delay would have on the September 30 launch date. A nine-day preflight test series that began August 17 would culminate in simulated liftoffs and descent from orbit to landing. MSFC later reported that the launch date for STS-2 would be reset to October 9 because of “a number of small problems” and a need to prevent crew fatigue. A loss of five days in the VAB was caused by delays in interface tests and misalignment of Shuttle and external-tank connections. The thunderstorm season would also account for some lost time. (NASA Releases 81-123, 81-135; MSFC Release 81-107) The 1,800-pound Voyager 2, having arrived within Saturn’s magnetic field early August 25 after a four-year 1.2 billion-mile journey, was sending back data and pictures “as perplexing as they are dazzling,” the New York Times said. The craft photographed four of Saturn’s moons in greater detail than before, sent data on the thousands of strands in Saturn’s rings, and dived behind the planet for a close approach and a gravity-assisted push toward arrival at Uranus in 4 Vi years. So far, it had found no new moons of Saturn, which had been one of its aims. When Voyager 2 reappeared, JPL engineers reported that its camera platform was stuck, affecting three scientific sensors as well as the two television cameras. Chief project scientist Dr. Edward C. Stone said Voyager 2 “basically completed” all of its observations before the malfunction: “We were fortunate that the troubles didn’t happen a few hours earlier,” he told a news conference. Signals needed 1 hour and 27 minutes to travel to Earth. Controllers picked up the signals again at 3 a.m. EDT after Voyager had been out of touch with Earth for 2 hours and 20 minutes; the cameras were showing black space, indicating that the platform was pointing away from Saturn. The platform could be rotated in two dimensions, and controllers countermanded the original program so that the swivel could operate in high torque and expel or destroy whatever foreign object was making the platform stick. A similar problem with Voyager 1 in 1978 was solved by manipulation of the swivel, after records showed a tiny piece of plastic had been left in a gearbox during construction. Further reports Thursday, August 27, said that the platform (which had been jammed for 17 hours) was working again but not perfectly. Project Director Esker K. Davis said that it was moving sluggishly in low gear; the plan was to keep moving it, but it took three hours just to send a command and get back a signal that the spacecraft responded. Stone said that his main objective was to recover use of the platform for the voyage to Uranus. Project scientists had turned the cameras off when the platform stuck and would not turn them on again until the problem was solved. Loss of about 600 pictures of Saturn’s rings and darkside, as well as infrared and ultraviolet measurements of clouds and atmosphere, did not mean that the mission had failed, Stone said, calling it “a 200 percent success.” Thousands of photos stored on Voyager’s tape recorders were still pouring back to Earth, showing sights never seen before. Dr. Arthur L. Lane’s telescope aimed at a distant star to catch it blinking on and off as Voyager 2 passed through Saturn’s rings was so successful that he said it would take years to map the rings, 45,000	miles of which were shown by his telescope. Early on Friday, August 28, flight directors restarted one of the five blacked-out cameras to photograph “a rapidly receding Saturn” from Voyager 2’s location already 2 million miles beyond the planet. The platform had responsed by rotating 40° on command in exactly the proper time. NASA would photograph Saturn’s outermost moon Phoebe next week when Voyager crossed its orbit: Phoebe, rotating in a direction opposite to that of the other 16 moons, might be a burned-out comet nucleus captured by Saturn.(NASA MOR S-802-77-01/02, July 16/81, WSJ, Aug 24/81, 15; NY Times, Aug 14/81, A-13; Aug 26/81, A-l; Aug 27/81, A-l; Aug 28/81, B-5; Aug 29/81, A-9; Aug 30/81, F—1; Aug 31/81, B-6; W Post, Aug 25/81, A-2; Aug 26/81, A-3; Aug 27/81, A-l; Aug 28/81, A-l, Aug 29/81, A-3; Aug 30/81, A-5; Aug 31/81, A-5; Science, Sept 11/81, 1236; Dscvr, Sept 81, 79)
NASA announced that it would shut down on December 1 its three 26-meter (85-foot) tracking antennas operated by the Deep Space Network at Canberra (Australia), Madrid (Spain), and Goldstone (California), because of reductions in the agency’s budget. The stations would operate the 64-meter (210-foot) and 34-meter (112-foot) deep-space antennas as in the past. Loss of the 26-meter antennas would mean a 30% reduction in tracking and data-acquisition and support for NASA’s planetary spacecraft: the network was currently supporting Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, Helios 1, the Viking I lander on Mars, and Pioneers 6 through 72. Shutting down the three antennas would save about $7.2 million per year, beginning in FY83; termination would eliminate 110 positions, 51 in Spain, 26 in Australia, and 33 at Goldstone. The stations in Spain and Australia were operated by government agencies of those countries, which would reduce staff by reassignment and attrition; the Goldstone station was operated by Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, which would also reduce staff by reassignment and attrition. JPL managed the Deep Space Network for NASA’s Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems. (NASA Release 81-171) Liftoff had been scheduled for 7:30 a.m. EDT on November 4, but officials called off the countdown at 9:35 a.m., when rising oil pressures in the Shuttle’s power generators, apparently caused by waxy contaminants, threatened to impair control of the hydraulic system that moved aerodynamic surfaces, such as the elevons, landing gear, and rudder and body flaps, and swiveled the nozzles on the Shuttle’s three main rocket engines. L. Michael Weeks, acting associate administrator for STS, said that the engineers would have to analyze the trouble, correct it, and lay out a plan for resuming countdown; the delay would be “approximately one week.” NASA was considering two courses of action: changing the oil and the filters in the auxiliary power units or replacing them with backup units. Engineers at KSC or JSC were not sure which course would take longer; neither, however, would mean hauling Columbia with its attached fuel tank and booster rockets back from the launch pad into the processing hangar for reworking. The launch team had noticed the lubrication problem while the countdown was halted to grapple with other problems. Pressure in the liquid-oxygen chamber of the external tank had dropped below the limit for launch, and a similar glitch occurred in three smaller tanks feeding the electricity-producing fuel cells inside the Shuttle. Flight controllers decided that they could live with the pressure drops and instructed the control computers to ignore the warning signals. Two of the computers accepted the instruction but “logic got hung up in the system” leading to the third computer, which stopped the clock governing countdown at T minus 31 seconds. This was the point at which Columbia’s on-board computers were supposed to take over control of all remaining steps in the countdown, but—having detected a problem—they refused to continue. Controllers at the Cape and at mission control in Houston called up data displays to locate the trouble, and Shuttle operations director George F. Page finally announced that there would be no launch. Astronauts Col. Joe H. Engle and Capt. Richard H. Truly, who emerged from the Shuttle about an hour after the launch was scrubbed, seemed to take the delay “in stride,” the New York Times said. What persuaded controllers to call off the launch was the Finding that oil pressure for two of the units had stabilized at 100 pounds per square inch, about 40 over normal. Neil B. Hutchinson, a flight director at JSC, said that contaminants in the oil had previously clogged Shuttle filters, which resembled the oil filter in an automobile. However, replacing a filter along with the lubricant it was supposed to keep clean would take far more time than in an automobile. If the auxiliary power units now in the Shuttle were to be used, technicians would have to drain the present oil, change filters, and flush the system before the flight could proceed. This had never been done on the launch pad; engineers would have to go ahead without knowing how long it would take. NASA spokesman Charles Redmond noted that General Motors found out about such problems “at the proving grounds, behind high screens, while we’re doing it in public.” Either changing filters and lubricant or completely replacing the two power units would be time-consuming because the units deep inside the ship would be difficult to reach. The power-unit fuel hydrazine, suspected of gumming up the works by interacting with the lubricating oil, was highly toxic, and the location of the power units would have to be purged with nitrogen. The nitrogen, which also could be fatal, would have to be purged in its turn. The next procedure was the flushing and reservicing of the auxiliary power-unit (APU) gearboxes and installation of new filters. Tests to see what would happen if the APU was operated with a clogged filter (using the oil and filter removed from Columbia) showed that the filter would clear after about 10 minutes of operation, as the temperature increased. Launch was reset for November 12. A second countdown to launch November 12 was delayed 2 hours and 40 minutes by trouble in the cockpit electronics. Engineers discovered November 11 that a 15-pound device, called multiplexer-demultiplexer (MUX/DEMUX), that collected information from all over the spacecraft about its condition to display both on video terminals for the astronauts and on the ground for analysis by engineers, was not working properly; it was quickly replaced with a substitute that did not work as well as the original. Officials sent for two of the instruments from the Challenger orbiter, still unfinished at Rockwell’s Palmdale plant, to be flown to KSC and installed on Columbia. One went into Columbia’s cockpit; the other would be carried as a spare. Countdown was at a built-in hold designed for emergencies such as the one that had occurred; it would resume early November 12 with the loading of 3-million gallons of supercold liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel into the external tank, delaying launch until at least 10 a.m. The latest delays would cost NASA more than $26 million; every day of delay, including the eight in this last series, cost $3 million. The MUX/DEMUX delay cost an extra $2 million from handling, overtime, travel costs, and additional launch and landing tracking report. Launch of the second mission finally occurred at 10:10 a.m. EST November 12.	About 2V4 hours into the mission, during the third orbit, fuel cell one showed a voltage drop; by the sixth orbit, it was so erratic that the astronauts were told to turn it off and use one of the other two. The faulty cell failed when one of the lines feeding hydrogen into it caused a water buildup that spilled onto an electrically charged manifold, breaking down the water into a potentially explosive mixture of gaseous hydrogen and oxygen. The failure took flight directors by surprise, as the cells had been used in 25 manned U.S. spacecraft since 1965 and had never before failed in flight. Hutchinson noted that “the good thing about this” was that the Shuttle could sustain a fuel-cell failure and continue operations. At 10 p.m. November 12, one of the standby cells was producing 7.5 kilowatts of electricity, and the other, 8.5, enough to do nearly everything except run all five instruments while the Shuttle arm was in operation. If the two good cells continued satisfactory, the flight would proceed as scheduled and return November 16 to Edwards Air Force Base in California; if either showed signs of weakening, the crew would return November 13 or 14. {WPost, Nov 2/81, A-3; Nov 6/81, A-9; Nov 13/81, A-l; NY Times, Nov 5/81, A-l; NASA MOR M-989-81-02 [postlaunch] Dec 17/81) The New York Times said that workers were already ahead of schedule November 13 in a 3- to 4-week cleanup of the launch compound at Cape Canaveral. A shock-absorber water-trough system worked “better than expected,” said Merrill Oakley, design engineer on the launch pad, cutting shockwaves to a fifth of the first launch’s intensity. After a washdown and system checks, Oakley said all that remained was replacement of some bricks that blew out of a flame trench and painting. The STS-2 crew flew to Ellington Air Force Base, in Texas shortly after landing the Columbia at Edwards Air Force Base ending “a troubled but scientifically rewarding 54-hour mission,” the New York Times said. Welcomed on their 9:50 p.m. arrival in Texas by about 400 JSC employees, the astronauts breakfasted the next morning with Bush, JSC director Chris Kraft, and the first shuttle crewmen John W. Young and Robert L. Crippen among the 23 guests. Although Bush said “the people here at the NASA complex are a national treasure,” he said that he could not promise any easing of budget constraints on the agency. Preparations were already under way for the third shuttle flight, now scheduled for March 1982. Damage to the launch pad from the second mission was “minimal and superficial,” Oakley said. (Public Papers of the President; WPost, Nov 14/81, A-7; NY Times, Nov 15/81, 35; Nov 16/81, A-l, A-19; JSC Sp NRdP, Nov 20/81, 1)
NASA said that its joint sounding-rocket project with Canada’s National Research Council [see November 20] was successful. William A. Brence of WFC said that preliminary results were satisfactory. Data from the seven experiments launched on five large suborbital rockets from temporary facilities at a radar site on the Arctic coast would, in combination with ground-based observations, enlarge understanding of the dynamics of the cleft in Earth’s magnetic field. (WFC Release 81-20) During December: NASA announced the appointment of Dr. Walter B. Olstad, deputy associate administrator for management to direct all matters such as personnel, supply and equipment, facilities, computer support, and the like. He would succeed Edwin C. Kilgore, who retired October 2. C. Robert Nysmith would replace Olstad in an acting capacity. Both appointments were effective immediately. The Office of Management was created in the NASA reorganization plan effective in November to perform some of the functions previously under the Office of Management Operations and some previously under the NASA comptroller. Olstad began his association with the agency in 1954, working at the Langley laboratory as a research engineer in the transonic tunnel branch, then in the reentry physics branch. He became chief of LaRC’s space systems division in July 1975. He went to Headquarters in 1979 as deputy associate administrator for OAST. (NASA anno Dec 14/81; NASA Release 81-195)
DFRC said that it was readying Shuttle orbiter Columbia for its return to KSC on its Boeing 747 carrier plane. DFRC was deservicing the orbiter after its 54-hour second flight, draining liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuels, removing pyrotechnic devices, and purging toxic chemical and fuel cells used in the propulsion systems. DFRC would attach a tailcone to the orbiter covering its three main engines and two orbital-maneuvering engines. The ferry flight would take two days, with a refueling and overnight stop at Bergstrom Air Force Base near Austin, Texas, or Dyess Air Force Base near Abilene. Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, manager of the orbital flight tests, would accompany Columbia back to KSC. (NASA Release 81-181; ARC Release 81-34)
Newsreview, published by the Air Force Systems Command, told of a special “bake job” done for NASA by Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., in its Civil Engineering Squadron’s fabrication-branch shop. Ovens there, normally used to harden, soften, or anneal metals, were large enough to treat 75 to 80 thermal tiles from Shuttle orbiter Columbia damaged by a nitrogen tetroxide spill. The heat treatment at 1,100—1,400°F took about 16 hours to burn off contaminant and bonding material. Checking for toxic vapors caused by the heat disclosed none. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 27/81, 8) During November: Administrator James M. Beggs appointed Philip E. Culbertson associate deputy administrator with revised duties, serving as senior staff adviser and directing formulation of NASA policy, strategy, and planning of a facility to constitute permanent U.S. presence in space. Culbertson had served for two years as assistant for space transportation systems. —Robert F. Allnutt, associate deputy administrator since mid-1978, would assume new duties as deputy general counsel for policy review, studying the long-term development of NASA and its relationship to other federal agencies as well as contractual arrangements with future users of the Space Shuttle. (NASA anno, Nov 18/81; NASA Release 81-178, 81-179) —NASA named C. Thomas Newman comptroller to succeed Wiliam E. Lilly, who retired in October. Thomas F. Campbell would replace Newman as deputy comptroller. (NASA anno Nov 25/81) —Frank J. Malina, cofounder of JPL and of the Aerojet General Corporation, died November 9 at his home in Paris. He had moved there to work with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) after retiring in 1947 as an officer of Aeroject and JPL. He had worked for Theodore von Karmann as a researcher for Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory, CalTech, leading to creation of the CalTech rocket-research project in 1936 that later became JPL, which made the first successful U.S. satellites in the 1950s. —William Pickering, who followed Malina as JPL director from 1954 to 1976, said that inventions'that made present-day rockets possible went back to work done at JPL under Malina. A leader in developing jet-assisted takeoff (JATO) rockets used in World War II and co-developer of the WAC Corporal, first U.S. successul stratosphere rocket, Malina had in 1942 joined von Karmann to form Aerojet General, first U.S. manufacturer of rocket engines. He left UNESCO in 1953 to start a studio as a graphic artist, working in a form he invented called “kinetic art.” (LA Times, Nov 11/81; LA Star News, Nov 11/81)
