An analysis of NASA’s 1983 budget for research and development, prepared for Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) by the General Accounting Office (GAO), said that more than 25 % of it was for military programs. The New York Times said that the report would lead to more criticism from Congress that NASA was becoming increasingly militarized, at the expense of civilian science and technology. Proxmire said that he asked for the report to “determine the extent to which NASA was merely acting as an agent” for DOD. As nearly half the Shuttle flights would take military payloads, more than $1 billion of the $3.5 billion requested for the Shuttle in FY83 was considered military: $1.1 billion of an R&D budget of $5.33 billion (20.5%) and $400 million support funds (7.77%) could therefore be military related. NASA’s total 1983 budget request was $6.6 PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED **J^LlNT£NTK)NAUr HO ML w billion; total Pentagon direct spending on space was not known but was probably as much as or more than NASA’s annual budget. Proxmire said that he did not object to use of the Shuttle for military purposes, but paying for DOD activities through the NASA budget was “not the way to ensure that dollars spent on national security are spent with maximum effect.” NASA said that it had been tasked with developing the Shuttle as a national endeavor, and reimbursement by other agencies for use of the Shuttle did not change the cost to the government. (NY Times, May 3/82, A-15)
NASA said that a team of astronomers led by Dr. Michael Werner of ARC had mapped the Orion nebula using infrared data from NASA’s Kuiper airborne observatory. The nebula, 1,500 light-years from Earth, was one of the closest known regions in the galaxy where stars were currently forming. Since its discovery 17 years ago, infrared images had shown the total power output of the group of new stars invisible to the naked eye to be more than 100,000	times the power output of Earth’s sun. (NASA Release 82-88; ARC Release 82-86)
LeRC said that it had developed a device called MIAMI (micro-wave ice-accretion measurement instrument) to warn airplane pilots of dangerous ice buildup. This was the only device able to measure actual ice thickness and rate of accretion, besides giving a warning. Unlike other such instruments, MIAMI was imbedded in, instead of projecting from, the surface under study; projecting probes tended to collect ice and confuse detection of how much was actually forming on the surface. The microprocessor in the device could tell the difference between ice and other substances (oil, dirt, grease, insects) and signal only the formation of ice. (LeRC Release 82-56) LeRC also reported the completion of a five-year $39-million program of engine improvements to conserve fuel in commercial jet aircraft through identifying areas for cost-effective refurbishment and of performance loss. The specific goal was to reduce fuel use by up to 5 % for current jet engines. Much of the cost would be repaid by contractors Pratt & Whitney and General Electric; under the reimbursement feature of the program, repayments over a 10-year period would be based on sales of improved components. So far, NASA had recovered nearly $1 million from the contractors, with a potential of $19 to $20 million. (LeRC Release 82-57) Salyut 7 had been visited twice by the other crews: on June 24 two veteran cosmonauts arrived with French test pilot Jean-Loup Chretien, the first nonAmerican from the West to travel in space; on August 19, a second set of visitors arrived, including Svetlana Savitskaya, the second woman to fly in space. Cargo ship Progress 16 had docked with the combined Salyut 7-Soyuz T-7 November 2 bringing fuel, research materials, supplies for the crew, and mail. On November 18 the cosmonauts launched from Salyut 7s airlock Iskra 3, a small communications satellite created by student designers at the Moscow Aviation Institute to make experiments in amateur radio. Student receiving stations in Moscow and Kaluga would control Iskra 3 and receive and process incoming data. (NY Times, Nov 15/82, B-6; FBIS, Tass in English, Nov 2, 9, 16, 18, 22/82) November. 15-19: Press reports said that problems November 15 with new million-dollar space suits had canceled the first space walk scheduled in nearly nine years and would bring STS-5 to a conclusion November 16. The walk was canceled when the fan in astronaut Joseph Allen’s suit quit and the device maintaining oxygen pressure in William Lenoir’s backpack behaved so erratically that flight directors feared a breakdown during any space walk. Program managers said that the walk could be done on a later flight; Glynn Lunney at JSC said that the program was “still right on track.” The next three flights would carry space suits for any unexpected problems, such as cargobay doors that refused to close. The next flight was scheduled for February 1983. Inspectors after the November 16 landing said that Columbia came through the fifth flight better than previously: an inboard tire on the left side was shredded and flattened on landing by a brake jamming against it, but only 4 of the 33,000 protective tiles were damaged or came loose during reentry. A seven-man panel investigating the space-suit failure said that they hoped to have answers within a week. One possibility was that the suits were dropped while in their cases or when removed and stowed in the ship. Engineers were baffled by the failure of both suits at the same time for different reasons. The New York Times said that the suits, “most complex human garments ever made,” differed from those used in Apollo moon landings, or for Skylab in 1973 and 1974, which functioned well but were too stiff for easy handling of tools needed by Shuttle astronauts. Shuttle missions had called for production, by United Technologies’ Hamilton Standard Division, of 43 suits and 13 backpacks at a cost of about $2 million each; the suits had been tested by the company 160 times while unmanned and 70 times while manned, said a company spokesman. (W Post, Nov 16/82, A-l; Nov 18/82, A-7; NY Times, Nov 16/82, C-3)
NASA said that it had added two physicians, Dr. Norman Thagard and Dr. William Thornton, to the crews of STS-7 and STS-8, respectively, to study space motion sickness, because other measures had failed to indicate the causes of the sickness. Neither physician had flown in space before. Thagard would join STS-7 commander Robert L. Crippen, pilot Frederick H. Hauck, and mission specialists John M. Fabian and Dr. Sally K. Ride. Thornton, the oldest astronaut at 53, would join STS-8 commander Richard Truly, pilot Daniel Brandenstein, and mission specialists Dale Gardner and Guion Bluford, Jr. A five-person crew would not require spacecraft changes. (NASA Release 82-190; MSFC Release 82-115; W Post, Dec 22/82, A-3; NY Times, Dec 22/82, B-12)
NASA investigators of the failure of $2-million space suits on STS-5 issued an interim report blaming two missing parts and a faulty sensor. During the mission on Shuttle Columbia, an oxygen device in astronaut William Lenoir’s suit failed to provide required pressure, and the fan in astronaut Joseph Allen’s suit and portable life-support system would not operate. JSC program Operations Manager Richard A. Colonna, who headed the team, said that two vital plastic parts the size of a matchstick, worth less than a nickel apiece, that several to hold a pair of screws against a metal piece in Lenoir’s suit, had been removed for a test last August and were never put back. Documentation indicated that the parts were in place, and during repeated tests, technicians failed to spot their absence. The team said that the fan failed because a tiny magnetic sensor no bigger than a pinhead apparently gave way just after Allen put on his space suit. The motor running the fan and pumping water through the suit used the sensors, instead of the magnetic brushes used in most motors, because of the danger of a spark igniting the pure oxygen circulating inside the spacesuit. Colonna said that the team would continue its investigation. He expected it to recommend further and more frequent testing and quality-control inspections by the manufacturer, Hamilton Standard, during space suit production and at JSC and KSC. (NASA Release 82-181; W Post, Dec 2/82, A-l)
NASA named Dr. Peter J. Denning head of a new Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science (RIACS) to begin at ARC in June 1983. Denning, chairman of computer sciences at Purdue, would direct research in computer science and engineering with potential for use in NASA programs. Funded by NASA through the Universities Space Research Association (USRA), RIACS would be an academic center for applications of the computer to solve scientific and engineering problems. {NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Dec 3/82) On December 10 the crew returned to Earth at 10:03 p.m. Moscow time in the preset area 190 kilometers east of Dzhezkazgan “not far from” the space center at Baykonur. Beijing’s Xinhua press service said that a special lighthouse equipped with a strong beam was installed at the site to guide helicopters with ground crews to assist the cosmonauts. Difficulties with the landing meant that journalists for the first time were not at the site. Berezovoy later reported that “Judging from previous crews, who hardly felt the shock of landing, this landing was quite severe: and was followed by a few more rolls, apparently because we were on a small incline, and we ended up on our side with one on top of the other—Valentin [Lebedev] was on the (?up-per) couch and I was on the lower. . . .We spent about 20 minutes in the descent module while an offroad vehicle was made ready but then spent 5 hours in this vehicle because of poor conditions. It was not bad, it was warm. We changed our clothes for clean and dry ones, replacing spacesuits with flight suits.” (Interview recorded for Moscow DomSvc in Russian, December 13) Later press reports said that the cosmonauts had “a harrowing reentry” in a craft rolling across a steppe swept by a blizzard and fog. Although initial USSR reports implied all had gone well, the New York Times said that the crew had “anxious moments” when unexpected bad weather landed them in darkness, near-zero temperatures, and blowing snow. One helicopter “force-landed” without injury, and another had to turn back. (NY Times, Dec 14/82, C-2; WPost, Dec 12/82, A-31)] Tass carried reports December 12 of the first meeting with the cosmonauts. Their doctors said that “the cosmonauts feel fine which is somewhat at variance with the real state of their organisms.” Good appetites indicated “energetic adaptation to terrestrial conditions. In 24 hours the cosmonauts gained about a kilogram in weight each. They particularly liked a bath with the air temperature of up to 70 Berezovoy said afterward “If we could have such a pleasure at the Salyut station I would have worked for more time in orbit.” On December 16 Ivan Skiba, chief physician of the space training center, said that the cosmonauts had been “put on a regime approximating their usual lifestyle.” He said that the doctors were “naturally worried over the decree to which the additional 26 days spent by [Berezovoy and Lebedev] in outer space over the 185-day space mission of [Popov and Ryumin] will affect the human organism. These 26 days constituted the “unknown path” both for the cosmonauts and for us physicians. Now we can say with certainty that the [additional] time in space.. .has not affected the cosmonauts’ organisms. Their cardiovascular activity, blood composition, and other characteristics are returning to preflight figures.” Skiba recalled that Boris Yegorov, “a representative of the medical profession,” was among the first cosmonauts and hoped he would not be the last medical man to fly in space. Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov told a magazine December 17 Berezovoy and Lebedev had “made an important step in increasing the endurance of weightlessness.. .essential for activity in large orbital stations, space plants and factories, and interplanetary missions.” When the two returned from the 211-day mission, they “were sunken physically and had become thinner and paler... [wanted] regular human communication with friends. They eat with a good appetite.. .swim every day.. .to have some weightlessness in water and make their life easier. They still find it a bit difficult to be seated as the muscles that make the position comfortable are out of their elementary function.” U.S. space officials were watching the cosmonauts’ adaptation to gravity after 30 weeks of weightlessness. A television broadcast three days after their return showed them moving unaided to the edge of a whirlpool where they were assisted down a ladder. A commentator noted they were “like infants” and would have to relearn how to walk. The Soviet Union had announced plans for a station orbiting for a year and permanently manned, its crews remaining in space indefinitely to reduce ferrying costs. Soviet experts, like former cosmonaut Konstantin Feoktistov, had talked of manned missions to destinations such as Titan, a satellite of Saturn. (Longest U.S. flight so far was the 84-day mission flown by Gerald Carr, Edward Gibson, and William Pogue on Skylab in 1973 and 1974.) The Washington Times said that Soviet planners were “seriously divided about what to do next.” Valery Ryumin, who spent 175 and then 185 days on Salyut 6 and was now a senior program chief at the space center, talked of grave risks to crew health on long-term missions and said that “four months is about the optimal period.” Ignoring reports that Berezovoy and Lebedev were in fine health, Ryumin said that it would take “through medical tests on earth” to show how they had fared. (FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 9-17/82; Beijing Xinhua in English, Dec 11/82; NY Times, Dec 11/82, 12; Dec 14/82, C-2; W Post, Dec 11/82, A-23; Dec 12/82, A-31; W Times, Dec 15/82, 8A)
The Observatory for Geophysical Monitoring of Climatic Change at Mauna Loa, Hawaii, on March 3 said that scientists doing a routine weather scan had discovered a huge cloud orbiting the Earth and had tracked it for five weeks, but could not explain what it was. The cloud, about 10 to 12 miles high (just above the flight paths of most commercial jets), had probably circled the Earth four or five times. The best guess was that it resulted from an unnoticed volcanic eruption. On March 10 NASA said that the “mystery cloud” detected over Hawaii definitely came from a volcanic eruption. Chemical analysis of samples showed that it consisted entirely of sulfuric acid, ruling out nuclear explosion or a meteorite, either of which would have produced fragments of rocky material. The cloud had been measured from the equator to Germany, about 50-f8-N, with the heaviest concentration of particles found by a Langley Research Center (LaRC) research aircraft at 20 °N. No volcanic source for the cloud had been identified. Scientists from ARC were studying atmosphere-circulation patterns to see how gas from an equatorial source could spread over the northern half of the Earth. Sulfur gases injected into the stratosphere by volcanic eruptions tended to remain for months, as there would be no rain to remove them; changing gradually into drops of sulfuric acid, the volcanic cloud would increase over time in depth and density as more sulfur compounds arrived. Highly reflective clouds of the acid, like those on Venus, could prevent solar heat from reaching the ground, but the current cloud apparently had not produced any climate changes. A NASA research plane flying from Wallops Flight Center (WFC) to Costa Rica carried a remote-sensing laser radar that mapped the cloud content while doing previously scheduled data-gathering on local volcanoes. LaRC would continue taking radar data; also, an ARC U-2 aircraft would make follow-on flights beginning March 23. (ARC Release 82-11; LaRC Release 82-12; NASA Release 82-45; W Post, Mar 6/82, A-4; NY Times, Mar 7/82, P-24) Heavy rains all day March 17 left more than an inch of water on the “dry” lake beds at Edwards, where Columbia had landed after its first two flights. NASA said that it was cheaper to move landing equipment to White Sands than to postpone the flight until Edwards dried out: each day of delay in launching the Shuttle cost the agency $3 million. A special landing team immediately began loading support equipment on a 23-car train that would carry it the 1,000 miles from Edwards to White Sands. The equipment should be in place late on Sunday, March 21, ready for use should an emergency occur after liftoff. The upcoming flight, third of a series of four test flights before the Shuttle began carrying payloads into space later in 1982, would subject the spacecraft to temperature extremes to see how it endured long exposure to dark and light. It would also include further tests of the 50-foot robot arm designed to handle Shuttle payloads. Exposure of the Shuttle tail would test pumping of fuel and restarting rear engines under extremely high or low temperatures. Exposure of the 65-foot-long cargo bay carrying more than 21,000 pounds of instruments and experiments to the extreme heat encountered in space would show how materials carried into space over the next 10 years would survive. The open cargo bay aimed at the Sun would also seek exposure to solar flares, for which scientists were still seeking explanations. Lousma and Fullerton flew from JSC at Houston to Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., near KSC in T-38 jet trainers Saturday, March 20, and planned to spend most of Sunday in preflight briefings. KSC said that the countdown had been virtually trouble-free and ahead of schedule. Liftoff from pad A, launch complex 39, took place Monday, March 22, at 10:59 a.m.; EST after an hour’s delay caused by failure of a protection circuit in the controller, for the heated nitrogen purge of the main engines, required before introduction.of cryogenic fuel. Countdown stopped for reestablishment of heater'control. Initial orbit elements were 240-kilometer apogee and perigee, 89-minute period, and 38° inclination. Operations began in the fourth hours of flight with the opening of payload doors, removal of ejection suits, and activation of the Office of Space: Sciences experiment package (OSS-1). Later reports indicated that the crew suffered from motion sickness after the exertion of removing the space suits; incidence of motion sickness had been less on Mercury and Gemini when astronauts had less area to move in, and both Soviet and U.S. crews had taken time on longer flights to get used to weightlessness before active exertion. Scheduled for the second day was deployment of the robot arm; for the third was practiceiin grappling payload packages and extending a set of sensors over the edges of the cargo bay to measure plasma (electrically charged gases) in Earth orbit. The fourth and fifth days would see further tests of the arm, more thermal testing, and two brief ignitions of the maneuvering rockets to see how they performed after long periods of cold. The sixth day would have more thermal tests and experiments on solar radiation; the seventh day would be for shutdown and landing preparations. All activities planned for day one were accomplished; OSS-1 experimenters reported “excellent data.” Thermal attitude tail-to-sun prevailed throughout the sleep period. A survey with the remote manipulator system (RMS) camera showed several low-temperature white tiles missing or damaged on the nosecone. Also, three pieces of black tiles (about 1 1/2 tiles) had been found 700 feet south of the launch pad; others had been found on and near the beach. All had been sent to JSC for identification and analysis. On Tuesday, the first day in orbit, the “wrist” camera on the manipulator arm went dark, and flight directors postponed the critical grappling test to devise a way to do the test without it. That camera served as the crew’s eyes whenever the end of the arm took hold of an object in the cargo bay. Planned use was to raise an 82-pound package and move it around the bay; the instrument inside would measure electrical disturbances caused by the spacecraft and its motion through the electronically charged ionosphere. Instead, the crew extended the robot arm far over the cargo bay and used the “elbow” camera to transmit “the best television ever seen of the earth” from 150 miles up. The crew turned on the monodisperse latex reactor [see January 19] for 14 hours; the solution would be stirred every 30 minutes for the rest of the mission. Ground control changed the activity schedule to allow for crew rest and troubleshooting; day four activities would be done on day three and vice versa, a prelaunch-planned option. Problems were reported with the environmental control and life-support systems and with the waste-control “slinger”; NASA said it had initiated “backup procedures.” Besides suffering from motion sickness, Lousma had been kept awake by loud radio static, probably from a Soviet radar at Rostov on the Black Sea, said to be the most powerful in the world; it was called Woodpecker by radio ham operators because of its noise, heard from Spain to parts of China. STS-3 lost three main radio links to Earth Friday, March 25, through the Shuttle’s transponders that locked on and amplified ground signals and carried nearly all data on Shuttle condition and its speed and location. Two ultra-high-frequency (UHF) radio channels carried voice transmission, however, and the astronauts were using the remaining transponder, a backup UHF voice line, and the FM-radio line to relay information to Earth. Gene Kranz, deputy flight director at JSC, said that the mission would go full time unless the high-power transponder link was lost. A premature end to the mission would require a landing somewhere other than at White Sands, because of bad weather with overcast skies and high winds that blew dust across the runways and created haze thick enough to obscure the landing site. Two days away from the scheduled landing, the crew had completed all the thermal tests on Columbia: baking tail, nose, and top in unimpeded sunlight and chilling the same parts in the icy cold of space for hours. They had restarted the Shuttle engines hot and cold, opened and closed cargo-bay doors under both conditions, and repeatedly tested the mechanical arm under varying conditions with excellent results. In the last possible opportunity, less than a day before the end of the mission, the crew pointed their solar telescope directly at the Sun and got a solar flare (an event on the Sun’s surface they could not have predicted) “almost as if it were planned.” Dr. Robert Novick of Columbia University, where the X-ray polarimeter was built, said that this was the first time that an instrument in space with this sensitivity had witnessed a solar flare. On Sunday night, March 28, the crew went to sleep two hours earlier than usual in preparation for landing Monday. About 40 minutes before the time scheduled for touchdown, astronaut John Young in a Grumman Gulfstream jet tried a practice landing on the White Sands runway and found visibility completely obscured. The Columbia crewmen were about to fire rockets to begin descent. “That’s the first time I’ve seen it this bad,” Young told mission control in Houston. “I think we ought to knock this thing off.” Less than 15 minutes later, mission control ordered a day’s delay. The two astronauts unpacked to await word from mission control on where and when they would return. Landing finally occurred at 9:04 a.m. MST on Tuesday, March 30, on a dry lake bed at White Sands. Touchdown point was 1,092 feet past the runway threshold; rollout distance was 13,732 feet. The crew left the orbiter 45 minutes after landing, and postflight operations proceeded without incident. (NASA Release 82-29; NASA MOR M-989-82-03 [prelaunch] Mar 13/82, [postlaunch] May 5/82; NASA MOR E-835-03-82-01, OSS-1, [prelaunch] Mar 17/82, [postlaunch] Sept 20/82; Spacewam SPX-341; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Mar 24, 25, 29/82; NY Times, Mar 18/82, A-18; Mar 20, 7; Mar 21, 1; Mar 22, A-l; Mar 30, A-l; WPost, Mar 19/82, A-7; Mar 21, A-l; Mar 22, A-l; Mar 25, A-2; Mar 27, A-2; Mar 29, A-l; Mar 30, A-l)
NASA announced the selection of a West German physicist, Ulf Merbold, and a U.S. biomedical engineer, Byron K. Lichtenberg, as the first nonastronauts to fly on the Space Shuttle. The two would be part of a crew of six on the ninth Shuttle mission, scheduled for September 1983, and would use the Spacelab workshop installed for the first time in the Shuttle cargo bay to operate 38 scientific packages representing more than 70 investigators from Europe, Japan, and the United States. ESA, which for 10 years had planned and built the $1 billion joint U.S.-European Spacelab unit, had agreed with NASA that one European scientist would be on all Shuttle missions carrying a Spacelab. Merbold, trained at Stuttgart University, competed for his Shuttle seat with Dutch physicist Wubbo Ockels, trained at the University of Groningen. Lichtenberg, with a Ph.D. from MIT, competed with Michael Lampton, holding a doctorate in physics from CalTech. Winners were chosen in secret ballot by a panel of 36 U.S. and European scientists. (MSFC Release 82-86; ESA Info 31; W Post, Sept 20/82, A-5)
NASA announced that MSFC had selected four of the eight aerospace firms making space-station mission analyses for Headquarters to negotiate contracts exploring early uses of a space station. Each MSFC contract would address a specific area: Boeing would describe building large structures in orbit, such as huge communications antennas; both Martin Marietta and TRW would study servicing and maintenance of satellites by a manned facility in space; and General Dynamics would study operations of a Orbital Transfer Vehicle (OTV) serviced in space by a manned facility to move payloads from lower to higher orbits. William R. Marshall, MSFC director of program development, said that the studies would posit a space station in orbit by 1990 and the kinds of experimental operations to be carried out there that would lead to a fully operational station by the end of the century. (NASA Release 82-134)
NASA announced the crews for the fourth, fifth, and sixth Shuttle flights. On STS A, Thomas K. Mattingly would be commander, and Henry W. Hartsfield, pilot. Scheduled for launch early in July, the seven day STS-4 would be the last of four orbital flight tests to verify Shuttle hardware and software. Mattingly, 47, orbited the Moon 10 years ago on Apollo 16: Hartsfield, 48, was a rookie. STS-5, a five-day mission planned for mid-November to deploy commercial communications satellites, would be the first to use mission-specialist astronauts. Vance D. Brand, 50, who was command-module pilot on 1975’s Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, would be mission commander. This would be the first spaceflight for Robert F. Overmyer, 45, the pilot. Mission specialists would be Dr. Joseph P. Allen and Dr. William B. Lenoir. Columbia would be the spacecraft for both STS-4 and STS-5. STS-6, planned for January 1983, would be the first flight of the orbiter Challenger, a two-day mission to deploy NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), one of an eventual two-satellite system providing comprehensive voice and data coverage between orbiting shuttles and the ground. Commander would be Paul J. Weitz, 49, who was pilot on Skylab /; copilot would be U.S. Air Force Col. Karol J. Bobko, 44, another rookie. Donald H. Peterson and Dr. Story Musgrave would fly as mission specialists. NASA would no longer assign Shuttle backup crews; its pool of experienced pilots at JSC would readily permit interchange of crewmen. (NASA Release 82-33; JSC Release 82-012; W Post, Mar 2/82, A-9)
Marine Col. Robert F. Overmyer, named as copilot with Vance D. Brand on the STS-5 flight, told a JSC preflight press conference that the mission would carry four astronauts, the largest number to fly on any U.S. spacecraft; the other two would be physicists Joseph P. Allen and William B. Lenoir, both making their first spaceflight. Overmyer said that it would take four men to launch the two communications satellites set for deployment from STS-5 over the Pacific between Hawaii and Chile. The Shuttle’s two ejection seats would be replaced with three nonejectable cockpit seats. The fourth crewman would ride in a seat installed in the middeck of Columbia’s cabin next to the airlock leading to the cargo bay, designed for use in the first Shuttle space walk. The report said that the crew did not seem bothered to be “the first to fly the shuttle without being able to eject if the spaceliner is damaged during liftoff.” (W Post, July 21/82, A-l)
The 200-inch telescope at Mt. Palomar observatoiy and an extremely sensitive electronic camera made the first confirmed sighting of Halley’s comet beyond the orbit Of Saturn. Recording the reflected light of an object the night of October 15 and observing it again at a predicted location the night of October 17, G. Edward Danielson and David C. Jewitt of CalTech told an October 20 press conference “it was both where we expected it to be and had the correct brightness.”'. The sighting was the farthest ever made of Halley’s, named for English astronomer Edmond Halley, first to recognize it as one traveling through the inner solar system every 76 years. He correctly predicted its reappearance in 1758 but did not live to see it. Its spectacular appearance in 1910 resulted from a favorable arrangement of Sun, Earth, and comet that would not occur on this visit. (W Post, Oct 21/82, D-1)
NASA launched the fifth flight (STS-5) of Space Shuttle Columbia on time at 7:19 a.m. EST from KSC with a four-man crew, largest ever to take off from Earth at the same time. Feeling none of the motion sickness suffered by three of the first four Shuttle crews, the astronauts were so busy preparing for deployment from orbit of the first of two communications satellites that they had no time for chitchat with mission control. Astronaut Joseph Allen took off his shoes and socks to work barefooted inside the Shuttle cabin: “it’s like having four hands,” he explained. He and William Lenoir maneuvered the first of twin satellites (one U.S., the other Canadian) into space at 3:17 p.m. EST, while Vance Brand and Robert Overmyer flew the 100-ton Shuttle, positioning Columbia to avoid smearing its windows with exhaust from the satellite engine. The astronauts would use the same procedures November 12 to deploy the Canadian satellite on a similar flight path. The first commercial cargo carried by the Shuttle was a 21-foot-tall cylinder worth almost $50 million, owned by Satellite Business Systems (SBS), a firm begun as a partnership of Aetna Life & Casualty, Comsat General Corporation (a subsidiary of Communications Satellite Corporation—ComSatCorp), and International Business Machines (IBM). Boeing, General Motors, and General Electric were among its more than 300 clients who used SBS satellites to transmit coast-to-coast computer traffic and telephone calls. Transmissions to SPS satellites were at 14GHz, twice as high as frequencies used by other U.S. communications satellites and were relayed at 12GHz to avoid interference. President Reagan held a telephone conversation with the astronauts at 10:26 a.m. November 11, repeating his request to an earlier crew to “pick me up and drop me off in California.” He added that “if more of us could see [the earth] from that angle we might realize that there must be a way to make it as united in reality here on earth as it looks from outer space.” Brand replied, “We’re in total agreement on that one.” (NASA MOR M-989-82-05 [prelaunch] Nov 5/82, [postlaunch] Dec 7/82; USA Today, Nov 12/82, 1A; W Post, Nov 12/82, A-l, D-8)
Presidential Science Adviser Dr. George A. Keyworth announced the names of 13 U.S. scientists and engineers to a White House Science Council. Chairman of the council was Solomon J. Buchsbaum, executive vice president, Bell Laboratories; vice chairman was Edward Frieman, vice president, Science Applications Inc. Other members were Harold M. Agnew, president, General Atomic Company; John Bardeen, emeritus professor, engineering and physics, University of Illinois; D. Allan Bromley, professor of physics, Yale University (chairman, American Association for the Advancement of Science); George A. Cowan, senior fellow, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory; Edward E. David, president, Exxon Research and Engineering (former science adviser to President Nixon); Donald S. Frederickson, resident fellow, National Academy of Sciences (former director, National Institutes of Health—NIH); Paul E. Gray, president, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT); Robert O.. Hunter, president, Western Research Company; Arthur K. Kerman, director, MIT Center for Theoretical Physics; David Packard, chairman, Hewlett Packard; Edward Teller, Hoover Institute, Stanford University. Lt. Col. Thomas H. Johnson, special assistant to Keyworth, said that the council would meet up to six times per year and would study issues with “significant technical components”; it was not meant to be demographically representative of U.S. science but rather would consist of “people with first-rate technical credentials and excellent judgment.” The New York Times noted that in an interview last summer Keyworth said that “good judgment is hard to find” among scientists because “our profession is one of the few where arrogance has been condoned if not nurtured.” A presidential science advisory committee formed in 1957 was abolished in 1977 by President Nixon, angry when some of its members took public stands against his policies. The new council, known by its initials WHSC (whisk), was meant to be more modest, the New York Times said. It would have its first meeting in March. (OST Policy Release, 2-16-82; NY Times, Feb 18/82, A-12)
The Washington Post noted the 25th anniversary of the USSR’s launch of an orbiting satellite, saying that “no single event in history assaulted America’s image of itself as did Sputnik.” Subsequent U.S. space ventures “did nothing but tarnish that image,” the Army and Navy arguing over which would launch the first satellite, while the Soviet Union orbited dogs, rats, and mice and took pictures of the dark side of the Moon. The Navy got the first opportunity December 6, 1957, with Vanguard on the pad at Cape Canaveral and “literally blew it.” The Army was given four days in January 1958 to launch Explorer from the Cape. When the launch finally took place after being delayed two days by unsafe winds, sea air had so corroded Army tracking radios in the Caribbean that, the Cape never received the signal that the satellite was in orbit. In 1961 “the roof fell in” when Yuri Gagarin became the first man to orbit the Earth, and Gherman Titov orbited 17 times. The “best U.S. orbital effort that year was that of Ham the chimpanzee.” Not until 1962 did John Glenn orbit the Earth, and then for only three orbits. By the end of that year the Soviet Union had sent four cosmonauts into, space.	. President John F. Kennedy had told Congress May 25, 1961, that the U.S. goal would be to put a man on the Moon and return him safely “before the end of the decade.” By the time a three-man crew in Apollo 8 orbited the Moon in 1968 at Christmastime, “the space race was over. What happened to the Soviets?” Former JSC Director Chris Kraft said in an interview that the Soviet Union PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED INTFNU0NAUt RUN* “abandoned their moon program. We took the wind right out of their sails.” Critics said that not all of the effects of the space race were good: it “spurred U.S. determination to improve the quality of schools and students, but whether that succeeded is debatable.” Kennedy “never saw the flight of anything to which he gave the initial impetus”; President Johnson, “who did more for the Apollo manned program than any president, suffered through the fatal Apollo fire”; President Nixon “basked in all of the Apollo triumphs only to answer for Watergate.” One educator said “Sputnik is one reason Johnny can’t read today. He’s more interested in Pac-Man, which you might call an outgrowth of Sputnik.” If Sputnik led to Pac-Man, the Washington Post said, it also “helped to produce the high technology of the computer revolution. . .Today’s state-of-the-art computer processes 5 million operations a second.” W Post, Oct 4/82, A-l)
NASA announced that Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, 58, last of the Mercury Seven astronauts selected in 1958, would leave after 23 years with the space agency. He had retired from NASA in February 1981 but had worked since that time on a temporary basis as a retired annuitant managing the Space Shuttle orbital flight tests at Johnson Space Center (JSC). He planned to work as a consultant to Aerospace Corporation, El Segundo, Calif., and to Space Sciences Inc. of Houston, Tex. Slayton joined the U.S. Air Force in 1942, flying 56 combat missions in Europe and 7 over Japan as a B-25 bomber pilot; he was a test pilot at Edwards Air Force Base when selected as a Mercury astronaut. Grounded in August 1959 because of a suspected heart condition, he was later approved for flight and was part of the U.S. crew in the Apollo-Soyuz mission of July 1975. (NASA Release 82-23) —The New York Times said that friends and associates “wondered why matters were not handled better”: NASA never responded to a JSC request for another year’s extension of Slayton’s employment. His departure reduced the number of the astronaut corps to 79. Several were doctors or scientists without piloting skills; 6 were women. “Many,” the New York Times added, “are young enough to be Slayton’s children.” There had been 108 U.S. astronauts “but only one Original Seven.” (NY Times, Feb 2/82, A-14; Feb 28/82, 30; W Post, Feb 18/82, A-21)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs established a space station task force, directed by John D. Hodge, to be responsible for developing program aspects, including mission analysis, definition of requirements, an program management. Hodge would report to Philip E. Culbertson, associate deputy administrator, and would draw on space-station activities at each program office and field center. (NASA anno, May 20/82)
MSFC reported Heao 2, second in a series of three high-energy astronomy observatories launched in the late 1970s and the last to reenter, fell from orbit at 1:27 a.m. CST and burned up in the atmosphere. John Stone, project manager a MSFC, said that tracking stations indicated that it broke up over the South Pacific east of Australia. Heao 1 had reentered in 1979; Heao 3, in December 1981. Heao 2 had not been operational for almost a year, as it had expended its control-gas supply in April 1981, so that it could not maintain attitude and had to be powered down. Launched in September 1979 and nicknamed Einstein, Heao 2 had operated for nearly 2 1/2 years, carrying the largest X-ray telescope ever built. It had made detailed imaging and spectroscopic observations of about 300 known X-ray sources and discovered thousands of faint new ones. It also made the first X-ray photographs of supernova remnants, pulsars, galactic X-ray sources, and diffuse emissions from galactic clusters. Scientists said it would take three years longer to analyze the data from the Heaos. (MSFC Release 82-31) During March: NASA said that Dr. John F. McCarthy, director of Lewis Research Center (LeRC) would return July 1 to MIT as professor of aeronautics and astronautics. Before becoming director at LeRC in October 1978, McCarthy directed MIT’s center for space research. From 1962 to 1971 he was with North American Rockwell. (NASA anno, Mar 2/82; NASA Release 82-35) —Daniel J. Fink, senior vice president at General Electric Company, was named chairman of the NASA advisory council by James M. Beggs, administrator. He assumed the chair March 11. As general manager of General Electric’s space division, Fink had received the Collier Trophy for his contributions to the Landsat program. (NASA Release 82-39) —Administrator Beggs changed the titles of officials in charge of three programs at NASA Headquarters: Harriett G. Jenkins would be assistant administrator for equal opportunity; Stuart J. Evans, assistant administrator for procurement; John F. Murphy, assistant administrator for legislative affairs. (NASA anno Mar 2/82) —A Thomas Young, director of GSFC, would leave NASA March 20 to become vice president of research and engineering at Martin Marietta Aerospace. He had joined the Langley laboratory in 1961 and in 1975 become Viking mission director. He was deputy director of ARC from February 1979 until taking over at GSFC in February 1980. Acting director at GSFC until the appointment of a successor would be Dr. Leslie H. Meredith, who had been director of applications there since 1976. (NASA annos Mar 1/82, Mar 23/82; NASA Releases 82-31, 82-48) —Andrew J. Stofan, who was acting associate administrator for space science at NASA Headquarters until Dr. Burton Edelson took over last month, would become director of LeRC, succeeding Dr. John McCarthy as of July 1. Before assignment to Headquarters in 1978 as deputy associate administrator for space science, Stofan was director of launch vehicles at LeRC, where he had begun as a research engineer in 1985. (NASA Release 82-47; LeRC Release 82-14)
NASA launched Intelsat 5E F-5 at 7:08 p.m. EDT from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit with 35,962-kilometer apogee, 165.7-kilometer perigee, and 24.4° inclination. This craft would carry for the first time a maritime communications package for ship and shore use by INMARSAT. ’An apogee kick motor fired October 1 would start it to geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release 82-136; NASA MOR M-491-203-82-05 [prelaunch] Sept 22/82, [postlaunch] Oct 26/82) During September: NASA Headquarters announced the reorganization of its Office of Space Transportation Systems and Office of Space Transportation Operations into a new Office of Space Flight. L. Michael Weeks was named acting deputy associate administrator, with assistant associate administrators for policy, space transportation, and institutions. The new arrangement would stress integrated Shuttle operations planning and direction; STS orientation to customers; a manageable span of control for the associate administrator; maximum delegation of authority to subordinate officials and field organizations; and minimum disruption to existing lines of communication with centers and outside NASA. (SP anno, Sept 1/82) —John J. Quann was appointed deputy director of GSFC, effective September 8. He had been director of GSFC’s mission and data operations directorate since October 1980 and had worked at Goddard since 1963. (NASA anno Sept 1/82; NASA Release 82-131) —NASA named Dr. Frank B. McDonald, chief of GSFC’s laboratory for high-energy physics since 1970, as NASA chief scientist, effective September 20.	In this position he would be the principal adviser to the administrator and other senior officials on scientific aspects of NASA activities. Beginning at GSFC in 1959, McDonald had been project scientist on nine NASA satellite programs and principal investigator for many space experiments. He previously taught physics at the Iowa State University of Science and Technology. (NASA anno, Sept 9/82; NASA Release 82-133) —NASA reported that the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, not slated for flight, was still working for the U.S. space program, helping DFRF engineers to predict and avert structural trouble spots resulting from wear and tear. All preShuttle spacecraft had been one-shot items, so that space fatigue was a new problem. As each Shuttle was meant to fly up to 100 missions, NASA needed a reliable way to foresee difficulties before they developed into problems and to detect potential weakness without damaging the structure. A method called modal analysis measuring structural response to shaker acceleration could track changes from baseline data. Piecemeal testing of parts would not give results valid for the entire structure: Enterprise, built to the same dimensions as the four actual orbiters, was “uniquely qualified for the job,” researchers said. (NASA Release 82-139; DFRF Release 82-13) —MSFC said that Lockheed’s contractor facility had successfully extended and retracted an experimental solar-array wing as tall as a 10-story building, scheduled for flight on the Space Shuttle in 1984. Unlike rigid metal structures used on current long-life spacecraft, the accordion-like array consisting of lightweight flexible plastic contained contact solar cells welded directly to the array like a printed circuit. The wing, measuring 105 feet by 13.5 feet, could fold into a package less than four inches thick and expand in orbit to its full length on a coilable extension mast. It could provide 66 watts per kilogram compared to 20 watts in present systems. (MSFC Release 82-84)
