Press reports said that the continuing STS-8 mission followed up its successful nighttime liftoff and nighttime launch of India’s INSAT-B, deployed from Challenger’s cargo bay at 3:49 a.m. EDT by mission specialist Air Force Lt. Col. Guion S. Bluford, Jr. This was the sixth successful launch of a communications satellite from a shuttle cargo bay in orbit. Navy Capt. Richard H. Truly and Navy Lt. Cdr. Dale A. Gardner spent most of the mission’s third day using the 50-foot mechanical arm to lift and move around a 19-foot 7,460-pound lead-and-aluminum dumbbell-shaped weight “the size of a truck,” practicing for retrieval next April of a dummy satellite platform before trying to catch and repair the crippled 20,000-pound Solar Max satellite. The next two days would see tests of the TDRS, now properly located to transmit communications during next April’s Spacelab mission for most of the Shuttle orbit rather than the present 20%. The odd workday beginning at night and launching INSAT in the dark had the crew retiring about 2 p.m. EDT, starting tasks in the late evening, and ending in the early afternoon. The computer at White Sands began refusing to acknowledge commands or to correctly position the three TDRS-use antennas at White Sands, on board the Challenger, and on TDRS. Flight controllers encountered a three-hour silence from TDRS, but other communications links showed no problem with Challenger, and the crew was not awakened. Harold Draughon, flight director at JSC, said that 90% of the trouble lay in the instructions given the White Sands computers and that he expected Spacelab to fly on time. The crew, also underwent tests by Dr. William Thornton on the causes of space sickness. In an unusual news conference between mission control in Houston and the crew in orbit, Thornton said that he had “learned more in the first hour and a half on orbit here than I had by all literature research I had done and all of the active work in the past year.” His crewmates had suffered symptoms like nausea, drowsiness, and “just plain giddiness,” although he refused to give details. However, he expressed confidence that the medical problem cpuld be solved through physiological studies aboard the Shuttle flights and would become a thing of the past “as in the early days the weight losses that were of great concern turned out to be a simple thing.” The mission also accomplished a successful first-time separation in weightlessness by mission specialists Bluford and Gardner of live pancreas cells, in a pharmaceutical process that could be a step toward conquering diabetes. The “astrorats’—six specimen flown on STS-8 to try out an “animal housing module” that would carry laboratory animals into orbit for various tests—were returning healthy and “feisty”; veterinarians at DFRF later found them dehydrated, as potatoes had been their source of water during flight. The rats were flown to ARC, where tests showed a postflight drop in blood volume like that of astronauts. STS-8 concluded its series of firsts September 5 with a first-time night landing at 3:40 a.m. EDT on an Edwards Air Force Base runway, touching down 300 feet from the aiming point with no on-board power or lights to assist. “That’s as good as we see in the daytime,” said Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight. “Based on what we’ve seen here tonight, I think night landings will become routine,” Truly told a welcoming ceremony. NASA had turned on the world’s most powerful searchlights, beams of 4.8 billion candlepower, visible for 100 miles in every direction, to guide Challenger down. The largest and most enthusiastic crowd of invited guests ever gathered at the end of a Shuttle mission gave the crew a standing ovation; Bluford said he was “really humbled tonight to see so many people out here at 4 o’clock in morning to welcome us back.” Thornton, the oldest person at 54 to fly in space, was visibly moved by the welcome and said “I know of no point in my life that will ever reach this.” President Reagan’s plan to visit KSC on Labor Day September 5 to greet the crew in person was canceled; he returned to Washington cutting short a vacation, when a Korean airliner was reportedly shot down. However, Vice President George Bush was to come in his place and attend a picnic for 15,000 employees, government and contractor. Challenger was in better shape than any of the Shuttles used on the seven previous flights, said Herman K. Widlick, KC ground operations manager, at Edwards to plan for the fastest turnaround so far. Despite a four-hour exposure to pelting rains before liftoff, six days in orbit, and landing in the dark on a concrete runway, Challenger showed less damage on the fuselage or underbelly. Tires and brakes also came through the night landing in good shape; however, the space toilet experienced the eighth straight breakdown in flight. Lt. Gen. Abrahamson said that he was “not at all pleased with the waste management system” and would set up a task-force 'equivalent to deal with the problem. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 9/83; NY Times, Sept 2/83, D-20; Sept 4/83, 1, 36; Sept 5/83, 9; Sept 7/83, A-18, A-22; WPost, Sept 2/83; Sept 3/83, A-3; Sept 5/83, A-3; Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 7/83, A-4; W Times, Sept 1/83, 2A; Sept 2/83, 2A; Sept 5/83, 3A; Sept 6/83, 1A; Time, Sept 12/83, 42) Press reports later said that the ISRO center in Bangalore had been able to put the entire solar panel in operation after tilting it toward the Sun. But ISRO also announced September 9 that “an unidentified object” struck INSAT IB only seconds after its release from Challenger; an object about eight inches across that came from outside the Shuttle hit the satellite 23 seconds after separation. Study of a videotape shot during INSAT development ruled out origin of the object in Challenger’s cargo bay. Experts said that this was the first spacecraft to be hit in space by a stray object. INSAT reached the correct geostationary orbit 19 days after launch and was to be operational by October 15; the first transmission test, sending and receiving a picture by a master control facility at Hassan, was successful and INSAT IB was “fully responding to ground commands.” India’s first commercial communications satellite INSAT 1, built and launched by the United States to India specifications, was declared officially dead a year ago when it failed to respond to ground commands and ran out of fuel 150 days after launch. (FBIS, Delhi DomSvc, Sept 8, 10, 11, 14, 15/83; WPost, Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 10/83, A-22; Sept 12/83, A-21; Sept 20/83, A-6; W Times, Sept 12/83, 6A)
U.S. balloonists Maxie Anderson, first to make a balloon crossing of the Atlantic, and Don Ida were killed when they crashed in a forest in Bavaria during the Gordon Bennett race for distance from Paris. Police saw the basket of the balloon detach and fall into the forest; a West German search-and-rescue unit said that the ballon struck a high-tension wire that separated it from the gondola. Police found both occupants dead at the scene. Anderson, with Ben Abruzzo and Larry Newman, landed Double Eagle II in France August 17, 1978, after a transatlantic flight. He and his son Kris hand flown across North America from San Francisco to Quebec, landing the balloon at Kitty Hawk May 12, 1980, far from its North Carolina goal. He and Don Ida had attempted a 45-day around-the-world flight in the balloon Jules Verne last November but encountered mechanical trouble in India. (NY Times, June 28/83, B-8)
The Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-9) landed at 3:47 p.m. PST at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., after 10 days in space and 167 orbits—the longest Space Shuttle mission ever. The landing followed a delay necessitating 22 more orbits than planned when Columbia’s computers failed 3 hours and 49 minutes prior to the planned reentry bum. Six hours after the two computers went off line, Columbia also lost one of its three inertial measurement units that provided orbiter orientation information. The orbiter carried five IBM general purpose computers and three inertial measurement units. Today’s reentry was flown with one of each inoperative. A reentry could be flown with only a single computer and single measurement unit. Mission pilots John W. Young and Brewster H. Shaw, Jr., said at the time that they believed that the triggering of an upward firing 870-pound nose reaction control jet, which caused an unusually strong impact to the orbiter, was the likely cause of the computer failures. However, telemetry analysis showed that the thruster activity was coincidental to the computer malfunction. Instead, NASA came to the conclusion that it was a transient hardware internal problem. About 40 minutes after the problems occurred, the crew restored the second computer to operation. On December 5, President Reagan and West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, in Athens at the time, held a conference call with the five U.S. crew members and one German payload specialist on Columbia. The U.S. Information Agency (USIA) used five satellites and thousands of miles of land lines around the world to bounce the signals among Athens. Washington, and JSC to provide live television coverage of the call to seven European cities and the Cable News Network (CNN). Aside from the computer problems, the ninth Space Shuttle mission was almost flawless and was distinguished by some significant scientific discoveries. One discovery involved the workings of the inner ear, disproving a 77-year-old hypothesis that had won the 1914 Nobel Prize in medicine for Swedish professor, Robert Barany. Barany had said that nystagmus, a flickering of a person’s eyes when cold air is blown into one of his ears and hot air into the other, was caused by convection, the motion of fluids under uneven heating. But in space, the lack of gravity meant that convection did not occur. Nevertheless, the astronauts aboard Columbia showed the characteristic eye movements. The six-man crew completed work on all but one of the 70 scheduled experiments; only a microwave sensing device misfired. Scientists from 14 countries designed the experiments, and the experiments did not end with touchdown. The four scientists were in quarantine, where they would be required to remain motionless so that scientists could observe how their bodies acclimated to gravity. (ESA Release, Dec 9/83; WH annon, Dec 5/83; W Times, Dec 6/83, 3A; WPost, Dec 6/83, A-3, Dec 8/83, A-3, Dec 9/83, A-l; NY Times, Dec 9/83, A-l; P Inq, Dec/83, A-l; AvWk, Dec 12/83, 23)
NASA launched at 11:00 a.m. EST the Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-9) from KSC. Columbia carried the largest space crew ever, which consisted of John Young, commander; Brewster Shaw, pilot; Dr. Robert Parker and Dr. Owen Garriott, mission specialists; and Dr. Byron Lichtenberg and West Germany’s Dr. Ulf Merbold, payload specialists. The crew would operate in two shifts to permit 24-hour operation of experiments. The mission was originally scheduled to get under way September 30 but was delayed to October 28 to give engineers additional time to check out a communications satellite needed to relay data to Earth from Spacelab, carried on Columbia. The flight was postponed again when an examination of the booster rockets used for the Space Shuttle mission in August revealed serious erosion of the insulation lining one of the rocket nozzles. The rocket was replaced. Columbia carried Spacelab, designed and built by ESA, which marked Europe’s first major entry into a manned space program. Other firsts associated with the flight was that it carried the heaviest payload on a Shuttle, the 33,584-pound Spacelab and pallet, and that it would include more experiments and spacecraft maneuvers than did any previous flight. Immediately after liftoff, Columbia rolled over and turned northward to put itself into an orbital path that would range from as far north as Scotland and Leningrad to as far south as Tierra del Fuego at the tip of South America in order to take pictures of Europe. The orbit would also take Columbia over Moscow and many militarily sensitive areas of the Soviet Union, the first time a U.S. manned spacecraft had flown over the Soviet Union in daylight. No pictures or other sensing would be taken of the ground while Columbia passed over the Soviet Union. The $l-billion Spacelab’s 23-foot-long laboratory was sealed and pressurized so that the scientists/astronauts could work in shirtsleeves as they carried out more than 70 experiments on 38 sets of equipment. Operating Spacelab were Merbold and Lichtenberg, a new breed of astronaut—payload specialists—who were not career astronauts but scientists trained to operate the science instruments on the mission. Wired with sensors, the scientists were guinea pigs in a number of experiments designed to explore how the body adapted to space and how it performed in the absence of gravity. Blood samples were taken three times so that scientists could study how the ratio of red to white blood cells changed once the body was weightless. Several experiments were conducted to measure eye movements; in another experiment, Garriott was given mild electric shocks to see how the muscles in his body responded to a sudden jolt that was the bodily equivalent of a sudden movement in weightlessness (doctors believed that one of the causes of space sickness might be abrupt movements that disoriented the inner ear). In another experiment, the crew in shifts pushed two balls identical in shape and size, although of different weights, to determine how quickly humans would distinguish weight from size in weightlessness. Other Spacelab studies were concerned with the growth in space of sunflower seedlings, a fungus, and four types of microbes. Exotic metal mixes were melted, and crystals were grown in three Spacelab furnaces. There were experiments intended to determine the practicality of orbiting factories to produce products not possible in the gravity of Earth. During the flight, two antennas failed on the TDRS-1 that was used to relay data from Spacelab to Earth. The failure meant that Litchtenberg and Merbold had to share the voice link to Mission Control Center in Houston with the four astronauts in Columbia’s cockpit, and it meant that the two scientists got their instructions from the ground via a teleprinter aboard Spacelab. Columbia landed December 8 at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. (NASA MOR M-977-09-83-01 [prelaunch], Oct 83; NASA Releases 83-163, 83-176; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Nov 29/83; W Post, Nov 22/83, A-8, Nov 28/83, A-l, Nov 29/83, A-l, Nov 30/83, A-l; USA Today, Nov 29/83, 1A; W Times, Nov 22/83, C—1; B Sun, Nov 29/83, A-l)
An international team of scientists studying the upper tropical atmosphere completed a month of rocket launches in Peru. Project Condor was an equatorial-atmosphere rocket and radar mission by universities and agencies of the United States, Peru, and the Federal Republic of Germany. The equatorial jet stream spawned the largest electrical currents and fields outside the auroral zone. Also, high- and low-density plasma mixing in the post-sunset ionosphere created greater disturbances than magnetospheric substorms. Project Condor, part of NASA’s sounding-rocket program, was managed by GSFC’s Wallops Flight Facility. Condor would map electrical conditions and wind- and radio-wave patterns in the tropic upper atmosphere; applications would include, for instance, satellite ranging systems used to locate ships at sea that could be affected by ionosphere conditions. (GSFC Releases 83-4, Press reports noted that the 75-ton Challenger, a slimmed-down version of Columbia, could lift more and was nearly 2,500 pounds lighter than its predecessor. Made of lighter materials, it had no crew-ejection seats. Crew of the five-day $26-million mission would be Paul Weitz, the only spaceflight veteran; Karol Bobko; and Donald Peterson and Story Musgrave, who on the fourth day of the mission would perform the first Shuttle space walk. Launch April 4 at 1:30 p.m. EST from KSC exhibited “no sign of the engine trouble that forced four of its five launch postponements,” said press reports. Challenger was in orbit 10 minutes after liftoff. About 11:30 p.m. the crew launched TDRS from the cargo bay by firing six explosive bolts that hurled it a mile or so from Challenger. About one: hour later, from a distance of about 32 miles, the crew fired a huge rocket engine attached to TDRS to start boosting it to a permanent position 22,400 miles above the equator. TDRS-A would be first of three communications satellites to be stationed in a global network that would quadruple the area from which U.S. spacecraft could communicate with Earth, as well as the amount of time available for such communication, and would begin to eliminate the need for global ground stations. About 6 a.m. EST April 5 ground control lost touch with TDRS,during a 104-second firing to nudge it into higher orbit. This was the second use of the rocket system called inertial upper stage (IUS), built by Boeing for the U.S. Air Force. The second state ignited but burned only about 70 seconds; TDRS arid its rocket were out of contact for 3 hours. The STS-6 crew was asleep at the time. At 9 a.m. EST, mission control suddenly reacquired signals from TDRS,. and project officials reported that it had separated from the IUS and stabilized itself. All satellite sytems appeared to be working normally. NASA said that it had appointed a panel to look into anomaly, which was blamed on misfire.of an on-board rocket. The misfire put TDRS into an eccentric orbit at an angle to the equator, instead of almost direclly over it. Flight directors said that they could correct the TDRS orbit by period firings of on board hydrazine. Just before the space walk April 7, President Reagan congratulated the STS-6 crew on being “ahead of schedule,” adding “I can’t say I envy you.” A reporter who asked the president why was told “May be a little claustrophobia.” Musgrave and Peterson exited through an airlock just after 4 p.m. EST, fastened themselves to 50-foot safety wires, and moved about the 65-foot-long cargo bay to test new space suits, handholds and footholds, tools, and ropes to be used in retrieval and repair of orbiting spacecraft. While Weitz and Bobko watched from inside, Musgrave and Peterson stayed outside Challenger for 3 hours and 52 minutes, doing the first U.S. space walk since February 1974, when Edward Gibson and Gerald Carr left Skylab to retrieve film from an exterior camera. A space walk scheduled last November from the Shuttle Columbia had been canceled when both space suits exhibited mechanical failures. On April 8 from JSC mission control, Vice President George Bush told the crew that their mssion was a “significant contribution.” The crew had suffered some space sickness but felt “pretty chipper,” according to the capsule communicator. When the astronauts appeared on television during Bush’s visit, Musgrave was performing rolls in the weightless environment, and Weitz explained that he was “trying to see if he can make himself sick again.” Challenger, with Weitz at the controls, landed at Edwards Air Force Base April 9 at 1:53 p.m. EST. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight, said that the crew and the vehicle were “in great shape.” Besides launching TDRS, the mission exposed seeds to effects of weightlessness and cosmic radiation. It also carried a snowflake machine from the Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun to produce symmetrical crystals, such as those needed in computers; a device to separate rat and egg proteins in weightlessness, aimed at ultrapure medicines; a device to produce uniform microscopic latex beads to test supersensitive measuring instruments; and an Air Force Academy canister containing a tiny oven to solder metals in weightlessness. STS-7, tentatively set for June 9, was to land Challenger at KSC only a few miles from its launch point. STS-8 was supposed to take TDRS-B into orbit as part of a communications link needed for the European Space Agency’s (ESA) Spacelab mission due to fly on STS-9; Spacelab would carry about 40 scientific experiments requiring constant communications with Earth through the two TDRS communications satellites. However, Abrahamson said that NASA “will not fly a second satellite on the eighth shuttle flight until we understand what went wrong on this flight.” He said that a U.S. Air Force camera in New Mexico had recorded, from a distance of about 20,000 miles, what happened to put the $100 million TDRS into a wrong orbit. (NASA MOR T-313-83-01 [prelaunch] Jan 14/83, Mar 25/83; NASA Releases 83-37, 83-49; MSFC Release 83-21; text, Pres. Doc., Apr 4, 7/83; NY Times, Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 7/83, D-7; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 9/83, 8; Apr 10/83, 1; WPost, Mar 31/83, A-15; Apr 5/83, A-l; Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 10/83, A-l; W Times, Apr 5/83, 2A)
NASA announced the selection of crews for STS-13 and Spacelab 3, as well as mission specialists for Spacelab 2. Robert L. Crippen, who piloted STS-1 and was scheduled to command STS-7, would command STS-13 in April 1984 with Francis R. Scobee as pilot. Mission specialists would be Dr. George D. Nelson, Terry J. Hart, and Dr. James D. van Hoften. Robert F. Overmyer, who has pilot of STS-5, would command STS-18 (the Spacelab 3 mission, now scheduled for launch ahead of Spacelab 2) with Frederick D. Gregory as pilot. Mission specialists v/ould be Dr. Don L. Lind and physicians Dr. Norman E. Thagard and Dr. William E. Thornton. Both of the latter would be on Shuttle flights before Spacelab 3: Thagard on STS-7, Thornton on STS-8. Payload specialists would be selected later. Mission specialists for STS-24 (Spacelab 2) would be Dr. Anthony W. England and Dr. Karl G. Henize. Spacelab 3 was originally to be the first operational mission; Spacelab 2, which should have preceded Spacelab 3, was delayed for completion of an instrument-pointing system. (NASA Release During February: The Florida Historic Preservation Society charged that NASA had breached a 1974 agreement by arranging for demolition of the last Apollo launch tower at KSC and sale of the metal as scrap. NASA said that it had to award a contract for demolition by February 18 or risk further delay in Shuttle schedules: the tower had to be removed by October so that NASA could begin modifying the mobile launch pad for use by the Shuttle beginning in 1986. NASA had postponed demolition for a week to let the society find a way to preserve the tower but said none of the suggestions was practical. The matter arose when two U.S. Air Force engineers at KSC said that the tower could be a major tourist attraction and started a move to save it. NASA said that it would cost up to $4 million to remove the tower and reassemble it for display. The agency had accepted a bid of $557,000 to remove the tower, and the demolition company would keep the steel, worth about $400,000, as scrap. A coalition of historic preservation groups said that the tower could be removed and rebuilt for $1 million (admittedly only an estimate). NASA had offered free storage and a site for reconstructing it if the coalition would pay a contractor to dismantle and move it. (NASA Release 83-25; W Post, Feb 17/83, A-17)
NASA announced crew selections for STS-11 and STS-12, both to be commanded by veterans of earlier shuttle missions. The crew for STS-11 in January 1984, led by Vance D. Brand, who commanded STS-5 in November 1982, would include pilot Robert L. Gibson and mission specialists Bruce McCandless II, Robert L. Stewart, and Dr. Ronald E. McNair. STS-11 would be the fifth flight of Challenger, and its seven-day mission would launch an Indonesian communications satellite. The crew for STS-12, led by Henry W. Hartsfield, who commanded STS-4 in June 1982, would include pilot Michael L. Coats and mission specialists Dr. Judith A. Resnik, Dr. Steven A. Hawley, and Richard M. Mullane. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) said that a sixth crewman might be added later under a new NASA policy permitting major customers to send a payload specialist along. To be launched in March 1984, STS-12 would be the first flight of a new orbiter, Discovery; its 5-day mission would include deployment of the third tracking and data-relay satellite. (NASA Release 83-15; MSFC Release 83-6)
The press reported the death in North Carolina at the age of “about 26” of Ham, the chimpanzee sent on a Mercury capsule into suborbital flight January 21, 1961, to prepare for the flight of Alan B. Shepard, Jr., first U.S. astronaut. Ham, named after the Holloman Aerospace Medical Center in New Mexico, retired from the space program in 1963 to live at the National Zoological Park in Washington, D.C., and after 1981 in the North Carolina Zoological Park. His trip in “a very primitive space capsule on an experimental suborbital run” was attended with “excitement and suspense,” even dread, because no one could predict whether he would survive the shocks of the trip or undergo emotional trauma. “Ham rose to the occasion and took it all in stride,” the report said. “Never mind that the capsule, through an error, had been shot 40 miles higher than planned or that it had landed 30 miles past the target area where a fleet awai ted it or that it had been traveling 5,000 miles an hour, 800 miles faster than planned. ... During the time radio signals were received the chimp pushed various levers and performed other behavior tasks assigned him.” (WPost, Jan 21/83, A-16; Jan 26/83, B-3; Jan 27/83, A-22)
Three new companies entering the “race to commercialize space” would launch Space America, a venture to provide remote-sensing satellite data services by 1986, the Washington Post reported. The companies were two in Washington, D.C.—American Science & Technology and AEROS Data Corporation—and Space Services Inc. (SSI) of Houston, which developed the first U.S. privately funded and operated launch vehicle. SSI would be managing partner. All three companies were less than three years old, privately owned, and “actively seeking capital,” according to Donald “Deke” Slayton, former astronaut and president of SSI. The group hoped to put into polar orbit a privately owned satellite built by Honeywell Inc. and Ball Aerospace Systems with sensors to collect data on Earth resources such as agriculture, mineral deposits, and water. (W Post, Sept 8/83, D-1)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced that NASA and Canada’s Department of Communications signed an arrangement to cooperate in the definition of a space program that could lead to the development of commercial satellite service to meet mobile communications needs in both countries. The arrangement would provide a framework for the Department of Communications and NASA to work with telecommunications carriers in both countries to initiate mobile satellite service. This approach could lead quickly to a commercial satellite system that simultaneously allowed for the development of advanced research and development to support second generation systems. In the event that the program definition activities were successful, the next step would be to agree to cooperate in the implemention and postlaunch phases of the program. Under that arrangement, N ASA would invite U.S. carriers to participate in a joint endeavor arrangement through a Notice of Opportunity, under which the carrier would be responsible for the development of commercial markets and, with Telesat Canada, the specification, procurement, and operation of the system. Succesful completion of this program would result in initiation of new services and industries in both countries to provide two-way radio, radio telephone, and low-speed message and data services to mobile terminals operating in rural and nonmetropolitan areas. Potential users would include radio common carriers, telephone companies, resource industries, trucking companies, federal and state governments, and emergency and law enforcement agencies. (NASA Release 83-186) During November: NASA announced that it had set up at JSC the Biomedical Research Institute, which would function as part of the Space Adaptation Project within the Space Transportation Systems Program Office, to focus efforts on solving some of the problems space crews had in adjusting to a weightless environment. The Space Adaptation Syndrome was the name that NASA gave to a wide range of physical problems that astronauts sometimes experienced, including nausea, vomiting, and general malaise. Approximately 45% of astronauts who had flown had experienced some of those symptons. Flight data on the problems had been collected over 22 years of manned spaceflight, particularly during the extended Skylab missions. Experiments were performed on Space Shuttle flights with physician astronauts Dr. Norman Thagard on STS-7 and Dr. William Thornton, the principal investigator and designer of much of the experimental hardware and research on STS-8. In an attempt to speed up the process of finding countermeasures and perhaps predict who might be more susceptible to the condition, NASA created the research project and established the institute. Elena Huffstetler was named project manager, and Dr. Sam Pool, chief of medical sciences at Johnson, was director. At NASA Headquarters, the Space Medicine Branch, Life Sciences Division, Office of Space Science and Applications, would be responsible for managing the program of both clinical and applied research in this area. (NASA Release 83-167) —NASA announced that Robert O. Aller was appointed associate administrator for space tracking and data systems. Aller, then director of the Tracking and Data Satellite System Division, succeeded Robert E. Smylie, who left NASA October 28 to become vice president for government communications services at the RCA American Communications Company in Princeton, N.J. Aller came to NASA in August 1964 from the Philco Corporation in Houston. Prior to joining Philco, he served for 10 years in the United States Air Force. He had held numerous positions in NASA during the Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, Apollo Soyuz Test Project (ASTP), and Space Transportation System (STS) programs. In September 1977 he was appointed deputy director of expendable launch vehicles and in 1979 to his current position, where he was responsible for the planning, direction, execution, and evaluation of the TDRS Program. Aller had twice been awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal for his work in the Apollo and Skylab programs, and he also received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal while working on the Apollo/Soyuz test project. (NASA anno, Nov 3/83)
A NASA team investigating space-suit failures that occurred during STS-5 issued a report listing ways to improve and simplify contractor test and inspection procedures. Regulators and motors would undergo more extensive testing on the Shuttle orbiter just before being stored, and space suits would be fully tested the day before a scheduled space walk. The first failure to be detected, shutdown of a fan motor while Joseph R Allen was donning his suit, was the fault of sensors in the motor electronics. The other failure, that of an oxygen regulator in William Lenoir’s suit, resulted from the absence of two tiny devices holding a regulator spring in place. (NASA Release 83-9)
NASA said that IRAS had completed its primary mission objective at 12:30 p.m. EDT by conducting an all-sky survey and giving an opportunity for double confirmation of sources. Survey data had a few “holes” because of Sun-Earth-Moon observation constraints and an anomaly that occurred early in June. NASA had begun another survey to fill in the gaps and confirm earlier observations; end-of-life would come early in January. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept. 1/83) 17-minute hold because of thunderstorms passing through. “Tropical disturbance” Barry had moved ashore August 26 about 40 miles south of the Cape and could have turned into a hurricane, but it bypassed the launch-pad area. This third flight of Shuttle Challenger was commanded by Navy Capt. Richard H. Truly, who was copilot of the second Shuttle mission two years ago; pilot for STS-8 was Navy Cdr. Daniel C. Brandenstein. Mission specialists were Navy Lt. Cdr. Dale A. Gardner; civilian physician William E. Thornton, oldest American in space; and U.S. Air Force Lt. Col. Guion S. Bluford II, first black American in space. This was also the first night Shuttle launch. NASA was testing its ability to launch at night from KSC, where weather was often more favorable than in the daytime. The DOD wanted a demonstration of night launch in case of needing the Shuttle for a military-mission on short notice. And Challenger was carrying into orbit a $43 million India satellite to forecast weather and relay radio, television, and phone calls that required a night launch for proper location, NASA’s first manned night launch had been December 7, 1972, when Apollo 17 lifted off at KSC on its way to the Moon; that launch had been visible to people in the Great Smoky Mountains more than 500 miles away. NASA also planned to land STS-8 at night, another first, for the same reasons it launched at night. Landing would be at Edwards Air Force Base in the Mojave desert of California instead of KSC, because of the longer runway and the greater probability of good weather there in midsummer. This would be the first time the public would not be allowed at the landing; NASA did not want “hundreds or even thousands of moving automobiles with headlights” to confuse Shuttle pilots descending out of total darkness toward the concrete runway. About three hours after reaching orbit, the crew began communicating with mission control through the properly relocated $100 million TDRS launched from STS-6 in April, instead of using ground stations out of reach during most of their orbit. The first major task of the STS-8 mission would be deployment of INSAT-B, and the crew spent most of August 30 checking the performance of the 50-foot mechanical arm in the Shuttle’s cargo bay that had entitled “a slightly arthritic reaction” in its elbow. The arm would grapple and move a heavy dummy-spacecraft package later in the mission in rehearsal for future release or retrieval of satellites. INSAT-B was launched over the Indian Ocean August 31 at 7:49 GMT and successfully put into transfer orbit, according to the Indian Space Research Organization, which said that all on-board systems were working well and that the solar panel was partly deployed. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Aug 30/83; FBIS, Delhi DomSvc in English, Aug 31/83; NY Times, Aug 3/83, A-10; Aug 31/83, A-l; WPost, Aug 25/83, A-8; Aug 26/83, A-10; Aug 30/83, A-l; Aug 31/83, A-8; USA Today, Aug 30/83, 1A, 3A; W Times, Aug 30/83, 12A; Aug 30/83, 1A; Intervia, Aug 83, 817) During August: NASA said that it would cease in September to operate Nimbus 6, launched June 12, 1975, for tracking balloons floating around the Earth to gather data on winds in the tropical and mid-latitudes. This system was the forerunner in one-way platform-to-satellite data collection that had provided worldwide ocean temperatures from buoys, tracked animal migration on land and sea, and kept in contact with numerous adventures, such as the crew of the Eagle I balloon rescued after it crashed in the Atlantic and a Japanese who crossed the North Pole by dogsled from Canada. Nimbus 6 had lost attitude-control capability in October 1982 when two momentum wheels failed with an accompanying severe power reduction. It would remain in polar orbit at 600 miles altitude, reentering the atmosphere some time after the year 2500, NASA said. (NASA Release 83-126)
NASA said that President Reagan asked his Senior Interagency Group for Space, chaired by William P. Clark, assistant to the president for national security affairs, to establish a basis for an administration decision on whether to proceed with NASA development of a permanently based manned space station. (NASA Release 83-51; MSFC Release 83-24)
NASA launched Telestar 3A for the American Telephone and Telegraph Corporation (AT&T) from the Eastern Space and Missile Range at 6:49 p.m. EDT on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 37,516-kilometer apogee, 185-kilometer perigee, 23° inclination, and 664-minute period, preparatory to moving it to geosynchronous station at 96 °W over the Pacific just west of the Galapagos. Telestar 3A was the first of a new series of three domestic communications satellites offering AT&T long-lines customers television, phone, and data service over the continental United States, Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico; it had 24 transponders and 6 spares, each able to relay a color-television signal at 60 million bits per second or up to 3,900 two-way phone calls. (Telestar 1 launched 21 years ago for the first transatlantic television relay could offer only 600 one-way voice channels or one television channel.) Launch of Telestar 3A was declared successful December 16. (NASA Release 83-110; NASA MOR M-492-216-83-01 [postlaunch] Dec 16/83; Spacewam SPX-358, Aug 30/83, 2) During July: NASA appointed Dr. Milton A. Silveira, assistant to the deputy administrator, to succeed Dr. Stanley I. Weiss as chief engineer. Weiss, who came to NASA in 1980 as associate administrator for space transportation operations at Headquarters, was leaving to become vice president for engineering at Lockheed Corporation, where he had worked from 1957 to 1978. Silveira began at Langley with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) in 1951 and worked in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs. He was deputy project manager at JSC for the shuttle orbiter program before coming to Headquarters in 1981. (Anno, July 1/83) NASA also appointed John W. Boyd associate administrator for management at Headquarters effective September 4. He had begun at ARC in 1947 and served there until appointed deputy director of DFRC in 1979, returning to ARC in 1980 as associate director. (Anno, July 1/83)
NASA reached agreement with the National Trust for Historic Preservation and five co-plaintiffs in a U.S. district court suit to preserve the last of the Apollo-program rocket gantries at KSC. NASA said that it would disassemble the gantry into 20-foot sections and store them until a place was found to display the tower and money could be raised to reassemble it. Michael Ainslie, president of the National Trust, said that the agreement recognized “the growing national imperative for the preservation of our physical history, even if that history was built less than 20 years ago.” NASA said that it would cost $1.8 million to take the tower apart and $8 million to reassemble it. (W Post, May 28/83, A-ll) During May: Dr. Jack Kerrebrock, associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology at Headquarters, announced that he would return to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) July 1 to resume the position as head of MIT’s department of aeronautics and astronautics that he held before coming to NASA in July 1981. Dr. Raymond S. Colladay would act as associate administrator until the position was filled (Hq anno May 27/83) —Robert C. Goetz, director of structures at Langley Research Center (LaRC), would become deputy director of Johnson Space Center (JSC), effective July 1, replacing Clifford E. Charlesworth who would become JSC director of space operations. (LaRC Release 83-32)
