NOAA’s GOES-5 satellite failed at 8:39 p.m. today, blanking out weather pictures for parts of the eastern United States and the Altantic Ocean, just at the time of the year when hurricanes and severe storms were likely to form there. NOAA had not planned replacement of the satellite for another two years, but would move the satellite covering the western half of the country and the Pacific eastward as a stopgap measure during the hurricane season. It would station the operational satellite midway over the continental United States, leaving Hawaii, Alaska, and the western Pacific uncovered to the west, and half the Atlantic uncovered to the east. The $100 million satellite, like its four predecessors, failed prematurely. It was intended to operate for five years but lasted only three. In testimony before a Senate subcommittee, NOAA’s John McF.lroy said that government experts and the system contractor, Hughes Aerospace, had calculated that the satellite expected a five-year lifetime, but that had proved optimistic, chiefly because one mechanical system, and in particular one specially made light bulb, kept having problems. Another official at NCAA said that the failure of the custom-made light bulb, which caused five of the six U.S. weather satellites to go blind prematurely, would cost Hughes millions of dollars in penalties. Because Hughes’s contract was linked to performance, it stood to lose as much as $3 million for the recent failure plus losses for earlier failures. (W Post, July 31/84, A-l, Aug 3/84, A-3; W Times, Aug 3/84, 4A)
Scientists at the University of Chicago announced that a U.S. experiment to analyze the dust of Halley’s comet was riding aboard the Soviet Union’s Vega-1 spacecraft. It was the first known Soviet-U.S. cooperative space venture since the docking of the manned Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft in 1975. The cosmic dust analyzer—and a twin that would be launched aboard Vega-2—were built by university scientists under the leadership of John Simpson, one of the preeminent astrophysicists in the United States, who had designed, experiments for more than 30 space missions over the past 25 years. The joint project was bom at an international symposium in Holland in . September 1983, where Simpson outlined vastly improved comet dust measuring methods. About'a month later, he said, the Soviets surprised him by inviting him to put the analyzer aboard their Vega. Simpson received Reagan administration approval and about $300,000 in NASA funds, which touched off a frantic search for components. “We scoured the U.S. and within two weeks got all the pieces,” Simpson said. Plugging U.S. electronics into a Soviet spacecraft required unusual cooperation. Moscow shared telemetry coding data, and Simpson was able to conduct high-speed computer analysis of Soviet rocket launch characteristics to aid in designing the dust analyzer so it could survive blastoff and flight. “On May 7, we walked into the Soviet space lab with working instruments,” which were then bolted aboard the Soviet spacecraft by U.S. scientists, he said. Simpson said that he had received computer tapes from the instrument during Soviet tests of the device while it awaited launch from the Baykonur cosmodrome and added that the Soviets had invited him to br on hand in Moscow when the comet encounter would begin in March 1986. (W Post, Dec 21/84, A—1; NY Times, Dec 21/84, A-l)
The People’s Republic of China (PRC) announced that it had launched on January 29 a space satellite that achieved “important results,” and the New York Times reported that Western experts speculated that the launch could be the debut of a more powerful Chinese rocket and the nation’s first communications satellite. They added that the launching could mean that China had joined the United States, the Soviet Union, and the European Space Agency (ESA) in its capability to loft satellites into geostationary orbits 22,300	miles above the Earth, the orbit favored for commercial and military communications satellites. There were no details of the satellite launched; only “Close observation is being undertaken of the satellite’s operations,” from China’s official Xinhua new agency. There had been reports as early as 1980 that China was developing a three-stage rocket for boosting heavy payloads. (NY Times, Jan 31/84, C-8) During January: The Washington Post reported, according to declassified documents, that the $100 million Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) that the U.S. Air Force found unusable in April 1983 had lost its bearings and was unable to determine its position. After being launched from the Space Shuttle, the inertial upper stage (IUS) rocket veered so far from course that the TDRS ended up in an orbit almost 10,000 miles closer to Earth than was intended. It took NASA and its contractors three months to get the satellite into geosynchronous orbit above the equator. According to the declassified documents, instructions to the gyroscope in the IUS were in error, causing the guidance computer to ignore them just before the rocket misfired. The Air Force said that the software error had been corrected. At the same time, the guidance computer’s memory became confused, rendering it unable to distinguish between right and wrong information about its location in space. Engineers said that they still did not know what caused this failure. Because of the changes that had to be made in the IUS rocket, the flight of a secret Department of Defense (DOD) satellite aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger would be delayed from July 1 until the end of 1984, sources said. (W Post, Jan 31/83, A-2) —NASA announced that John J. Martin was named associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology. Previously, Martin had served as vice president and general manager at Bendix Advanced Technology Center, Columbia, Md.; at the Institute for Defense Analyses; on the staff of the president’s science adviser at the White House; as associate deputy to the director of central intelligence for the intelligence community; as principal deputy assistant secretary of the Air Force; and as assistant secretary of the Air Force for research, development, and logistics. A graduate of the University of Notre Dame and commissioned by the U.S. Navy, Martin is the author of numerous technical papers and reviews and a book on “Atmospheric Reentry,” published in 1966. (NASA anno, Jan 30/84) —NASA announced that C.A. “Sy” Syvertson would retire on January 13 as director of Ames Research Center (ARC). Syvertson had a major part in the first U.S. research in supersonic and hypersonic flight, both in finding new aerodynamic theory and in development of hypersonic wind tunnels. He designed the first lifting body (a vehicle for flight from orbit to airfield landing and the precursor to the Shuttle) and did planning for major NASA missions in both aeronautics and space. During his tenure, ARC merged with NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and continued advances in aircraft research. Syvertson received the Lawrence Sperry Award for “fundamental understanding of hypersonic air flow and its application to efficient aircraft design.” He received the NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1971 for work as executive director of the joint Department of Transportation (DOT)—NASA Civil Aviation Research and Development (CARD) policy study, which made a series of recommendations for future civil aviation policy. He was named a fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 1976 and of the American Astronautical Society in 1978 and was elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 1981. (NASA Release 84-01) Dr. William F. Ballhaus, Jr., director of astronautics at ARC, was named director of the center, succeeding C.A. Syvertson. who retired January 13. Ballhaus is a nationally known expert in computational fluid dynamics—use of supercomputers to stimulate air flow around flight vehicles. As ARC director of astronautics, Ballhaus had been responsible for interplanetary spaceflight projects, operation of a number of airborne observatories used in astronomy and Earth resources research, development of supercomputer systems, research in computational fluid dynamics and computational chemistry, space science, thermophysics, and materials science. Ballhaus came to ARC in 1971, after receiving his doctorate at the University of California at Berkeley (UCB). He joined what is now the Army Aeromechanics Laboratory at ARC and was assigned to the Computational Fluid Dynamics Branch. He has lectured throughout the United States, Europe, and Asia and has published more than 35 technical papers. (NASA Release 84-5) —Jack Lousma, commander of the Space Shuttle Columbia on its third flight, announced at the state capitol in Lansing, Mich., his campaign for the U.S. Senate. He will seek the Republican nomination to run against Democratic Senator Carl Levin. “Twenty-five years ago, I made a commitment to serve my country—a commitment that has led me from Michigan to the Marine Corps to missions in space,” he said. “That same commitment brings me home today.” He spent 59 days in orbit as part of Skylab’s second manned mission in 1973 and was commander of the Shuttle Columbia in 1982. (W Post, Jan 26/84, C-2)
The White House approved a policy that would free the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to begin processing several applications from companies hoping to provide satellite telecommunications services, thereby breaking INTELSAT’s 20-year monopoly on such service. President Reagan signed a “finding” that it was in the national interest to have alternatives to INTELSAT. The announcement came after the State and Commerce departments had fought for months over who would define the new international telecommunications policies. And, of course, INTELSAT and its U.S. representative, ComSatCorp, tried to block entry of private competitors into the international market. David Markey, assistant secretary of commerce for telecommunications and information policy, said that the new policy would not permit private satellite networks to mount full-fledged competition against INTELSAT. “It will be clear that [such networks] should be restricted to non-public switched voice services,” he added. (W Post, Nov 28/84, C—1) During November: Upon the departure at the end of November of Dr. Donald P.	Hearth from NASA, Richard H. Petersen will move from deputy director to director of LaRC. Hearth had been center director at Langley since September 1975. He joined NASA in 1962 and had held various agency positions, inlcuding deputy director of Planetary Programs at NASA Headquarters. Petersen had served as deputy center director at LaRC since July 1980.	He began his career at ARC in 1957 and was chief of the Aerodynamics Division there from 1975 until he joined Langley. (NASA Release 84-163)
Engineers at NASA’s GSFC completed checkout and activation of the Landsat-5 Earth resources satellite, launched from the Vandenberg Air Force Base complex in California on March 1, and turned over today operational control of the spacecraft to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The 1,950-kilogram (4,300-pound) spacecraft was placed in a 705-kilometer (438-statute miles) near-polar orbit. NASA engineers had checked out all computer, communications, telemetry, and other spacecraft systems and declared the spacecraft ready for operational use. With Landsat-4 still functioning, data acquisition over the same ground swath was possible on an eight-day repeat cycle. NASA planned to turn over to NOAA operational responsibility for Thematic Mapper operation and data processing in January 1985. (NASA Release 84-49; NASA Dly Ac tv Rept, Apr 9/84) —NASA announced that it had established an interim Space Station Program office as a result of President Reagan’s January 25, 1984, directive to NASA to develop a permanently manned Space Station and to do it within a decade. Philip E. Culbertson, in addition to his duties as associate deputy administrator, would assume the role of acting director of the interim office, with John D. Hodge (former director of the Space Station task force) as acting deputy. The interim office superseded the former Space Station task force and would be responsible for direction of the Space Station Program and for planning the organizational structure of a permanent Program Office. (NASA anno, Apr 6/84)
The Washington Post reported that Air Force Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator, said that coded software instruction cards on both computers on the Space Shuttle Columbia’s last voyage (STS-9) were contaminated, delaying Columbia’s landing at Edwards Air Force Base in California by eight hours. The instruction cards were shaken from their printed circuits when the Shuttle pitched up and down just before reentry; however the up-and-down maneuvers would not ordinarily loosen the software cards unless there was something wrong with them. Abrahamson said that postflight analysis of the cards at IBM’s Owego, N.Y., plant, where the computers were built, showed that one card was contaminated with solder and the other had a carbon chip coated with gold that should not have been there. Abrahamson pointed out that “the most disturbing thing.. .is that both computers were contaminated. I do not like the idea that we flew 10 days in space with contaminated computer parts.” The six-man crew, commanded by astronaut John W. Young, was able to land the Shuttle and its $1 billion European Spacelab safely by relying for navigation on three standby computers. (W Post, Jan 6/84, A-8)
NASA announced that three of its centers would participate with JSC, named earlier in the year to be the lead center, in definition and preliminary design studies of the Space Station. MSFC would be responsible for definition of the pressurized Space Station modules that would be built and equipped with appropriate systems for use as laboratories, the ward room and galley, and logistic transports. Development of this single “common” module design, with provisions for data distribution, power, environmental control, thermal control, and communications systems to be used in all pressurized areas in the station would provide significant savings in the overall program. LeRC would be responsible for the definition of the electrical power generation and conditioning and storage systems. Although most Space Station studies had focused on large solar arrays as the probable power generation system, Lewis would also examine and evaluate a number of alternative systems. GSFC would be responsible for definition of the automated free-flying platforms that would be part of the overall Space Station program and for provisions to service, maintain, and repair these platforms, as well as other free-flying spacecraft. Goddard would also define the provisions for instruments and payloads to be attached externally to the pressurized sections of the Space Station and the pressurized modules as a laboratory. In addition to its lead contractor role, JSC would be responsible for the definition of the structural framework to which the various elements of the Space Station would be attached and for the integration and installation of systems into this structure. The center would oversee the interfaces between the Space Station and the Space Shuttle and be responsible for mechanisms such as the remote manipulator systems. JSC would also manage the attitude control, thermal control, communications, and data management systems and the equipping of a common module for crew use as a ward room and galley. Other NASA centers would support the definition and design activities, particularly in technology areas. KSC would be responsible for preflight and launch operations and be involved in logistic support activities. (NASA Release 84-85) The flight of Discovery was delayed on June 25 for at least 24 hours when its backup navigating computer failed less than 30 minutes before takeoff. Though it was not operational in space, the fifth backup computer was used during ascent to “watchdog” the other computers during the critical first 10 minutes of flight. Four seconds from launch on June 26, the flight of Discovery was automatically aborted by a computer due to malfunctioning of a fuel valve on the rear starboard engine, causing the engine to catch fire. The fire was extinguished after three attempts with heavy sprays of water. NASA placed Hartsfield and his five-member crew on leave for two days after experiencing this first launch abort in 12 Space Shuttle missions and only the second launch abort in American manned spaceflight history. Thomas E. Utsman, Shuttle operations manager at KSC, said that he had no idea when the maiden flight of Discovery could be rescheduled. It depended, he said, on how much damage had been done to the malfunctioning engine that caught fire and to the Space Shuttle’s protective tiles from the high-speed water jets that extinguished the fire on the aft part of the fuselage. Utsman said that the fire may have burned through the heat shield on the engine nozzle, meaning that the entire engine would have to be replaced. NASA announced on June 27 that Discovery’s maiden flight would not be attempted for at least two weeks in order to verify all three main engines. John Talone at KSC said, “I don’t think we’re talking about mid-July before we can get to the point of launching again.” Talone said that the only serious question remaining about the aborted launch was why the valve stayed closed when commanded to start the liftoff firing sequence. When the valve failed to open, a backup actuator automatically started the opening sequence, and the valve opened soon enough for the engine to build full power, although it did not. He said that Discovery probably would have reached orbit, but mission rules said that a Space Shuttle could not lift off without redundant valve, and when the Shuttle’s main computer sensed that one actuator system was out, the computer ordered engine cutoff. Photographic inspection of Discovery showed remarkably little damage from fire that broke out below the main engine nozzles after engine shutdown. The only structural damage to the Space Shuttle’ airframe was the speed brake just below the tail and half of the brake’s protective enamel was scorched off. {W Post, June 23/84, A-3, June 25/84, A-l, June 26/84, A-l, June 27/84, A-3) During June: ARC Director William F. Ballhaus announced that center aircraft and their operation would be transferred to the Ames Flight Operations Directorate. Martin A. Knutson, director of flight operations and site manager of the Ames Dryden Flight Research Facility, would be responsible for all flight activities at the Ames’s Moffett Field location in northern California and at the Ames Dryden Facility in southern California. The Flight Operations Directorate office would continue to be maintained at the Ames Dryden Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Factors in the management change were continued safety of flight and continuity of aircraft operations to be assured with all flight operations reporting through a single management chain. And the change served to integrate more fully the Ames Dryden Facility into the day-to-day operations of the parent Ames Center. The Ames Research Center and the former Dryden Flight Research Center, now Ames Dryden, were consolidated in 1981, a move that enhanced the capabilities of both organizations. Ames officials said that the latest move was a continuing part of the overall Ames-Dryden consolidation and would centralize all flight operations activities in terms of operations procedures, safety, and management philosophy. There were no plans to move any aircraft or personnel involved from either location. (ARC Release 84-15) Later, NASA announced that it was considering a plan to continue the 12th and 13th Space Shuttle missions as a way to avoid expensive delays that could push at least one mission scheduled for 1984 into 1985. The problem with combining missions was the inability to combine crews. Five crew members from the aborted flight or from the August flight would have to step down and wait for another turn. The possibility of combining missions arose when technicians at NASA’s engine test facility at Bay St. Louis, Miss., were unable to duplicate the failure of Discovery’s starboard engine that had aborted the flight. “No matter what we did, we were unable to duplicate the failure,” a NASA source said. “And until we understand what went wrong, we don’t want to fly.” The failure of a rocket nozzle on a communications satellite during a test in St. Louis then further complicated NASA’s rescheduling decision. A final decision awaited analysis on the test of a Star^f8 solid-fuel rocket nozzle at the Astronautics Division of McDonnell Douglas Corporation in St. Louis. Star-48 rockets were on two communications satellites that would be part of the cargo on a combined mission. On July 12 NASA announced that the next Space Shuttle flight would consist of payloads from flights 41-D and 41-F and would be launched from KSC no earlier than August 24. The mission aboard the orbiter Discovery would retain the designation 41-D. The cargo would remain essentially the same, except that the large format camera and spartan would be replaced with the Satellite Business Systems (SBS) and Telstar payloads then scheduled for launch in the same time frame. The crew for mission 41-D would be the six-member team of Commander Henry Hartsfield; pilot Michael Coats; mission specialists Judith Resnik, Steven Hawley, and Richard Mullane; and payload specialist Charles Walker. The crew of 41-F would be scheduled for a later flight. (NASA Release 84-95; WPost, July 3/84, A-12, July 10/84, A-5, July 11/84, A-6)
Hundreds of spectators gathered to watch giant balloons float overhead in honor of the first American to build a full-scale hot-air balloon and fly the tethered balloon June 16, 1784, 70 feet over a field in Bladensburg, Md. Peter Carnes had been a Bladensburg innkeeiper, lawyer, and adventurer and had built the hot-air balloon, the first of its kind in this country. Carnes had had no interest or knowledge of ballooning until he read newspaper accounts of the first flights in France in 1783. Having never seen a balloon, Carnes fashioned his 35 feet in diameter based on sketchy newspaper stories. One week after his unmanned balloon flight, Carnes took his balloon to Baltimore, where 13-year-old Edward Warren volunteered to ride in the tethered craft, making him the first American to ascend in a hot-air balloon. Shortly thereafter, at the Philadelphia Commons, spectators watched 234-pound Carnes ascended about 10 to 20 feet in the balloon, when a wind shift pushed him into a wall, breaking the chains and dropping him to the ground. Tom Crouch, curator of aeronautics at the National Air and Space Museum, said that the balloon construction “was considered a great scientific achievement. It is difficult to realize what an achievement flying that balloon really was. His flight was a demonstration of the fact that while this nation was young, it was a nation with great hope for the future.” (W Post, June 17/84, B—1; B Sun, June 25/84 D-1)
NASA announced the crew assignments for Space Shuttle flights 51-D, scheduled for launch in February 1985, and 61-D, set for January 1986. Brewster H. Shaw, Jr., would command 51-D. Shaw was pilot of the orbiter Columbia on STS-9, the first Spacelab mission flown in November and December 1983. His crew would consist of Bryan D. O’Connor as pilot and mission specialists Mary Cleave, Sherwood C. Spring, and Jerry L. Ross. Mission 51-D would be the 21st Space Shuttle flight and the 9th for the orbiter Challenger. The principal objectives of the six-day flight would be deployment of a SYNCOM communications satellite and retrieval of the free-flying Long Duration Exposure Facility. John M. Fabian, an Air Force pilot with more than 3,500 hours of flying time, would fly as one of the pilots on 61-D. He flew as mission specialist on STS-7 in July 1983 and was scheduled for 51-A in October as a mission specialist. Flight 61-D mission specialists would be James R Bagian, M.D., and Rhea Seddon, M.D., who is also scheduled to fly on mission 41-F in August. Mission 61-D would be the fourth Spacelab flight, focusing on experiments in life sciences during its seven days in space. It would be the ninth flight of the orbiter Columbia. A commander and another pilot for 61-D would be named at a later date. (NASA Release 84-11) —Donald J. Johnston, Canadian Minister of State for Science and Technology, announced that a Canadian would fly as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle mission 51-A, set for launch in October, in addition to two earlier Canadians already scheduled for Shuttle flights. NASA offered Canada the opportunity to fly a payload specialist in keeping with President Reagan’s initiative to increase international cooperation. Shuttle flight 51-A would be a six-day flight, carrying Telesat Canada’s ANIK C-l satellite and a Getaway Special experiment designed by two Canadian high school students. The Canadian crew member and backup for the October flight would be announced in March. (NASA Release 84-12) Seven hours after launch, the astronauts pushed Westar VI, Western Union’s $30 million satellite, out of the cargo bay to join two identical satellites already serving North America. However, NASA officials said that the satellite could not be contacted by radio and was considered lost in space. Officials said that the satellite’s on-board rocket engine, which was to propel it into higher orbit, either misfired or never fired. Radars operated by the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NAADC) later found the satellite in an erratic orbit above and behind Challenger. The radars found two large pieces in an orbit more than 800 miles high at its peak and just over 200 miles high at its lowest point above Earth. On February 5, a large balloon that the astronauts were to chase through space exploded just after it had begun to inflate. Plans called for the astronauts to back up to 120 miles away from the balloon, then move in over the next eight hours to contact it. Instead, the crew spent 90 minutes tracking pieces of the balloon and never got farther than 20 or 30 miles from the debris. The astronauts tracked the balloon’s largest piece with radar for almost 20 miles and used special binoculars and an optical sextant to follow the same piece more than 20 miles by watching sunlight reflected off the balloon’s aluminum surface. The Indonesian satellite Palapa-B2, launched February 6, went into a useless orbit, believed to be caused by the same technical problem that Westar VI suffered. The NAADC located Palapa-B2 about seven hours after its ejection from the Challenger’s cargo bay, but it was in an orbit so low that it “cannot perform its mission,” said Richard Brandes of Hughes Aircraft Company, builder of the satellite. He added that both satellites’ rocket motors apparently shut down 15 seconds early; they were intended to burn for 80 seconds. On February 7, astronauts Bruce McCandless and Robert Stewart left Challenger and flew unrestrained for the first time, adding another milepost to man’s conquest of space. They unhooked their lifelines and rose up more than 100 yards away from the Space Shuttle. Propelled by $10 million jet-powered backpacks, they traveled at 4.8 miles a second, although they had no sensation of speed. The two reentered Challenger after 5 hours and 55 minutes. The exercise was a rehearsal for the next Shuttle flight, when other astronauts would try to retrieve an ailing satellite, bring it into the cargo bay for repair, and release it to orbit again. On February 9 the two took a second walk in space, which lasted 6 hours and 17 minutes. The Space Shuttle made its first landing at KSC on February 11, when it touched down at 7:16 a.m. EST. The Florida landing had been a Shuttle program goal because it would save money and time by eliminating sending maintenance crews to California to prepare the vehicle for a return flight to Florida on the back of a Boeing 747. It was the first Florida landing in two attempts and the first of six planned for the year. Challenger was in relatively good shape following the landing, although its windshield, fuselage, and landing gear were damaged. The windows were hazed and pitted; and 31 of its 33,000	protective tiles, two brake assemblies, and all four tires on the main landing wheels would have to replaced. Repairs should not slow the preparation of Challenger for its next flight in April. (NASA MOR M-989-41-B [prelaunch] Jan 30/84; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Feb 6/84; WPost, Feb 2/84, A-2, Feb 4/84, A-l, Feb 5/84, A-l, Feb 5/84, A-l, Feb 8/84, A-l, Feb 9/84, A-12, Feb 11/84, A-2, Feb 12/84, A-l, Feb 13/84, A-3; W Times, Feb 6/84, 2A, Feb 7/84, 1A, Feb 8/84, 1A; USA Today, Feb 6/84, A-l)
The New York Times reported that space industry experts and government intelligence officials had said that U.S. Air Force satellite photographs of launching pads in central Asia showed that the Soviet Union was developing a booster rocket for a Soviet version of the Space Shuttle and a new family of big rockets similar to those used by the United States for the Apollo Moon program. A special feature of the new rockets was that they would use liquid hydrogen, a cryogenic (supercooled) type of fuel technology that had eluded Soviet space experts but had been mastered in the United States nearby 20 years ago. The Pentagon had originally described the Soviet development of new booster rockets and a Space Shuttle in April. The new disclosures gave added detail of the Soviet program, including checkouts on the launching pad and the development of cryogenic fuels. “It’s a major step to go to liquid hydrogen,” said James E. Oberg, an expert on Soviet space technology.” They’ve been using the same boosters for 20 years. Now they appear to be trying to build a new family.” The Pentagon’s “Soviet Military Power 1984” had originally suggested the existence of a new family of Soviet booster rockets. The publication asserted that the biggest of the new Soviet rockets could lift payloads of up to 150 tons into low orbits around the Earth, about seven times more than the largest operational Soviet booster and five times more than the biggest U.S. booster, the Space Shuttle. The publication also said the Soviet Union’s space shuttle differed from the U.S. Shuttle only in the respect that the main engines were not on the orbiter. In addition, the publication published pictures of a small Soviet space plane that had undergone flight tests. (NY Times, Aug 30/84, B-13) —NASA, launched at 8:41 a.m. from KSC the Space Shuttle Discovery (STS 41-D) on its maiden voyage after three earlier postponements, another one-day postponement due to computer problems, and a last-minute delay to avoid possible collision with a private line. Discovery carried for mission 41-D a six-member crew of commander Henry Hartsfield; pilot Michael Coats; mission specialists Judith Resnick, Steven Hawley, and Richard Mullane; and payload specialist Charles Walker, a McDonnell Douglas engineer. It also carried the heaviest cargo flown in orbit aboard a Space Shuttle. About eight hours after liftoff, three of the crew members deployed a U.S. communications satellite, SBS-4, which was owned by Satellite Business Systems, McLean, Va., and was designed to relay data, including telephone and television transmissions. About 45 minutes later its on-board engine ignited flawlessly to send it to a position 22,400 miles above the equator just west of South America. The successful launch helped dispel doubts about the solid-fuel rocket motor technology when two satellites last February did not reach orbit. Also planned for launch from the Space Shuttle were the Leasat-2, owned by Hughes Communications Services, Inc., and leased by the U.S. Navy, and the Telestar 3-C of AT&T. On board would be NASA’s Office of Astronautics and Space Technology OASTOl, a collapsible solar array, and the Continuous Flow Electrophoresis System (CFES) of McDonnell Douglas. On the same day as the liftoff, President Reagan visited GSFC and addressed several hundred of Goddard’s employees. In his remarks, Reagan said that “there is nothing that the United States of America cannot accomplish. If the doubting Thomases would just stand aside and get out of our way.” He went on to speak of the creation of new jobs, technologies, and medical breakthroughs as a result of the rigors of the space program. (NASA Release 84-112; NASA Press Kit June 84, August 84; WPost, Aug 31/84, A-l; W Times, Aug 31/84, 3A)
NASA named Neil B. Hutchinson manager and John W. Aaron deputy manager of the Space Station Program Office at JSC in Houston, Tex. Hutchinson was serving in a staff assignment to the Johnson director since his return in January 1984 from a one-year assignment at NASA Headquarters, where he was director, Space Shuttle Operations Office in the Office of Space Flight. Aaron had been chief of the Spacecraft Software Division at JSC since 1981. He also had served as avionics flight software project manager for the Shuttle approach and landing test and orbital flight test programs. (NASA Release
NASA announced that it had selected a team of scientists to observe Halley’s comet in 1986 using a Space Shuttle-based astronomy observatory called Astro. The scientists were Dr. Michael A’Heam, University of Maryland, College Park, Md.; Drs. John Brandt, Bertram Donn, and Malcom Neidner, GSFC; Dr. Barry Lutz, Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz.; Dr. Chet Opal, University of Texas, Austin; Dr. C. Robert O’Dell, Rice University, Houston; and Dr. Susan Wyckoff, Arizona State University, Tempe. These reseachers, together with a scientist representing each of the three ultraviolet telescope teams, comprised the Astro Halley Science Team that would plan the overall program for observing the comet. Astro consisted of three specially designed ultraviolet telescopes and two wide-field cameras that would be carried as a Spacelab payload in the Space Shuttle cargo bay. The observatory was scheduled for assembly and integration into the Space Shuttle at KSC during 1985 for launch in early March 1986. The first seven-day Astro mission was scheduled at a time when several comet probes would intercept Halley, and it was intended to return important scientific data and photography of the comet. ESA, Japan, and the Soviet Union had each designed probes that would fly by the comet and through its tail in early March 1986. (NASA Release 84-72)
President Reagan, in his State of the Union address, endorsed the development of the U.S.’s first permanently manned space station. “Wc can follow our dreams to distant stars, living and working in space for peaceful, economic and scientific gain. Tonight, I am directing NASA to develop a permanently manned space station and to do it within a decade,” he said. “A space station will permit quantum leaps in our research in science, communications and in metals and life-saving medicines which can be manufactured only in space. We want our friends to help us meet these challenges and share in their benefits. .. .Just as the oceans opened up a new world for clipper ships and Yankee traders, space holds enormous potential for commerce today,” he said. NASA presented the agency’s plans to the presidenl on the day that he spoke to astronauts in the Spacelab orbiting in the Space Shuttle in December 1983. NASA Administrator James N. Beggs had sought the space station as a science laboratory, astronomical observatory, space manufacturing center, servicing facility for spacecraft, and an assembly site for larger orbiting structures. Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Director William J. Casey had opposed any major commitment to space station funding because they feared it could draw money from their own space programs, government officials said. The officials added that military and intelligence agencies were concerned that they would have to share the space station with civilian agencies such as NASA and sometimes with astronauts of other countries. NASA also had found little enthusiasm when it turned for support from other agencies. When the National Academy of Sciences space science board was asked whether basic research in science would “require or be enhanced by the space station,” Thomas M. Donahue, chairman of the space board, said the answer was no. “I don’t think you could ever really justify $20 billion for a space station,” he said. At this early stage, there was no design for the space station, but officials of NASA had previously sketched the broad outlines of the most likely initial design. {Weekly Compilation of the Papers of Ronald Reagan, Jan 25/84, 87ff; NY Times, Jan 26/84, A-l; W Post, Jan 18/84, A-l, Jan 29/84, A-4)
The Washington Post reported that, in testimony to a House subcom-mitte on space science and applications, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said that he feared that an Air Force plan to make more use of large, unmanned rockets to launch Pentagon satellites would undermine NASA’s plans for the Space Shuttle program. “The Air Force has said they plan two flights a year starting in 1988 using expendable launch vehicles as an alternate to the shuttle, and if they stick to that it will have no real impact on us,” Beggs said. “But if they increase that rate to four or five flights a year, as some people suggest they might, it will have severe impact on us,” he pointed out. Beggs went on to say that the Air Force had asked General Dynamics Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation to submit plans for increasing the lifting power of their Atlas-Centaur and Titan 34D booster rockets to launch into space large satellites that currently could be carried only by the Shuttle. He pointed out that NASA stood to lose much of the business of one of its main customers and also that, because he disagreed with the Air Force, having an alternate way of putting its satellite in orbit was an improvement in security. “All.. .that means is they’ll have another launch pad right on the ocean,” he said. Beggs indicated that he was worried that the Air Force would acquire an alternate launch vehicle to use more frequently to make it cost effective. And he expressed concern that the winner of the Air Force contract to build the larger rocket would try to take commercial business away from the Space Shuttle. “Our commercial business has already begun to fall off a little because our commercial customers tended to overbook when we started to fly,” Beggs said. “Our traffic model for 1985 is already down about 10 percent.” (W Post, Aug 1/84, A-20) During July: NASA announced the appointment of C. Robert Nysmith as associate administrator of management, effective August 26, 1984. He would succeed John Boyd, who would return to ARC to become associate director. Nysmith had served as assistant associate administrator for management since January 1984. Before that, he was assistant associate administrator for management support in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 84-107) —NASA announced the appointment of Jesse W. Moore to associate administrator for space flight, effective August 1, 1984. Moore had been serving as the acting associate administrator for space flight since April 15, 1984. He was appointed deputy associate administrator for space flight in February 1983. Moore came to NASA Headquarters in 1978 as deputy director of the Solar Terrestrial Division in the Office of Space Science. In June 1979 he was appointed director of the Space Flight Division. He assumed the position of director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division, in December 1981. Prior to these assignments he was employed at JPL. (NASA Release 84-105) —Effective August 1, 1984, the Interim Space Station Program Office would become the permanent Office of Space Station (Code S), NASA announced. Philip E. Culbertson would be the associate administrator for space station and John D. Hodge would be the deputy associate administrator for space station. The Office of Space Station was responsible for developing the Space Station and conducting advanced development and technology activities, advanced planning, and other activities required to carry out President Reagan’s direction to NASA to develop a permanently manned Space Station within a decade. (NASA anno July 27/84; NASA Release 84-104) —Intervia reported that Transpace Carriers Inc. (TCI) was challenging in the United States the pricing policies of the European multinational company Arianespace. TCI, a Washington-based firm, had earlier received the go-ahead to take over the Delta launcher following completion of existing NASA contracts and subject to the provision that TCI secured three new customers before October 1, 1984. TCI lodged a complaint with the U.S. Trade Representative, alleging that Arianespace was practicing “predatory” pricing by offering users from non-ESA member countries (notably U.S. commercial satellite operators) rates that were up to 33 percent below launch fees quoted for European satellites. So far, both the Space Shuttle and Ariane were generally agreed to have been operating at unprofitable “introductory” prices; NASA had put Delta-class satellites into geostationary orbit for around $15 million, including the PAM-D upper stage. General Telephone & Electronics (GTE) reported paid Arianespace “under $25 million” for the Spacenet 1 launch. The complaint raised by TCI applied only to contracts for launch after 1985, the earliest date it could begin operations. TCI President Tony L. Savoca said that his company would charge between $26 and $32 million, according to launch requirements. He claimed that he had heard of Arianespace bids as low as $22 million for the same time period and added that Arianespace “should be charging” around $64 million for a dual (SYLDA) launch on Ariane III. (Intervia, July 7/84, 643) —George M. Low, president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and a driving force in the Apollo moon landing program, died July 17 of cancer. The White House announced that he would be awarded the President’s Medal of Freedom for his contributions to education and the nation’s space program. In his 27 years with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), Low served as an. engineer and manager in the Mercury and Gemini programs and was put in charge of redesigning the Apollo spacecraft after a fire on the launching pad killed three astronauts in 1967. Later he became deputy administrator of NASA and acting administrator in the early 1970s when he negotiated the initial agreements leading to the joint American-Soviet mission in August 1975. (NY Times, July 18/84, B-8) Also on that day the Progess 23 cargo craft, launched August 14, undocked with the Space Station, following unloading of the cargo craft’s contents. Progress 23 was launched on August 14. On August 8, Kizim and Solovyev made their sixth space walk. The cosmonauts removed part of the heat insulation cover on the back of the service module and shut off a pipe in the fuel line with a special device. This extravehicular activity lasted 5 hours and was the first time that cosmonauts had made six space walks, for a total of 22 hours and 50 minutes, in the course of one trip. (FBIS, Thss in English, Aug 9/84, Aug 14/84, Aug 16/84, Aug 20/84, Aug 24/84)
U.S. balloonist Joe W. Kittinger crash-landed his 10-story balloon on a mountain in Savona, Italy, after completing the first solo balloon flight across the Atlantic. Kittinger also made the flight in four days, setting a speed-for-distance record. Six other people had tried the solor ocean crossing, but all failed, and two died in the attempt. A three-man U.S. crew of Max-ie Anderson, Ben Abruzzo, and Larry Newman was the first to cross the Atlantic by balloon in 1978. Kittinger said, before beginning his flight, that his next goal would be a solo crossing of the Pacific. (W Times, Sept 19/84, 1A, 6A)
