NASA announced that it had named effective immediately John Hodge acting associate administrator for space station. Hodge became director of the Space Station Task Force on its establishment in May 1982 and was appointed deputy director of the Interim Space Station Program Office in April 1984 when the task force completed its work. He directed activities that resulted in the initial concepts definition for the space station, established program management policies, initiated advanced development programs, defined user needs, and organized potential international cooperation. In 1984 NASA appointed Hodge deputy associate administrator for Space Station, coinciding with establishment of the Office of Space Station. Hodge joined NASA in 1959, after working with Vickers-Armstrong, Ltd. and AVRO Aircraft Ltd., as chief of Flight Control, supervising a team of over 200 technical and administrative personnel and 100 aerospace contractors and serving as flight director for Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo flights. In 1970 Hodge worked for the Department of Transportation as director of transportation systems concepts at the Transportation Systems Center and later became associate administrator for Policy, Plans and Program Management before rejoining NASA. Hodge received a B.S. degree in engineering from Northampton Engineering College in London and in 1966 the honorary degree of Doctor of Science from the City University, London. (NASA anno., Dec 26/85) NASA Installations Ames Research Center
A computer failure 25 minutes before launch today forced postponement for at least two days of Space Shuttle mission 51-1, the NY Times reported. Launch crews planned to replace the malfunctioning computer, inspect the Space Shuttle's fuel plumbing, and try to launch Discovery on August 27 at 7:02 a.m. EDT. At 7:15 the Space Shuttle crew and Johnson Space Center (JSC) flight controllers almost simultaneously noted warnings that a backup guidance and control computer was registering errors. This came as the backup computer was undergoing a final check to see that its programs agreed with those driving the Space Shuttle's four main computers. NASA halted the launch countdown while engineers at Kennedy Space Center and JSC examined data retrieved from the malfunctioning computer and compared it with data from one of the regular computers. They concluded that the trouble was an apparent failure in the computer, which could not be remedied in time for a launch. That the computer worked perfectly in tests before August 25 and worked in tests after the failure, although it showed signs of trouble, puzzled engineers. NASA was about 99% sure that it was a hardware failure, although only an inspection of the computer by JSC engineers would determine the exact nature of the problem. It was the second postponement in two days for the Discovery and its crew of five, and NASA officials were growing concerned that Discovery might not reach orbit in time for repair of the crippled Leasat 3 satellite. Any delay beyond August 29 would cancel the repair effort, and the crew would have to confine themselves to deploying three communications satellites in the first three days of the mission. The flight would thus fall short of the eight days then planned. Arnold Aldrich, manager of the Space Shuttle program at JSC, said NASA would not reschedule beyond August 29 any attempt to repair Leasat 3, as that would have too disruptive an effect on other flights scheduled in the next few months. If it had been only a matter of replacing the computer, the delay would have been a day. However, the need to inspect insulated ducts that carried liquid-hydrogen to the Space Shuttle's three main engines necessitated the twonday postponement. After NASA had pumped the super-cooled fuel into the Space Shuttle system two consecutive mornings and drained it again, there was a chance that the contractions and expansions caused by the alternating freezing cold and Florida heat might have damaged the engines, which in extreme cases could cause them to explode in flight. (NYT, Aug 26/85, All) November27: NASA announced that it had agreed with the U.S. Air Force to delay the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base until mid-July 1986. NASA originally scheduled this mission, STS 62-A, for no earlier than March 20, 1986. Under Secretary of the Air Force Edward "Pete" Aldridge, Jr. said, "There are no major problems at the Vandenberg site. We have repeatedly stated that safety and quality would not be sacrificed for schedule. Our decision reflects our continued commitment to this philosophy." Aldridge added that, "We have had to make some facility modifications because of what we learned from routine Air Force/NASA operational readiness inspections. We have also added time to the schedule to allow for better preparation and evaluation of the operational systems tests and we have extended the training period for the launch crew of this historic, first West Coast shuttle mission. "This revised schedule will permit us to complete ongoing modifications, inspections, rework and operational testing with higher confidence than could be permitted with the March 20 schedule," he added. "It also minimizes the potential for conflict with the NASA Ulysses and Galileo planetary missions scheduled in May." NASA Office of Space Flight associate administrator Jesse Moore concurred, adding, "NASA agrees completely with the Air Force regarding Vandenberg. Our first commitment is to the safety of the crew and the reliability of the vehicle and launch systems. The development of the Vandenberg site is proceeding very smoothly. This readjustment gives us all more time to carry out our commitment to safety and reliability." The decision to delay meant NASA would deliver the orbiter Discovery to Vandenberg around March 1, 1986, and NASA and Air Force officials would continue to evaluate the STS 62-A schedule in order to establish after January 1 a firm launch date. (NASA Release 85-158)
NASA announced that Acting Administrator William Graham confirmed the appointment for an indefinite period of Philip Culbertson, associate administrator for space station, to the position of NASA general manager. In that capacity he would assist Graham and have specific responsibility for the Offices of Space Science and Applications, Commercial Programs, Space Flight, Aeronautics and Space Technology, Space Station, and Space Tracking and Data Systems. Culbertson had held his current position since August 1, 1984, coinciding with the establishment of the Office of Space Station. Since November 1981 he had been associate deputy administrator, serving as senior staff advisor to the administrator and the deputy administrator and directing the formulation of policy, strategy, and planning for the space station. From 1979 to 1981 he served as assistant for the Space Transportation System (STS), providing continuous assessment of STS development, acquisition, and operations status and otherwise advising the administrator and deputy administrator on STS matters requiring policy decisions. His earlier NASA assignments included the positions of deputy associate administrator for STS/technical, assistant administrator for planning and program integration, director of advanced manned missions, and manager of the institutional assessment conducted in 1977. He also served as the NASA representative in the 1979 antisatellite treaty negotiations and in 1976 and 1977 was detailed to the Executive Office for a five-month period as Executive Director of the President's Committee on Science and Technology. Culbertson received a B.S. in aeronautical engineering from Georgia Institute of Technology and served as a commissioned officer in the U.S. Navy, after which he spent four years as a research associate at the University of Michigan, where he received his M.S. degree in aeronautical engineering. (NASA anno., Dec 6/85)
Astronauts James van Hoften and Dr. William Fisher said at a Johnson Space Center news conference that they would attempt to activate the Syncom satellite deployed in April from the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. Although the satellite was loaded with rocket fuel, the astronauts said they didn't think their mission was any more dangerous than the two other rescue missions by astronauts in the previous two years. Because the satellite was "armed," (in the position in which it was ready to fire its engines), the danger was great if the engines ignited accidentally while the astronauts were working. However, the astronauts indicated the hardest part of their upcoming mission was its awkwardness, not the danger. They said they would attempt the rescue on the seventh day of the August 24 Space Shuttle 51-1 mission with the orbiter Discovery. Van Hoften would stand in foot restraints at the end of the Space Shuttle's 50-foot-long mechanical arm 35 feet below the satellite to affix a capture bar to the side of the satellite, then force the satellite to come to a standstill from its once-a-minute spin. Fisher, standing in temporary foot restraints fixed to the side of Discovery's cargo bay, would put two plugs on either side of the arming switch to prevent the satellite from accidentally turning itself on. Then, standing on opposite sides of the satellite, the astronauts would bypass the satellite's electronics so that flight directors on the ground could begin to command it from earth. NASA gave the operation a 50-50 chance of succeeding. (IV Post, July 23/85, A2)
NASA launched at 11:15 a.m. today from KSC the Space Shuttle Atlantis, the maiden voyage of the orbiter and the 21st mission in the Space Shuttle program, on mission 51 -J, a secret flight for the Department of Defense (DOD), the NY Times reported. The secrecy was part of DOD's efforts to make it difficult for the Soviet military to monitor the Space Shuttle takeoff and find out the identity and mission of the payload. Despite these precautions, it was widely reported that a primary goal of the flight was to launch a pair of $100-million military communication satellites. DOD apparently planned to station the satellites, designated DSCS III for Defense Satellite Communications System, 22,300 miles above earth, where they would relay messages to U.S. military forces around the world. The commander of Atlantis was Air Force Col. Karol Bobko, flying his third Space Shuttle mission; the pilot was Air Force Lt. Col. Ronald Grabe. Other crew members were Maj. David Hilmers of the Marine Corps, Army Lt. Col. Robert Stewart, and Air Force Maj. William Pailes. The first four were members of NASA's astronaut corps; Pailes was an Air Force pilot assigned to the mission to assist in deploying its secret payload. In accordance with security rules, NASA gave out little information about the flight. There were no space-to-ground communications released to the public and no postlaunch news conference. Nearly five hours after the launch, mission control in Houston said, "On the maiden voyage of Atlantis, the crew is doing well and all systems on board the orbiter are performing satisfactorily." NASA officials said it would issue no other status reports during the mission, which might last a week or more. Atlantis was the lightest and most advanced of the four orbiters. In its planning and construction, engineers removed minor design flaws found in earlier versions and incorporated the latest in electronic technology and light-weight, high-strength structural materials. NASA strengthened Atlantis mainly so it could withstand more vigorous launchings from the Air Force's facility at Vandenberg Air Force Base. These launches, which would take the Space Shuttle into orbits around the earth's poles, required greater thrust from the Space Shuttle's engines. Although the mission was devoted to the military, NASA officials said there was a civilian experiment on board to study exposure of the orbiter and its crew to cosmic rays, which were extremely high-energy particles from space that bombarded the earth and the orbiting Space Shuttles. (NY Times, Oct 3/ 85, A18, Oct 4/85, B5)
Commander Robert Overmyer landed the Space Shuttle Challenger today on a lake-bed runway at Edwards Air Force Base, after it had caused two sonic booms that triggered burglar alarms and calls to police, the Washington Post reported. Of the 15 experiments flown on Spacelab 3, 12 apparently operated successfully and two at least partially so. Among the successful experiments was photography of the Northern and Southern lights, which sent streaks of brilliant flashes at the extreme latitudes near the north and south polar regions at that time of year. Challenger's crew photographed 18 auroras. Another successful device was a laser spectrometer that for the first time measured from orbit the ozone layer that protected the earth from the sun's ultraviolet light. Crew members were able to restore two experiments that had initially been inoperable. One was an experiment to study the dynamics of droplets of fluids in weightlessness, the other an instrument that counted and measured cosmic rays striking Challenger in orbit. They were unable to deploy the wide-field camera intended to study the ultraviolet light of hot stars. The afternoon of the landing NASA personnel removed the monkeys and rats in their cages for a flight to Kennedy Space Center, where researchers would kill and dissect the rats to examine their vital organs under a microscope for changes caused by weightlessness. Physician/astronaut William Thornton said they had brought back two monkeys that were even friendlier than they were before the flight—"Those primates are part of the crew right now," he commented. During the flight, one of the monkeys experienced motion sickness for several days, requiring Thornton to feed it by hand. On May 4 the Greensboro News & Record reported that Thornton said, "Our feeding crisis is over. I wouldn't have believed the effect of a caring human hand." However, on May 14 Overmyer told reporters at Johnson Space Center that, "NASA has a problem that NASA has to solve if we're going to fly those cages again," the W Post reported. "I never dreamed that all that stuff would come out of those cages and escape into our atmosphere" [see May 2], He added that the experience with the animals "never took away the luster" of spaceflight, a sentiment echoed by pilot Frederick Gregory, an Air Force colonel who became the first black astronaut to take the Space Shuttle's controls. (W Post, May 5/85, A4, May 6/85, A3, May 7/85, A1, May 14/85, A3; Greensboro News & Record, May 4/85, A4)
NASA announced the assignment of Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee overseeing the NASA budget, as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle mission 51-E, a four-day flight using the orbiter Challenger to deploy the second Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the Canadian Telesat I communications satellite. The flight was scheduled for launch February 20, 1985, from KSC. Garn was in preliminary training at Johnson Space Center and would soon begin training with the other members of the crew. The NY Times reported that Garn's activities in space would include research on space sickness and, if he did not become sick in orbit, he might be made ill as part of the experiment. NASA astronauts assigned to the flight included Karol Bobko, commander; Donald Williams, pilot; mission specialists M. Rhea Seddon, S. David Griggs, and Jeffrey Hoffman; and French payload specialist Patrick Baudry. (NASA Release 85-9; NYT, Jan 18/85, A13)
NASA announced that a panel of scientists at its Ames Research Center (ARC) said today that, although Mars presently was a frigid desert planet, it once had enough water to cover its entire surface with an ocean more than 300 feet deep. Dr. Michael Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey said at the meeting, which grew out of research discussed the previous winter at ARC's Water on Mars Workshop, that "The pictures taken by the two Viking spacecraft in orbit around Mars tell us that Mars had as much water in geologic history as earth did." Carr said the 20,000 close-up pictures taken since 1976 by the two Viking spacecraft revealed canyons that were deeper, wider, and longer than the Grand Canyon and could be made only by rushing rivers. The photos also showed thousands of gullies formed only by water or snow and ice slicing into the surface or forcing their way up to the surface. "If all the water that existed on Mars to form these channels covered its surface today," commented ARC's Dr. James Pollack, "it would be enough to form a global Martian ocean tens of hundreds of meters deep." Carr pointed out that the Viking photos also suggested that water was below the surface at latitudes near the Martian equator where the planet's interior heat could keep it from freezing just as do underground rivers in most temperate latitudes on earth. "There is a softening of the terrain, a rounding off of the edges . . . that is evidence of underground water flow and the creep of ice near the surface," he said. "This terrain is also located where most of the Martian gullies are today, where snow, ice, and water burst out of the ground to cause the colossal floods that formed the channels we see today," Carr said. And Pollack added that Mars long ago lost most of its carbon dioxide, which helped trap the sun's heat, causing in effect a permanent Martian ice age. (NASA Release 85-140)
NASA would once again be one of the chief exhibitors at the 33rd annual Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) International Fly-in July 26 to August 2 at Oshkosh, Wisconsin, the Langley Researcher reported. NASA would broaden its exhibit, "The Shape of Things To Come," which was traditionally only aeronautical, to include a greater representation of its activities in space technology. A 60 x 90-foot tent would house displays of NASA's research and technology development work in aeronautics, the space station, Space Shuttle, and space exploration. Langley Research Center and Ames Research Center would provide aeronautical exhibits, Lewis Research Center would provide aeropropulsion and space exhibits, Goddard Space Flight Center would haw its search and rescue satellite van on hand, and Johnson Space Center and Marshall Space Flight Center would exhibit material on space research. Astronauts Robert Gibson and Robert Overmeyer would be EAA guests and would participate in a program the evening of July 29. Two dozen NASA forum speakers would give presentations covering every aeronautical discipline. Each year for the last several years about 100,000 people and 10,000 privately owned light airplanes were at Oshkosh for the exhibition. Organizers also scheduled the British Airways Concorde to make special fly-bys during the afternoon air shows. (LaRC Researcher, July 26/85, 3) July 26\ Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Flanford Dole announced the award of a $196.9 million contract to IBM to provide new-generation computers that would give controllers extra capacity to handle growing air traffic safely and efficiently in the coming decade. Under the contract, IBM would replace the computer systems in the nation's 20 air route traffic control centers. Contract options for future hardware maintenance and software and technical support, if exercised, could total an additional $235.1 million. In making the announcement, Dole said that "existing computers are based on outmoded technology . . . The new computer will have the capacity to assume added functions—such as improved conflict detection and resolution—permitting the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to make more efficient use of controllers." And it would provide a vehicle for a stable transition to an advanced automation program in the future. The new computers would have greater storage capacity than the IBM 9020s used since the early 1970s in FAA centers, which control all aircraft operating under instrument flight rules between the nation's airport terminal areas. The FAA awarded the contract to IBM following a 21-month design competition with the Sperry Corp. The FAA based the selection on a number of cost and performance factors including the results of a "compute off" at the FAA Technical Center near Atlantic City, New Jersey. A key factor in the side-byside evaluation was the capability of each computer system to run the current 9020 software package with minimum modifications. Key element in the IBM hardware was the IBM 3080-BX1 model. Each installation would consist of two units with one serving as the primary processor and the other as a backup. The contract called for IBM to deliver the new computer systems over a one-year period beginning in the summer of 1986 to air route traffic control centers including the FAA Technical Center and the FAA Aeronautical Center where the computer system would be used for training purposes. (FAA Release 32-85) July 29\ U.S., Indian, and Canadian officials were estimating the cost of raising portions of the wreckage of the Air-lndia Boeing 747 that crashed June 23 into the Atlantic off Ireland, Aviation Week reported. Lack of significant data on either the cockpit voice recorder or the flight data recorder, recovered July 10 and July 11, respectively, by a remotely controlled submersible vehicle, stalled the investigation into the cause of the crash until more information became available. Raising portions of the wreckage seemed the only way to accomplish this. After a British ship initially surveyed the sea bed where the wreckage lay, the Canadian ship John Cabot completed a second sonar survey of that portion of the ocean floor. Officials later said wreckage of the aircraft could be identified only as "lumps." Officials said they had not determined the cost of raising the wreckage or a significant part of it, but knew it to be high. Although responsibility for the accident investigation legally belonged to India, the U.S. and Canada—both parties to the investigation—might contribute funds to the salvage operation. (AvWk, July 15/85, 28; July 29/85, 29)
The U.S. Navy implemented a plan announced earlier by Navy Secretary John Lehman to abolish the Naval Material Command and to restructure the Naval Electronics Systems Command to integrate space systems, force ships, and aircraft systems into a Space and Warfare Systems Command, Defense Daily reported. The actions were part of a two-year-old plan to decentralize acquisition management in the Navy and streamline the decision making process. Defense Daily reported the Navy as saying a major impact of the reorganization of Navy acquisition management would be improved accountability by eliminating a reporting layer. Adm. James Watkins, chief of Naval Operations, said the space aspect of the reorganization was part of a total package intended to bring the Navy "up to speed" in addressing space needs. "We are trying now to put our act together. We have established the Navy Space Command. . .putting in my office the Space and C3 Directorate, rather than just C3," Watkins said. "The Space and Warfare Systems Command will be our technical depository, working with the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) and other laboratories to work our projects in space, of which there are many. . .This is a nice stepping stone on the route to a unified space command," Watkins added. He also pointed out that the Navy and the Air Force, and perhaps the Army, would rotate into the unified space command that President Reagan would establish on October 1,1985. Therefore, Watkins said, he saw the reorganization as important not only within the Navy, but also within the unified command system to achieve a higher level of command decision. (D/D, Apr 10/85, 225)
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) announced it was using sophisticated electronic equipment to identify pilots who were illegally using air-traffic control radio frequencies to harass nonstriking United Airlines pilots. The FAA had already initiated enforcement action against the pilots responsible for such incidents near Chicago's O'Hare International Airport and the Seattle-Tacoma Airport. The equipment also identified other flight crew members who had engaged in such harrassment, and additional enforcement actions were likely. The equipment was a tracking device that helped pinpoint the source of otherwise unidentified radio transmissions, of which more than 50, either jamming a radio frequency by pressing a microphone button or verbal abuse over the radio, had occurred since the strike began on May 17. FAA Administrator Donald Engen said he would not tolerate misuse of the air-traffic control frequencies, which could lead to suspension or revocation of a pilot's license and possibly criminal penalties of up to 10 years imprisonment or a fine of $10,000. (FAA Release 24-85)
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Administrator Donald Engen, citing improvements in scheduling practices and air traffic control, told airlines today that on April 1 he would remove minute-by-minute restrictions on the number of flights at airports in Atlanta, Chicago, Denver, and the New York City area, the Washington Post reported. He said delays would continue to occur but should be reduced and more manageable. Before the restrictions, the air traffic system had experienced an unprecedented number of delays, averaging 1,400 daily 15-minute or longer delays nationwide the previous August. Between November 1 and January 31, 1984, average daily delays dropped to 863, a reduction of 46%. Not all delays were attributable to airport congestion or air traffic control problems; the FAA generally blamed about 60% of them on weather. Also likely to contribute to a decrease in delays was the increasing ability of the FAA to monitor traffic nationwide through its computer system and to redirect planes to less-busy routes. Engen noted that the airlines had indicated they would continue to operate the schedules adopted under the restrictions and would not revert to the bunching of large numbers of operations within short time periods. (W Post, Mar 15/85, A16)
NASA launched Discovery on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 today through the worst weather of the Space Shuttle program, the NY Times reported. After two postponements in three days because of bad weather and a computer failure, Discovery barely got off the ground before the darkening clouds moved over the launch pad and the rain descended in torrents. "We could see large holes in the system 50 or 100 miles across so we prayed for the breaks that would let us thread the needle when the time came," launch director Robert Sieck said later. "We had two things in our favor: There was no lightning in the cloud cover, and most of the rain was south of the launch pad, not right over it." Launch directors gambled that rain would not be falling on the pad at liftoff time, which was delayed three minutes to make sure the gamble was the right one. As heavy rain fell on the press site three miles to the west, Discovery roared away from the pad through a hole in the clouds and sped into the air 10 minutes before the pad was pelted with rain. Commanding the flight was Air Force Col. Joe Engle, who commanded the second Space Shuttle test flight in 1981 and on August 26 turned 53. Air Force Lt. Col. Richard Covey was pilot; mission specialists were John Lounge, Dr. James van Hoften, and Dr. William Fisher. A malfunction encountered two hours into the flight forced the astronauts to deploy a day early one of the three satellites in the orbiter's cargo bay. During a cargo inspection by remotely controlled cameras, a shield that was to protect Australia's AUSSAT 1 from direct exposure to sunlight stuck in a partly open position. An astronaut then used the Space Shuttle's mechanical arm to nudge the sunshade completely open so they could release the spring-loaded satellite. Any delay of more than six hours could have resulted in radiation damage to the exposed satellite's electronics. Less than five hours after deploying the Australian satellite, Discovery's crew deployed ASC 1 for the American Satellite Co. The second deployment marked the first time a Space Shuttle crew deployed two satellites in one day. (NYT, Aug 28/85, D18)
NASA announced that John O'Brien, currently NASA deputy general counsel, was appointed effective August 4 NASA general counsel, succeeding S. Neil Hosenball who was retiring. O'Brien began his career in 1962 with NASA at the Launch Operations Center, later Kennedy Space Center (KSC), during the Mercury Program. He then served as chief counsel of the KSC and assistant general counsel for procurement matters at NASA Headquarters. He received an A.B. degree from Niagara University and his J.D. degree from Georgetown University. After joining NASA, O'Brien was designated a Princeton Fellow in Public Affairs at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton University, and in 1976 received the NASA Exceptional Service Medal. (NASA Release 85-108)
NASA announced the appointment effective November 25 of Joseph Alexander to deputy chief scientist with responsibility for providing assistance to the chief scientist in advising the Administrator and in establishing policy related to scientific aspects of NASA programs and missions. Alexander joined Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) in 1962, where he participated in the establishment of NASA's program in space radio astronomy and conducted studies of the sun, the planets, and the galaxy from earth-orbit, lunar-orbit, and planetary flyby spacecraft. In 1970 he became head of the Galactic Studies Section where he was responsible for scientific studies associated with the Radio Astronomy Explorer satellite program. Following leave as a visiting scientist at the Department of Astro-Geophysics at the University of Colorado, Alexander became head of the Planetary Magnetospheres Branch and directed a research team conducting both experimental and theoretical studies of planetary environments by using instruments on board spacecraft such as the Interplanetary Monitoring Probes, Mariner-10, Magsat, Pioneer-11, and Voyager 1 and 2. From January 1984 until March 1985, Alexander was a senior policy analyst at the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy where he concentrated on issues related to space science and technology in the civil space program. He then returned to GSFC as associate chief of the laboratory for extraterrestrial physics. A member of the American Geophysical Union, the U.S. National Committee of the International Union of Radio Science, and the International Astronomical Union, Alexander received in 1960 a B.S. degree and in 1962 an M.A. degree, both in physics, from the College of William and Mary. (NASA anno., Dec 2/85)
NASA announced selection of 13 new astronaut candidates, six pilots and seven mission specialists, who would report to the Johnson Space Center in late summer to begin a one-year period of training and evaluation. Upon successful completion of the training, they would be eligible for assignment to Space Shuttle flights. The candidates would join 90 current astronauts. Including the new group, NASA had named 157 astronauts since the beginning of the program. In making the latest selections, NASA considered 33 civilians from the selection rosters developed during the 1984 selection process and 133 nominees from the military services. Those selected as pilot candidates were LCdr. Michael Baker (USN), Maj. Robert Caban (USMC), Capt. Brian Duffy (USAF), Stephen Oswald (civilian), and LCdr. Stephen Thorne (USN). Mission specialist candidates were Jerome Apt (PhD—civilian), Capt. Charles Gemar (US Army), Linda Godwin (PhD— civilian), Richard Hieb (civilian), Tamara Gernigan (civilian), Capt. Carl Meade (USAF), and Lt. Pierre Thuot (USN). (NASA Release 85-84)
NASA deputy associate administrator for space science and applications Samuel Keller, speaking at a weekly staff meeting, said "We expect 1986 will be the most demanding year we've ever had,'' the Washington Post reported. In January Voyager would encounter the planet Uranus. In March the Space Shuttle would fly a mission dedicated to observing Halley's comet. In May NASA would launch Ulysses, which would fly to Jupiter and use the planet's gravity to "slingshot" itself around the sun, and Galileo, which would orbit Jupiter. In August the Space Shuttle would carry the Hubble Space Telescope into orbit. The three spacecraft cost $2 billion not including launch costs. Keller's toughest time would occur in May, the Post said, when Ulysses and Galileo at the same time would be in the cargo bays of two Space Shuttles on their launch pads. NASA would try May 15 to launch Ulysses and then Galileo four days later. If anything delayed the May 15 launch, NASA had 24 days to get the Space Shuttle into space, a launch window that allowed the two spacecraft to fly to Jupiter using the least amount of fuel. "I'll be glad when 1986 is over," Keller said. (W Post, Oct 18/85, A21) October24: NASA announced that an October 29 conference in Washington sponsored by NASA, the Department of Defense, and other government agencies would provide a forum for government executives to discuss the Reagan Administration's program to increase government efficiency and effectiveness. Following welcoming remarks by Dennis Whitfield, chief of staff to the Secretary of Labor, and David Braunstein, director of NASA's productivity programs, conference participants would be briefed on several perspectives on the President's productivity improvement program. Stephen Scholossberg, deputy under secretary for labor-management relations, Department of Labor, would then provide a labor-management view of quality and productivity. In the afternoon, NASA astronaut Bruce McCandless, first human to freely maneuver in space without a tether, would speak on the importance of quality and productivity in the space program. John Franke Jr., assistant secretary for administration, Department of Agriculture, would then give case examples of management's commitment to quality; and Commodore John Kirkpatrick, commander, Naval Aviation Logistics Center, would discuss quality improvement through total quality management. (NASA Release 85-146)
Members of the House of Representatives, former astronauts, and assorted other government people would depart on October 10 for a five-day stay in Moscow to interest Soviet officials and scientists in a joint manned mission to Mars, the NY Times reported. The Soviets invited the group, and the White House cleared the visit. Heading the 40-member delegation was Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who was chairman of the House space science subcommittee and scheduled to fly aboard the Space Shuttle in December. Former astronauts Thomas Stafford and Donald Slayton, also in the group, would join in a celebration in Moscow of the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz space mission. Nelson noted that the formal space cooperation agreement between the two countries expired in 1982 and said that he hoped the Congressional mission would open the way to a "new spirit of scientific cooperation." Under the sponsorship of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, the group would visit the space research institute, the cosmonaut training center, and the mission control center in Kaliningrad. A U.S. request to visit the Baikonur Astrodrome, the launching facility in Tyuratam outside the city of Leninsk, was pending. (NYT, Oct 9/85, B14) Military Programs
NASA announced that scientists from the U.S., France, the United Kingdom, and West Germany released their findings from the rendezvous on September 11 of the International Cometary Explorer (ICE) spacecraft with Comet Giacobini-Zinner. Although some ICE data confirmed the traditional portrait of a comet, other information was unexpected. Perhaps most surprising was detection of electrical wave (plasma) disturbances and high-speed molecular species coming from the comet more than a day before rendezvous. The spacecraft's Plasma Wave Experiment, developed by TRW's Dr. Frederick Scarf, detected the electrical waves while ICE was 1,429,200 miles from the comet. Scientists had theorized that first detection might occur just a few hours before the spacecraft crossed the comet's tail. A few hours after initial detection, but still one day before intercept, two of ICE's instruments discovered electrically-charged particles (ions) as far as 1,130,000	miles from the comet. The Energetic Proton Experiment, directed by Dr. Robert Hynds, Imperial College, London, and the Low-Energy Cosmic Ray Experiment, directed by Dr. Dieter Hovestadt of the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics, Garching, West Germany, detected these ions. According to Hynds, it was believed solar ultraviolet light ionized gas molecules escaping from the comet's nucleus, then the solar wind picked up and accelerated the ions back toward the comet. In another finding, Dr. Samuel Bame of the Los Alamos National Laboratory reported that, in contrast to the hot electrons on the outskirts of the comet, its tail consisted of a dense narrow structure of cool plasma. The Radio Wave Experiment of France's Meudon Observatory made this same finding. The ICE's Ion Composition Experiment, directed by Dr. Keith Ogilvie of Goddard Space Flight Center, made the first direct measurements of molecules in a comet. The experiment found mainly water vapor ions, confirming the "dirty snowball" model of comets. A major prediction confirmed by the ICE data was that the magnetic structure of the comet's plasma tail consisted of two parallel lobes, each threaded by a magnetic field of opposite polarity. ICE's Magnetometer Experiment of Dr. Edward Smith of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory mapped this structure, which was predicted in 1957 by Nobel physicist Dr. Hannel Alfven. Putting conflicting scientific conjectures to rest, the ICE mission revealed that no clear-cut bow shock—a surface moving ahead of the comet like that through which a jet aircraft passes as it breaks the sound barrier—accompanied the comet. Instead, researchers found around the head of the comet what they called "a transition region" in which the solar wind was heated, compressed, and slowed. Neither the ICE spacecraft nor its instrument payload suffered any detectable damage as a result of the impact with the comet's dust. (NASA Release
NASA announced that the U.S. Senate confirmed on November 18 Dr. William Graham to be NASA deputy administrator; Graham, who was a founder and executive of R&D Associates, was nominated by President Reagan on September 12. Graham had served for three years as chairman of the President's General Advisory Committee on Arms Control and Disarmament and previously served as a member of the President-elect's transition team. Before founding R&D Associates in 1971, Graham spent six years with the Rand Corp. and before that three years active duty at the Air Force Weapons Laboratory, Kirtland Air Force Base, as a project officer directing a group conducting experimental and theoretical research on strategic system survivability. Graham had been a consultant to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and served on many international and national boards and advisory groups including the National Academy of Science/National Research Council Committee on Undersea Warfare, the Air Force Science Advisory Board Task Force on Manned Strategic System Vulnerability, the U.S.-United Kingdom Joint Working Group on Atomic Weapons, the Defense Nuclear Agency Scientific Advisory Group on Effects, and the Defense Science Board System Vulnerability Task Force and Associated Task Forces. His memberships in professional and honorary organizations included Tau Beta Pi, the American Institute for Aeronautics and Astronautics, the New York Academy of Science, the Council on Foreign Relations, the board of directors of the Committee on the Present Danger, the Defense Preparedness Association, the Ethics and Public Policy Center, and the American Association for the Advancement of Science. In 1959 Graham received a B.S. degree in physics from the California Institute of Technology and in 1961 an M.S. degree in engineering science and in 1963 a Ph.D. in electrical engineering, both from Stanford University. (NASA Release 85-155)
University of Texas scientists recently held a farewell ceremony at the McDonald Observatory in the mountains of west Texas for the Korad laser that had for the past 16 years measured the distance between the earth and the moon to within four inches, the Washington Post reported. The laser, one of the last experiments still in use from the days of the Apollo moon missions, would have as a replacement the McDonald Laser Ranging System, which would compute the constantly changing distance to the moon to within two inches. However, the two lasers worked the same way, bouncing a beam of laser light off a reflector left on the moon by astronauts Neil Armstrong and Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin and measuring its return to the observatory's 107 in. telescope. (W Post, July 5/85, A15) During October. Despite a recent surge of interest among undergraduate students, many university aerospace engineering departments were coping with faculty shortages, uncertain research support, and inadequate funding to operate and maintain their research facilities, the National Research Council's (NRC) NewsReport reported. A study prepared for NASA by an NRC committee chaired by Morris Steinberg, vice president for science at Lockheed Corp., said, "Faculty positions today are not especially attractive to ambitious young aerospace engineers." The number of doctorates awarded annually in the field dropped by half in the decade ending with 1983, indicating students were choosing careers in industry rather than academe. The committee concluded that NASA, which depended on the nation's universities for ideas and expertise, should take several steps to help remedy the problem. NASA should bolster its support of campus research efforts that addressed "long-term fundamental problems whose solutions are likely to have lasting impact," the committee said. NASA also should institute a system of peer review of research proposals, establish Ph.D. fellowships in aerospace engineering, and coordinate its efforts to support university research and teaching in the field. (NRC NewsReport, Oct 85, 17) U.S. Space Policy During January. The U.S. government released an unclassified version of the National Space Strategy based on the National Space Policy President Reagan unveiled on July 4,1982, and on his 1984 State of the Union Address, Space World reported. The strategy identified selected high-priority efforts and responsibilities and provided for implementation plans for major space-policy objectives. The document gave new impetus for future manned military-space operations, underscored Administration support for the space station program and establishment of future civilian-space goals, encouraged space commercialization, ordered a joint NASA/Department of Defense (DOD) study of post-1995 launch vehicles, and called for full Space Shuttle cost recovery by October 1, 1988. Gilbert Rye, director of space programs for the National Security Council (NSC), said of the strategy: "To our knowledge this is the first document of its kind to lay out in any coherent manner a list of priorities that cover the total U.S. space program. It should be useful for the Congress, the private sector, executive branch agencies, and the American people to fully understand the main thrust of the U.S. space program in the years to come." The strategy authorized DOD to procure a limited number of expendable launch vehicles to complement the Space Shuttle, but did not specify particular civilian space program goals. A Presidential National Commission on Space during 1985 was to identify goals, opportunities, and policy options for the U.S. civil space sector for the next 20 years. (Space World, Jan 85, 8)
NASA announced that astronomers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and the Universities of Hawaii, Arizona, and Texas were observing Pluto and its only known satellite, Charon, as the two alternately moved in front of one another in a series of eclipses that occurred every 124 years or twice in each orbit of the sun. Each time Charon passed between Pluto and earth, a portion of Pluto's surface was blocked from view, resulting in a dimming of the combined light from both bodies. When Charon moved behind Pluto, their roles reversed. Measurements of the times, durations, and changes in brightness of the events would allow astronomers to calculate the masses, diameters, and densities of Pluto and Charon, permitting development of models of the two bodies' composition. Current estimates of Pluto's density had an uncertainty of 50%, not accurate enough to derive information on its composition. However, researchers thought Pluto's density was about that of water, making it the lowest-density planet known that had a solid surface. The new measurements indicated that the combined brightness of Pluto and Charon diminished by 4% during the eclipses, a dimming that lasted about two hours and was superimposed on a 30% brightness change that occurred over a 6.4-day period. The longer change in brightness happened because one hemisphere of Pluto was 30% brighter than the other. Very little was known about Pluto and even less about Charon, including when or even if the five-year-long series of eclipses would begin. In order not to miss any of the earliest events, the astronomers had established an observing network at McDonald Observatory in Texas, the University of Arizona observatories, Palomar Observatory in California, and Mauna Kea Observatory in Hawaii. Dr. Edward Tedesco of JPL had been the first to see and measure an eclipse of Pluto by Charon January 16 from Palomar; Richard Binzel observed another eclipse February 17 from the McDonald Observatory; and Dr. D. J. Tholen observed a third eclipse February 20 from the Mauna Kea Observatory. Pluto and Charon's great distance from earth and relatively small sizes made them the solar system's most difficult objects to observe. (NASA Release 85-36)
NASA announced that John Young would command Space Shuttle flight 61-J scheduled for launch August 1986, Vance Brand mission 61-K scheduled for September 1986, and Donald Williams mission 61—I. Other crew for the 61-J mission, during which astronauts would deploy the Hubble Space Telescope, were pilot Charles Bolden Jr. and previously named mission specialists Kathryn Sullivan, Steven Hawley, and Bruce Mc-Candless. S. David Griggs would pilot mission 61—K, and other crew would be mission specialists Robert Steward, Owen Garriott, and European Space Agency astronaut Claude Nicollier. NASA previously assigned payload specialists Michael Lampton and Byron Lichtenberg to the mission. Remaining mission 61-1 crew would be pilot Michael Smith and mission specialists James Bagian, Bonnie Dunbar and Manley "Sonny" Carter. NASA also announced that Norman Thagard would replace John Fabian on mission 61-G scheduled for May 1986 during which crew would deploy the Galileo interplanetary spacecraft. Fabian was leaving NASA; he had not announced his plans. James Buchli would replace Thagard on mission 61-H in June 1986. (NASA Release 85-131)
A sophomore at Purdue University and a senior at San Francisco's Lowell High School designed experiments to be carried on two 1986 Space Shuttle Flights, the Washington Post reported. Kentucky Fried Chicken would sponsor an experiment in which eggs would fly in orbit to determine whether chicken embryos could survive the rigors of weightlessness. The Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory at the University of California would sponsor an experiment to measure the effects of weightlessness on cell division in yeast. Greg Delory, 16, said he got the idea for flying baker's yeast from the first Spacelab mission where bread mold was grown in orbit. "The mold was supposed to produce spores every 22 hours, but in space it lost its circadian rhythm and produced spores all the time," he said. Delory won a competition to design a Space Shuttle experiment while attending the U.S. Space Camp under the auspices of Marshall Space Flight Center. John Vellinger, 20, who won a competition to design a NASA experiment, said, "We hope this will give us some data about the feasibility of raising chickens as a food source in space." (WPost, Aug 15/85, A19)
Astronauts James van Hoften and William Fisher on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 today completed repair of the Leasat 1 satellite, the Washington Post reported. Steven Dorfman, president of Hughes Communications Corp., satellite owner, referred to the effort as the "most remarkable salvage mission" tried in space. During the second day of the salvage mission [see Satellites, Aug. 31], astronaut John Lounge, using the Space Shuttle's mechanical arm, raised the satellite 35 feet above the cargo bay and placed its center of gravity on a straight line with that of the orbiter Discovery. Outside, van Hoften stepped into foot restraints on the end of the arm, and Lounge lifted him to the satellite. Reaching up, van Hoften placed gloved hands on the bar he had earlier attached to the satellite and pushed down as hard as he could to start the satellite spinning. Three more pushes sent the satellite spinning evenly into space over the equator near the west coast of South America where officials planned to operate it as a Navy radio relay. Although Hughes was still concerned that very cold temperatures might have permanently damaged the satellite, it did beam to earth its first signals since deployment on April 13. The signals indicated that temperatures in the satellite's outer shell were normal, suggesting that the inner drum holding the two onboard rocket engines and more than 7,500 lb. of rocket fuel might have survived the varying temperatures of space and be ready to carry the satellite into permanent position 22,300 miles above earth. (IV Post, Sept 2/ 85, A3)
Christa McAuliffe, first teacher as well as private citizen to fly onboard the Space Shuttle, and backup Barbara Morgan arrived September 9 at Johnson Space Center (JSC) to begin their training program, the JSC Roundup reported. Reporters, photographers, and TV crews accompanied the two as they arrived at building 100 to receive their identification badges. Mission commander Francis "Dick" Scobee that afternoon welcomed McAuliffe and Morgan at a meeting with the crew of mission 51 -L, scheduled for launch in January 1986. Other 51 —L crew members were pilot Michael Smith and mission specialists Ronald McNair, Ellison Onizuka, and Judith Resnik. JSC personnel the next day measured them for flight suits, helmets, and G-suits. McAuliffe said she would be allowed to select either a jumpsuit or a standard flight suit to take home with her following her flight. After a food tasting and rating session, in which food lab manager Dr. Charles Bourland asked McAuliffe and Morgan to taste about 40 food and drink items and rate them on a scale of 1 to 9, both teachers commented on their surprise in finding space food so flavorful. They would have several more opportunities for taste tests before McAuliffe selected her flight menu. Other first-week activities included orientation briefings by management and training officials and familiarization tours of training facilities and mission control. Asked by a reporter how drastically her life had changed since her selection, McAuliffe said that other than having the opportunity to fly onboard the Space Shuttle and the accompanying publicity she didn't perceive that much difference. She pointed out that as a teacher for a long time she had to gather material and present information to students daily. "As I see it, I'm doing basically the same things, only my audience has changed." (JSC Roundup, Sept. 27/85, 7)
Spacelab 2 mission manager Roy Lester of Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) Spacelab Payload Project Office said today that the Spacelab 2 payload was declared "ready for installation" into the orbiter Challenger, the Marshall Star reported. Spacelab 2 would be the second of two Spacelab missions designed to demonstrate the performance of hardware received from the European Space Agency (ESA). The Spacelab 1 mission verified the majority of Spacelab systems including the habitable module, tunnel, scientific airlock, and pallets. For the second verification mission, Spacelab would not use a habitable module but only a pallet configuration. The crew would operate experiments from Challenger's aft flight deck. Spacelab 2 consisted of a pressurized igloo approximately the size of a five-gallon oil drum and three pallets, two of which joined to form the train needed to support several experiments. Also new on the mission was the instrument pointing system for pointing four of the onboard solar experiments. Spacelab would carry 13 experiments in 7 scientific disciplines. Primary objective of the mission was to demonstrate the performance of the igloo, the two-pallet train, and the instrument pointing system. John Thomas, manager of the MSFC Spacelab Program Office, said NASA had removed Spacelab 3 hardware from Challenger's cargo bay and was reconfiguring the bay for Spacelab 2. "We expect to begin installation of the Spacelab 2 payload on June 3," he noted. The last major test for the hardware before July 12 scheduled launch would be an end-to-end test planned for June 10, in which NASA would test all systems connecting Challenger, Spacelab 2, and the MSFC-operated payload operations control center (POCC) at Johnson Space Center. Thomas said the other primary effort was to complete training of the payload team. (Marshall Star, May 29/85, 1)
John Townsend, corporate vice president and president of Fairchild Space Co., said in a January 16 speech to the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics' (AIAA) National Capital Section that those planning commercial space ventures must monitor the uncertainty of NASA's Space Shuttle manifest and orbiter fleet's long-term availability, Aerospace Daily reported. "The manifest is at risk," he said and cited difficulties NASA had in "remanifesting" resulting from the orbiter Challenger's thermal-protection tile-adhesion problems. NASA had cut back its planned 13 missions to 12 in 1985, and Townsend expressed concern over the potential problems of a 4-orbiter fleet that could be exacerbated by an accident. Townsend also expressed concern over the Space Shuttle pricing policy, noting NASA's recommendation of a 22% price increase in Space Shuttle flights from $71 million (1982 dollars) per flight to $87 million, and concluding that NASA's "expendable launch vehicle people have Ariane to face." (A/ D, Jan 17/85, 90)
NASA announced it selected three scientific investigations for the Hubble Space Telescope that would lead to the design and development over the next several years of one or two advanced scientific instruments for flight readiness during the period 1992 to 1994 for that orbital observatory. The three investigations selected for the definition phase were an imaging Michelson spectrometer, by Donald Hall, University of Hawaii, Honolulu; near-infrared camera and multi-object spectrometer, by Dr. Roger Thompson, University of Arizona, Tucson; and space telescope imaging spectrograph, by Dr. Bruce Woodgate, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. All the proposed instruments would be capable of taking photos of celestial objects and breaking down the light from these objects into spectral colors. NASA would then select one or two of the investigations for flight hardware development about one year after telescope launch, scheduled for the last half of 1986. Space Shuttle astronauts would install the selected instrument(s) on the telescope while it was in earth orbit. (NASA Release 85-164)
Two groups of scientists, who were making observations at infrared and radio wavelengths, reported the strongest evidence so far of a supermassive black hole in the center of the Milky Way galaxy, the NY Times reported, strengthening the theory that very massive black holes existed in the cores of all galaxies. Astrophysicists had already deduced that black holes might be at the cores of some distant galaxies. Eight physicists and astronomers from the University of California, Berkeley, reported in the British journal Nature their infrared observations showing gas whipping around a core at 100,000 to 400,000 miles per hour. They concluded the gas was in the grip of a black hole four million times the mass of the sun. The group measured the velocities near the center of the core with sufficient precision to show that they decreased further out in a way to be expected if controlled by gravity from a single central object. They believed this ruled out a dense cluster of stars, proposed by some astronomers, because that gravity field would be more uniform. Radio astronomers using coordinated observations with antennas in West-ford, Massachusetts; Green Bank, West Virginia; Fort Davis, Texas; and Gold-stone, Hat Creek, and Owens Valley, California; and the 27 antennas of the very large array in New Mexico aimed the antennas at a radio source, a suspected black hole, almost directly in the center of the Milky Way called Sagittarius A (in the constellation Sagittarius). The results indicated that the source, despite its enormous mass and output of energy, was smaller than the orbit of Saturn. Donald Lyndon-Bell of Britain's Royal Greenswich Observatory and Martin Fees of Cambridge University had proposed 14 years before that there might be such an object there. Astronomers using improved radio and infrared techniques had mapped in more and more detail the Milky Way core, which was 30,000 light years from earth. They could not see the core with visible light because of dense clouds of dust and gases. (NVTJune 7/85, A15) June 22\ NASA announced that the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) observed for the first time the comet Giacobini-Zinner while the comet was approximately 87 million miles from earth on the inbound leg of its orbit between the sun and the neighborhood of Jupiter. IUE would continue observations of the comet as it moved closer and ultimately became the target of the world's first intercept, on September 11, 1985, of a comet by a satellite, the International Cometary Explorer (/Cf) spacecraft. The June 22 IUE observations of Giacobini-Zinner produced ultraviolet spectrograms—graphic depictions of the intensity of light over a range of ultraviolet wavelengths—revealing emissions of two molecules, carbon monosulfide and another known as the hydroxyl radical. Preliminary evaluation indicated that the ultraviolet emissions from both molecules were somewhat brighter than expected at this stage of the comet's development. The IUE had taken the ultraviolet "pulse" of not only nearby solar system objects such as comets and planets, but also extragalactic objects such as quasars, providing research data to more than 1,000 astronomers around the world. Scientists, engineers, and technicians at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center designed and integrated the spacecraft, which was launched in 1978 as a cooperative venture of the British Science Research Council, the European Space Agency, and NASA. (NASA Release 85-103)
Already far ahead of their work schedule, astronauts aboard Discovery on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 began preparing tools they would use in an attempt to revive the U.S. Navy Leasat 3 satellite, the Washington Post reported. Mission planners had hoped the satellite repairs could be made during an August 30 spacewalk, but they added another spacewalk for August 31 because ground tests showed that the Space Shuttle crippled robot arm could not work fast enough to complete the repair job in one day. "It appears we are faced with a two-EVA (extravehicular activity) plan," flight director Bill Reeves said. He blamed a failed circuit that prevented Discovery's robot arm from operating in an automatic mode. Reeves noted that ground tests showed that the robot arm, when operated manually, would need about 75% more time to maneuver the Syncom 3 satellite and that it would take two 6-and-a-half hour spacewalks to complete the repair. Mission specialists Dr. James van Hoften and Dr. William Fisher spent about four hours August 28 checking out electronic gear they would use to repair the satellite. Mission specialist John Lounge would work the robot arm from inside the cockpit, while van Hoften and Fisher worked outside on the satellite. The robot arm would play a crucial role, holding van Hoften in place while he worked on the satellite 35 feet above the cargo bay. Lounge would also use the robot arm to help van Hoften turn the satellite so Fisher, standing in foot restraints inside the bay, could remove a panel and disengage a timing lever, then plug two electrical cables into the panel and, in effect, jump start the satellite. (W Post, Aug 29/85, A3)
NASA announced the astronaut crews for two upcoming Department of Defense (DOD) Space Shuttle missions, including the 1st from Vandenberg AFB. Robert Crippen (Capt., USN) would command mission 62-A, scheduled for launch no earlier than Jan. 29, 1986, from Vandenberg. Other crew members named were Guy Gardner (Lt. Col., USAF), pilot; and mission specialists Dale Gardner (Commander, USN), Jerry Ross (Maj., USAF), and R. Michael Mullane (Lt. Col., USAF). Crippen had flown with John Young on the orbiter Columbia's maiden flight in April 1981 and was commander of STS-7, 41-C, and 41-G. Dale Gardner had served as a mission specialist on STS-8 and 51-A; Mullane on 41-D. Karol Bobko (Col., USAF) would command mission 51-J, scheduled for launch September 1985 from KSC. Ronald Grabe (Lt. Col., USAF) would serve as pilot; David Hilmers (Maj., USMC) and Robert Stewart (Col., USA) as mission specialists. Bobko had served as pilot on STS-6 and would command 51-E scheduled for launch in March; Stewart had flown as mission specialist on 41-B and had been the 2nd person to fly the manned maneuvering unit on that flight. (NASA Release 85-25)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force announced today that the Space Shuttle Atlantis would take off October 3 on its maiden voyage to carry a secret payload into orbit, the Washington Post reported. On board Atlantis, the fourth and final Space Shuttle in NASA's fleet, would be commander Karol Bobko, pilot Ronald Grabe, mission specialists David Hilmers and Robert Stewart, and payload specialist Air Force Maj. William Pailes. Pailes, who has a master's degree in computer science and is an accomplished pilot, would be on board to tend the classified cargo. (WPost, Sept 6/ 85, A12)
The Smithsonian Institution announced selection of Robert Gilruth and astronauts Kathleen Sullivan and Bruce McCandless II to receive the newly created National Air and Space Museum Trophy for their achievements in the fields of aerospace science and technology. The Smithsonian on October 4 would present the trophy, created by Washington, D.C., sculptor John Safer, at the Air and Space Museum. Sullivan, selected by NASA as an astronaut in 1978, was the first U.S. woman to walk in space in October 1984 on Space Shuttle flight 41-G. During that flight, Sullivan and fellow astronaut David Leestma tested an orbital refueling system for use on satellites and the proposed space station. McCandless, a 1966 astronaut selection, flew for the first time February 1984 aboard Space Shuttle flight 41-B and became the first person to fly in space the manned maneuvering unit that he helped develop. In 1936 Gilruth joined Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory where he specialized in structures, dynamic loads, and pilotless aircraft. In 1958 NASA named him director of its space task group, the organization responsible for designing, developing, and testing the Mercury spacecraft. From 1961 to 1971, Gilruth was director of the manned spacecraft center in Houston where he was responsible for the Mercury, Gemini, and many Apollo missions. (Smithsonian Institution release, Aug 7/85)
Brig. Gen. Donald Kutyna, director of Air Force space systems and C\ told the Senate Armed Services Committee the previous week that two-thirds of the FY 86 space budget was earmarked for the military, Defense Daily reported. The Air Force would receive about 48% of the national space budget, NASA 33%, and other Defense Department activities (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency [DARPA], Navy, and Army) the remaining 18%. Kutyna added that Air Force space activities represented about three-quarters of the total Defense Department space program, with the Defense agencies, mainly DARPA, coming in second. He noted the Air Force budget for FY 86 was $10.95 billion, with "no change percentage-wise" from FY 85 and "very little change among the elements." Maj. Gen. Carl Beer, deputy chief of staff for plans for the Air Force Space Command, reported to the same committee approval of the Air Force space plan, which was divided into support and operational missions, including the launch, orbit transfer, and on-orbit control of spacecraft and payloads, and the operations necessary "to secure free passage in space and deny the enemy the use of space" when necessary. Beer confirmed that the requirement for a space-based radar system was established for the Air Force and Navy and the two would meet in the near future to get an R&D program underway. (D/D, Mar 25/85, 129)
NASA announced that space age technology was in use in the Republic of Gabon, Africa, where solar photovoltaic power systems installed in four rural villages would improve public health and education facilities and lighting and sanitary water supplies. NASA's Lewis Research Center (LeRC) managed the project, which was jointly funded by the U.S Department of Energy (DOE) and the Ministry of Energy and Hydraulic Resources of the Republic of Gabon; the Gabon government selected the villages to participate in the program. The project provided a photovoltaic power system, lights, air circulation fan, and a refrigerator/freezer for vaccine storage to each village dispensary and a power system, lights, and a color TV and video cassette recorder/player to each village school. The villages' sanitary water systems had a newly drilled well, a photovoltaic system, a submersible well pump, a water storage tank, and a water distribution system that piped water to village fountains. Public lighting systems included a power system and sodium vapor lamps mounted on poles. All systems were instrumented to collect data for performance analyses. Total photovoltaic array capacity for all systems was 12.1 kw; output of the smallest array was 80 watts for street lights, the largest 3 kw for one water pump. Batteries for the solar arrays should last about 10 years before replacement; solar arrays had a life expectancy of at least 20 years. According to Tony Ratajczak, project manager at LeRC, "The goal of DOE and the Republic of Gabon, for this project, is to investigate and evaluate the economic, social and technical value of photovoltaic power systems in aiding progress and improving the quality of life in Gabon." (NASA Release 85-68) During November: NASA announced that three physicians from Washington University Medical Center, St. Louis, Misssouri, met the previous month with NASA scientists from National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) to discuss using remote sensing techniques as an analytical tool for use in the field of body scanning known as nuclear magnetic resonance or NMR. Dr. Michael Vannier, radiologist and principal investigator for the project, said NMR was already used on a number of organ systems in the brain. However, interest had grown in how magnetic resonance imaging might fit into the scope of breast diagnostic techniques. So Drs. John Gohagan and Ed Spitzna-gel, also of Washington University, on behalf of the National Cancer Institute's Breast Imaging Project joined Vannier at the discussions. The meeting resulted in a three-year collaborative effort among the Mal-linckrodt Institute of Radiology in St. Louis, NSTL, and the Kennedy Space Center. Vannier commented that the union with NASA was vital to maximize the potential of NMR scanning. "One of the characteristics of these magnetic resonance scanners is that they provide very specific anatomic information about the location and size of a tumor. However there are other ways to get the same information, one being the use of a mammogram, or breast X-ray." At NSTL, scientists Doug Rickman and Jim Anderson were responsible for applying the analytical capabilities to make NMR scans a notable advancement over other methods of X-ray and body scanning techniques. They had demonstrated the use of ELAS software to enhance NMR images, thus increasing disease detection accuracy. Vannier explained, "No one in medicine really has the kind of experience with classifying or analyzing these types of images this way. That's why we are using NASA expertise to help us." By incorporating the ELAS software used in processing satellite imagery into the system, NMR scans could provide not only information on the location and size of a tumor, but also its biological behavior. That is, physicians could determine the status of a mass of tumor directly from the NMR image without having to enter the body surgically. Close affiliation with pathologists while working on actual cases was important in determining whether there had been misclassification on the image processing machines, Gohagan said. "Our goal is to ultimately get the kind of discrimination necessary to distinguish different anamolous conditions," he explained. For example, blood clots would appear distinctly different from benign tumors, and a marked difference would be evident between benign and malignant tumors. Vannier concluded that, as a result of the collaboration, an improvement should evolve in the way NMR images are acquired. "I think it will have significant influence on what we do in the future," he said. (NASA Activities, Nov 85, 7)
Naval Observatory astronomer Richard Walker proposed a simple explanation for the inclination of a descending passageway in the Great Pyramid of Cheops in Egypt, the Washington Post reported. Walker had first examined the suggestion of John Herschel, an early 19th-century astronomer, that the 337-foot passageway was at an angle of 26.5230° to point at the North Star, allowing the pyramid to serve an as astronomical observatory as well as tomb for the pharaoh. Walker noted, however, that due to the wobble of earth's axis in its orbit around the sun, no prominent star could have been seen from the base of the passageway in 2800 B.C. Walker suggested the angle resulted from the construction technique. By placing three stones of equal length horizontally and another of equal size on top of the 3rd horizontal stone, the angle from the top stone to bottom stone at the other end was 26.5°. (W Post, Jan 15/85, A10)
NASA announced that Sultan Salman Abdelazize Al-Saud, an Arabsat payload specialist scheduled to fly on the 51-G 7-day Space Shuttle mission in June, would conduct 70mm photography over Saudi Arabia, 35mm photography of a fluids experiment, and would participate in the French posture experiment. Al-Saud's flight was part of a reimbursable agreement with the Arab Satellite Communications Organization covering the launch of the Arabsat 1B communications satellite. Al-Saud would use the 70mm camera to take pictures on daylight orbital passes over Saudi Arabia and the 35mm camera to document such phenomena as surface tension effects on mixed fluids in the absence of gravity. His other activities would include photography of the new moon in a lunar crescent observation and assisting the French payload specialist as a test subject in the French experiment. At a May 28 news conference at Johnson Space Center, Al-Saud said his flight was bound to improve diplomatic relations between the U.S. and the Islamic world, the Washington Post reported. "You will have 800 million Moslems and 155 million Arabs glued to their TV sets watching an American spaceship carrying an Arab into space," he commented. NASA selected Al-Saud, nephew of Saudi's King Fahd, from hundreds of Saudi applicants. He had logged more than 1,000 hours in jet aircraft. Other crew for the mission were Daniel Brandenstein, commander; John Creighton, pilot; Shannon Lucid, John Fabian, and Steven Nagel, mission specialists; and Patrick Baudry, French payload specialist. Backup payload specialist for Arabsat was Abdulmohsen Hamad Al-Bassam. (NASA Release 85-69; WPbst, May 29/85, A12)
Francis Scobee would command orbiter Atlantis flight 51—L in November to deploy the third NASA Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and relaunch one of the communications satellites retrieved during flight 51-A; Michael Smith would pilot; Judith Resnick, Ellison Onizuka, and Ronald McNair would serve as mission specialists. Michael Coats would command the orbiter Columbia flight 61-C in December carrying Western Union's Westar 7 and RCA's Satcom KU-2 satellites for launch, 3M Corp.'s Material Sciences Laboratory 3, and the EASE/ACCESS space manufacturing experiment. The pilot would be John Blaha; mission specialists, Anna Fisher, Norman Thagard, and Robert Springer. NASA also assigned Vance Brand, commander, and S. David Griggs, pilot, for flight 61-D/Spacelab 4 in January 1986, and Jon McBride, commander, and Richard Richards, pilot, for flight 61-E/Astro 1 in March 1986. (NASA Release 85-14)
NASA Administrator James Beggs, testifying today before the U.S. House HUD and independent agencies appropriations subcommittee on NASA's FY 86 budget request, said that orbiter processing constraints at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) made it difficult for NASA to consider adding Space Shuttle flights to get the year's planned commercial launches back on schedule, Aerospace Daily reported. When asked by Chairman Edward Boland (D-Mass.) if reports were true that NASA was considering launching three commercial satellites on Deltas rather than the Space Shuttle to get the Space Shuttle's manifest back on schedule, Beggs responded that it was an option the agency "had to look at" but one that probably would not be exercised. He said NASA talked to several Space Shuttle customers about flying payloads on Deltas and some were interested. Another option NASA considered was adding another Space Shuttle flight to the manifest, but orbiter processing constraints posed problems. "We just can't push the orbiters through the processing facility quickly enough," he said, although NASA still "may be able to squeeze another launch" into the year's manifest. He pointed out the hardware for another flight was available and NASA proposed building a third orbiter processing facility high bay and Space Shuttle tile facility at KSC with FY 86 funds. (A/D, Apr 3/85, 1)
Ted Stevens (R-Aka.), chairman of the Senate defense appropriations subcommittee, told Air Force officials today that Congress would provide funds in FY 86 to buy a number of Northrop F-20 Tigershark fighters, possibly for the Guard or Reserve, despite what the Air Force decided about the plane, Defense Daily reported. "You're going to get some F-20s if you like it or not," he said, although he added if the Air Force could prove to Congress the F-20 could not do the job, that would be a different matter. He also said that no one in Congress was "shilling" for one company or another, but simply wanted to have competition, which would ensure the best product at the lowest price. Air Force Assistant Secretary Thomas Cooper said the Air Force was very interested in the F-20, but that the question had not been put to the Defense Resources Board and that the Defense Department had made no final decision to buy the F-20 in FY 87. When Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) asked about cutting the FY 86 F-16 buy from 180 to 161 aircraft and using the money freed to buy 32 F-20s, Cooper answered that the Air Force would not simply buy 32 F-20s without a follow-on commitment. Northrop had proposed to provide 396 F-20s to the Air Force over a four-year period at a fixed price of $15 million each. However, Cooper said General Dynamics had told the Air Force that it would provide a fixed-price proposal for the F-16 if the Air Force requested it. Sen. Warren Rudman (R-N.H.) pointed out the "supplier of the F-16 has not had the best record recently in defense contracting, ... in fact, is in mild disrepute with some sectors" of the Department of Defense and is "guilty of some misconduct." Therefore, he said, the government should not "continue to reward them" if there was a viable competitor who gave them a better price. (D/D, Apr 26/85, 321)
NASA announced it had scheduled the 51-E Space Shuttle mission from KSC for no earlier than March 3, 1985, with landing on March 7, 1985, at KSC. The 7th flight of the orbiter Challenger would include deployment of the 2nd Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B) and Telesat Canada's Anik Cl communications satellite and the French echocardiograph and postural experiments. Mission 51-E crew would be Karol Bobko, commander; Donald Williams, pilot; mission specialists M. Rhea Seddon, S. David Griggs, and Jeffrey Hoffman; and payload specialists Patrick Baudry and Sen. E. J. "Jake" Garn (R-Utah). Thermal protection system refurbishment [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Launch Schedules, Feb. 6] had necessitated the delay from February 20. NASA had yet to accomplish step measurements, gap filler installation, and tile-bond and quality verifications. NASA said the current 51-E launch date did not affect the planned March 19 launch date of the Space Shuttle 51-D mission. (NASA Release 85-20)
Scientists analyzing data recently sent from two monitoring devices aboard the Nimbus-7 satellite said the observations confirmed a progressive deterioration in the earth's ozone layer above Antarctica, the NY Times reported. Since 1974, the satellite data showed that a "hole" appeared each October in the ozone layer there, meaning the layer in that area became less able to shield the earth from damaging solar ultraviolet rays. This had caused scientists to predict that increased atmospheric pollution was causing the gradual depletion of stratospheric ozone; the new data seemed to show researchers that the ozone loss was proceeding much faster than expected. However, Goddard Space Flight Center's Dr. Donald Heath, who had monitored the satellite recordings for several years, said he was uncertain of the reason for the ozone decline. In addition to the theory that fluorocarbons caused ozone depletion, some scientists blamed the depletion on the sulfur compounds and other particles ejected into the stratosphere in the 1982 eruption of El Chichon in Mexico. And Heath said there were other possible explanations, such as the sunspot cycle, which was then near a minimum. According to a study by NASA scientists, the chemical reactions that produced stratospheric ozone were stimulated by a form of ultraviolet radiation that became weak when sunspots were fewest. Even under normal conditions the ozone layer was subject to wide variations, so it was difficult to establish that the recent depletion was part of a long-term trend. Heath also pointed out that it was not clear whether the Antarctic readings manifested a local change in atmospheric circulation or a global depletion, since the condition of the winter atmosphere over Antarctic was unique. Government officials in 1977 imposed a ban on fluorocarbons as spray-can propellants, but it became evident that the ozone varied in response to a variety of interacting natural and human influences. By 1984 a National Academy of Science report estimated fluorocarbon-caused ozone reduction at only 2 to 4%. (NYT, Nov 7/85, B21)
Approximately 200 NASA management officials and contractors met June 12 and 13 at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) to discuss initiatives to improve quality and productivity in NASA/contractor operations, the Marshall Star reported. The first NASA/Hardware Contractors Productivity Conference was at MSFC in April 1984. Attendees at the 1985 conference heard an interim report on the status of activities implemented as a result of the 1984 meeting and related recommendations. NASA and contractor panels discussed topics such as quality in relationship to productivity; productivity and quality initiatives and incentives; efforts toward implementing participative management techniques; and improvement in specification, preplanning, and measurement. The conference was part of NASA's continuing effort to provide national leadership in the development and application of advanced technology and management practices. During fiscal year 1984, about 85% of NASA's $7.2 billion budget was placed with contractors. "It's very important,'' said William Reynolds, associate director for management in MSFC's science and engineering directorate, "that NASA's productivity effort include an improved relationship with the NASA hardware and service/support contractors.'' (Marshall Star, June 12/85, 1)
The Department of Defense (DOD) decided to drop the fee it planned to charge civilian users of the Navstar Global Positioning System, the Air Force System Command Newsreview reported. William Taft IV, deputy secretary of defense, said deleting the user fee was necessary to enhance worldwide aviation safety and to avoid charge difficulties. He said the standard positioning service signal, which would be the lower of two accuracy levels, would be broadcast in the clear and available to any properly equipped user. However, Congress could reinstate user fees. The precise positioning service signal, the higher-accuracy signal, would be encrypted and made available initially to the U.S. and some allied military users. DOD would permit limited civil use if it was shown to be in the national interest, adequate security protection was provided, and comparable accuracy could not be obtained from another source, DOD officials said. DOD scheduled the Navstar system, a continuous worldwide satellite-based radio navigation system, for operation in the late 1980s. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct 11/85, 6)
Ben Abruzzo, who took part in the 1st balloon crossings of the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, died February 11 along with five others when his twin-engine Cessna 421 plane crashed after takeoff from Coronado Airport north of Albuquerque, the Washington Post reported. In 1978 Abruzzo, along with Maxie Anderson and Larry Newman crossed the Atlantic in the Double Eagle II, landing near Paris after the 3,000-mile flight. Late in 1981 Abruzzo, Newman, and two other men flew the Double Eagle V across the Pacific. Lifting off November 9 from Nagashima, Japan, Abruzzo crash-landed four days later in northern California in one of the worst storms there in 20 years. Abruzzo and another crew member won the Gordon Bennett race in 1979. (IV Post, Feb 13/85, C6) Large Space Systems
The Washington Times reported on the "Planet X" theory of Daniel Whitmire and John Matese, physics and astronomy professors at the University of Southwestern Louisiana, in which they had suggested that an undiscovered planet triggered a rain of comets upon earth, resulting in extinctions of dinosaurs and other species at roughly 26-million-year intervals. "Planet X, if it's out there," Whitmire said, "lies in an orbit outside Neptune and, every 30 million years or so, passes through a ring or disc of comets that also lie out there. When it does, gravity diverts some of the comets toward earth, kicking up huge clouds of dust on impact that disrupt the weather enough to kill off many species of plants and animals." Whitmire noted the theory would explain several phenomena that had puzzled scientists: fossil evidence of extinctions at approximately 26-million-year intervals and the slight variations in Neptune and Uranus's orbits by Planet X's gravitational pull. (IV Times, Jan 17/85, 3A)
NASA announced that Loren Shriver, pilot of Space Shuttle mission 51-C, would command mission 61-1 scheduled for launch from KSC no earlier than July 15, 1986. The pilot would be Bryan O'Connor, also scheduled to fly as pilot on mission 61-B in November 1985. Mission specialists would be William Fisher, also scheduled as a mission specialist on 51-1 in August 1985; Mark Lee, making his initial flight; and Sally Ride, who flew June 1983 on STS-7 as the first U.S. woman in space and then again October 1984 on 41-G. (JSC Release 85-027)
A mountain climbing team reached the wreckage of an Eastern Airlines Boeing 747 that crashed January 1, 1985, at 19,600 feet into Mt. Illimani in the Bolivian Andes and photographed the site for use in an investigation, Aviation Week reported. Judith Kelly, wife of William Kelly, a U.S. Peace Corps official who died in the crash, financed and led the three-person expedition because she was concerned that the accident investigation was lagging. Photographs of the site showed parts of the tail structure and the fuselage. Kelly also collected cable and honeycomb structures identified by part numbers and turned them over with the photos to the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB). Remains of the 29 persons on board were not located. The Kelly team's ascent was the fourth visit to the site since the crash and prompted questions over the status of the accident investigation. Although Bolivia had primary responsibility to report the accident, government officials said it was unlikely Bolivia would finance an expedition to the site due to lack of funds, but added it would not stand in the way of an investigation by the U.S., which was the country of aircraft registry and manufacture. Early in January Bolivian Bernardo Guarachi, who was Kelly's guide, reached the crash site and spent several hours there, bringing back pieces of wreckage and luggage tags identifying the flight. A second Bolivian team in March reached the site and took motion pictures. The film showed the aircraft wreckage, including a tail section that was torn off the plane, and scattered cargo and baggage. The team also found an engine cowling, a piece of the fuselage with the Eastern name on it, and other parts of the tail structure. A team sponsored by the Bolivian Red Cross spent three days in August at the site, but was hindered by new-fallen snow and lack of guidance on where to look for technical evidence. John Young, the NTSB investigator in charge, said he was discussing with officials in the safety board's accident investigation division whether the safety board should attempt to carry on the investigation and what approach to take. Recovery of the flight data recorder and cockpit voice recorder could aid in determining navigation procedures the crew were taking. Because of the questions surrounding the crash of the aircraft, which was several miles off course when it struck the mountain 26 miles southeast of La Paz International Airport, the U.S. Air Line Pilots Association was discussing financing an expedition to recover the recorders. (AvWk, Sept 9/85, 40)
NASA announced that Voyager 2 began today its encounter with Uranus, which would continue through February 25, 1986. During the period, the spacecraft's 11 instruments would perform close-range studies of the planet, its five known satellites, and nine rings. Voyager 2 would also search for a planetary magnetic field, new satellites, and new rings. The spacecraft would make its closest approach to Uranus, flying 81,500 km above the cloud tops of the seventh planet, at 1:00 p.m. EST January 24, 1986.	Because Voyager 2 was the first spacecraft to reach the planet, the encounter would provide scientists with more information about Uranus and its satellites and rings than had been learned since William Herschel discovered the planet March 31, 1781. In addition to two cameras, a photopolarimeter, and a spacecraft radio, Voyager 2 carried an infrared interferometer/spectrometer and radiometer, an ultraviolet spectrometer, a cosmic-ray detector, a plasma instrument, a low-energy charged-particle detector, magnetometers, a planetary' radio astronomy receiver, and a plasma-wave instrument. Three radioisotope thermoelectric generators supplied the spacecraft's electric power, a system necessitated because solar cells could not receive sufficient solar energy at such a great distance from the sun. NASA's Deep Space Network (DSN) antenna complex at Canberra, Australia, would receive most key data obtained during the Uranus encounter and all of that during the closest approach. (NASA release Dec 85, NASA Voyager Bulletin, Dec 4/85) ATMOSPHERIC RESEARCH
The National Space Institute (NSI) announced establishment of "Space Outreach '85," a program to acquire original ideas from the public as to potential uses of space for social and economic benefit. The program was intended to broaden what appeared to be a too narrow debate on a new and clarified set of long-term civilian space goals. Rules for the program were that ideas could not exceed 750 words; submissions could not include projects already under review by the federal government; and proposals must be creative, innovative, and feasible. The NSI would present all ideas received during the program to Congress, NASA, and, in particular, the newly created National Commission on Space [see Mar. 30]. Judges for the program, which had the support of the Sophron Foundation of McLean, Virginia, were Walter Boyne, director of the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum; Evert Clark, technology editor, Business Week, former astronaut Michael Collins; and Robert Cowen, science writer for the The Christian Science Monitor. The NSI would present awards for the outstanding entries, with the writer of the most innovative suggestion receiving an all-expense-paid trip to see a Space Shuttle launch. (NSI Release, May 13/85) August 9; World amateur radio operators participated in the shuttle amateur radio experiment (SAREX) on Space Shuttle mission 51-F, the Lewis News reported. SAREX allowed people connected with amateur radio to talk with Challenger's crew and watch TV transmissions from the flight deck. The SAREX test, conducted during off-duty hours in cooperation with onboard mission specialists/ham operators Tony England and John-David Bartoe and mission commander Gordon Fullerton, allowed world amateur radio operators access to the Space Shuttle's voice and video transmissions to earth on amateur 2-m band. A video buffer circuit designed, built, and tested by Lewis Research Center (LeRC) ham operators was key to SAREX's success. The SAREX system worked in two primary modes, one mode at a time. The first allowed voice communications back and forth between radio operators on the ground and spacecraft crew. The second primary mode was amateur TV. Using a set-up similar to the ham radio system, amateur TV operators and the Space Shuttle crew sent images to one another—the first such use of two-way video in space. Users transmitted color TV pictures in a slow-scan-mode—one picture every 8 to 36 seconds. SAREX, closely connected to the Young Astronaut Program, was a joint effort of the American Relay League and NASA. A ham radio experiment with mission specialist Owen Garriot conducted in 1983 on STS-9 was generally credited as the genesis for the current SAREX. (Lewis News, Aug 9/85, 1)
Dr. Michael Kaiser of the Goddard Space Flight Center said at a news conference today that, "We see no radio emissions from Uranus that would tell us it has a magnetic field, and we're less than 46 million miles from the planet" with the Voyager 2 spacecraft, the Washington Post reported. "We still pick up Jupiter's radio noise, Saturn's radio noise and even the sun's radio noise but we're not hearing any radio events at Uranus," he added. If Uranus had no magnetic field, it would make it only the second known planet in the solar system without one, Venus being the other. Kaiser said the sign of a planet's magnetic field was its radio noise, generated when protons and electrons poured off the sun and collided with the planet's magnetosphere. This collision triggered the one billion-watt radio signal from earth called the Northern Lights, a 100 billion-watt signal from Saturn, and a signal so loud from Jupiter that it dwarfed every other radio signal in the solar system. "You don't need much to form a magnetosphere that would generate noise out at Uranus's distance," Kaiser said, "so we figure we're either dealing with a planet that has no magnetic field at all or is so bizarre we don't even know what to look for." Kaiser pointed out that a missing magnetic field suggested that Uranus had no internal heat source—no radioactive core such as that which made the rotating earth behave like a dynamo, and no internal heat source such as those that gave the rapidly rotating Jupiter and Saturn a strong magnetic field. "You need an internal heat source to drive a magnetic field," Kaiser said. "A planet's rotation is not enough by itself to create one." Voyager 2, which had been in space for eight years and had passed Jupiter and Saturn, on January 24 would fly within 51,000 miles of the cloud tops of Uranus. Voyager 2 would in August 1989 encounter Neptune, but its flight would not take it near Pluto, the last known planet from the sun. The spacecraft would then pass out of the solar system. (W Post, Dec 4/85, A20)
NASA announced that Dr. Joseph Allen, who in November 1982 was a mission specialist on the four-member crew of mission STS-5, the first fully operational flight of the Space Shuttle, would resign July 1, 1986 from NASA to become executive vice president of Space Industries, Inc., a Houston-based firm pursuing commercial ventures in space. Allen also flew on mission 51-A, the second flight of Discovery, during which he participated in the deployment of two communications satellites and, in the first space salvage mission, helped retrieve the Palapa B-2 and Westar VI satellites for return to earth. In addition to his astronaut work, Allen was a mission scientist for Apollo 15, staff consultant on science and technology to the President's Council on International Economic Policy, and NASA assistant administrator for legislative affairs. Allen had received NASA's Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal, Exceptional Service Medal, and Superior Performance Award. (NASA Release
NASA announced that Frederick Hauck would command Space Shuttle flight 61 —F scheduled for no earlier than May 15, 1986, to deploy the Ulysses (International Solar Polar) spacecraft and David Walker would command the Galileo mission 61-G scheduled for no earlier than May 21, 1986. The Galileo spacecraft would explore the environment of Jupiter and its moons. Hauck first flew as pilot on Space Shuttle flight 7 in June 1983 and was commander in November 1984 of mission 51-A, for which Walker was pilot. Other 61-F crew members would be Roy Bridges, pilot, and mission specialists David Hilmers and J. Mike Lounge. Other mission 61-G crew members would be pilot Ronald Grabe and mission specialists John Fabian and James van Hoften. The Ulysses mission would be the first to use the liquid-fueled Centaur upper stage; the Galileo mission would also use the Centaur upper stage. (NASA Release 85-82)
During a recent ceremony, the U.S. Naval Academy named a new Space Systems Research Chair in memory of two naval astronauts— Roger B. Chaffee, who was a Lt. Commmander in the Navy, and Clifton C. Williams, who was a Major in the U.S. Marine Corps. The faculty chair was designed to enhance space education programs for the Navy. The astronauts' widows, Jane Williams and Martha Chaffee, joined Rear Admiral Charles Larson, Academy superintendent, and Commodore Richard Truly, commander of the Naval Space Command, for the plaque unveiling ceremony. Both Williams and Chaffee were among the third group of astronauts NASA named in October 1983. Williams served as backup pilot for the Gemini 10 mission. He was killed in a T-38 crash October 5, 1967. Chaffee was assigned as one of the pilots for the first three-man Apollo flight. He was killed in the Apollo 1 spacecraft fire January 27, 1967, at Kennedy Space Center along with astronauts Virgil Grissom and Edward White. The Naval Space Command and the Naval Academy signed earlier in the year an agreement to establish the Space Research Chair. The principal objective of the new Academy professorship, as stated in the agreement, was to provide a means for future officer candidates at the Academy to further their understanding of space systems and their naval applications. "It will provide the mechanism by which midshipmen and faculty members will become exposed, involved, and committed to scientific activities at the forefront of the technologies related to space systems," the agreement said. Rear Admiral William Ramsey, director of the Naval Space Systems Division, also participated in the Space Chair dedication ceremony. He presented the Defense Superior Service Medal to three Navy astronauts present at the dedication—Commodore Truly, Captain Robert Crippen, and Commander Robert Gibson—commending them for "exceptionally superior achievement" as astronauts. Truly served as pilot on STS-2 and commander of STS-8; Gibson served as pilot for STS 41-B; Crippen had flown on STS-1, STS-7, STS 41-C, and 41-G. (JSC Roundup, Sept 13/85, 2) October 28\ Astronaut John Fabian resigned from the NASA astronaut corps in the summer of 1985. It was the eighth astronaut resignation over the previous 16 months, the Washington Post reported, suggesting the way of life that was the hallmark of astronaut service might have begun to wear thin. Besides Fabian, NASA lost over those months Joseph Allen, Terry Hart, William Lenoir, Jack Lousma, Thomas Mattingly, Donald Peterson, and Richard Truly, all veterans in the prime of their careers whose combined experience covered 12 of the 21 Space Shuttle missions flown. "Are these resignations something we worry about?" said NASA Administrator James Beggs. "Yes, especially the younger ones like Allen [45] and Fabian [44], who still have a lot of tread left on them. We've now begun to lose the guys we've educated and trained to the most difficult things we do, like spacewalks, and if this trend starts to increase, it's going to disturb me," he concluded. Stripped of its glamor, astronaut service was demanding work that kept its members away from home, the Post said. One female astronaut, who just began training for a flight late in 1986 said she had seen her husband twice in the previous two months, "The last time it was for 12 hrs," she said, "and for six of those we were both asleep." Astronaut training ranged from studying the physics and biology of spaceflight to making parachute jumps and three-day survival visits in Panama's jungle. Classroom hours were equivalent to time spent by Ph.D. candidates. Physical fitness was a must, but astronauts had to exercise on their own time. Once assigned a mission, the astronaut's training pace quickened. At Johnson and Kennedy Space Centers there were around-the-clock computer simulations of astronaut tasks and potential problems in space. Astronauts also visited other NASA centers and contractors' facilities to become familiar with the equipment they would use on their missions. NASA officials said there was nothing they could do to slow the training pace, because they believed it was the reason the U.S. had not had a fatal accident in space. NASA Administrator Beggs indicated that the way to keep astronauts happy and in the corps was to keep them busy and assigned to a mission. That didn't keep Fabian from resigning, however, the Post pointed out. "I'll miss flying and I'll miss the people, but I don't want to be known to posterity as the oldest astronaut to fly in space," Fabian said. (WPost, Oct 28/85, Al)
As five military officers on the Space Shuttle Atlantis orbited earth on the secret 51 —J mission, a debate was growing in the U.S. over how much secrecy was necessary in the civilian-run space program and what the military's role in it should be, the NY Times reported. Proponents of an expanded role for the Defense Department (DOD) said the U.S. needed to counter a growing Soviet threat in space. They pointed out that the USSR launched four to five times as many spacecraft a year as the U.S., with the majority of missions devoted to military objectives, and that Soviet military officers had logged years in space, while the U.S. military had logged days. Critics of an expanded DOD role said the U.S. already had an advantage in military space technology. They said U.S. systems worked better and lasted longer, pointing out the USSR was still trying to perfect a vehicle similar to the Space Shuttle. The critics also argued that the U.S. military's assertions about the Soviet Union were often veiled excuses to try to edge civilians out of the astronaut corps and to classify the most mundane Space Shuttle payloads. This goal of secrecy, they said, was not heightened security but was intended to protect DOD's plans and programs from public scrutiny. The debate was likely to become more vocal, the Times said, as the military expanded its manned space activity when secret military missions would account for 25 to 30% of all Space Shuttle flights in the next decade. Carl Sagan, professor of astronomy and space sciences at Cornell University, said there was a "fundamental tension" between open scientific inquiry and "the necessarily closed world of military activities ... As military programs expand," he said, "there's a huge deflection of resources, financial and intellectual, from peaceful uses into the production of weapons." Daniel Graham, a retired Army lieutenant general who formerly headed the Defense Intelligence Agency, disagreed, saying the military had been at the forefront of U.S. space exploration since its earliest days. "The myth since the Eisenhower Administration is that there's a distinction between military and civilian matters in space," he said. "That's a pretense that a lot of people in NASA would like to believe, that all their activities are sweetness and light," he insisted. However, even military proponents saw emerging tensions in the manned space program, the Times reported. William Gregory, editor of Aviation Week & Technology said in an editorial, "The original legislation creating [NASA] specified a civilian space program, separate from the military . . . That line is being crossed now not so much as a formal policy change as out of simple economic necessity. The shuttle needs the military as a customer to spread the system's overhead costs." Some critics feared that NASA's charter for free and open dissemination of scientific information was eroding as the military's role grew. Scientists ineffectually protested last year when NASA announced that its Defense Department Affairs Division would review and possibly censor images from a large camera and radar carried on a civilian Space Shuttle mission. "There's a real question of how the decision was made to move the space agency from being open to substantially closed," the Times quoted Morton Halperin, director of the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union. "What's at stake is the public's right to participate in the process of making government policy." (NY Times, Oct 6/85, A1)
President Reagan nominated Anthony Calio, who served at NASA for 16 years, to be administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the Washington Post reported. Pending confirmation of the nomination by the U.S. Senate, Calio, who was deputy administrator of NOAA, would replace John Bryne. (W Post, July 23/85, A13)
NASA announced new crew assignments for the STS 51-D mission set for late March-early April would be Karol Bobko, commander; Donald Williams, pilot; M. Rhea Seddon, Jeffrey Hoffman, and S. David Griggs, mission specialists; and Charles Walker (McDonnell Douglas) and Sen. E. J. "Jake" Garn, payload specialists. NASA would assign the originally announced 51-D crew of commander Daniel Brandenstein, pilot John Creighton, and mission specialists Shannon Lucid, John Fabian, and Steven Nagel to a future mission. The Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales (CNES) and NASA had agreed to reassign payload specialist Patrick Baudry (France) from the 51-E mission to STS 51-G, as the earliest flight opportunity with adequate middeck experiment stowage capability for the French medical experiments. As a seven-day mission, 51-G would also offer more time for data collection. For fluid-transfer experiments designed to assist Hughes Aircraft in the refinement of their satellite design activities, NASA would assign a Hughes payload specialist to the 51-1 flight to substitute for the lost opportunity on 51-D. Hughes would announce later whether John Konrad or Gregory Jarvis would fly the mission scheduled for early August. Preservation of the year's flight and crew training schedules had necessitated the changes. Bobko's crew had to fly soon in order to preserve subsequent training schedules for the 51—J dedicated Department of Defense (DOD) mission, the first flight of the Atlantis orbiter. The reassignment was consistent with NASA's crew selection policy of separating crew from payload flight assignments except in the case of Spacelab and dedicated DOD missions, for which substantial crew/payload interaction was required. (NASA Release 85-34)
The Canadian recovery ship MV Kreuztrum, chartered by the U.S. government, retrieved from the Atlantic Ocean the first piece of wreckage, a section of fuselage skin approximately 15 by 30 feet, of the Air-lndia Boeing 747 that crashed in June off Ireland, Aviation Week reported. Another Canadian recovery ship, the John Cabot equipped with a Scarab 2 underwater search and recovery vehicle, was also at the site. The two ships later recovered three other sections of the aircraft's fuselage and were in the process of lifting a fifth section. Recovery team members said they had confronted no serious problems but that the work was time-consuming. The Scarab 2 itself lifted a smaller second piece of wreckage; high-capacity winches on the Kreuztrum lifted two other sections. Officials said it was taking 18 to 24 hrs to lift each piece of wreckage. The ships' crews recovered the larger pieces by using four clamps that the Scarab 2 attached to each corner of a piece. Scarab 2 could take only two clamps down during a dive, and a third dive was necessary to carry down a lifting bridle to attach to the four clamps and a lift line to attach to the bridle. This method made it possible to raise large sections with as little additional damage as possible. "Since it takes two hours for the Scarab to dive to the 6,700-foot depth, two hours to do its work, and another three hours to swim back to the surface," a recovery official said, "it's going to take some time." Recovery officials believed wreckage retrieved as of the previous week was from the fuselage both fore and aft of the wing, and they were working to locate its position on the aircraft structure. They believed the fifth piece being recovered was a primary fuselage structure, including ribs and skin. Recovery officials said they established a two-tier priority system for the order in which they recovered wreckage. They gave top priority to pieces that were likely to confirm or refute primary theories on the cause of the crash. Secondary priority was given to pieces considered likely to contain evidence of what occurred to cause the aircraft to break up in flight. Early efforts focused on fuselage structure. The officials had located the aft pressure bulkhead of the Air-lndia 747 and scanned it with TV cameras, but said "there is nothing visible to indicate any common problem" with the August crash of a Japan Air Lines 474. Plans called for raising this bulkhead section toward the end of the recovery operation. (AvWk, Oct 21/85, 32)
Deputy Secretary of Defense William Howard Taft gave approval to the U.S. Air Force to begin development of higher thrust derivatives of the Pratt & Whitney F100 and General Electric F110 engines that powered the F-15 and F-16 fighters, Defense Daily reported. The development program, expected to cost between $400 and $500 million, would boost the thrust of the 24,000-lb. thrust F100 and 27,000-lb. thrust F110 to 29,000 lb., about the maximum possible. Air Force Assistant Secretary Thomas Cooper said durability, not thrust, was the key problem for fighter engines and that the new engines would have the same durability as current engines. He said the Air Force planned to start production of the engines in 1989 and to complete annual buys on a shared basis. The Air Force would seek warranties on the derivatives as on current engines, access to proprietary data, and pre-priced production options. Cooper said the new engines, costing slightly more than current engines that were between $2 and $3 million apiece, would have the same dimensions as present engines, could be used in all models of the F—15 and F-16, and could be retrofitted. He pointed out the Navy could also use either derivative engine for its fighter program. Under questioning, Cooper declined to say whether the Air Force planned to buy the Northrop F-20 fighter in FY 87, but said the Air Force was interested in the aircraft and needed more detailed cost data to make a decision. Northrup had offered to supply 396 F-20s over four years at a fixed price of $15 million per plane; however, Cooper said the Air Force required more detailed data on the "bits and pieces" of the program in order to make the cost comparison that people were asking for. (D/D, May 10/85, 57)
Langley Research Center announced that John Langford of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology would speak February 11 on the MIT Monarch, a human-powered aircraft that had won first prize May 11, 1984, in the Kremer World Speed Competition. An all-volunteer team had designed and built the craft in 88 days during the summer of 1983 and had flown it 29 times before disassembling it. With an improved version, the team had made 35 flights in spring 1984, culminating in the record flight. Langford would discuss design consideration and construction details of the Monarch, including propulsion and avionics. (LaRC Release 85-5) Supersonic Transport
NASA launched at 12:02 p.m. EDT today from KSC the Space Shuttle Challenger mission 51 —B carrying seven astronauts, Spacelab 3, 24 rats, and two squirrel monkeys for the most intensive science mission to date, the Washington Post reported. Launched 17 days after Discovery left the same launch pad, the Challenger flight bested the previous "turnaround" record of 34 days. Challenger carried the oldest crew ever to fly in space. Marine Col. Robert Overmyer, commander, was 49; Frederick Gregory, pilot, and Taylor Wang, payload specialist, were 44; Don Lind, mission specialist, was 54; Lodewijk van den Berg, payload specialist, was 53; William Thornton, mission specialist, was 55; and Norman Thagard, mission specialist, 41. The crew called the flight one by scientists for science. "This mission marks the first time that scientists who designed their own experiments will be executing those experiments in space," said Lind, who had been waiting 16 years for the flight. The five scientists would work in around-the-clock shifts on the 15 experiments inside the European-built Spacelab. Before liftoff NASA decided not to have the crew launch two Get-Away Special satellites, one a student experiment and the other a Pentago payload, because a nine-volt battery had failed on the last Space Shuttle flight. Ground tests showed that three other batteries from the same batch failed after 18 hours in vacuum. The satellites would return to the ground with the Space Shuttle. The crew successfully deployed a satellite intended to calibrate air traffic control radars on the ground, but encountered difficulties when trying to deploy a U.S. Navy satellite that would locate drifting weather buoys. The satellite would not move from the cargo bay despite repeated signals to trigger deployment. Later the crew discovered they had no fresh water from their galley faucet and had to bypass the faucet and reconnect themselves to their water supply using an all-purpose hose carried for such emergencies. Other problems ranged from an overheated hydraulic system power unit to a urine collection device that one crew member said sprayed water "all over the place." The monkeys and rats appeared to be doing well. Four of the rats had surgical implants in their hearts to record changes in heartbeat and blood flow. The others were testing cages and equipment for future animal experiments. The monkeys were on a shakedown flight to determine how they tolerated living in orbit. If they didn't get nervous or frightened in space, later flights would carry squirrel monkeys with surgical implants to test for space sickness and heart changes. (W Post, Apr 28/85, A18, Apr 29/85, A3, Apr 30/ 85, A7)
The waste products of two monkeys and two dozen rats continued to float through the cabin of the Space Shuttle Challenger [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Apr. 29], forcing crew members to rearrange their tight schedules and operate in full surgical gear to clean up, the Washington Post reported. "Be advised we now have feces in the crew compartment and it isn't much fun, guys," commander Robert Overmyer said to the mission control center in Houston. "How many years did we tell them these cages would never work?" With TV cameras recording the activity, Overmyer and mission specialists William Thornton, Norman Thagard, and payload specialist Lodewijk van den Berg, wearing surgical smocks, gloves, and masks, floated about the Spacelab cabin using vacuum cleaners to suck the waste out of the cabin air. At one pont Thagard said, "Even the vacuum cleaners aren't enough." The problems began on the day after liftoff with feeding the animals food and water. One rat had to be hand-fed a gelatin bar to get water into him; when physician-astronaut Thornton tried to press food bars into the cage, the bars would crumble and a cloud of tiny particles would scatter in the cabin. "I'm not exaggerating," Thornton told mission control, "but there are food particles flooding out of every crack in those cages. I don't see any way we can stop this except if we had a seal over the entire cage." Monkey and rat feces also leaked out of the cages. The five scientists also could not deploy a French-built camera, intended to survey for 17 hours hot stars in distant galaxies, because an airlock hatch failed to open. And physicist Taylor Wang was unable to run an experiment to test behavior of drops of fluids in weightlessness because circuit breakers continually popped open. Nine of the 15 Spacelab experiments were running even better than hoped, and the crew described the monkeys and rats as "real clean and real happy." On May 1, however, one of the monkeys got spacesick. "We can tell by the way he's behaving that one of our monkeys is not feeling well," said Dr. Paul Callahan of Ames Research Center. "The other monkey was under the weather his first day in space but he's adapted very well since, which is an almost identical reaction we get from human astronauts." Callahan noted "Monkey No. 1" was not eating and drinking normally, seemed to have a headache, and was generally lethargic and dispirited. "He's just not moving around and the other monkey has begun to do somersaults." Eleven of the Spacelab experiments were running by that time, although mission specialist George Fichtl said "One is a hit-and-miss kind of thing and three look very doubtful." He added the astronauts had proposed to give up on the French-built wide-field camera and that it was doubtful NASA would extend the mission to give the crew additional time to try to deploy it. On May 2 Fichtl explained that the rats' and one monkey's vigorous movement, which was "much more than expected," was likely the main reason their waste was escaping the cages. "We designed those cages with an airflow control to keep the waste in the cages," he explained. "Our best guess now is that the animals are so spirited and are enjoying weightlessness so much that they induced turbulence in the cage that's too turbulent to contain the waste." The problems with the animals cast some doubt over future animal flights on Spacelab, the Washington Post continued. NASA had scheduled for 1986 a flight to carry 48 rats and four squirrel monkeys. However, Spacelab mission manager Joseph Cremin insisted that research on animals was crucial to the future of the permanent space station where men and women would have to work in orbit for months at a time. (W Post, May 1/85, A3, May 2/85, A11, May 3/85, A3)
President Reagan announced today his intention to nominate William Graham to be NASA deputy administrator to succeed Hans Michael Mark, the Administration of Ronald Reagan reported. Graham, with R&D Associates since 1971, had served there as director of computing operations, division manager, corporate program manager, and most recently senior associate. Before joining R&D Associates, he was a member of the technical staff, physics department, at the Rand Corp.; project officer of the Air Force Weapons Laboratory; and a member of the technical staff of the Hughes Aircraft Corp. research laboratory. Since 1982, Graham had served as acting chairman of the President's General Advisory Committee on Arms Control and Disarmament. He had also been a member of the Defense Nuclear Agency Scientific Advisory Group on Effects, a consultant to the Defense Nuclear Agency, and consultant to the Office of the Secretary of Defense. Graham received his B.S. degree from the California Institute of Technology and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Stanford University. (Admin, of Ronald Reagan, Sept 13/85, 1073)
At the third in a series of hearings on assured access to space NASA and Defense Department officials said today before the House Science and Technology space science and applications and Armed Services research and development subcommittees that available data did not support the need for a fifth Space Shuttle orbiter in the early 1990s. But the officials acknowledged that there could be a period around 1992 and beyond in which unforeseen launch demands would strain capability, Aerospace Daily reported. Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) pointed out that earlier testimony had revealed a launch demand for 26 to 33 Space Shuttle equivalent flights per year in the post-1992 timeframe, and Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for spaceflight, acknowledged that a flight capability of 30 per year would require a fifth orbiter. He said that NASA projected the annual launch capability of a four-orbiter fleet in the 1990s timeframe to be 24 flights, 20 from Kennedy Space Center and four from Vandenberg AFB, with the ability to surge temporarily to 28 flights per year. When asked to factor in potential extended downtime of one orbiter, Moore replied that NASA had not made a projection of lost flights because it would be directly related to the length of the downtime and when it occurred. He added that NASA could probably fly 20 to 24 flights with the three remaining orbiters if one were out of service for periods up to one year; a sustained launch capacity for three orbiters would be in the range of 15 to 20 flights per year, he said. Edward Aldridge, undersecretary of the Air Force, said that, although the Department of Defense (DOD) was committed to at least eight Space Shuttle missions per year, its current known requirements through the mid-1990s averaged 10 launches per year. Including the one-to-five Space Shuttle-equivalent launches per year projected through 1995 for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) research, he said the total DOD requirement became roughly 11 to 15 Space Shuttle-equivalent launches per year. Those numbers excluded any mission supporting potential deployment of SDI-related systems, he added. At the same hearing, Gen. Robert Herres, commander of the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD), said he thought the "time had passed" during which the U.S. might have built a fifth orbiter. He pointed out that resources needed for it might better be devoted to new technology and options, "which afford us more flexibility and versatility." Offering an opposing view, Hans Mark, chancellor of the University of Texas System and former NASA deputy administrator, said that the argument for a fifth orbiter could not be based either on currently projected flight rates or on backup requirements. He said only the proposed space station and SDI requirements could increase space operations to the point where a fifth orbiter was necessary. (A/D, July 26/85, 137)
Michael Burch, assistant secretary of defense for public affairs, said beginning in 1987, two years earlier than planned, two Space Shuttle flights a year would carry experiments for President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) research program, with initial experiments testing the ability to detect, track, and aim against targets in space, the Washington Post reported. The tracking and targeting tests, developed in a Pentagon research program that antedated the Reagan Administration, would include a mounting device for attaching the telescope-like sight to the Space Shuttle and sensors that could pick up at a distance equal to the width of the U.S. the "signature of objects" such as the booster plume of a missile. The Department of Defense had canceled a Space Shuttle test of the system's main telescope, though sources said it would continue land-based tests to develop a more capable telescope. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger had said the previous year's congressional SDI program budget cuts would delay by one year an integrated-system demonstration. (W Post, Feb 20/85, A5)
New car buyers in 1988 might find a Navstar Global Positioning System (GPS) receiver among their list of options, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. "It would essentially be a small TV screen that shows your position on a map," said 1st Lt. John Schoenewolf, GPS cargo manager for the Eastern Space and Missile Center. A small cursor, or mobile electronic dot, would pinpoint a car's location to within 300 miles, he added, and map cassettes could be purchased separately. Before the satellite electronic car map became a reality, along with other GPS applications both military and civilian, the Air Force between 1986 and 1988 would have to launch 28 satellites, the most ambitious launch rate attempted in space-launch history. "We plan to launch the satellites for the GPS system at a rate of one every seven weeks aboard the shuttle." Schoenewolf said. "We will need a total of 18	to start operating the system, and the target year is 1988 to begin operating." The East Coast Navstar GPS launch facility opened in August at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station to help make possible the accelerated launch rate. At the facility's ribbon cutting ceremony, Maj. Gen. Donald Henderson said the facility and GPS itself "will revolutionize the way we perform precision navigation." He noted the satellite system would be the largest constellation ever established and would have an influence on everything that floats, drives, flies, or submerges. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 13/85, 5)
NASA announced that its Administrator selected Dr. Charles Chappell of Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) and Dr. Dirk Frimout of the European Space Agency (ESA) to serve as alternate payload specialists for the first Earth Observation Mission (EOM), which would use the Spacelab scheduled for launch on the Space Shuttle orbiter Atlantis in the latter half of 1986. Chappell and Frimout would serve as backups to flight payload specialists Dr. Byron Lichtenberg and his alternate, Dr. Michael Lampton. Chappell was chief of the Solar Terrestrial Div., Space Science Laboratory at MSFC and was responsible for directing a research group that studied the physics of the sun-earth environment. He served as mission scientist for the 10-day Spacelab 1 mission, during which 70 investigations were carried out. Frimout was the senior engineer supporting European researchers who would have experiments on the mission, and he had served as ESA crew coordinator and operations manager for Spacelab 1. Chappell and Frimout would train with the flight crew and serve as members of the mission management team in the Payload Operations Control Center during the flight. They would communicate directly with the crew on orbit, assist the payload operations team during normal operations, and aid in trouble shooting problems and in changing crew procedures when necessary. They would also advise the mission scientist, Dr. Marsha Torr, of the possible impact of problems and timeline changes. The EOM flight was the first in a series of Space Shuttle missions primarily dedicated to measuring solar irradiance and the chemical composition of the earth's stratosphere and mesosphere during an 11-year solar cycle. NASA would refly several instruments originally carried on the Spacelab 1 and 3 missions to accomplish these measurements. The mission would use the short version of the Spacelab module, in which a single Spacelab pallet and special support structure would hold instruments that required exposure to the space environment. The mission would consist of 15 experiments conducted in six disciplines—atmospheric science, solar physics, plasma physics, earth resources, astronomy, and life sciences. The international mission included experiments sponsored by Belgium, France, Japan, Federal Republic of Germany, and the U.S. ESA would provide operations support for the European investigations. The Investigators Working Group (IWG), which consisted of the principal investigator for each of the mission experiments, recommended alternate payload specialist candidates for selection by NASA's administrator. (NASA Release 85-179) External Tank November 27r The U.S. Senate awarded Martin Marietta Corp. the United States Senate Productivity Award for the state of Louisiana for manufacturing improvements and costs savings in production of the Space Shuttle's external tank, Defense Daily reported. The Senate cited the company for its innovative across-the-board productivity program that included plant modernization, installation of automated production processes, and development of an employee participation program that led to a number of improvements in the manufacturing process. "Estimates are that this increased productivity will save NASA and ultimately the American taxpayer more than a billion dollars over the long run," said Louisiana Senators J. Bennett lohnston (D) and Russell Long (D) in a joint statement. The two also cited the "flawless performance" of the tanks in Space Shuttle missions to date. (D/D, Nov 27/85, 142) Launch and Landing Facilities
NASA announced that seven world class gymnasts would undergo testing May 20-22 at Johnson Space Center (JSC) as part of a continuing study of the space adaptation syndrome that affected about half the astronauts who had flown in space. Researchers wanted to know if gymnasts were less susceptible to the malaise because of their experience of moving and spinning in three dimensions. The gymnasts underwent baseline testing at JSC in mid-April. A second battery of tests would measure their responses in the laboratory and aboard a jet aircraft that induced brief periods of reduced gravity. Testing was co-sponsored by the U.S. Gymnastics Federation, of which the participants were members. They were Kathy Johnson, Patty Gerard, Megan Marsden, Krista Canary, Tom Beach, Scott Johnson, and Steve Elliot. (NASA Release 85-75) During May. Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) personnel were testing the interface of the software in the space telescope data capture facility (ST DCF) with other elements of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) ground system, the GSFC News reported. The DCF, which had arrived at GSFC ahead of schedule and on target with program costs, would accept science data from the telescope's five instruments through the NASA communications (NASCOM) system via the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) and the NASA ground terminal at White Sands, New Mexico. William Stallings, head of GSFC's data capture systems section and project manager for ST DCF development, said, “Within 24 hours of receipt of the science data stream from NASCOM, the facility will preprocess the data and forward it to the Space Telescope Science Institute (STSI) for further processing and use by scientists." The DCF had two identical Gould 32-87 computer systems and special hardware to provide the science data processing requirements. The DCF had previously demonstrated the ability to capture the 1.024 megabit and 4 kilobit per-second data streams, processing the data into user data sets, and transmitting them to the Science Institute at the daily required volume level of three billion bits of science data. Because the space telescope's science instrument data were packetized, future refurbishment of the space telescope with new instruments would require only table updates in the DCF's software. Also, the DCF had automated quality control that should reduce operational costs. (Goddard News, May 85, 3) During July. After preliminary examination of Spartan 1 data, mission manager Dave Shrewsberry said the spacecraft appeared to have performed well during the Space Shuttle 51-G mission. Astronauts deployed the spacecraft on the fourth day of the mission into a free-flying orbit and retrieved it on the sixth day, Goddard News reported. Final evaluation required analysis of Spartan 1 's tape recordings. "Although the grapple fixture wasn't pointed in the direction we thought it would be when we were retrieved," Shrewsberry said, "that is not a matter of concern. The running lights were on and the experiment doors closed, indicating that the program we had computed was completed." Early indications also showed that all six of the Get Away Special experiments turned on during the mission. (GSFC News, July 85, 1)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51 —J landed just after 10 a.m. today at Edwards Air Force Base, ending a four-day flight operated under secrecy rules imposed by the Department of Defense (DOD), the Washington Post reported. "Of course, I can't say anything about our mission," said flight commander Karol Bobko, an Air Force colonel and one of five military men on the mission, "but I can say Atlantis performed superbly its first time in space. I've flown Challenger, Atlantis, and Discovery now, and I think that NASA really has quite a fleet of orbiters and that we have a great national asset here," he added. NASA ground operations manager Fritz Widick said Atlantis was in "excellent condition" at the end of the 1.7 million-mile flight, although engineers were inspecting an underside area of the left wing to see if tile-insulation damage might have exposed its aluminum mainframe to reentry heat. Such heat might have discolored a region along the portside engine pod under the Space Shuttle's tail. Widick said Atlantis's brakes came through the 190 mph landing on the lake-bed with only "minor damage" to one of four brake assemblies on the main landing gear. Bobko appeared to apply minimum braking after landing into a stiff headwind that brought Atlantis to a stop on the center line halfway down the 15,000-foot desert runway. Fewer than a dozen reporters and about two dozen NASA employees were present for the landing, an event that usually drew hundreds of spectators, the NY Times reported. The military gave just 24 hours notice of when the mission would end and had barred members of the public from watching. (W Post, Oct 8/85, A3; NYT, Oct 8/85, C3) Air Force Maj. Ronald Rand said the Department of Defense (DOD) approved dissemination of information about the payload because it was experimental and not designed to carry out an operational mission. He said there were two payloads: an assembly of six space physics experiments that would remain in the Space Shuttle's open cargo bay and an experimental airplanedetecting experiment. "In light of the mounting Congressional and public interest in this historic first manned polar orbit and first west coast shuttle mission, we've made an exception to our policy with the understanding that we'll continue to protect performance data and results of these two experiments," Rand said. "This doesn't mean we've changed our policy of classifying DOD payloads." Flying aboard Discovery, which was scheduled for launch March 20, 1986, would be Comdr. Robert Crippen of the Navy; pilot Guy Gardner; astronauts Jerry Ross, Dale Gardner, and Richard Mullane; Under Secretary of the Air Force Edward Aldridge; Air Force Maj. John Brett Watterson; and a DOD specialist to tend the cargo. (NYT, Oct 11/85, A6)
NASA terminated today efforts by the crew of the Discovery 51-D mission to revive the U.S. Navy's Syncom IV-3 (Hughes Corp.'s Leasat 3) satellite, the Washington Post reported. Troubles with the satellite became apparent the morning of April 13 after astronauts M. Rhea Seddon and Jeffrey Hoffman completed commands that deployed the satellite from the Space Shuttle's cargo bay. The satellite's engine, which would lift it into a permanent geostationary orbit 22,300 miles above earth, failed to fire. A fault in the satellite's timing mechanism (which would direct the satellite through a series of steps to put the satellite into permanent orbit) apparently caused the failure. Johnson Space Center flight director John Cox said that NASA's best guess was that the "post-deploy sequencer (timer) never was activated. The reason we think so is that the antenna should have popped out about a minute and 20 seconds after deployment, and the satellite should have been put into a 15-rpm spin to stabilize it. Neither of those things happened." Engineers at Hughes Aircraft Corp., satellite manufacturer, tried to simulate the conditions of the satellite failure in hopes of duplicating what had happened. "One of the astronauts might be able to get close enough to the satellite to move the lever to start the timing mechanism, then get out of there and inside in enough time to be far away from the satellite when the engine fires," said Marvin Mixon, Hughes vice president. Astronauts maneuvered the Space Shuttle about 45 miles ahead of the satellite in order to take pictures of it; however, they could not draw too close because the satellite's main engine contained 7,370 lb. of solid rocket fuel, its second-stage engine had 4,092 lb. of nitrogen tetroxide and dimethyl hydrazine fuel. The satellite also carried 352 lb. of hydrazine for controlling its position in orbit. NASA made the decision to extend the flight from five to seven days, and on April 15 the Discovery crew cannibalized plastic covers from flight manuals, parts of a window screen, nylon straps, and other paraphernalia in the spacecraft to fashion flyswatters to attach to Discovery's robot arm for an attempt to fire the satellite's engine. Seddon sewed the plastic covers together to form cones that the astronauts would attach to the arm in order to flip the arming lever. On April 16 astronauts Jeffrey Hoffman and S. David Griggs went on history's first unrehearsed spacewalk to rig Discovery's mechanical arm with the flyswatter devices. The two spent more than three hours in Discovery's open cargo bay putting the extension "hands" on the 50-foot-long arm. At about 8:00 a.m. April 17, commander Karol Bobko and pilot David Williams manuevered Discovery to within 30 feet of the satellite. Then Seddon swatted at the four-in.-long power switch. Although she hit it at least twice—once so hard that part of the plastic broke—the lever didn't move. Following the unsuccessful attempt, ground controllers order the Space Shuttle to move away and abandon the rescue attempt on the off-chance that the contact somehow might have activated the satellite's internal timer, which would cause its rockets to fire. Underwriters who had insured the satellite said the failure to either recover the satellite or boost it into an operational orbit would be a serious blow to the satellite underwriters business, Defense Daily reported. "If we have another major claim," James Barrett, president of International Technology Underwriters, said, "the market would be very seriously injured by a total loss." Hughes said the satellite was insured for between $80 and $85 million, and the space insurance market had already suffered three losses over the past year. (W Post, Apr 15/85, A1, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 17/85, A7, Apr 18/85, A1; NYT, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 18/85, BIO; USA Today, Apr 16/85, 3A; W Times,Apr 18/85, 1 A; D/D, Apr 16/85, 257)
NASA announced that a NASA scientist and a Stanford University engineer developed the bone stiffness analyzer, an instrument that might aid in treating bone fractures and bone-weaking diseases including osteoporosis, which afflicted millions of the elderly. The two originally developed the instrument, which measured bone mass and stiffness, to help scientists combat bone loss that might occur during long-term spaceflights, particularly on manned space stations or extended space journeys such as trips to Mars. The instrument was based on a theory, initially demonstrated by Dr. Donald Young, a physiologist at NASA's Ames Research Center, that bone behaved as a structural beam and that well-developed concepts for testing the stiffness and displacement properties of structural beams could be applied to measuring the same properties in arm and leg bones. Dr. Charles Steele, professor of mechanical engineering at Stanford University, adapted the instrument for clinical application. The analyzer gauged the bone's resistance to a small amount of pressure applied to the forearm or leg bone, while the subject's arm or leg was positioned so the ends were immobile. The instrument's probe, an electromagnetic "shaker" or iron core wrapped with wire, was placed at mid bone and current was run through it, causing the bone to vibrate. A microprocessor then measured the bone's displacement using algorithms stored in its memory, deducing the bone's stiffness and effective mass. Since the analyzer responded quickly—a test took less than one minute and did not damage the bone or tissue—the analyzer might have wide applications for screening diseases such as osteoporosis, which weakened bones but was usually diagnosed only after a fracture occurred when the disease was well advanced. Although the bone analyzer could not be used on the spine where osteoporosis often first appeared, it could detect the disease long before X-rays, which did not show evidence of change until after at least 20% bone loss. Steele was planning to adapt the device for use on fingers, which also showed early evidence of the bone disease. Since the analyzer could also monitor a bone's strength as it healed, the device might also aid in the treatment of fractures. The analyzer's quantitative measure of bone strength could replace the inference and guesswork that usually was the basis for a decision on removing a cast from a fractured bone. After three years of clinical testing on more than 300 subjects, Steele believed the device was at a useful level of precision. To find normal values for bone stiffness, Young and Steele tested participants in the Stanford Invitational Rugby Tournament in 1984. In the coming year, they would conduct more tests on healthy subjects and a data search to find normal "loads," the amount of stresses and strains needed to maintain healthy bones. After further tests, Young and Steele planned to use the instrument to create an exercise program for maintaining bone strength during the weightless environment associated with extended spaceflight missions when bones tended to atrophy. Young hoped to develop a program efficient enough to place the necessary stresses on bones through short periods of daily exercise. "It would be great if it could be done in an hour a day," Young commented. He believed a trampoline-like device, with restraints to hold the body, might be effective. Eventually, the analyzer itself might go into space with astronauts, who could test their own bone strength, perhaps determining when they needed to return to earth. (NASA Release 85, 163)
The U.S. Air Force announced today that it had selected Air Force Undersecretary Edward "Pete" Aldridge to fly on the first Space Shuttle mission launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, the Arizona Daily Star reported. The Air Force said Aldridge and Air Force Maj. John Brett Watterson would serve as payload specialists with five astronauts named by NASA for the Defense Department's mission set for launch March 20, 1986. Aldridge, 47, who had been Air Force undersecretary since 1981, said in a statement, "I'm thrilled at the opportunity and thrilled at the prospects that I will be able to apply what I have learned to expanding U.S. efforts in space." NASA and the U.S. Air Force were building the Vandenberg Space Shuttle launch facility primarily for military missions. Because the Space Shuttle could be launched from there directly south, it could go into a north-south orbit that covered the entire globe, passing over both poles and allowing Space Shuttle crews to observe Soviet military forces anywhere in the world. Space Shuttles launched from Kennedy Space Center could not go directly north or south because they would fly over inhabited areas during the initial minutes of flight, possibly endangering the population if something went wrong. Those Space Shuttles launched into east-west orbits did not fly any closer than about 2000 miles to the poles. (Ariz. Daily Star, Sept 12/85, A3)
NASA launched from KSC at 5:00 p.m. EDT today Space Shuttle mission 51-F with the orbiter Challenger carrying Spacelab-2. The flight was the eighth for Challenger and the 19th Space Shuttle mission. The flight commander was Col. C. Gordon Fullerton, who served as pilot on the third Space Shuttle mission. Air Force Col. Roy Bridges, Jr. was pilot; mission specialists were Dr. Anthony England, a geophysicist; Dr. F. Story Musgrave, a physician; and Dr. Karl Henize, an astronomer who at the age of 58 was the oldest American to travel in space. Payload specialists were Dr. Loren Acton, a solar physicist at the Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory, and Dr. John David Bartoe, an astrophysicist at the Naval Research Laboratory. Approximately 5 minutes and 45 seconds after launch onboard computers shut down Challenger's center engine (SSME 1) due to failure of the orbiter's two high-pressure, fuel turbo-pump discharge temperature sensors. Challenger was 70 miles above earth at the time, about 50 miles below the orbit considered safe for a manned spacecraft. The two remaining main engines ran smoothly and burned about a minute and 10 seconds longer than originally planned, putting the Space Shuttle into a lower-than-scheduled orbit. The crew then used two auxiliary engines to raise the orbit in steps from an initial 122 miles to 194 miles at 10:30 p.m. the night of launch. The crew also dumped as much as 4,400 lb. of fuel to achieve the higher orbit. In explaining the problem with SSME 1, NASA associate administrator Jesse Moore said the onboard sensors first indicated that the center engine might be overheating four minutes after liftoff, the Washington Post reported. "Computers then ordered the center engine fuel pump to bypass one valve and use another to feed fuel into the combustion chamber," he said. Two minutes later computers again sensed that the fuel pump was overheating and automatically shut down the center engine.The mission control center in Houston also received indications of dangerously high temperature readings on a second engine and instructed the crew to disconnect a backup sensor to prevent the second engine from shutting down before the spacecraft reached orbit. The crew encountered the next problem when attempting to operate a $60 million telescope-pointing device. The instrument pointing subsystem (IPS) and its four solor telescopes were one of 13 experiments carried on the European-built Spacelab-2. Mission specialist Henize told mission control that the pointing attempts were "rather dismal," the NY Times reported. Lee Briscoe, flight director, elaborated to reporters. "It appears that we are able to find the sun, find the stars, get into what we call a rough track mode," he said. "But we never appear to get into a fine track and actually finish the total tracking." Since the problem appeared to be with the computer programming that drove the unit, NASA radioed up a new version of the programming. However, it initially failed to correct the problem, and NASA told the crew to try harder. Eventually the IPS operated successfully after the crew inserted a series of software patches developed at Marshall Space Flight Center. NASA extended the mission duration by one day to allow additional collection of engineering and scientific data. The Spacelab-2 aboard Challenger was the second of its two verification test flights and consisted of an igloo attached to a lead pallet, the IPS mounted on it and a two pallet train behind, with an experiment special support structure. Experiments conducted during the Spacelab-2 mission were in the fields of life sciences, plasma physics, infrared astronomy, high-energy physics, solar physics, atmospheric physics, and technology. Experiments were located on the IPS, the three pallets, the special support structure, the orbiter mid-deck, and one on the ground (NASA FOR M-989-51-F [postflight] Sept 27/85, [prelaunch] July 9/85; NASA MOR M-977-51-F-03 [prelaunch] July 1/85; W Post, July 30/85, A1, July 31/85, A3; NYT, July 31/85, B4)
The U.S. Air Force couldn't decide whether the next test of the miniature homing vehicle antisatellite (ASAT) system should be against a target in space, Aerospace Daily reported. The Air Force was evaluating data from its November 13 ASAT test, in which the miniature homing vehicle MHV infrared sensor tracked a star, but had said that its next ASAT test would be flown against an instrumented target vehicle. Congressional limitations barred such a test until March 1 and until President Reagan had certified to Congress that the test was needed and wouldn't undercut the potential for negotiations with the USSR. The previous day the magazine had discussed a House Republican research report recommending raising the limit of three U.S. ASAT tests against objects in space during that fiscal year. (A/D, Jan 16/85, 84; Jan 15/85, 73) May 24: The U.S. Senate voted today, 74 to 9, to approve a proposal by Sen. John Warner (R-Va.) to allow three final-stage antisatellite tests next year as long as President Reagan told Congress the test would not disrupt negotiations aimed at banning antisatellite weapons, the Washington Post reported. The Senate previously rejected, 51 to 35, a testing ban proposed by Sen. John Kerry (D-Mass.). The U.S. antisatellite (ASAT) weapon was a small warhead atop a rocket carried by an F—15 jet to the edge of space, where it was released to pursue its target. Although the U.S. had tested the weapon in stages, the U.S. had not fired the weapon against a target in space. The Pentagon had scheduled that final round of testing to begin within several months. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	m 9UX |[0 INTENTIONALLY BLANK During the Geneva negotiations on weapons reductions, the USSR sought a halt to ASAT tests, while the Reagan Administration said it was open to such a proposal but had refused to halt ASAT testing as a condition to talks. In 1984 Congress banned tests of the U.S. system in hopes the pause might help negotiations, which had not then started. The Washington Post earlier had reported that electronic problems would raise the cost of the antisatellite system and stretched out its testing program. The Air Force planned a test, originally scheduled for fall 1984, for late July in which the target would be two metallic balloons attached to an orbiting satellite. However, the Air Force was cautious about the first test against a target in space, fearing that a well-publicized failure would hurt the space defense program. Sources told the Post that it might be impossible for the Air Force to carry out a second test of the weapon against the balloon target in space during the current fiscal year. Originally the Air Force had planned for three tests in 1985. (WPost, May 25/85, A4; May 16/85, A27)
NASA announced that Gerald Griffin, director of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), would leave the agency January 14, 1986, to become president of the Houston Chamber of Commerce. Robert Goetz, deputy director of JSC, would become acting director upon Griffin's departure. Griffin had been JSC's director since August 1982 and had served with NASA for more than 20 years in a number of key positions at three NASA centers and in Washington, D.C. Griffin served in the U.S. Air Force and worked in the aerospace industry before joining NASA in 1964. "It was a tough decision to leave NASA," Griffin said, but "I'll depart with the comfort that the NASA team of government, industry, and university people will continue their outstanding job in space activities for this country." William Graham, acting NASA administrator, said, "As one of NASA's key senior executives, Gerry has had a long distinguished career. He has received many honors and awards in recognition of the contributions he has made both to aeronautics and space. We shall all miss him very much and wish him great success as he moves on to new accomplishments." (NASA Release 85-172) Kennedy Space Center
The Circumnavigators Club in New York City would present Sally Ride, the first American woman astronaut, with its Order of Magellan, the Washington Post reported, which was presented to individuals who were dedicated to advancing peace and understanding in all parts of the world and who had circumnavigated the globe. Ride was only the 17th person to receive the award. Other recipients were Gen. Douglas MacArthur, former President Hoover, Neil Armstrong, Sen. Barry Goldwater, Lowell Thomas, and Thor Heyerdahl. (W Post, Nov 11/85, C3)
At 44 million miles from earth, the International Cometary Explorer (ICE) spent 20 minutes traveling through the tail of Comet Giacobini-Zinner, the Spaceport News reported. During the precedent-setting encounter, ICE was traveling at 46,000 miles per hr. when it entered the 14,000-mile wide tail at a point 4,900 miles behind the comet's nucleus; when it emerged, ICE had no apparent damage. Dr. John Brandt, head of Goddard Space Flight Center's Laboratory for Astronomy and Solar Physics, summarized scientists' tentative conclusions at a press conference, saying that mission discoveries added significantly to and confirmed many predicted features of the scientific portrait of a comet. Scientists expected to see a sharply defined bow shock, but instead they observed that a broad U-shaped turbulent interaction region preceded the comet as it moved through the solar wind of interplanetary space. Some data, however, confirmed what cometary scientists postulated about the comet's plasma tail: it was threaded by hairpin-shaped magnetic field lines captured from the solar wind and included electrified gases both denser and colder than those of the surrounding solar wind. The flight also showed that the hazard of flying through the dust in Comet Giacobini-Zinner's tail was less than expected. There was one new-found phenomenon that puzzled the ICE scientists. At least 300,000 miles before the ICE reached the comet, it detected high-speed heavy ion beams never before found in space. ICE scientists theorized that these beams were actually low-speed molecules that escaped from the comet, were ionized by solar ultraviolet light, and then turned around by the supersonic solar wind and accelerated back toward the comet as particle beams. ICE was then continuing on to take solar wind measurements upstream of Halley's Comet on two occasions—the second, March 28, 1986, to be within 19.5	million miles of the comet. (Spaceport News, Sept 27/85, 1)
The Coca-Cola Co. had developed the first container capable of dispensing carbonated beverages in weightlessness, and NASA officials said Coca-Cola could be aboard Space Shuttle flights as early as July, the Washington Post reported. Coca-Cola President Donald Keough said that including carbonated soft drinks on a Space Shuttle flight reflected NASA's interest in providing home-like comforts for the astronauts. Because liquids did not pour in weightlessness, astronauts had to sip drinks from straws inserted into plastic containers that collapsed as they were emptied. However, gas in carbonated drinks expanded in weightlessness and low atmospheric pressure and therefore could escape from plastic containers. A company spokesman said Coca-Cola had solved the problem with a steel supercan equipped with a drinking spout, a screw to adjust beverage flow, and a safety lock to prevent leaks. (WPost, May 9/85, A8)
American University professor Jeffrey Richelson, testifying at the espionage trial of former Navy intelligence analyst Samuel Morison, said publication in 1984 of three secret KH-11 spy satellite photos in Jane's Defense Weekly told the Soviets nothing important that they did not already know, the Washington Post reported. Morison, who worked at the Naval Intelligence Support center in Suitland, Maryland, had official approval for his part-time job as U.S. editor of Jane's Fighting Ships and in 1984 sent the weekly the three photos in hopes of securing a full-time job there. He was also indicted on charges of keeping in his apartment two classified documents about a May 1984 fire at a Soviet naval ammunition depot. In his testimony, Richelson said the Soviets already had the KH-11 manual, which they had bought from a CIA officer, as well as earlier published satellite photos to show them how the system worked. Government witnesses earlier testified that the photos sent to Jane's were potentially valuable to the Soviets in confirming the KH-11's sophisticated workings and in disclosing U.S. targeting interests. Similarly, a Navy intelligence expert testified that the details about the ammunition depot fires, also gleaned from satellite photos, were so precise that it would have been "very damaging" to the U.S. if the documents had been leaked. Richelson, however, said public sources had provided much detail about the KH-11 and other satellite programs, such as their flight paths over the Soviet Union, their altitude (75 to 155 miles), and the fact that a Titan 3D rocket launched them and another so-called Keyhole satellite, the KH-9. He said it was well known that the KH-11 sent its pictures back to Washington in a matter of seconds via another satellite and that it passed over targets quite frequently. Another defense witness, John Pike, associate director for space policy at the Federation of American Scientists, testified on what was publicly available about the KH-11, saying DOD would soon replace it with a longer-lasting KH-12. According to Pike, the KH-11 orbited the Soviet Union 11 times a day, had the capacity to take pictures continuously, and had a peripheral vision that could switch from extreme left to extreme right in an instant. The Washington Post six days later reported that Morison was found guilty of espionage and theft and could be sentenced to up to 10 years in prison and fined $10,000 on each of four counts. (W Post, Oct 12/85, A9, Oct 18/85, A1) Strategic Defense Initiative The UCS had also stated in its report that the neutral particle beam (to destroy Soviet missiles) would require orbiting a 40,000-ton accelerator, an impossible task. However, Jastrow noted the correct weight of the accelerator was 25 tons, quite reasonable for earth orbit, and the UCS had admitted the error. Also on the SDI program, Space World published the Council on Economic Priorities's (CEP) recommendations, in which CEP suggested the Department of Defense reduce emphasis on developing prototype systems until clarification of the technological uncertainties of deploying an effective overall space defense and Congress should significantly slow SDI's growth rate until demonstration of the plan's technical feasibility. (WSJ, Jan 17/85, 2-E; Space World, Jan 85, 3)
NASA launched today at 2:50 p.m. EST the Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-C with its five-man military crew to carry out secret military objectives, the NY Times reported. NASA, which had delayed launch due to subfreezing temperatures [see STS/Launch Schedules, Jan. 23], did not announce liftoff time until nine minutes before launch. One and a half hours after launch, Houston Mission Control reported the Space Shuttle had reached its intended orbit, the altitude and position of which were secret. How long the astronauts would remain in orbit was unknown; although most Space Shuttle flights lasted five to eight days, the apparent Discovery mission to launch a single satellite might limit it to three or four days. Discovery carried a 32,000-lb. propulsion, inertial upper stage capable of boosting a large satellite to 22,300 miles above the equator south of the USSR. This was the first test of the rocket system since a predecessor had misfired on a Space Shuttle mission in April 1983. Many newspapers had already published reports, based on information in the aerospace trade press and other unclassified documents, that the secret payload was an electronic spy satellite. Both the U.S. and USSR had engaged in electronic eavesdropping from orbit for several years, and the USSR had obtained many of the plans and engineering information for the earlier U.S. electronic reconnaissance satellite Rhyolite. The Carter administration had cancelled an advanced version of Rhyolite, the Argus, but the Reagan administration had revived the project. Most reports described the Discovery's payload as the most advanced and sensitive form of orbital electronic spying. The Air Force began an investigation to find the officials or contractor employees who had provided information about the secret payload aboard Discovery, the Washington Post reported. Inquiries were not aimed at news organizations, Michael Burch, a Department of Defense (DOD) spokesman, had said. When questioned about a photo of an early-warning satellite published on the cover of Aviation Week, Burch said the picture should not have appeared. However, the Pentagon later acknowledged that the Air Force had given the photo to the magazine after determining it was unclassified. Burch refused to say what action the government would take if it could identify those who leaked information on the Space Shuttle mission. Brig. Gen. Richard Abel had previously warned reporters not to speculate about the Space Shuttle's cargo. After the Washington Post had reported it was an intelligence satellite intended to eavesdrop on the USSR, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger had said the story might have given "aid and comfort to the enemy." Abel later had told a Univ. of Georgia journalism class that little or nothing in the Post story was not available from public sources. Aviation Week's January 21 issue had described the Pentagon's next generation of early-warning surveillance satellites, which would monitor missile and spacecraft launches from Soviet territory and be protected against Soviet laser weapons. {NYT, Jan 25/85, A1; W Post, Jan 25/85, A3)
NASA announced that the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) had that day named 114 elementary and secondary school teacher nominees in the NASA Teacher in Space Project. Selection followed the review of more than 10,000 applications [see Space Transportation System/ Civilian in Space Program, Feb. 21]. Dr. William Pierce, CCSSO executive director, said after announcing the names that "It is a great pleasure for the Council to be involved in this historic project. The calibre of the applications from teachers throughout the country has been truly impressive. If their applications are any indication, we can be proud of the quality of teaching that occurs in the classrooms of the elementary and secondary school teachers who applied for this unique educational opportunity." NASA would host the 114 nominees at a national workshop, June 22-27, in Washington, D.C., during which NASA would discuss current developments in the space program and provide information and training on NASA educational materials available for the classroom. At the workshop a national review panel would interview the applicants to determine the 10 semifinalists. (NASA Release 85-67)
NASA Administrator James Beggs today took an indefinite leave of absence from the agency to fight fraud charges against him [see NASA/ Management and Personnel, Dec. 2], the Washington Post reported. With White House approval, associate administrator Philip Culbertson became general manager. Although Beggs had refused to resign, White House spokesman Larry Speakes said that President Reagan, "while reluctantly acceding to his request for a leave of absence," asked Beggs to assist in an "orderly transition of his responsibilities to his colleagues at NASA to facilitate continuity of management at this critically important agency. Mr. Beggs has agreed to do so." Speakes added that the space program "has been revitalized" under Begg's leadership and "this important record must continue." Putting Culbertson in charge of day-to-day operations put Begg's stamp on the transition, the Post said. Culbertson was a 20-year NASA veteran, well-known to the House and Senate committees that dealt with the agency, and responsible for planning the agency's next big project, construction of an $8 billion permanent space station. William Graham, a former planning analyst at the Rand Corp. and chairman for the previous three years of the White House Advisory Commission on Arms Control and Disarmament, had been with NASA eight working days. Reagan appointed Graham acting administrator, so that Graham could create the job of general manager and name Culbertson to the post. "Whoever is running the space agency in 1986 has to know where the space station stands, what money it needs and who to talk to to keep it on track," said a congressional aide who dealt with NASA. "That's why Phil Culbertson is getting the job of running the agency day-to-day. He knows the issues." In his statement, Beggs reiterated that he is innocent of the fraud charges resulting from a Justice Department investigation. "I have concluded there was nothing I did then that I would not do again," Begg's statement said. "I have not been involved in any criminal wrongdoing or, in fact, of wrongdoing of any kind. I am totally confident I will be exonerated." (W Post, Dec 5/85, A3)
On the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, former astronauts Thomas Stafford, Donald Slayton, and Vance Brand and cosmonauts Alexei Leonov and Valery Kubasov met on July 16 in Washington D.C. at a celebration sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the Planetary Society, and called on their countries to undertake a joint manned mission to Mars, the Washington Post reported. "People in both countries are already dealing with the technological questions about how to accomplish such a mission," said Leonov, who commanded the Soyuz spacecraft that docked on July 17, 1975 with an Apollo spacecraft. "I know that all big things start with small steps but we can accomplish big tasks, not only in space but on the ground as well. I know we want to work together," he continued. The conference heard repeated calls for the U.S. and USSR to begin planning a joint manned mission to Mars. Speakers included Carl Sagan of Cornell University; Bruce Murray, former director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory; former New Mexico Senator Harrison Schmitt, a former astronaut; and Sen. Spark Matsunaga (D-Hawaii), who has sponsored Senate resolutions promoting more cooperation in space between the two countries. Other conference participants reminded the audience of the difficulties inherent in sending men to Mars. "Our two uppermost concerns are still a large solar flare and the everyday cosmic radiation the Mars pioneers would receive on their two-year round trip," Dr. John Billingham of Ames Research Center said. "Massive solar flares represent the worst hazard," he explained. "In 1972 a large flare produced a cloud of radiation equal to a dose of 1500 rads and in 1956 an even bigger flare sent out a dose of 2500 rads. Both would have been lethal to men on a trip to Mars. "We have to find a way to create a kind of bomb shelter inside a ship bound for Mars and for the crew to have their own solar observatory on board to warn them of things like flares," Billingham said. During the celebration, the Soviet Union released details of its next unmanned mission to Mars—the 1988 launch of a spacecraft and its 1989 landing on Phobos, the larger of Mars's two moons. (W Post, July 17/85, A18)
NASA launched today at 8:59 a.m. from KSC the Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-D, the 16th launch in the Space Shuttle program and the fourth flight of Discovery, the NY Times and Washington Post reported. Discovery carried a crew of seven, including Sen. Jake Garn (R-Utah), chairman of the Senate subcommittee responsible for the NASA budget. The launch followed a last minute repair for a salt water leak on the McDonnell Douglas Corp. experiment, the continuous flow electrophoresis system to produce an unidentified hormone that couldn't be manufactured on earth. Also, launch came 55 minutes later than scheduled and 55 seconds short of postponement because of clouds between 14,000 and 30,000 feet above the launch pad. Astronaut John Young, flying a training plane through the clouds, encountered rain. KSC officials then delayed launch because they did not want to risk getting the spaceship wet, which might cause erosion of critical heat-shielding material. When skies lightened and dried at 8:50, NASA resumed the countdown with no further interruption. After launch, Discovery reached an elliptical orbit ranging in altitude from 185 to 286 miles, one of the higher courses achieved by the spacecraft. Discovery's crew besides Sen. Garn were Air Force Col. Karol Bobko, making his second Space Shuttle flight, commander; Navy Comdr. Donald Williams, pilot; Dr. M. Rhea Seddon, Jeffrey Hoffman, and Navy Capt. David Griggs, mission specialists; and McDonnell Douglas Corp. engineer Charles Walker, payload specialist. The astronauts deployed during early evening of launch day the Canadian Anik C-1 satellite, which then moved to a higher equatorial orbit. They would deploy on April 13 the Hughes Aircraft Co.'s Leasat 3, which the Department of Defense would lease and the Navy operate as part of a military communications network. The remainder of the mission would be devoted to medical experiments and a test of how mechanical toys behaved in space. Dr. Seddon began the first of the mission's medical tests by taking echocardiograms of three of the crew members. There were no reports on Sen. Garn's medical tests. In an effort to determine the causes and effects of space motion sickness, the Senator wore a waist belt with two stethoscopic microphones to record sounds his stomach and intestines made during digestion. His head and chest were wired to record electrical signals from his brain and heart; other instruments would measure the way his bones grew and shrunk in zero gravity. Also, he would perform exercises aimed at inducing nausea. (NY Times, Apr 13/85, A1; W Post, Apr 12/85, A6, Apr 13/85, A1)
Having served as NASA deputy administrator for only two weeks, Dr. William Graham was not known well by most NASA employees; but, as acting administrator replacing James Beggs, Graham had a clear opinion of NASA and his opportunity to lead it, the Washington Post reported. Graham, who had a Ph.D. in electrical engineering, said in an interview today that "NASA's a marvelous organization ... For a technologist, this is like dying and going to heaven." Thus, Graham characterized himself as a professional technologist, which his background would certainly indicate. He had worked as a project officer with the Air Force Weapons Laboratory in New Mexico, was a founder and executive of R&D Associates in California, and had served on numerous advisory panels on nuclear weapons, strategic military policy, and undersea warfare. However, this emphasis in his career on weapons research and military policy aroused some unease at NASA, the Post commented. "He's from the other side of the river," one NASA official said, referring to Graham's long association with the Pentagon. But Graham had sought to assure Congressional committees recently that his appointment was not designed to lead to the "militarization of NASA." Graham's close ties to the Reagan Administration were seen as possibly beneficial to the space agency. And Graham commented that he would follow President Reagan's "very strong and clear space policy." Some associates noted that even as acting administrator they expected Graham to "take a strong hand" in agency affairs. Graham had already announced that he intended to meet soon with all the agency's top executives and then visit the research and operations center at Cape Canaveral, Houston, Pasadena, and elsewhere. "I'm a hands-on kind of person," he said. "I like to get out and walk the halls and talk to people." (W Post, Dec 6/85, A29)
NASA announced that H. William Wood, deputy associate administrator (Networks), Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems (OSTDS), was retiring effective early in January after more than 30 years of government service. Wood had served in his present post since April 1984. Before that he managed the Network Systems program as the division director since 1981. Wood was a research engineer at Langley Research Center when NASA was formed in 1958; and in 1959 he became the group leader with the Tracking and Ground Instrumentation unit for the Mercury Network. His other NASA assignments included associate director, Network Systems Division; NASA senior scientific representative in Australia; and associate director, Operations, in the Network Directorate at Goddard Space Flight Center. Earlier, Wbod had served several years in the U.S. Air Force. Wbod received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal and two NASA Exceptional Service Medals, and he is a Fellow of the American Astronautical Society. In 1955 Wbod received a BSEE degree from North Carolina State University. (NASA anno., Dec 18/85) December23: NASA announced that Dr. Charles Kupperman was appointed effective immediately as executive assistant to the deputy administrator. Kupperman came to NASA after serving as executive director of the President's General Advisory Committee on Arms Control and Disarmament. From 1978 to 1981 he was the research associate and defense analyst for the Committee on the Present Danger, and he also served as a member of President Reagan's 1980 presidential campaign and defense transition team. Kupperman was a consultant to R&D Associates and taught at the School of International Relations, University of Southern California. Kupperman graduated Phi Beta Kappa with a B.A. degree in political science from Purdue University, received an M.A. degree in political science from the University of British Columbia, and a Ph.D. in international relations from the University of Southern California. He was the author of articles on defense, the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT), and national security policy for academic and public journals. (NASA Release anno., Dec 23/85)
Goddard Space Flight Center announced the Wallops Flight Facility would celebrate its 40th anniversary on June 29. The events planned were in recognition of the scientific and technological achievements at Wallops, which had conducted rocketborne experiments since July 4, 1945, when researchers first launched a 17-foot Tiamat. Since that original flight, Wallops had launched approximately 13,000 rocket-propelled research vehicles and conducted thousands of aeronautical and aircraft tests to obtain information on aircraft and spacecraft flight characteristics and to increase knowledge of the upper atmosphere and the nearspace environment. This research led to major contributions to the U.S.'s aeronautical and space programs. The breakthroughs to supersonic flight by aircraft and to hypersonic flight by rocket systems were largely attributed to fundamental aerodynamic research conducted at Wallops by means of aerodynamic models propelled by multiple-stage rocket systems. Using sounding rockets Wallops personnel developed the technologies for measuring atmospheric structure and the space environment, such as temperature, pressure and density, micrometeorite densities, electric fields, energetic particles, and radiation levels. These measurements formed the basis for developing design criteria for scientific satellites and manned spacecraft. Wallops's researchers also pursued technology development for the manned space program, such as manned capsule-escape techniques and maximum dynamic pressure tests for the Mercury Program. Most recently Wallops was known as a center for the NASA suborbital program. Sounding rockets, balloons, and aircraft conducted space science and aeronautical research missions. The island obtained its name from John Wallops, appointed deputy surveyor of Virginia in the 17th century by Col. Edmund Scarburgh. Wallops received a Crown Patent to the island in 1672. At present, the facility, in addition to the island, included the mainland area in back of the island and the main base (formerly the Chincoteague Naval Air Station) about seven miles northwest. In addition to an open house, the day's anniversary events would include an Air Force F—15 aerial demonstration and demonstrations in crash/fire/ rescue, space sciences, model rocketry, and radio controlled model airplanes. (GSFC Release 85-16) Office of Inspector General
Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and British Defense Minister Michael Heseltine signed a memorandum of understanding for Britain's participation in the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program, Defense Daily reported. The signing came one day after British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher had told Parliament that the negotiations over British participation were not finished but that she hoped for a signed agreement before Christmas. Joining Heseltine at a press conference following the signing, Weinberger said it "emphasizes both the closeness of our alliance and the special nature of our relationship which is a very vital thing" to both countries. "Britain is the leader in many of these technologies and we want very much to have these capabilities placed at the benefit of the program," he said. Heseltine explained the signing of the agreement one day after Thatcher's statement to Parliament, saying both he and Weinberger had received communiques overnight from their teams in Washington permitting completion of the agreement. Heseltine said the agreement offered a "very significant opportunity for British industry and for British research capability to be associated with a major and exciting program at the frontiers of human capabilities in many of the technologies of tomorrow." (D/D, Dec 9/85, 185)
University of Chicago scientists Edward Anders, Wendy Wolbach, and Roy Lewis found evidence that continent-sized firestorms 65 million years ago raged across much of the earth, blackening the skies with soot and possibly triggering a sudden global freeze that wiped out the dinosaurs, the Washington Post reported. The event occurred at the time that other scientists said a giant asteroid collided with earth, which may have generated enough heat to start the fires. It was the asteroid theory that led the University of Chicago researchers to ask whether a nuclear war could trigger a similar freeze, a phenomenon now known as nuclear winter. Their findings suggested that nuclear winter theorists had greatly underestimated the amount of soot that would enter the atmosphere from wildfires. The researchers found some of the soot, which eventually settled to the ground, in the same geologic layers that five years previously gave evidence of the asteroid impact. The layer, sampled in regions as far apart as Europe and New Zealand, contained an amount of soot, which was pure carbon, equal to about 10% of the carbon currently incorporated into all forms of life on earth. The original impact theory held that an asteroid, probably at least six miles wide, hit earth, blasting enough rock dust into the atmosphere to darken the sky for weeks. Deprived of sunlight, the ground would have cooled, bringing on a global freeze that exterminated not only the dinosaurs but many other species all over the world. Paleontologists knew that the dinosaurs died out in the most wide-ranging mass extinction the earth had even seen. Scientists working on the asteroid impact theory already had calculated that airborne rock dust alone would have been thick enough to bring on a devastating freeze. The discovery that vast quantities of soot might also have been in the upper atmosphere indicated that the period of darkness and freezing would have lasted longer, perhaps months, because soot washed out of the atmosphere more slowly than did rock dust, although it would have been no darker or colder than originally thought. The finding added two more factors that might have contributed to the extinction—concentrations of fire-produced toxic substances, such as carbon monoxide, and the destruction of plants and animals by fire. The researchers said the discovery was an accident, resulting from examination of ancient sediments while looking for traces of gases that had been part of the asteroid. Instead, they found that the sediments contained about 10,000	times as much carbon as would have been expected. The layer, sampled in Denmark, Spain, and New Zealand, was the one in which other scientists previously found unusually high concentrations of iridium, an element that is rare on earth but abundant in meteorites and asteroids. The scientists thought that when the asteroid hit the earth, the impact would have generated enough heat to vaporize the asteroid, sending its iridium into the atmosphere where it spread around the world. Anders said the impact would have scattered white-hot particles of rock dust as far as 800 and possibly 1,200 miles, igniting forest fires over the entire area. "Once started," he noted, "such a fire could spread over an entire continent, and the resulting winds may disperse the soot worldwide." The impact, other scientists calculated, would have left a crater 85 miles wide and 20 miles deep. Since no such crater had been found, many scientists assumed the asteroid hit the ocean, vaporizing the water before it hit the sea floor. (W Post, Oct 4/85, A2)
NASA announced that Edward Frankie was appointed effective October 27 deputy general counsel succeeding John O'Brien. Frankie had been chief counsel of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center since September 1982 and prior to that associate director, policy development and administrative legal systems, for the Selective Service System, where he was responsible for the development and promulgation of operating regulations for deferment and classification and the selection and training of local and appeal board members across the U.S. He served from 1974 to 1980 as a member of the Office of General Counsel, Department of the Navy. Frankie received B.S. and M.S. degrees in aerospace engineering from the Catholic University of America and a J.D. degree from Georgetown University School of Law. (NASA anno., Oct 15/85)
The Celestis Group, an organization of Florida undertakers, signed a contract with Space Services, Inc., headed by Donald Slayton, one of the original seven U.S. astronauts and based in Houston, to orbit a payload of cremated human remains at 1,900 miles high, the NY Times reported. The mission, scheduled for late 1986 or early 1987, would cost about $15 million. The Department of Transportation (DOT), which must approve the contract, indicated it had no immediate objections. In 1982 Space Services had become the first private company to launch its own rocket, the 36-foot Conestoga, into suborbital flight. The company's original liquid-fuel rocket had exploded on the launching pad a year before. The space-burial mission would use a second-generation Conestoga capable of putting 1,500 lb. into orbit. John Cherry, who had formed the Celestis Group, said that a Conestoga nose cone could contain as many as 13,000 capsules, each 3/8 inches by 1/4 inches, holding ashes reduced in volume by a Celestis-developed technique. Burial price would be $3,900 a customer. A reflective material would cover the nose cone in the first launch, enabling viewing of the satellite mausoleum as it passed overhead. Later missions would be deep-space burials, in which the nose cone would eject the capsules for dispersion into the cosmos. The Commercial Space Launch Act of 1984 empowered the DOT to license all commercial space launchings. DOT examined proposals for their effect on public safety, national security, and international treaty obligations. (NY'^Jan 25/85, A13)
The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) approved plans of a Florida-based undertakers and engineers' consortium to orbit in 1986 or early 1987 a mausoleum [see U.S. Space Policy/Commercialization, Jan. 25] with the announcement that the plan represented "a creative response to the president's initiative to encourage the commercial use of space," the Washington fast reported. The approval was the first granted by the DOT'S new licensing authority for commercial space activities and followed checks with the Department of Defense, the State Department, and NASA. The mausoleum's 1,900 mile-high orbit would place the spacecraft in the Van Allen radiation belts, a region of space rarely used by other spacecraft. The mausoleum would be in the nose cone of a rocket, Conestoga 2, designed and built by Space Service Inc. (SSI), a Houston firm headed by Donald Slayton, one of the original Project Mercury astronauts. Conestoga 1, a one-stage rocket, had made a successful test flight in 1982. The Celestis Group, Melbourne, Florida, would pay SSI $14 million to put the 300 lb. cargo into orbit and charge $3,900 per cremated body. A Celestis spokesman said that since announcement of its plans, the group had received hundreds of calls from people wanting to sign up. Slayton said seven or eight other companies had approached him about setting up similar businesses. (WPost, Feb 13/85, A2)
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev today told a U.S. Senate delegation that the USSR would make "radical proposals" to reduce strategic and intermediate-range offensive nuclear arms one day after the U.S. agreed to prohibit the militarization of space, the Washington Post reported. Gorbachev told the eight visiting senators, headed by Sen. Robert Byrd (D-W. Va.), that the Soviet Union opposed research on military space defense programs, such as President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), that went beyond what was done in laboratories. Clarifying the Soviets' position, Gorbachev said that any research outside of a laboratory was considered verifiable and subject to limits defined in the Antiballistic Missile Treaty ratified in 1972 by both countries. During the discussion on SDI research, according to notes taken by Sen. John Warner (R-Va.), Gorbachev said, "You can't verify what's going on in the brain . . . and that's what we refer to as fundamental or basic research. "But as soon as you go beyond the laboratory, to mock-ups, models, contracts with defense contractors, here surely verification can be done. "We want a ban on that phase of research that approaches design and manufacture," Warner said his notes concluded. (W Post, Sept 4/85, A1)
NASA announced that its Kennedy Space Center (KSC) awarded a research grant to Tuskegee University to research possibilities of growing food in outer space. In the project, the researchers would select several sweet potato varieties that looked promising and research nutrient delivery and hydroponic systems that appeared best suited to development of the crop. The sweet potato project was part of NASA's Controlled Ecological Life Support Systems (CELSS) program to search for methods to supply a continuous food source and to regenerate waste during long-duration spaceflights or for proposed lunar colonies. Dr. William Knott, manager of KSC's Life Science Support Facility and technical monitor for the project, said that, if the sweet potato could deliver enough energy conversion efficiency and productivity, NASA would incorporate it into a nearly full-scale "breadboard" of a working CELSS that it was developing. Other plants previously chosen for the CELSS breadboard project included sugar beets, lettuce, snap beans, wheat, soy beans, and white potatoes. The sweet potato research would focus on three systems: plant growth, food processing, and waste management. The program would begin by studying the plants in a sealed 24 by 12-foot growth chamber with controlled light, food, water, and temperature. Plants would receive food in the chamber by recycling the atmosphere and water that passed through the nutrient system. NASA expected the chamber, once used to test the Mercury spacecraft for flight, might produce enough food for two to three people. A waste management system would treat leftovers from the recycling process, converting the waste products into a nutrient source for the plants. Knott said a major challenge of the project was to harvest the highest yields possible while using a minimum of space and water to deliver nutrients to the plants. "We will take the edible seeds and fruit out of the chamber for processing and storage. The leaves, stems, and parts of the plant normally not consumed also would be converted into a food material." Calling the CELSS program "a beyond the year 2000 endeavor," Knott said NASA would test some of the concepts of the program on the proposed space station "just to see if they work." However, he pointed out, "resupply on a long-duration spaceflight, a lunar base, or on a Mars mission . . . would make the 'space farm' . . . much more attractive." (NASA Release 85-180)
Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger today cancelled the Army's new battlefield anti-aircraft gun, called the Division Air Defense (Divad) gun, saying that tests showed it would give soldiers no significant improvement over existing weapons, the Washington Times reported. Weinberger told a Pentagon press conference that operational tests held from March through June demonstrated the Divad mobile gun system "does not effectively meet the military threat" or justify adding $3 billion to the $1.8 billion already spent for development and production of the first Divads. The cancellation was one of the largest ever made of a weapon in production. Weinberger said the gun showed poor flexibility and a lack of range against the threat posed by Soviet missile-firing Hind helicopters. The Army declined comment, other than to say it would follow Weinberger's direction. Sources had said, however that the Army fought hard in meetings over the previous several weeks to keep the Divad in production. The Army had planned to buy 615 Divads for a total cost of $4.5 billion and had accepted delivery of 65 units. Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp. developed and built the weapon, employing 1900 people in its Divad division at Newport Beach, California. Ford Aerospace President Donald Rassier said the company understood the basis for the defense secretary's decision and that the firm had already begun work on new solutions to the growing Soviet threat. The Divad was based on the 40-millimeter double-barrel Swedish Bofers gun system, designed to be mounted on old M-48 tank chassis that the Army had in stock. Ford Aerospace equipped it with radar from the F—16 fighter for all-weather and nighttime operation. The Army considered the weapon essential for the defense of quick-moving armored tank divisions, especially in Europe, against both helicopters firing missiles and fixed-wing aircraft. (W Times, Aug 28/85, 1 A)
Navy Secretary John Lehman said that intercepting U.S. Navy aircraft ordered the Egyptian Boeing 737 Airliner, which Palestinians hijacked and ordered to be flown from Egypt, to land at Sigonella Air Base in Sicily "or else," Defense Daily reported. Lehman said one of two Grumman E-2C Hawkey airborne control aircraft, which joined six Grumman F—14 Tomcats and four tankers in the intercept mission, issued the command. Lehman said four of the F-14s flew a close intercept formation on the 737 to the landing in Sicily; the E-2Cs from the USS Saratoga had loitered overhead until the airliner took off from Egypt with the hijackers. There "was no deal," Lehman said, and no help from any other country. He noted the operation demonstrated the Navy's readiness, which "doesn't come cheap." (D/D, Oct 15/85, 225) Antisatellite System
NASA announced it had presented at a ceremony at NASA Headquarters its 1984 inventor of the year award to Dale Kornfeld, Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), and John Vanderhoff, Mohammed El-Asser, and For-tunato Micale, all of Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, for their "process for preparation of large-particle size monodisperse latexes." The monodisperse latex reactor processor, an experiment flown aboard the Space Shuttle, had produced microspheres in zero gravity in sizes ranging from 5 to 30 micrometers. The maximum size particles produced on earth, with the required standards of quality and uniformity, were about 2 to 3 micrometers. Researchers used microspheres in calibrating sensitive scientific instruments such as microscopes, filters, and particle counters. Medical uses included identification of cancer and glaucoma and the study of the transport of materials inside living organisms. Industrial applications included the production of finely ground products such as paint pigments, inks, toners, explosives, and other powder materials. NASA took an important step toward making the microspheres commercially available when it presented 15 grams of 10-micrometer particles to the Commerce Department's National Bureau of Standards for certification as "standard reference material." (NASA Release 85-44)
The first test of a U.S. antisatellite weapon against a physical target in space was delayed indefinitely because technical difficulties forced postponement of the target launching, the Washington Post reported. The U.S. Air Force cancelled the launching from Wallops Island, Virginia, and sent the targets back to the manufacturer, Avco Systems, for repair. Until the cause of the problem was found, Air Force officials said they could not estimate when the test might be rescheduled. The NY Times reported John Pike, associate director of the Federation of American Scientists, as saying he was told by "usually reliable sources" that the technical problems centered on the radio that would signal the results of the target practice back to earth. The Air Force had conducted two of the test flights planned for the antisatellite weapon, but aimed at a point in space rather than a physical target. The Air Force had already for apparently technical reasons rescheduled several times in 1985 the latest test, in which the weapon would be fired at one of two six-foot-diameter target balloons in orbit. The antisatellite weapon was a two-stage rocket with a 13-inch, heat-sensing homing vehicle in its nose. Launched from beneath an F15 fighter, the rocket would intercept and destroy its target on impact. The U.S. House the previous week approved an amendment to the military programs bill banning tests of antisatellite weapons against targets in space as long as the USSR refrained from similar tests. The Senate voted to permit the testing as long as President Reagan certified that he was trying to negotiate a treaty prohibiting antisatellite weapons. A House-Senate conference committee was scheduled to begin reconciling differences on the military bill the following week. (WPost, July 4/85, A4; NYT, July 4/85, A9)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced its researchers completed at KSC a series of three intensive tests that verified the compatibility of Spacelab 2 experiments in space. Known collectively as the "mission sequence test," the tests determined for the first time that actual experiment flight hardware for the mission operated in tandem with the Spacelab flight systems. MSFC's Spacelab 2 mission manager Roy Lester said they learned they “could operate this complex system with high efficiency within acceptable Spacelab resource allocations." MSFC had responsibility for managing the first three Spacelab missions in a series of Spacelab flights that extended over several years. The first mission flew in 1983; the next would fly later in April. "This third and last test was a simulated six-hour slice of the actual on-orbit timeline," Lester said. "It simulated the commanding of experiments as if they were being done both from the payload operations control center (at Johnson Space Center) and from the flight deck of the orbiter." The period chosen was one that would put maximum stress on the computer, "a worst-case scenario," Lester explained. "Without a situation like that, we wouldn't have gotten the confidence we have now that we're ready to go." The 13 Spacelab 2 experiments, covering seven scientific disciplines, would rest on three pallets and a special support structure. Unlike the other two Spacelab missions managed by MSFC, there was no habitable laboratory. Spacelab 2 crew would operate the experiments from the aft deck of the orbiter interior. (MSFC Release 85-19) During April: NASA announced that Space Shuttle flight 51-B/Spacelab 3, an ESA<Jeveloped Spacelab carrying 15 experiments [see Spacelab, Apr. 17], was scheduled for launch April 29 from KSC. The mission's main objective was to provide a high-quality microgravity environment for materials processing and fluid experiments. For the second time in U.S. space history, crew members would perform scientific investigations continuously. Two scientists who developed Spacelab 3 experiments, payload specialists Dr. Lodewijk van den Berg, a materials scientist from EG&C Energy Management Corp., and Dr. Taylor Wang, a fluid physicist from JPL, would conduct onboard research during the mission. Mission specialist Dr. Don Lind, a high-energy astrophysicist, and Drs. Norman Thagard and William Thornton (both medical doctors making their second Space Shuttle flight) would also do scientific research. The payload operations control center (POCC) at Johnson Space Center would manage all Spacelab 3 operations. Members of the Marshall Space Flight Center mission management team and the investigator teams that developed Spacelab 3 experiments would monitor, direct, and control experiment operations from the ground control center. The mission control center in the same building as POCC would control the orbiter and basic Spacelab systems. (NASA Release 85-60)
During Space Shuttle mission 51-1 astronauts James van Hoften and William Fisher spent seven hours and eight minutes, a new record for a spacewalk, in the first stage of repair of the Leasat 3 satellite, the Washington Post reported. During the walk, they retrieved the 15,000-lb. satellite, fastened Discovery's mechanical arm onto it, disarmed its Minuteman rocket motor, and exposed its electronic connections. Later Fisher said he could see no evidence of what caused the satellite to go dead after astronauts deployed it in April. "There is no evidence of debris on anything that would cause a problem. It's clean as a whistle," He said. Van Hoften and Fisher were outside the Space Shuttle from about 8:00 a.m. to shortly after 3:00 p.m. EDT, breaking by one minute the spacewalk record set April 1984 by van Hoften and George Nelson when they repaired the scientific satellite Solar Max. Although the astronauts accomplished more than half of what was needed in the salvage mission, they were planning a four-hour spacewalk on September 1 to finish the job. They would put a "space blanket" over the engine bell that served as the Minuteman motor's rocket nozzle to trap more of the sun's heat to warm it, because Leasat-3 had been in the cold of space so long that its rocket motor was too cold to fire correctly. Then the astronauts would install a vertical bar along the 20-foot length of the satellite to serve as a handle for van Hoften to spin the satellite and push it away from Discovery into space. It would then be seven days before the satellite acquired enough power to thaw its liquid-fuel tanks and almost two months before the solid-fuel rocket motor was warm enough for ground controllers to command it to ignite. (W Post, Sept 1/85, A5)
