The Soviet Union launched a Soyuz TM4 from Baikonur Space Center in Soviet Central Asia. The spacecraft, scheduled to dock with the Soviet space station Mir on December 23, 1987, carried three Soviet cosmonauts: mission commander Vladimir Titov, flight engineer Musakhi Manarov, and research scientist Anatoly Levchenko. They were expected to work together with the crew already aboard Mir for about a week, then Levchenko would return to Earth with Yuri Romanenko, who had been in the space station for 322 days. The new crew aboard Mir was expected to remain for a year, breaking Romanenko's record. (B Sun, Dec 22/87 & Dec 29/87; CSM, Dec 30/87; LA Times, Dec 26/87; NY Times, Dec 22/87, Dec 27/87, Dec 29/87; P Inq, Dec 22/87, Dec 25/87, Dec 30/87; W Post, Dec 25/87, Dec 30/87)
Despite the efforts of Soviet cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Aleksander Laveikin, who had tended the space station since February 7, 1987, the first attempts to dock the Soviet Union's Kvant space module with the space station Mir failed. The Kvant, a selfcontained astronomical observatory, was to be the first experimental module to link with Mir. (NY Times, Apr 10/87; W Times, Apr 9/87)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that the Space Goals Task Force of the NASA Advisory Council recommended a crew tended mission to Mars. The task force, headed by former Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins, stressed that the development and operation of a U.S./international Space Station was a prerequisite for exploration of Mars and beyond. It also stressed that NASA needed to resume Shuttle flights as soon as possible and develop expendable launch vehicles. The task force listed the following major steps required for a successful Mars mission: an aggressive exploration of Mars to support a longerterm crewtended mission to Mars, buildup of the technological base needed to support that mission to Mars, establishment of a realistic schedule for the project, and an assessment of whether another crewed mission to the Moon was H&needed to precede a Mars mission. (AvWk, Mar 9/87; NY Times, Mar
NASA announced two new management appointments effective June 22, 1987. Dr. Noel W. Hinners, Director of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, was appointed to the newly created position of NASA Associate Deputy Administrator (Institution). The position was created on recommendations of the NASA Management Study Group to provide focus on institutional management matters. NASA appointed Dr. John W. Townsend, Jr. to replace Dr. Hinners as Director of Goddard. Dr. Hinners joined NASA in 1972 as director of Lunar Programs, in the Office of Space Science. From 1974 till 1979 he served as NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science. From 1979 to 1982,h)0*0*0*Dr. Hinners was Director of the Smithsonian Institute's National Air and Space Museum. In 1982 he was appointed Director of Goddard Space Flight Center. Dr. Townsend, a research physicist at the Naval Research Laboratory, was transferred with his branch and the Vanguard Project to NASA in 1958 and became chief of the space science division. He became Assistant Director in 1959 and Deputy Director in 1965 of Space Science and Satellite Applications at Goddard Space Flight Center. In 1968 he was appointed Deputy Director of the Environmental Science Service Administration (ESSA), Department of Commerce. He became the Associate Administrator of ESSA, when ESSA became part of NASA in 1970. (NASA Release 8799)
John W. Young, chief of the astronaut office since January 1974, was appointed as Special Assistant to the Director for Engineering, Operations, and Safety at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. Young was expected primarily to advise the Director and other senior managers at JSC on issues affecting the safe return to flight of the Space Shuttle. According to JSC Director Aaron Cohen, "John Young's acceptance of this new responsibility will strengthen the link between operational and engineering elements at the Johnson Space Center." (NASA Release
The Air Force, after two consecutive failures in 18 months, successfully launched a Titan 3B rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch placed a classified payload into a polar orbit around the Earth. Air Force Secretary Edward C. Aldridge hailed the launch as "the first major step" in the recovery of the American space program after the Challenger accident in January 1986. (LA Times, Feb 13/87; NY Times, Feb `"13/87; W Post, Feb 13/87)
Representative Edward Boland (DemocratMassachusetts) and Senator Jake Garn (RepublicanUtah), who hold leadership positions on House and Senate appropriations panels with NASAh)0*0*0*oversight, recommended that NASA change the Space Shuttle program launch schedule. The two members of Congress asked NASA to move the ESA Ulysses mission, scheduled for launch sometime in 198990, to a Titan 4 launch in 1991. This change would permit U.S. planetary satellites Galileo, Magellan, and the Mars Observer to be launched in the 198990 period. NASA officials agreed to give serious consideration to the change, but expressed fear that another delay in the Ulysses launch, originally scheduled for 1983, might damage NASA's relationship with the ESA. (AvWk, Jan 12/87)
Soviet cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Aleksander Laveikin left their space station and successfully tightened the seal between the research module Kvant and the space station. Kvant had failed to dock on two previous tries. (NY Times, Apr 13/87)
Former astronaut Donald K. Slayton, President of Space Services, said that his company would be the first private U.S. company to launch satellites into orbit. According to Slayton, the first of five precision navigationlocation Star Find satellites would be launched from NASA's Wallops Island in Virginia in 1988. Space Services would use its Conestoga II rocket system to launch the 300pound satellite into a geostationary orbit 22,000 miles above the Earth. (W Post, May 11/87; W Times, May 11/87) h)0*0*0*May 11: NASA released the findings of the Accident Investigation Board, which had looked into loss of the Atlas/Centaur67 on March 26,1987. In a report to Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Jon R. Busse, Chairman of the Accident Investigation Board, blamed the accident on an electrical transient, caused by a singletriggered lightning flash. Furthermore, the Board found that the launch was made "in violation of the established criteria used to avoid potential electrical hazards." The Board made recommendations concerning weather criteria, the launch decision process, and future launch vehicle. (NASA Release 8772)
NASA selected five crew members for STS27, a Department of Defense Space Shuttle mission. The five crew members, scheduled for launch on Atlantis in early fall 1988, included Robert L. Gibson (Cdr., USN), Commander; Guy S. Gardner (Lt. Col., USAF), Pilot; and Mission Specialists Richard M. Mullane (Col., USAF), Jerry L. Ross (Lt. Col., USAF), and William M. Shepherd, (Cdr., USN). (NASA Release 87139; LA Times, Sept 16/87; USA Today, Sept
Top astronaut John W. Young told the Orlando Sentinel that he had been forced to resign as chief of NASA's astronaut office. Young claimed that his reassignment to a new post, as special assistant to the director for Shuttle engineering and safety, stemmed from his frequent criticism of NASA safety policies after the Challenger disaster. (LA Times, July 30/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced the promotion of Dr. John M. Klineberg, Deputy Director of Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, since July 1979, to Director of the Center, effective immediately. Dr. Klineberg went to Lewis from NASA Headquarters, where he had served as Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology. An internationally recognized expert in the field of transonic flow, he first joined NASA in 1970 at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 8786)
The Soviet Union launched another cargo ship with supplies for the space station Mir. According to Tass, the cargo ship Progress 30, the third supply ship launched since cosmonauts Yuri Romanenko and Alexander Laveikin had occupied the space station in February `"1987, was functioning normally after the launch. (LA Times, May
William V. Boynton, an Arizona University scientist charged with developing a comet penetratorlander for NASA, announced that a prototype prober was successfully tested at the Sandia National Laboratory in Albuquerque, New Mexico. The comet penetrator, an integral part of NASA's Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby mission, is an instrumentbearing missile designed to pierce a comet's surface to a depth of 3 feet or more. (NASA Release 87161)
The Soviet newspaper Sovietskaya Rossiya reported that two Soviet cosmonauts grew taller while in space. According to the paper, cosmonaut Yuri Romanenko grew fourtenths of an inch taller during his record ten and a half months in space, and his crewmate Alexander Alexandrov grew sixtenths of an inch. The gain in height was because of lack of gravity in space. (NY Times, Dec During December: NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher reviewed Agency activities during 1987 and declared that "NASA is on the road to recovery." He believed, "the United States can maintain a leadership role in space,...but only if the Nation stays truly committed to the space program." (NASA Release 87184) Industry officials said that the U.S. aerospace industry recorded the most profitable year in its history in 1987. (P Inq, Dec 17/87)
NASA named the five astronauts selected as the crew of the first U.S. space flight since the Challenger accident. Frederick H. Hauck was selected to command the crew, which would include Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey, the pilot; and mission specialists John M. Lounge, George D. Nelson, and Marine Major David C. Hilmers. For the first time, the crew would be astronauts who had flown on Shuttle missions. Frederick H. Hauck, named acting Associate Administrator of NASA Headquarters Office of External Affairs in August 1986, led the successful 1984 Shuttle recovery mission that returned two broken communications satellites H&to Earth. (StarNews, Jan 10/87)
Two Soviet astronauts were launched aboard the new space vehicle, Soyuz TM2, toward a rendezvous with the orbiting Mir space station. This was the first crewtended Soviet space launch since July 1986 and only the second launch in the Russian human space program to be shown live on Soviet television. Western experts speculated that the two astronauts would aim for a long duration flight of at least six months. Mission commander Yuri Romanenko and flight engineer Alexander Laveikin were expected to begin link up operations with the Mir space station on February 7. NY Times, Feb 6/87; W Post, Feb 6/87; P Inq, Feb 6/87; C Trib, Feb
NASA announced that it had established a team to review launch decision processes used for NASA expendable launch vehicles and the Space Shuttle. The purpose of the review, which was to be completed by July 3, 1987, was to ensure consistent approaches and risk evaluations for all NASA launches. Joseph B. Mahon, Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, and Robert L. Crippen, Deputy Director of the National Space Transportation System Operations, were selected as cochairmen of the team. (NASA Release
NASA announced that it had chosen the final design for the Space Shuttle's new rockets. Also, the Agency declared it had resolved the problem of Challenger's leaking seals. Hot gasses escaped during launch and the seals failed to close properly because of cold weather. John Thomas, Manager of the rockets design team at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, stated that henceforth the oring seals would be heated in cold weather rather than constructed of new materials. He also said that the new design would contain three oring seals instead of two. Thomas emphasized that up to eight more test firings of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket motor were planned before flights resume. (NY Times, July 17/87; W Post, July 17/87; W Times, July
Robert Lovell and Fred Flatow, NASA search and rescue mission managers, were awarded the Yuri Gagarin medal by a space delegation from the Soviet Union. The awards were in recognition of their outstanding contribution to COSPAS/SARSAT, an international search and rescue program that uses satellites to locate people in distress. (NASA Release 8717)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher issued a statement in response to Senator William Proxmire's request in Congress to abolish the Space Station program. Dr. Fletcher pointed out that the Space Station proposal has been repeatedly debated in Congress and each time has received bipartisan congressional support. He stressed that by abolishing the Space Shuttle program, the United States would abdicate its position as a world leader in space. He also emphasized that a Space Station would lead to new scientific and technological advances and would "provide infrastructure for future exploration of the solar system by manned spacecraft." (Statement by Dr. James C. Fletcher in Response to Senator Proxmire's Statement Asking for Abolishment of the Space Station, August 27, 1987)
A Soyuz TM3, carrying Colonel Yuri V. Romanenko and two fellow Soviet cosmonauts, Aleksander P. Aleksandrov and Anatoly Levchenko, parachuted to Earth about 50 miles from the town of Arkalyk in Soviet Kazakhstan. The three returned from the Soviet space station Mir, where Romanenko had set a new record of 326 days in orbit. (NY Times, Dec 30/87)
Astronaut John A. McBride was named acting Assistant Administrator for Congressional Relations, effective September 1, 1987. He would replace John F. Murphy, who was appointed Chief of the Office of External Affairs at NASA's Ames Research Center, in Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 87116)
