The Administrator appointed Edward A. Frankle to be NASA general counsel. Frankle had been Deputy General Counsel since October 27, 1985. He began his career at NASA in September 1982, as Chief Counsel of the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release 8898)
The first direct observation of an atmosphere on Pluto was made by Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) astronomers flying aboard NASA ARC's Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO). A team of astronomers from MIT, including Edward Dunham, James Elliot, Amanda Bosh, Steve Slivan, and Leslie Young, made the observation during a temporary occultation of a star behind Pluto. The observations were made at 41,000 feet (12,300 meters) altitude, approximately 500 miles south of Pago Pago, American Samoa, over the Southern Pacific Ocean. Information about the temperature, pressure, and extent of the atmosphere would be derived from the occultation data, obtained using a solid state video camera attached to KAO's 36 inch (92 cm) telescope. The airborne observations lasted about 1.5 minutes, occurring shortly after midnight. (ARC Release 8840)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher received the International Technology Institute's (ITI) William F. Rockwell, Jr. Medal at the International Congress on Technology and Technology Exchange banquet, in Pittsburgh. The Rockwell Medal, awarded annually to a maximum of three individuals from different continents, recognizes contributions toward the generation, transfer, and application of technology for the betterment of mankind. (NASA Release 88139)'%0*October 20: Two of the three cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station took a fourhour spacewalk to replace a faulty component on an xray telescope attached to the station. Cosmonauts Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov, on a yearlong endurance mission aboard Mir, wore a new spacesuit design intended to increase flexibility. C Trib, Oct 21/88)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, on mission STS27, a dedicated Department of Defense (DoD) mission. After a 24hour launch delay because of strong winds at KSC, Atlantis lifted off on a fourday mission to deliver into orbit a classified DoD payload, reported by various media sources as being a Lacrosse radar reconnaissance satellite. Crew members for STS27 were Robert L. Gibson, Commander; Guy S. Gardner, Pilot; and Richard M. Mullane, Jerry L. Ross and William M. Shepherd, Mission Specialists. Atlantis landed on December 6 at Edwards Air Force Base, California. (NASA Release 88171; AP, Dec 2/88; UPI, Dec 2/88; NY Times, Dec 7/88; W Post, Dec 7/88; WSJ, Dec 7/88; W Times, Dec 7/88; B Sun, Dec 7/88; P Inq, Dec 7/88)
In response to a civil suit brought under the Freedom of Information Act by the Associated Press and six other news organizations, the Justice Department disclosed documentation showing that the Federal Government and Morton Thiokol paid $7,735,000 in cash and annuities to settle all claims with the families of four of the crew members who died in the explosion of the Shuttle Challenger. Thiokol, maker of the faulty booster rocket blamed for the January 28, 1986, explosion, paid $4,641,000. The Government's share of the settlement was $3,094,000. The settlements were reached on December 29, 1986, with the immediate survivors of the spacecraft crew members, Francis R. Scobee, Ellison Onizuka, Gregory B. Jarvis, and Sharon Christa McAuliffe. Settlements had been reached among Thiokol and two other familiesthose of Judith Resnik and Ronald E. McNair with no Government contribution. A claim by the widow of Michael J. Smith against Thiokol was still pending in Federal court. The Federal Government maintained that it cannot be held liable for the deaths of civilian and military government employees who die on duty. (UPI, Mar 8/88; NY Times, Mar 8/88; W Post, Mar 8/88; WSJ, Mar 8/88; USA Today, Mar 8/88; LA Times, Mar 8/88; W Times, Mar 8/88; C Trib, Mar 8/88; P Inq, Mar 8/88; AP, Mar 13/88)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's NOAA11, meteorological weather satellite was launched aboard a U.S. Air Force AtlasE launch vehicle from Launch Complex 3 at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. NOAA11, and its companion spacecraft, NOAA9 and NOAA10, assist in global and local weather forecasting. In addition, the NOAA satellites are used for hurricane tracking and warning; global sea ice monitoring; various atmospheric studies; and for agricultural, commercial fishing, forestry, maritime, and other industrial uses. NOAA11 was placed in a 540mile Sunsynchronous, near polar orbit, where it would circle the Earth approximately every 102 minutes, observe a different portion of the Earth's surface on each orbit, and view the Earth's entire surface and cloud cover once every 12 hours. `"(NASA Release 88126; Aeronautics and Space Report of the (#President: 1988; SSR 1988 089AC) September 29October 3: U.S. crewassisted space flight resumed after a hiatus of over two years with the successful launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission STS26 from Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39B in Florida. The first Space Shuttle flight since the Challenger accident in January 1986, STS26 followed a'$0*prolonged period of review and reassessment of the entire Shuttle program and redesign of the Shuttle's solid rocket motors (SRMs), which had experienced a catastrophic failure on STS25. STS26 had as its primary payload the Tracking and Data Relay SatelliteC (TDRSC), which would significantly expand communications and data links between Earth and the orbiting Shuttles. In addition, Discovery carried the Orbiter Experiments Program Autonomous Supporting Instrumentation System (OASIS), which would record environmental data in the orbiter payload bay during STS flight phases, as well as 11 secondary payloads. The STS26 mission lasted four days and concluded with a landing at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on October 3. The fiveman crew for STS26 included Navy Captain Frederick H. Hauck (Commander), Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey (Pilot), and Mission Specialists John M. Lounge, Marine Lieutenant Colonel David C. Hilmers, and George D. Nelson. (NASA STS26 Press Kit, SSR 1988 091A; UPI, Sep 29/88; AP, Sep 29/88; Reuter, Sep 29/88; NY Times, Sep 30/88; W Post, Sep 30/88; W Times, Sep 30/88; USA Today, Sep 30/88)
A Soviet Proton launch vehicle, carrying a Soyuz TM5 spacecraft with a threeman SovietBulgarian crew, took off from the Baikonur launch facility. The Soyuz TM5 crew was to join a twoman crew aboard the Mir space station. The launch, which occurred at 10:04 a.m. EDT, was the first Soviet crewtended launch in 1988. The Mir visit was to be a 10day mission in which the visiting astronauts would perform over 40 experiments aboard the station. The two astronauts aboard Mir were to remain after the departure of their colleagues and continue a yearlong endurance0*mission that was expected to break the record established by Yuri Romanenko in 1987. (FBISSov88110, Jun 8/88; SSR 1988 048B; NY Times, Jun 8/88; B Sun, Jun 8/88)
Congress ordered a temporary halt to NASA's efforts to lease a commercial crewtended space laboratory, citing several irregularities in NASA's handling of the procurement process and questioning the space agency's abrupt reversal of its prior opposition to the facility. The chairmen of the House appropriations subcommittee for NASA, Representative Edward Boland, and the Chairman of the House authorization subcommittee for NASA, Representative Bill Nelson, agreed to freeze funding for the facility until these issues could be addressed. Several ranking members of the House and Senate had written NASA to complain that the Agency was moving ahead with a contract without congressional authorization. (H Post, Mar 24/88; AvWk, Mar 28/88)
NASA held dedication ceremonies for the newly renamed John C. Stennis Space Centerformerly the National Space Technology Laboratoriesin Hancock County, Mississippi. The Center was named for Mississippi's retiring senator by an Executive order signed May 20, 1988, by President Ronald Reagan. (NASA Release 8893)
An untended Soviet spacecraft carrying fuel, food, equipment, and mail, docked with the Mir space station. Two Soviet0*cosmonauts, on a long duration mission, tended Mir. The cosmonauts, Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov, arrived at the space station in December and were expected to stay in space for about a year, breaking the 325day endurance record set the previous year by Yuri Romanenko. (FBISSov88108, Jun 6/88; SSR 1988 038A; AP, May
Scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland, successfully launched a rocket experiment aimed at simulating the effect of small comets entering the Earth's atmosphere. Following two aborted attempts, the Environmental Reactions Induced by Comets (ERIC) experiment payload was launched from GSFC's Wallops Flight Test Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, by a twostage suborbital TerrierBlack Brant VC rocket. At the 186mile (300 kilometer) apogee of suborbital trajectory, the payload released a combination of water, carbon dioxide, and ice crystals into the upper atmosphere, simulating the release of gases that would result from the impact of a small comet with the Earth's atmosphere. The gas release was synchronized with the passage of NASA's Dynamic Explorer (DE) satellite over Wallops Island. The satellite photographed the atmosphere over Wallops in ultraviolet (UV) light in order to detect ionospheric depletion resulting from the release of the gases. The purpose of the experiment was to test the hypothesis that the phenomenon of ionospheric depletiona sudden appearance of small holes in the Earth's ionosphereis caused by the impact of small, undetected comets. The principal investigator for the project, Dr. Michael Mendillo, declared the experiment a success and noted, based on preliminary data, that the hole in the ionosphere "seemed to last longer than we had anticipated." (GSFC Release 885; UPI, Jan 29/88)0*January 30: This date marked the thirtieth anniversary of the launch of Explorer 1, the first satellite put into orbit by the United States. The launch of the 31pound satellite aboard a modified Army JupiterC booster marked America's entry into a space race with the Soviet Union following their launch of two Sputnik satellites. In addition, Explorer 1 discovered the Van Allen radiation belts that surround the Earth. (UPI, Jan 30/88) 0*
