The first scientific results from the Hubble Space Telescope confirmed that it would reveal a more detailed view of the heavens than any ground telescope, in spite of its flawed mirror. The latest pictures showed the clearest view yet of a supernova discovered in 1987 and of densely packed stars in a distant galaxy that could be the result of a black hole. Meanwhile, scientists at NASA reported that the Magellan spacecraft was operating in another safe mode and communication with it had been offandon. The navigation problem had been0*narrowed down but not pinpointed, and the mapping survey of Venus would be delayed two or three weeks. (NY Times, Aug 30/90; W Times, Aug 30/90; NASA Release 90117; 90118) During August: Joseph B. Mahon, Deputy Associate Administrator, and astronaut Michael J. McCulley announced they would retire. Mahon had served with NASA for almost 30 years, managing and directing untended launch vehicles, Shuttle carrier systems, and spacelab operations. Captain McCulley, who planned to retire from the Navy, was to join Lockheed Space Operations Company and be involved with daytoday processing of Space Shuttle vehicles. (NASA Release 90116; 90119)
NASA's Chief Scientist William Lenoir told a Senate committee that the Agency should have performed tests on the Hubble Space Telescope's mirrors. He said that the problem could have been caught by simpler, less costly tests than the "endtoend" test, rejected because of its high cost. (Hearing before the Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space, Jul 10/90; B Sun, Jul 11/90; W Post, Jul 11/90; NY Times, Jul 11/90)
Vice President Dan Quayle, leader of the White House National Space Council, told scientists at the 175th meeting of the American Astronomical Society that "the rest of the world is catching up and may pass us by" because our space programs consume too much time and money. His eightpage speech was not lauded by the audience until he suggested greater emphasis on untended space flight; many scientists, dependant on Federal funding, see crewassisted flights as a drain on their own projects. Quayle reiterated a commitment to balance tended and untended space exploration and called upon allied nations, most specifically Japan, and the business sector to share costs. The Vice President also asked the NASA to look "across the traditional divisions among civil, commercial, and national security activities," which some NASA sources interpreted as a suggestion that outside agencies might assume a bigger role in the space program. In accord with Quayle's comment concerning lengthy and costly space projects, John Pike, Associate Director for Space Policy at the Federation of American Scientists, brought up NASA plans for crewassisted flights to the Moon and to Mars. The missions, he noted, would cost $15 to $20 billion annually over 25 years while guaranteeing job security for NASA. P Inq, Jan 11/90; W Post, Jan 11/90; NY Times, Jan 11/90, W `"Times, Jan 11/90)
Recent grounding of the Space Shuttle fleet and problems with the Hubble Space Telescope had prompted President George Bush to consider appointing a panel composed of a group of experts outside of Government to review the space program, White House officials announced. Officials noted, however, that NASA made a good call when it grounded the Shuttle fleet and that no plans for changing its management had been formulated. Vice President Dan Quayle met with NASA Administrator Richard R. Truly on July and directed him to appoint the independent task force. NY Times, Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; B Sun; Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; NASA Anno)0*July 17: NASA scientists proposed almost a dozen plans for a temporary fix of the Hubble Space Telescope until 1993 Space Shuttle mission would install an optically corrected main camera. A brainstorming session included some "far fetched" ideas that involved Shuttle missions to the telescope. Elsewhere, NASA official William Lenoir reported that Space Shuttle flights might resume soon and that Atlantis could fly as early as August 10. He added that if the repairs could not be accomplished on the launch pad, then the orbiter would be taken into the hanger and rescheduled for launch sometime after the
NASA named William W.L. Taylor of TRW Corporation as the Chief Scientist for the Space Station Freedom Program. Taylor, who was with NASA until 1978 when he joined TRW, was the third person chosen for the twoyear assignment and the first from industry. (NASA Release 9061)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Lawrence J. Ross as Director of the Lewis Research Center (LeRc), Cleveland, Ohio. Administrator Truly announced the planned retirement of Dr. John W. Townsend and named Dr. John Klineberg to replace him as the new Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center. Sue Mathis Richards was also appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for communications. She had previously held several managerial positions in the private sector. Lawerence Ross, who joined NASA in 1963, has served mostly in an executive capacity, as Deputy Director of LeRC, as a design and test engineer, and has been given several special assignments. Klineberg joined NASA in 1970. After conducting research at the Ames Research Center, near San Francisco, California, he became Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology and, later, Director of LeRc. Townsend began government service in 1947 and held several positions with NASA. (NASA Release 9049; 9050; 9051; 9055)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Thomas E. Utsman as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight. He was to assist William Lenoir, Associate Administrator, in daily management of space flight programs. Utsman began at NASA in 1963 as a facilities design engineer in the Apollo program and later was named to head the Design Engineering Directorate's Project Engineering Office. He also served as Deputy Director of Project Management, Associate Director of Design Engineering, Operations Management Director of Technical Support, Director of Shuttle Operations, and Director of Shuttle Management and Operations. Truly also named James A. Thomas as Deputy Director of the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Thomas joined0*NASA in 1962 and served as lead engineer for prelaunch testing and communications for the Apollo program. He worked on the initial Shuttle program and served as lead flight engineer, as chief Shuttle flight project engineer, in the Shuttle Engineering Directorate, and as Director of Shuttle Launch and Landing Operations. (NASA Release 903)
Space Shuttle pilot Donald E. Williams announced his retirement from NASA and the Navy, beginning March 1. He piloted two Shuttle missions, in April 1985 and October 1989, was Chief of the Astronaut Office Mission Support Branch, and Deputy Manager of Operations Integration. (NASA Release 9031)
A White House commission, formed in July as a result of the Hubble Space Telescope problem and temporary grounding of the Shuttle fleet, released its report concerning future space plans. The 12member panel emphasized a new system of crewless launch vehicles for a number of NASA missions in order to reduce reliance on the Space Shuttle. It also recommended a greater pursuance of scientific study and less emphasis on the accomplishment of engineering feats for their own sake, that is, crewassisted space flight. In addition, it recommended a gradual phasing out of the Space Shuttle; redesign of the Space Station to make it cheaper and simpler, with a focus on life in space; and restructuring of Agency management. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, said that a heavylift rocket would take $10 billion to design and take 7 to 10 years to complete. He also said that new Space Station designs were underway, but would be similar to the original ones. WSJ, Dec 7/90; Dec 11/90; NY Times, Dec 11/90; W Post, Dec 11/90; H Post, Dec 14/90; NASA Release 90161)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly addressed the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee and defended the projected 24 percent budget increase that President George Bush0*had proposed for the agency. Truly warned that any attempt to slash the budget would render the Space Station defunct, a project whose expected cost had risen from the original 1984 estimate of $8 billion to $20 billion, despite reduction in design. Also discussed was the status of the planned ShuttleC, an crewassisted heavylift cargo rocket that representatives claimed could be built by private industry. It was doubtful that the rocket could be ready in time to aid construction of the Space Station. William Lenoir, NASA Associate Administrator, said the new rocket was not necessary for building the Space Station, but would have other uses. In a related matter, Truly released to the White House and Congress his plan to increase NASA's budget by 60 percent over the next three years: $15 billion in 1991, $17.6 billion in 1992, $19.3 billion in 1993. The increases, he said, were needed for the Space Station Freedom, the Earth Observing System, and crewassisted Moon and Mars explorations. (Hearings before the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Feb 6, 8, 21, 27/90; Sp News, Feb 1511/90; H Chron, Feb 7/90; UPI, Feb 6/90)
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS31, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with the $1.5 billion, 25,000pound Hubble Space Telescope in its cargo bay. Seven years of delays, the latest occurring last April 10, when a power failure in the orbiter caused the mission to be scrubbed, preceded the event. The craft ascended to a 381mile orbit, the highest altitude yet obtained by a Shuttle. On April 25 the Hubble telescope, which had an expected 15year duration, was deployed; the telescope was to probe the universe with 10 times the clarity ever before achieved. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, on April 29, with a test of stronger, carbon brakes that would allow future landings at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, reducing both time and money for NASA's Shuttle launches. Scientists, however, could not receive data from the telescope immediately after it had been deployed because of an antenna entangled in a power cable. The entangled antenna could not rotate and relay information to a TDRS satellite. The low, 381mile orbit prevented all data from reaching ground stations. The six to eightweek chore of powering up and calibrating instruments on the telescope could not begin until the problem was resolved. Engineers zeroed in on and only partially resolved the next day. (B Sun, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; W Post, Apr 25/90; H&Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; May 1/90; NY Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; W Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; P Inq, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90)0*During April: NASA began acting on some of the recommendations from its principal independent safety review organization, which had predicted that the approximately 100 flights planned by the agency would probably entail another Shuttle loss. Among the panel's main engineering concerns were the Shuttle main engine, the redesigned solid rocket motor, orbiter structural loads, longterm orbiter maintenance, and human factors. NASA Associate Administrator William Lenoir explained that the safety panel acts as a "devil's advocate" and noted that conclusions drawn by them were intentionally exaggerated. (AvWk, Apr 23/90; CSM May 8/90)
NASA officials said that they had begun overhauling the design of their Space Station, a response to budget cuts passed by Congress and a directive to eliminate $6 billion from the Space Station plan over the next 5 years. William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said that the redesign would make the Space Station an orbiting laboratory merely visited by astronauts for scientific research. He added that it would not only be stripped of equipment for studying Earth and to make astronomical observations, but for servicing spacecraft on their way to the Moon and Mars. (WSJ, Nov 8/90; Nov 9/90; Nov 12/90; W Post, Nov 8/90; NY Times, Non 9/90)
NASA scientists Michael J. Prather and Robert T. Watson warned that current levels of ozone depletion could cause public health problems and threaten plant life regardless of what steps were taken to reduce it. Their study predicted that the salient depletion over the Arctic could drift southward, similar to the damaged ozone over Antarctica that periodically drifts over New Zealand and Australia. (P Inq, Apr 20/90)
Engineers located two leaks in the Space Shuttle's fuel line that they determined could easily be fixed and stated that flights would resume soon. The problems, said William Lenoir, NASA's flight director, did not appear to be a result of any design flaw; he added that eight of the nine scheduled missions would likely be flown this year. In the meantime, investigators from a sixmember board of investigation created by NASA July 2 were seeking to find what had gone wrong with the Hubble Space Telescope. Lew Allen, Director, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, who headed the board, promised a congressional committee that they would pinpoint the problem and fix responsibility. The investigation, he said, would be "very embarrassing to someone or some group." (W Post, Jul 14/90; NY Times, Jul 14/90)
A report released by NASA, concerning plans for the Space Station Freedom, said that 3,700 hours of maintenance would be required annually to keep it running. The final figure from the 6month study was up from the 2,200 hours that a preliminary version had given in March and dwarfed the original goal of 130 hours. The most alarming statistic was that 6,200 hours of maintenance would be needed before the station could even be habitable. "The significance is that there's no one up there to do this," said Dr. William J. Fisher, an astronaut who headed the 12member panel that did the estimate. (NY Times, Jul 21/90; W Post, Jul 21/90; WSJ, Jul 23/90)
NASA announced the selection of Margaret G. Finarelli as Acting Associate Administrator for External Relations, and the names of microgravity mission payload specialist candidates. Finarelli, who had been Deputy Associate Administrator since December 1988, would temporarily replace Kenneth S. Pedersen, who had taken a oneyear teaching assignment with Georgetown University in Washington, D.C. Candidates for payload specialists for the March 1992 STS53 Space Shuttle mission were Lawrence J. DeLucas, Joseph Prahl, Albert Sacco, and Eugene H. Trinh. (NASA Release 90107; 90108)
