Lieutenant General Donald Cromer, commander of the Air Force Systems Command Space Systems Division, told a Space Expo '91 audience that the next generation of rockets would lift payloads into near-Earth orbit for $300 a pound instead of the $3,600 per pound it now costs a Titan 4 launch vehicle. Cromer worked with NASA to develop an advanced launch system (ALS). The goal was to develop engines ready for testing in 1995-96 with a first flight by 1999-2000. (AP, Mar 26/91)
The United Nations (U.N.) reported that the world's ozone layer, particularly over the Antarctic, was thinner than ever and the "hole" over the Antarctic was increasing. However, U.N. scientist Ruman Bojkov said the U.S. Space Shuttle Challenger had not significantly contributed to the situation. Readings were taken by NASA satellites and ground-based spectrometers and the data analyzed by international scientists convened by the U.N. Environment Program and the World Meteorological Organization. Subsequently Environmental Protection Agency Administrator William K. Reilly said "The problem is more serious than we believed." (UPI, Oct 22/91; P Inq, Oct 23/91; W Post, Oct 23/91; USA Today, Oct 23/91; NY Times, Oct 23/91; WSJ, Oct 23/91; CSM, Oct 23/91; W Times, Oct 23/91; B Sun, Oct 23/91; LA Times, Oct 23/91)
AP reported that astronaut John Blaha, commander of the Atlantis mission, said he used the post-flight news conference to express his views on the space program and the importance of the Space Station, after reading criticism of the latter. (AP, Aug 21/91)
NASA General Counsel Edward Frankle announced that Johnson Space Center's Leo Monford was NASA's Inventor of the Year. The award, to be presented March 28, was for a docking alignment system called Targeting and Reflective Alignment Concept, or TRAC. Used in combination with another of Monford's inventions, a Magnetic End Effector, it could change the shape of future robot arms, satellites, and Space Stations.
William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, announced that NASA was sending Space Shuttle Discovery from the launch pad back to the hangar to repair cracked door hinges. Shuttle director Robert Crippen said Discovery should be ready to fly in late April or early May. (AP, Feb 28/91; P Inq, Mar 1/91; NY Times. Mar 1/91; WSJ, Mar 1/91; W Times, Mar 1/91; USA Today, Mar 1/91; W Post, Mar 1/91; UPI, Mar 1/91)
NASA announced that astronaut Michael L. Coats would retire from the Navy and leave NASA August 1 to become Director of Advanced Programs and Technical Planning at Loral in Houston. (NASA Release 91-104; AP, Jul 3/91)
Astronaut Manley Lanier "Sonny" Carter, who flew on the Shuttle Discovery in 1989, was one of those killed in the crash of the commuter plane carrying former Senator John Tower. Biographic data were given. (UPI, Apr 5/91; AP, Apr 5/91; AP, Apr 6/91; NY Times, Apr 6/91; W Post, Apr 6/91)
William B. Lenoir, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, said NASA hoped to cut the operating cost of its Space Shuttle program by 15 percent over a five-year period. It planned to do this by eliminating a layer of management and merging the offices of the Program Directorate in Washington, Level I, with the Program Office located at the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in Houston, Level II. The reorganization plan as yet lacked final approval. (W Times, Dec 13/91; Fla Today, Dec 13/91)
Resigning astronaut Dr. William F. Fisher warned that the planned $37 billion NASA Space Station could be canceled if its redesign is superficial. He stated that the Space Station needed total rethinking, adding that both Congress and a White House panel also indicated such a need. (NY Times, Jan 9/91)
The Soviet Union used the name of Yuri Gagarin, the first human in space 30 years ago, to boost its emerging commercial space program. President Mikhail S. Gorbachev at an opening ceremony in Moscow said Soviet space science and technology were open to international cooperation and called for joint space research with the United States, European countries, China, India, Japan, and others. (AP, Apr 11/91)
John Guest, a geologist from University College, London, was working at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory on data from the Magellan spacecraft's mission to Venus. Evidence of volcanic action exists although Magellan's mapping mission, begun September 15, 1990, thus far reveal no volcano erupting. (AP, Feb 14/91)
NASA announced that on February 21 test personnel at its John C. Stennis Space Center, Mississippi, had conducted a 1.5 second ignition test on a new turbopump developed by Pratt and Whitney for the Space Shuttle Main Engine. The company test program, underway since 1986, includes a partnership with Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International. The pumps use newer design technology and materials. Stennis Space Center is NASA's facility for testing all Space Shuttle Main Engines that power the orbiter during its first 8 1/2 minutes of flight. (NASA Release 91-36)
At a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Seattle, research physicist Michael S. Briggs reported finding a second huge source of gamma rays in the Milky Way. The Soviet satellite Granat and a gamma detector aboard NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory were to be used to observe the new source. (LA Times, May 30/91)
NASA announced delivery of its "restructuring" report to Congress, redesigning Space Station Freedom. William B. Lenoir, Associate Administrator for Space Flight, stated that NASA cut costs (by $8.9 million through 1999), simplified the design, and reduced the complexity of the project in accordance with Congress's directions and the Augustine Commission's recommendations. Six Shuttle flights would be needed to achieve the human-tended phase when astronauts, brought by the Space Shuttle, work for two-week periods. A permanently manned configuration would be achieved in fiscal year 2000, consisting of the US laboratory and habitat, and European and Japanese laboratories; the Canadian Mobile Servicing System; accommodations for a live-in crew of four; and three sets of solar arrays providing 65 kilowatts of electric power. Before permanent occupancy, an Assured Crew Return Vehicle must be available to evacuate crew in emergency; this phase requires 17 Shuttle flights. Various changes in ground facilities were also planned, scaling back some plans and resulting in some layoffs by contractors and subcontractors. (NASA release 91-45; B Sun, Mar 21/91; W Post, Mar 21/91; WSJ, Mar 21/91; USA Today, Mar 21/91; AP, Mar 21/91; UPI, Mar 21/91; CSM, Mar 22/91; W Post, Mar 22/91; B Sun, Mar 22/91; NY Times, Mar 22/91; W Times, Mar 22/91; UPI, Mar 22/91; The Citizen, Mar 24/91)
Senator Albert Gore, Democrat of Tennessee, chairman of the Senate Commerce subcommittee on Commerce, Space, and Transportation, questioned the cost figures in NASA's revised Space Station plans. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight, conceded that the $30 billion cost did not include such items as $1.5 billion to $2 billion to build an emergency crew return vehicle. The Space Studies Board of the National Research Council told the Senate subcommittee that it supported its earlier March statement about spending Space Station funds differently. (W Times, Apr 17/91; UPI, Apr 17/91; AP, Apr 17/91; Washington Technology, Apr 18/91; AP, Apr 19/91; Htsvl Tms, Apr 19/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly named Robert L. Crippen as the new Director of the John F. Kennedy Space Center, effective January 1, 1992. Crippen is to replace Forrest S. McCartney. (NASA Release 91-180; AP, Oct 31/91; UPI, Oct 31/91; O Sen Star, Nov 1/91; Fla Today, Nov 1/91)
William Paciesas, research professor of Physics at the University of Alabama, Huntsville, is co-investigator of an experiment on NASA's Gamma Ray Observatory to be carried by Space Shuttle Atlantis in April. The Burst and Transient Source Experiment was to study the origins of gamma ray bursts. Gamma rays are at the upper end of the energy spectrum, carrying more energy at higher frequency than visible light, ultraviolet light, or x-rays. (Hntsvl Tms, Mar 25/91)
Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) chief scientist William Kinard of NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, revealed that 200 experimenters in nine countries were analyzing the data gathered by the LDEF satellite that Space Shuttle Columbia rescued in 1990. The plan was to retrieve LDEF after 11 months, but delays and loss of Challenger stranded LDEF for five years and nine months. Nevertheless experiments were conducted and interesting findings were being discovered. (CSM, Feb 8/91)
The Soviet Union observed Cosmonaut Day, marking the thirtieth anniversary of the space flight of Yuri Gagarin. (P Inq, Apr 12/91; USA Today, Apr 12/91; AP, Apr 12/91)
NASA program scientist Edward Weiler said in a telephone interview with UPI that an emergency Shuttle mission to replace faulty gyroscopes and solar panels aboard the Hubble Space Telescope was not needed before a flight already set for 1993 or early 1994. As a precaution, however, NASA engineers were perfecting computer control software that would stabilize the telescope if all its gyroscopes were to fail, until a Shuttle repair mission were mounted. (UPI, Aug 23/91)
The New York Times featured a lengthy article on robots that might be used in Martian exploration as well as in industrial activities. The designer of the principal robot under consideration was William L. Whittaker, a Carnegie-Mellon University professor. He demonstrated to government officials the Ambler, a 19-foot tall, six-legged robot that could step over high boulders and avoid holes. Named Attila, the robot has 25 motors and 150 sensors and develops its behavior from the interaction of dozens of independent processors. The robot represents a combination of electrical and mechanical engineering and computer science. In addition, Whittaker  demonstrated a computer and laser vision system that could steer a vehicle in a straight line. (NY Times, Apr 21/91)
Former astronaut Michael Collins in his new book, Mission to Mars, said that he believed homosexuals and lesbians should be barred from space exploration because they would be likely to create interpersonal problems. NASA never considered sexual orientation in hiring. (AP, Apr 9/91; Long Beach Press Telegram, Apr 9/91)
Edward Stone, new director of the California Institute of Technology's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), which manages planetary missions for NASA, commented on present and future plans. He stated Magellan was sending back pictures of Venus; Galileo, on its way to explore Jupiter and its moons, would view the asteroid Gaspra in October; and Mars Observer was being prepared for a September 1992 launch. He spoke of the preliminary unmanned research necessary before any exploration of Mars could be undertaken. (CSM, Apr 15/91)
Several newspapers commented on the study by a panel of experts, headed by Edward A. Frieman of Scripps Institution of Oceanography, released by the Federation of American Scientists. The report recommended that NASA scrap plans for six huge scientific platforms to gather data for studies of global warming as part of the Earth Observation System. Instead, experts urged that NASA use smaller satellites that could provide critical data more quickly and more cheaply. (LA Times, Sep 14/91; NY Times, Sep 16/91; Time, Sep 16/91; NY Times, Sep 20/91)
The two astronauts on NASA's first Shuttle flight 10 years ago, John Young and Robert Crippen, returned to Cape Canaveral for an anniversary celebration. The 20,000 workers at Kennedy Space Center and their families were invited for the occasion. (AP, Apr 13/91; B Sun, Apr 14/91)
An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology commented on the regeneration of US aerospace technological strengths represented by the National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) and NASA's space program. The editorial quoted Assistant Air Force Secretary for Acquisition, John J. Welch, Jr., as strongly endorsing the NASP before Congress, calling it "our flagship science and technology program." The editorial commends NASA's downsizing of its Space Station plans, as well as the work of the Synthesis Group in working on a master plan for the Moon/Mars missions. (AvWk, Mar 18/91)
An internal memorandum signed by four NASA officials as well as interviews with staff at the Reston, Virginia, facility indicated a strong opinion that moving the headquarters now would disrupt development of the $30 billion Space Station. At a recent meeting three-quarters of NASA staff were said to oppose a move. Despite this fact, NASA Assistant Administrator William B. Lenoir was said to have decided to recommend moving the headquarters. (H Chron, Apr 13/91)
The media reported an article in the journal Science, indicating that despite reports of global warming and African drought, the Sahara desert shrank markedly since 1984, following a substantial expansion over the preceding four years. Two NASA scientists, Compton J. Tucker and William W. Newcomb, at NASA's Laboratory for Terrestrial Physics in Greenbelt, Maryland, and Harold E. Dregne of Texas Tech University's International Center for Arid and Semi-Arid Land Studies, conducted the research. Satellite measurements of vegetation on the ground were used to calculate the extent of the desert. (AP, Jul 18/91; NASA Release 91-114; W Post, Jul 21/91; P Inq, Jul 22/91; LA Times, Jul 22/91)
Physicists at Los Alamos National Laboratory discovered that huge parts of the sun's magnetic field break away and are propelled into space by the constantly blowing solar wind. This explains how the sun's magnetic field remains in balance while new magnetic field lines are formed, according to Los Alamos physicist John Phillips. (W Times, Mar 22/91)
The Environmental Quality Permit Board for the state of Mississippi in Jackson approved an air emissions and waste water discharge plan of NASA, needed to test-fire rocket motors at the John C. Stennis Space Center near Bay St. Louis. Water quality certification remained to be granted. The Board had one opposing vote from the head of the Department of Wild Life because of NASA's plans to fill in 69 acres of wetlands and clear 150 to 200 acres. The official considered this plan contrary to the president's policy that there be no net loss of wetlands. (Poplarville Democrat, Jan 3/91)
Navy Captain Michael L. Coats, the astronaut to command the Discovery mission, said that astronauts in Discovery, although with no military charge, would seek to observe the Persian Gulf War in their flight. The Discovery's military payloads would provide data to help the united States detect missiles fired in future wars. (H Post, Jan 24/91)
Hughes Communications Galaxy is suing NASA because it refused to launch Hughes' satellites from the Space Shuttle after the Challenger accident. Edward Frankle, NASA general counsel, said the contract foresaw that Hughes might not get the service it signed up for. (B Sun, Mar 23/91; AP, Mar 25/91; W Times, Mar 26/91; W Post, Mar 26/91; P Inq, Mar 26/91; AP, Mar 26/91)
Following the Flight Readiness Review, NASA announced April 23 as the launch date for Space Shuttle Discovery, with a seven-man crew commanded by Navy Captain Michael L. Coats. (NASA Release 91-54; W Times, Apr 16/91; AP, Apr 16/91; UPI, Apr 16/91; B Sun, Apr 17/91; NY Times, Apr 18/91)
David Webb of the White House National Commission on Space, speaking at a U.S. Space Foundation National Space Symposium in Colorado Springs, said that the commission in 1985 had recommended increased NASA spending for research and development. However, Admiral John Poindexter, then National Security Adviser, opposed it, with the result that no action was taken. (Washington Technology, May 2/91)
William Lenoir, NASA space flight chief, outlined the revised plans for the Space Station to the National Space Council on February 5. The revision would save $6 billion over five years and would cut in half the number of astronauts to live aboard as of September 1999. The new design would assemble the station in larger pieces on the ground, thus requiring 23 Space Shuttle flights to build instead of the original 34 flights. The plan is due to Congress on March 5 but may be extended to a later date. (SP News, Feb 18-24/91)
The Synthesis Group, an advisory panel headed by former astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, outlined ways to create a lunar base and make the 35-million-mile trip to Mars. The group's report was expected in May, and John E. Pike, space policy expert for the Federation of American Scientists, said it was expected to recommend that the best method for the flight would be a nuclear reactor-powered rocket. Nuclear power would cut the time of the trip in half from the 450-500 days needed using conventional chemical rockets. It would require convincing the public of the safety and desirability of such nuclear power, which to date has been used only to produce electrical power for long, unoccupied trips such as that of Voyager that photographed the outer planets. (Plain Dealer, Apr 2/91)
James T. Rose, Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs, announced his plan to leave NASA. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced that John G. Mannix would take his place. (NASA Release 91-179)
According to the Huntsville Times, NASA's Advisory Council met following the House of Representatives vote to discuss plans for the Space Station and how to put the "A" for aeronautics back into NASA. Edward Starke Jr., chairman of the ad hoc committee on the High Speed Research Program reported on plans for a new supersonic jet to be used by the commercial aviation industry. (Htsvl Tms, Jun 8/91)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, Director John M. Klineberg announced that Peter T. Burr had been named Deputy Director of the center. Burr had served as Director of Flights Projects at Goddard since August 1989. (NASA Release 91-28)
In a letter to the editor, Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator of NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, and John N. Bahcall, Professor of Natural Science at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, declared that "There is strong national support for both a vigorous manned space program and a strong science program." Believing that both were essential, they pointed out that to maintain its space leadership position, the United States must continue such programs as the Advanced X-Ray Astrophysical Facility, missions to a comet and to Saturn, and the Earth Observing System. (W Post, Jun 27/91)
William Lenoir, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said discussion was taking place concerning the possibility of a Soviet cosmonaut flying on a US Shuttle and a US astronaut spending six months on the Russian Space Station Mir. (UPI, Mar 15/91)
The Washington Post, quoting Edward Weiler, NASA's chief Hubble Space Telescope scientist, said that a computer programming error caused the Hubble to shut itself down temporarily on December 9. The problem was not considered serious and should result in losing only two days of scientific observations. NASA announced on December 12 that the Hubble resumed science data collection as of that morning and returned safely from its standby condition or safe mode, a capability built into all NASA spacecraft. In connection with the Hubble, the Baltimore Sun reported a problem with its spectrograph, which NASA believed it solved by leaving the power supply units for both ultraviolet detectors on all the time. (W Post, Dec 11/91; UPI, Dec 11/91; AP, Dec 11/91; W Times, Dec 12/91; NASA Release 91-204; C Trin, Dec 12/91; W Post, Dec 13/91; B Sun, Dec 13/91)
The Washington Post quoted John Knauss, head of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, which includes the National Weather Service, as saying that "We can no longer assume that a NASA-built satellite will serve our needs." The statement referred to NASA's plans to launch GOES-NEXT, the next generation of Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites. NASA tests indicated that two of the main instruments to be used on the satellites: an imager and a temperature-humidity sensor called a sounder, were defective. UPI indicated that Knauss announced the appointment of a task force to consider alternative courses of action regarding a weather satellite, such as leasing a Japanese or European satellite. (W Post, Jun 28/91; UPI, Jun 28/91; NY Times, Jun 29/91; Time, Jul 1/91)
NASA named Margaret G. Finarelli as Associate Administrator for External Relations and John D. Schumacher as Deputy Associate Administrator for External Relations. Finarelli, who has served in a number of U.S. government agencies, joined NASA in 1981 as Chief of the International Planning and Programs Office. Schumacher came to NASA in 1989 from a law practice in New York City. (NASA Release 91-3)
John W. "Jack" Russell, a crack aviation mechanic and retired NASA employee, was scheduled to be the first member of the aviation support sector to be enshrined in the Amherst Museum's Niagara Frontier Aviation Hall of Fame. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 21/91)
The media carried the discovery, announced on August 23, by three astronomers, Donald P. Schneider of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, Maarten Schmidt of the California Institute of Technology, and James E. Gunn of Princeton University of the oldest and most distant object yet found, a 900 million year-old quasar. The discovery resulted from the use of a supersensitive digital camera, developed by Gunn for the Hubble telescope. The camera was attached to Mount Palomar's Hale telescope and special filters were used. (B Sun, Aug 26/91; NY Times, Aug 27/91; W Times, Aug 27/91; LA Times, Aug 27/91)
William B. Lenoir said NASA's manned space flight division must cut expenses by 3 percent each year in the next five years to save $1 billion. The last alternative would be to reduce the number of space flights but that would be "a couple of years away." Later media comments indicated that NASA's budgetary discipline and the slimming down of the Space Station plans appeared to be paying off for NASA in relation to Congress. (AP, Oct 5/91; AvWk, Oct 21/91; W Post, Oct 28/91)
As the thirtieth anniversary of his trip as America's first space pioneer approached, Alan Shepard reminisced about his vivid recollections of that flight on May 5, 1961 as well as the 33 hours he spent on the Moon 10 years later. Since that day in 1961, NASA has launched 70 manned flights with 161 individuals. (LA Times, Apr 28/91)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had completed one year of operation on April 25. Joseph H. Rothenberg, Associate Director of Flight Projects for Hubble Space Telescope at Goddard, summarized the Hubble's achievements. These included the taking of various images and presentation of data from observations at key scientific meetings. Scientists planned to compensate for the spherical aberration by modifying the telescope's replacement instruments. These included the placement of the Wide Field/Planetary Camera II in 1993 and further servicing plans during astronaut space walks. (NASA Release - Hubble Space Telescope; LA Times, Apr 29/91)
Joseph Stickle, chief engineer at NASA's Langley Research Center, was quoted in connection with NASA's role in promoting small planes. He said that the annual convention of the Experimental Aircraft Association, held in Oshkosh, Wisconsin, was a place where NASA featured its innovations that would make small planes safer, such as a spin-resistant design, lightning-protection technology, or airfoils. (WSJ, Dec 12/91)
The media reported the concern of Soviet cosmonauts aboard the Mir Space Station that the station and the space program in general might be sold because of Russia's economic plight. The role of the new Soviet republics with regard to space was also undetermined. Subsequently, Yuri Semyonov, general designer of the Energia team that managed Mir, said according to Tass, that the Space Station would remain the property of his collective. (NY Times, Sep 7/91; AP, Sep 7/91; P Inq, Sep 8/91; B Sun, Sep 8/91; AP, Sep 12/91; NY Times, Sep 13/91)
The media carried comments by William B. Lenoir, NASA Associate Administrator, that if the congressional appropriations process did not restore the cut in the Space Station funding, it would kill the project and signal that the United States "was going out of the manned space business." In addition, some media articles commended Congress for its action or raised serious questions about NASA's new design or its education of the public about the need for a Space Station. (NY Times, May 21/91; AP, May 21/91; B Sun, May 21/91; SP News, May 20-26/91)
The House Government Operations Committee asked NASA to reinstate the third bidder, Convex Computer Corporation, for the Operations Automatic Data Processing contract. Convex was disqualified for filing its bid nine minutes late. The request was made, according to committee chairman John Conyers, Democrat from Michigan, in order to encourage competition. (Federal Computer Week, Apr 15/91; Government Computer News, Apr 15/91))
NASA announced that astronaut William F. Fisher, M.D., would resign effective January 31, 1991. He was to return to full-time medical practice in Texas. With NASA since 1980, Fisher took part in research and in the 20th Space Shuttle mission in August 1985 where he engaged in the longest spacewalk in the history of spaceflight. (NASA release 91-4; UPI, Jan 8/91)
A feature article in the New York Times discussed the impact of space rockets on the ozone layer. Reportedly, NASA estimated that each Shuttle flight injected some 75 tons of chlorine into the stratosphere. Dr. Michael J. Prather, an atmospheric scientist at NASA's Goddard Institute in New York City, calculated that the lifting of nine Shuttles and six Titan 4s every year would add 0.3 percent to stratospheric chlorine, which in turn would destroy much less than 1 percent of the ozone there. This made the Shuttle a large source of pollution but small by comparison to any other industry such as refrigeration or solvents. (NY Times, May 14/91)
Michael Griffin, deputy for technology at the Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative Organization, said that the reason the Aries rocket of Orbital Sciences Corporation had to be destroyed when it went off course on August 20 was that a technician loaded the wrong computer program into the rocket's guidance unit. The matter would be investigated. (P Inq, Aug 27/91; W Times, Aug 27/91; W Post, Aug 27/91; NY Times, Aug 27/91; USA Today, Aug 27/91; LA Times, Aug 27/91; AP, Aug 27/91)
Concurrently, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Michael D. Griffin for the new position of Associate Administrator for Exploration. (NASA Release 91-139; SP News, Aug 26-Sep 8/91)
The Antelope Valley Press quoted John Young, special assistant for engineering, operations, and safety at NASA's Johnson Space Center in Houston as saying that for NASA to land Shuttles at Kennedy Space Center instead of Edwards Air Force Base in California posed an increased risk. Although the Florida landing saved NASA the cost of ferrying a Shuttle back from California and the five to seven days involved, Florida weather was more problematic. Furthermore, Edwards had more runway alternatives whereas Kennedy had only one. John E. Pike, space policy analyst for the Federation of American Scientists said NASA should wait on Florida landings till all Shuttles were equipped with drag chutes to slow them down. (Antelope Valley Press, Aug 9/91)
A group advising the UN-sponsored Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change stated that a 10-year delay in taking action to curb global warming would mean little further increase in the level of warming predicted by the end of the 21st century. Michael E. Schlesinger, a climatologist at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and Xingjian Jiang authored a study indicating this. Meanwhile, William K. Reilly, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, echoed this stance by saying "It's better to get it right than to act too precipitously." Scientists disagreed on the subject, and Senator Al Gore strongly opposed the Bush Administration's position. (NY Times, Mar 21/97)
NASA announced that astronaut John M. Lounge would leave NASA June 21 to become Director of Houston Operations for Spacehab, Inc., which is providing a pressurized module for future space flights. (NASA Release 91-86)
NASA announced that investigations of the sun's fiery outer atmosphere would intensify when the Ulysses spacecraft passed behind the sun on August 21. Edward J. Smith, Project Scientist for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said that at conjunction (when the spacecraft and Earth are on opposite sides of the sun), radio waves transmitted from the spacecraft would travel through and become distorted by the innermost region of the corona. (NASA Release 91-131)
The same publication discussed the way in which Michael Griffin, described as "NASA's new moon/Mars czar," was shaking up NASA's space exploration initiative. Reportedly, Griffin wanted to move fast on launching a "relatively inexpensive, high-visibility space mission," such as sending an unmanned spacecraft to scout for a permanent base on the moon. (AvWk, Oct 21/91)
William J. O'Neil, manager of the $1.4 billion Galileo project at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said Galileo fired its thrusters to put it on a course to take it close to the asteroid Gaspra on October 29. (AP, Oct 10/91; W Times, Oct 10/91; LA Times, Oct 10/91)
NASA announced that its John F. Kennedy Space Center, Florida, had awarded EG&G Florida, Inc., a one-year extension of its contract for base operations services. (NASA Release C91-qq)
NASA was considering repairs costing at least $50 million to the Hubble Space Telescope. In addition to the telescope proper, the question was whether to compensate for flaws in three other instruments: two spectrographs and the faint-object camera. Such repairs would involve Costar (Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement) and cost $30 million to $40 million, while the telescope repair cost would be $14 million. To test the feasibility of performing such repairs, mock spacewalks inside a huge water tank at Marshall Space Flight Center would determine whether the work could be accomplished in the estimated 16 hours required. Despite the need for such repairs, Edward Weller (Wiler?), NASA program scientist for the observatory, stressed the achievements the Hubble telescope had made in revealing the universe. (NY Times, Apr 23/91; B Sun, Apr 23/91; Birmingham News, Apr 23/91; AP, Apr 23/91; UPI, Apr 23/91)
The California Institute of Technology and the University of California, with funding from the W.M. Keck Foundation, were preparing to build a new $93.3 million Keck II telescope in 1992 on top of Hawaii's Mauna Kea volcano, adjacent to the Keck I being completed. Foundation chairman Howard B. Keck announced that the foundation would pay $74.6 million for the second telescope. Edward C. Stone, director of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said scientists were sure NASA would get Congressional approval to finance the remainder. The linked telescopes, according to Stone, "can explore the origin of the visible universe by peering back to the first 1 billion to 2 billion years after the Big Bang, when we believe that galaxies began to form out of the residue of the Big Bang." (C Trin, Apr 27/91; B Sun, Apr 27/91; NY Times, Apr 27/91; LA Times, Apr 27/91; W Post, Apr 27/91; CSM, Apr 29/91)
A tiny crack was found on one of the substitute Shuttle hinges sent from Endeavour to spaceship Discovery. Dr. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, said the crack was too small to be a cause for concern. (NY Times, Mar 15/91; W Times, Mar 15/91; USA Today, Mar 15/91; AP, Mar 15/91; UPI, Mar 15/91
The New York Times reported that Edward C. Aldridge Jr., president of McDonnell Douglas Electronic Systems, who served on the National Space Council that made recommendations on NASA's programs, was to become president and chief executive of Aerospace, a federally financed research and development center in El Segundo, California. (NY Times, Dec 19/91)
