Dr. William B. Lenoir, NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Flight, submitted his letter of resignation to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly, to be effective May 4, 1992. During Dr. Lenoir's tenure, NASA safely and successfully launched the Space Shuttle 17 times and completed a major restructuring of the Space Station Freedom program, reducing its development costs by $6 billion, simplifying its subsystems and improving its on-orbit assembly process. (NASA Release 92-41)
Astronaut John Young was awarded the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal today by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin at NASA headquarters in Washington, D. C. Young, 62, was currently serving as Special Assistant to the Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, for Enginering, Operations, and Safety. (NASA Release 92-160; Fla Today, Oct 11/92)
John L. Sloop, 76, an electrical engineer who was a retired official of NASA, died in Washington, DC. Mr. Sloop retired in 1972 as assistant associate administrator for advanced research and propulsion after a 30-year career with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. (W Post, Oct 7/92)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) revealed a new class of object in the universe--a grouping of gigantic star clusters produced by the collision of galaxies. Images of the core of the peculiar galaxy Arp 220 show that stars are produced at a furious rate from the dust and gas supplied by the interaction of two galaxies. The discovery was made by Dr. Edward Shaya and graduate student Dan Dowling, University of Maryland, and the Wide Field/Planetary Camera Team. (NASA Release 92-80)
Officials at NASA's John F. Kennedy Space Center in Florida said that the agency had selected I-Net, Inc., of Bethesda, Maryland, for negotiation of a contract to provide engineering support services to the center's Engineering Development Directorate. The contract was to  run for five years and have an estimated value in excess of $100 million. (NASA Release C92-12)
Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev returned to earth five months later than originally planned. The 33-year-old flight engineer's stint in space aboard the Mir Space Station had been originally scheduled to end in October. But because of the disintegration of the Soviet Union, money problems in Moscow, and Kazakh nationalism, he was asked to extend his space journey by almost five months, creating a predicament for him and making him a media celebrity. (NY Times, Mar 26/92; USA Today, Mar 26/92; W Post, Mar 26/92; WSJ, Mar 26/92; B Sun, Mar 26/92)
Final preparations were made for the launching of Earthwinds, a balloon whose three-member crew hoped to be the first to circumnavigate the world in a single balloon flight. Larry Newman, the captain of the Earthwinds and a former crew member of both the trans-Atlantic balloon flight in 1978 and the trans-Pacific flight in 1981, predicted a successful voyage of some 22,000 miles at an altitude of about 35,000 feet. Included in the crew, was to be Maj. Gen. Vladimir Dzhanibekov, chief of astronaut training in the Russian air force. The balloon, which is higher than the Statue of Liberty, would carry scientific experiments built in the former Soviet Union and NASA. (NY Times, Jan 29/92)
Michael Griffin, NASA associate administrator for exploration, said that a new heavy-lift vehicle built from components of the Space Shuttle transportation system should be able to launch elements of Space Station Freedom at a cost comparable to that of the space shuttle. (AvWk, Nov 2/92)
NASA set a December 2d launch date for the year's eighth and last Shuttle flight, a military mission, designated STS-53. Five astronauts, all military men, will release a classified satellite, thought to be a Lacrosse radar-imaging satellite from the Shuttle Discovery. Crew members are David Walker, commander; Robert Cabana, co-pilot; James Voss, Guion Bluford, and Michael Richard Clifford. (W Times, Nov 20/92; UPI, Nov 19/92; UPI, Nov 30/92)
NASA announced that Sergei K. Krikalev and Col.Valadimir G. Titov had been approved as the two Russian candidates to be trained to fly on a Space Shuttle mission scheduled for November 1993. (NASA Release 92-166)
It was announced that NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite had achieved two of the three goals of its $400 million mission to study the "big bang." In 1991 COBE had shown that the wavelength or "color" of the cosmic background radiation was consistent with what the big-bang theory predicted, said John Mather, project scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists also said that COBE had met its second goal: detecting the oldest structures in the universe, thereby explaining how matter first started clumping together in the young universe to produce galaxies and stars. COBE was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on November 18, 1989. It was carried into a 559-mile-high, near polar orbit by a two-stage Delta rocket with nine strap-on boosters. (AP, Apr 23/92; LA Times, Apr 24/92; B Sun, Apr 24/92; NY Times, Apr 24/92; USA Today, Apr 24/92; NASA Release 92-51)
Democratic vice presidential candidate Albert Gore criticized the Bush Administration for misdirecting the national space program before an audience at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Gore said that the administration had failed to establish strategic priorities and that under President Bush NASA had found itself working on too many programs with too little money. He pledged that a Bill Clinton administration would seek to spend $35 billion by the end of the decade to build an orbiting space station, in part to replace jobs lost in military industries. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; NY Times, Oct 20/92; Prince Georges Journal, Oct 21/92; W. Post, Oct 20/92)
Air Force Secretary Donald Rice voiced strong support for designing a National Aero-Space Plane capable of flying into orbit. Rice's statement came in response to news reports about plans to lower the aerospace plane programs' goals in response to Congressional concerns about the cost of the program. France and Russia were also reported to be working jointly to develop aerospace-plane type engines that could threaten America's leadership in the field. Known as the X-30, the plane would be the world's first single-stage-to-orbit vehicle. (Antelope Valley News, Dec 19/92)
In a real sign that the "space race" between Russia and the United States was over, the director of the Russian Space Agency, Yuri Koptev, was taken on a tour of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Koptev was in southern California to familiarize himself with the U.S. space program and to develop contacts with local aerospace companies. The United States and Russia already had plans to cooperate on two unmanned missions to Mars, and American space officials were discussing the possibility of using the Russian Soyuz spacecraft as a lifeboat in space for astronauts aboard Space Station Freedom. (Star-News, Dec 4/92)
Yuri P. Semenov, general director of NPO Energia, the Russians' civilian manned space program, invited U.S. officials to lease room aboard the Mir Space Station, orbiting 240 miles above Earth, to conduct experiments. In addition, Semenov also proposed selling Russians' most powerful rocket, the Energia, which exceeds the lifting capacity of any U.S. launch vehicle. (W Post, Feb 23/92; NY Times, Feb 23/92)
It was announced that astronaut John O. Creighton (Capt., USN) would retire from the U.S. Navy and leave NASA to work in the Commercial Airplanee Group of the Boeing Co., Seattle, Washington, beginning September 1, 1992. He was to work as a production test pilot and as an instructor pilot in the customer support area. (NASA Release 92-96)
According to Michael Griffin, NASA's associate administrator for exploration, NASA needs $3 billion annually to conduct a program of human exploration of the moon and Mars. Those funds would have to come from sacrificing other space projects if NASA's overall budget could not be increased, Griffin said. (Space News, Apr 13/92)
The U.S. Air Force, NASA, and Grumman aircraft company said they had reached the mid-point of the X-29 vortex flow control (VFC) program at Edwards Air Force Base in California, producing yaw rates of up to 20 degrees. The use of VCF to yaw the aircraft while at high angle-of-attack is an aviation first according to Col. William Gotcher, X-29 program manager.(Flight International, Aug 19-25/92)
Geologists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory and at Louisiana State University announced that they had discovered several previously unknown earthquake faults in California's northeastern Mojave Desert by analyzing remote sensing images at optical, infrared, and radar wavelengths. At a meeting of the Geological Society of America in Cincinnati, JPL's Dr. John Ford outlined how spaceborne imaging technology has helped scientists find these newly observed faults. (NASA Release 92-186; AP Oct 27/92)
After two failed launch attempts, the Earthwinds around-the-world balloon flight was postponed until November. The captain, airline pilot Larry Newman of Scottsdale, Arizona, and his crew, Don Moses and Russian cosmonaut Vladimir Dzhanibekov, need near-calm conditions on the ground and the right trajectory to launch the trip, expected to last from 12 to 21 days at an altitude of about 35,000 feet. It would be the first balloon to circle the world. (LA Times, Feb 23/92;)
The Space Shuttle Discovery's international crew took time off from their scientific work to remember the seven astronauts who died in the explosion of the Shuttle Challenger six years ago. "It being the 28th, we're all mindful of the sacrifices made along the way," Discovery crewman William Readdy said during a news conference from space. It was the first time that Americans had been in orbit on the anniversary of the Jan 28, 1986 explosion of Challenger 73 seconds after it took off from Cape Canaveral. (P Inq, Jan 29/92; USA Today, Jan 29/92)
NASA research aircraft were exploring the potential of fiber optic sensors in critical aircraft flight control systems. Because of fiber optic's advantages in flight systems, researchers believe fiber optics will improve flight control, engine performance and safety. The research project is part of the Fiber Optic Control System Integration program managed by NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland and jointly funded by NASA and the U.S. Navy's Naval Air Systems Command. The first NASA plane to fly with fiber optic sensors was the F-15 Highly Integrated Digital Electronic Control (HIDEC) aircraft at Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edward, California. (NASA Release 92-23)
Michael Griffin, associate administrator of NASA, told an opening session of a NASA was conference, that NASA in trouble with the tax-paying public because its hadn't been running efficient programs. Griffin said NASA risks losing support for its projects--like proposed returns to the moon and manned missions to Mars--because the public perceives it is employing more people than it needs and not giving a good return for the money it spends. (Birmingham News, Mar 25/92)
A Russian-German crew docked with the Mir Space Station and was to relieve a Russian cosmonaut who had been orbiting over an extended period of time. The ITAR-Tass news agency reported that the TM-14 capsule docked on schedule. Cosmonauts Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Kaleri would replace cosmonauts Sergei Krikalev and Alexander Volkov, who were scheduled to return to Earth on March 25. Germany paid $24 million to send its astronaut Klaus-Dietrich Flade into space. He was to spend six days studying the influence of zero gravity on the human body. (P Inq, Mar 20/92; AP, Mar 19/92)
Two American scientists presented a new theory on the evolution of Earth's continents and on early mass extinctions of life. Michael Rampino of New York University and Verne Oberbeck, a geologist at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, discussed evidence that suggests that a huge asteroid struck Earth 250 million years ago, helping break up a super land mass called Gondwanaland and contributing to Earth's worst mass extinction of life forms. The new theory, presented during the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco, was met by disbelief and skepticism, even by scientists who believe there is overwhelming evidence that another later asteroid impact wiped out the dinosaurs and other species by disrupting Earth's climate 65 million years ago. (P Inq, Dec 10/92; The Sun, Dec 10/92; W Post, Dec 10/92; AP, Dec 10/92; W Times, Dec 20/92)
James Edwin Webb, 85, whose work as the chief of America's space agency was instrumental in putting a man on the moon, died March 27 at Georgetown University Hospital. During Mr. Webb's tenure, America's first manned space flight took place as well as the first orbital flight by John Glenn and the first walk in space by Edward White. (W Times, Mar 30/92; USA Today, Mar 30/92; NY Times, Mar 29/92; W Post, Mar 29/92)
NASA managers set January 13 as the launch date for the first Shuttle mission of 1993. Designated STS-54, the flight was to have two primary objectives--deployment of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-F) and astronomical observations of invisible x-ray sources within the Milky Way Galaxy with the Diffuse X-ray Spectrometer. The crew was to be comprised of John Casper, commander, Don McMonagle, pilot, and three mission specialists, Mario Runco, Greg Harbaugh, and Susan Helms. (NASA Release N92-110; C Trib, Dec 23/92; AP, Dec 22/92; UPI, Dec 22/92)
Two astronauts at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said that they had evidence of planets or other bodies around eight stars they had studied in a star-forming region of the Milky Way Galaxy, 450 light years from Earth. The scientists, Drs. Kenneth Marsh and Michael J. Mahoney, said their discovery of unseen companions around low-mass stars in the Taurus-Auriga region of the Milky Way had resulted from the study of data from the Infrared Astronomy Satellite acquired in 1983 and data from ground-based observations acquired mostly from 1981-1983. (NASA Release 92-87)
The Space Shuttle Columbia blasted into space under control of a five-man, one-woman crew. In command was James Wetherbee of the Navy; his co-pilot was Capt. Michael Baker.  Mission specialists were Capt. William Shepherd of the Navy, flight engineer; Charles Lacy Veach; Tamara Jernigan; and Canadian researcher Steven MacLean. On board were commercially sponsored experiments that were to examine a potential treatment for osteoporosis, material crystals to increase the speed of computers, protein crystals to determine the molecular structure of "alfa-2b interferon" used in the treatment of some cancers, and experiments on microgravity effects on astronauts. (NASA Release 92-180; P Inq, Oct 22/92; UPI, Oct 22/92; AP, Oct 22/92; P Inq, Oct 23/92; NY Times, Oct 23/92; Oct 25/92; W Times, Oct 23/92; USA Today, Oct 23/92; AP, Oct 23/92; CSM, Oct 23/92; LA Times, Oct 23/92; The Sun, Oct 23/92; C Trib, Oct 23/92)
NASA scientists using the Hubble Space Telescope said they had discovered extended disks of dust around 15 newly-formed stars in the Orion Nebula starbirth region 1,500 light-years away. Such disks are a prerequisite for the formation of solar systems like the sun's. Hubble's detailed images confirm more than a century of speculation, conjecture, and theory about the genesis of solar systems. Astronomers said the Hubble data was the strongest evidence yet that planets could exist beyond the solar system and may even be a common occurrence. "We have found a place where it is very possible that there will be planets within the next few million years," said Edward Weiler, program scientist for the space telescope, at a NASA briefing. (NASA Release 92-226; W Times, Dec 17/92; USA Today, Dec 17/92; W Post, Dec. 17/92; NY Times, Dec 17/92; LA Times, Dec 17/92; CSM Dec 17/92; The Sun, Dec 17/92; AP, Dec 17/92; UPI, Dec 17/92; APn, Dec 17/92; Newsweek, Dec 28/92)
A research arm of John Hopkins University was chosen to design a spacecraft intended to take the first close-up look at the kind of asteroid that could one day collide with Earth. Hopkin's Applied Physics Laboratory in Laurel, Maryland, was given a $450,000 contract by NASA for preliminary work on the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous satellite, called NEAR. If NASA and Congress approved costruction of the compact $150 million spacecraft, it could begin orbiting an asteroid called "nereus" in January 2000. (B Sun, May 9/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Dr. Charles Pellerin as Associate Deputy Administrator for Strategic Planning, John R. Dailey as Associate Deputy Administrator, and Ralph C. Thomas as Assistant Administrator for Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization. The appointments continued management changes Goldin had instituted in recent months. (NASA Release 92-194; Space News, Nov 9-15)
Yuri N. Koptev, a top Russian space official, declared in Izvestiya, that the six-year-old Space Station Mir must be replaced by 1994 and suggested turning to the West for technical and financial assistance. "We do not exclude attracting foreign capital and forming a joint stock company for joint use of the Mir Station," he said. (AP, Feb 28/92)
In his annual speech to the Aerospace Industries Association, President Donald Fuqua predicted another year of declining production and more layoffs. "The long-term outlook for the aerospace industry is for a continued decline in overall sales volume for the rest of the decade," Mr. Fuqua told industry officials in Washington, D. C. (The Sun, Dec 17/92; USA Today, Dec 17/92; W Post, Dec 17/92; AP, Dec 16/92)
The names of Michael Adams and Manley "Sonny" Carter, two astronauts who died in line of duty, were scheduled to be added to the $6.2 million Space Mirror memorial at Kennedy Space Center. The 50 foot by 42 foot memorial was conceived as a way to pay tribute to the seven astronauts who died aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1986. But it became a memorial for all U.S. astronauts who had died in the line of duty. The names of Adams and Carter, who died in 1991 in a commuter plane crash on their way to a NASA speaking engagement, were added to the memorial when workers were repairing cracks that had developed around the astronauts' names, which are cut through black-granite panels. (O Sent, May 7/92)
Scientists studying the effects of ozone depletion in Earth's atmosphere reported that the frequencies of light passing through a depleted ozone layer may not cause the widespread catastrophic damage to plants scientists previously predicted. They found that the kind of ultraviolet radiation that causes the most damage to alfalfa plants passes straight through the ozone layer, meaning a depleted ozone layer would not increase exposure to the most damaging light. Significant depletions in the ozone layer would certainly send up the cancer rate in humans quite substantially, biophysicist John Sutherland of the Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, New York, said, but plants are not likely to be the most severely affected by the increased ultraviolet light hitting Earth because of a thinning protective layer. (UPI, Aug 13/92)
William R. Schindler, 64, a former project manager of the Delta launch vehicle project at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, died Jan 27 in Loma Linda, California. (W Post, Jan 29/92)
NASA announced that Dr. Martin J. Fettman of Colorado State University's College of Veterinary Medicine would be the prime payload specialist for the second Spacelab Life Sciences mission scheduled for launch in August 1993. Previously named crew members consist of Commander John Blaha; Pilot Richard Searfoss; Payload Commander Rhea Seddon; and mission specialists William S. McArthur, Jr.; Shannon Lucid, and David Wolfe. (NASA Release 92-190)
Russia launched a spaceship carrying two monkeys and insects into orbit to conduct radiation experiments on the creatures. Experts from the European Space Agency as well as Italian, German, and other foreign scientists were to oversee the biological experiments. The ITAR-Tass news agency also said that Cosmonauts Anatoly Solovyov and Sergei Avdeyev, who had spent five months aboard the Mir Space Station, were in good condition following routine medical examinations. (AP, Dec 28/92, Dec 29/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and Yuri Koptev, the Director General of the Russian Space Agency, ratified the first contract between NASA and a Russian aerospace firm, NPO-Energia. The contract was for the study of applications of Russian space technology to the Space Station Freedom program. The contract was for an initial period of one year with a value of $1 million. (NASA Release 92-91)
J.P. Mitchell, Pratt and Whitney's Space Shuttle Main Engine (SSME) Alternate Turbopump Development project manager, reported that a pair of Pratt and Whitney designed high-pressure turbopumps had been successfully tested at 100 percent rated power on a SSME at NASA's John C. Stennis Space Center in Mississippi. (PR Newswire, Jan 23/92)
