Lieutenant General Malcolm O'Neill, Director of the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO), proposed to Pentagon Acquisition Chief John Deutch cancellation of the purchase of four Russian Topaz II space nuclear reactors--believed to be the last in Russia's inventory--to be used in the DoD's Thermionic System Test Evaluation. Steven Aftergood, of the Federation of American Scientists, said that the Air Force might take over the ground test program. The Nuclear Electric Propulsion Space Test Program, with which they might have been used, was also dropped. These moves continued a trend in the cancellation of several NASA and Air Force efforts to develop space nuclear power. A White House Space Nuclear Power Interagency Working Group was scheduled to draft administration policy by July 1994 and a U.S. position for the February meeting of the United Nations Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (COPOUS) Science and Technology Subcommittee. (Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
NASA announced that astronaut William F. Readdy would replace Kenneth D. Cameron as NASA manager of operational activities at Star City, Russia. As Director of Operations, Russia, Readdy would work with Russian trainers, engineers, and flight controllers to support the training of NASA astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center, Star City, and to enhance continued cooperation between NASA and Russia's Space Agency. (NASA Release 94-115)
U.S. Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin signed a number of cooperation agreements in Moscow. The agreements included one to conduct joint space research to gather data on the Earth's atmosphere and to cooperate on the International Space Station. According to Yuriy Koptev, director of the Russian Space Agency, the agreement with NASA concerning the Earth's atmosphere provided for U.S. instruments for measuring the ozone layer and atmospheric components to be installed on Russian Meteor-3 satellites scheduled to be launched in 1996 and 1999. Agreement was also reached on a joint program of biologicial experiments under which two Russian Bion satellites with U.S. equipment were to be launched. Gore and Chernomyrdin also signed a customs agreement providing for duty-free clearance of goods shipped to Russia for cooperation in space, which would remove barriers causing delays in the Space Station program.
NASA announced that it would continue to study how the Earth's environment was changing and how human beings affected that change during the upcoming flight of Space Shuttle Atlantis. This, the third flight of the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS) was part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. Also during the mission astronauts would deploy and retrieve a free-flying satellite designed to study the middle and lower thermospheres and would perform various experiments covering life sciences research and microgravity processing. The flight, commanded by Donald R. McMonagle, was scheduled for launch on November 3. (NASA Release 94-175)
The crew for the STS-67 mission aboard Columbia for late 1994 was announced. Stephen S. Oswald was to command the Astro-2 astronomy mission to study the far ultraviolet (UV) spectra of faint astronomical objects and polarization of UV light from hot stars and galaxies. USAF Major William G. Gregory was named pilot, Navy Lieutenant Commander Wendy B. Lawrence mission specialist, Ronald A. Parise and Samuel T. Durrance payload specialists, Tamara E. Jernigan Payload Commander, and John M. Grunsfeld mission specialist.
NASA's John C. Stennis Space Center (SSC), Hancock County, Mississippi, announced the award of a contract to Lockheed Space Operations Company, Titusville, Florida, to provide propulsion and technical services at SSC. (NASA Release C94-dd)
NASA announced that of the various devices left by astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin on the moon 25 years ago, a laser ranging retroreflector continued to provide fundamental scientific data. From the data obtained and new observations scientists now believed that the moon might have a liquid core. Among other findings from the laser ranging experiments were a verification of Einstein's theory of relativity and the direct influence on the moon's orbit of ocean tides on Earth. (NASA Release 94-122)
Engineers William Weist and Ray McLaughlin, with three other scientists and pilots of AlliedSignal, Inc., have since October 1991 been flying a converted 1952 Convair with powerful, updated turboprops at 300 feet in Florida testing a new system to detect low-level wind shear. In summer, bursts of concentrated cold air descend to the ground and violently spread out horizontally in all directions, causing unpredictable changes in wind direction at low altitude. Identified only two decades ago, wind shear has since 1964 caused at least 26 aircraft accidents in the U.S., killing more than 500 people. Although airports are installing radar, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) reported that air-traffic controllers might need two minutes to warn pilots, who might have only ten seconds to react. In contrast, this system can warn in 50 seconds, despite analyzing four million pieces of information per second and filtering out ground clutter such as traffic. (WSJ, Jan 13/94)
NASA announced the creation of the Office of Space Access and Technology at NASA Headquarters in Washington and the selection of John E. Mansfield as the new NASA Associate Administrator for the office. The merger of two previous offices: the Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology and the Office of Space Systems Development gave greater focus to the development of advanced space technologies and future space launch systems. The changes were to take effect September 6. (NASA Release 94-137; Defense Daily, Aug 24/94)
The approaching 25th anniversary of the first moon landing by Neil Armstrong occasioned a feature article on Gene Kranz, NASA Flight Director, who enabled the operation to occur. (LA Times, Jul 5/94)
Alumni of the Aerospace Human Factors Division office of NASA's Ames Research Center at Moffett Field, south of San Francisco, reportedly were exerting pressure to maintain the division as a separate entity in the restructuring taking place under new director Ken K. Munechika. These alumni had prominent positions in the airline industry, aircraft manufacturing, and government. Moreover, NASA created human factors research and a human factors pioneer such as John Lauber, of the National Transportation Safety Board, maintained that a separate organizational structure, combining computer sciences, engineering, psychology, medicine, and other disciplines, was essential. (W Post, Jun 24/94)
The crew for the STS-66 mission aboard Atlantis in the Fall of 1994 was selected. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel Donald R. McMonagle was to command the mission, called ATLAS-03. This third Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS) would continue Spacelab studies of solar energy effects on the Earth's climate and environment. USAF Major Curtis L. Brown, Jr, was named pilot; Scott E. Parazynski, M.D., Joseph R. Tanner, and ESA astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy, mission specialists; and Ellen Ochoa, PhD., Payload Commander. Tasks included the CRISTA-SPAS Cryogenic Infrared Spectrometer Telescope for Atmosphere on the Shuttle Pallet Satellite, jointly with Germany. (NASA Release 94-4; Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
In preparation for commemorating the 25th anniversary of Neil A. Armstrong's walk on the moon on July 20, 1969, the media featured various articles, books, films, television specials, and high-level conferences on the meaning of the moon landing. One article commented on the significance of these publications and events, with particular reference to Moonshot, a memoir cowritten by Alan B. Shepard Jr. and the late astronaut Deke Slayton. (LA Times, Jun 28/94)
Naval Academy graduate Wendy B. Lawrence was scheduled to fly on Space Shuttle Columbia in December. After earning a Master's degree in ocean engineering at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, she taught physics at the Naval Academy. (Capitol, Mar 15/94)
Space Tec Ventures, a Hampton, Virginia, company created by Joseph Casas, helped NASA's Langley Research Center in Virginia build a laser scheduled to be be used to monitor Earth's environment from space. The laser was to measure the amounts of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and was to be aimed at Earth from Space Shuttle Endeavour's cargo bay. The firm built two other lasers that were scheduled for NASA flights in August and September.
Astronomer Holland C. Ford and COSTAR project manager Dr. Jim Crocker, both with the Space Telescope Science Institute (STI) at Johns Hopkins University, expressed scientists' jubilation at the remarkable photos from the recently repaired Hubble Space Telescope (HST). COSTAR is the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement package that repaired the HST. Dr. Gary A. Bower, an HST astronomer in a group of 1,800 attending an American Astronomical Society (AAS) conference in Crystal City, Virginia, predicted that the HST would be able to confirm evidence of black holes at the center of galaxies. Dr. Edward J. Weller, an HST program scientist at NASA headquarters, reserved judgement. (B Sun, Jan 13/94; AP, Jan 13/94)
Major Oleg Kulakovsky of the Military Space Forces, the branch of the Russian army that runs Baikonur Cosmodrome, was quoted as saying that people were leaving adjacent Leninsk because "There's nothing to stay for." The population was said to have fallen from 100,000 to 45,000 since Kazakhstan gained independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. Kazakhstan has a severe energy crisis and a chronic water shortage, which contribute to the harsh life for the population. Since the first Soviet manned space flight by Yuri Gagarin in 1961, Baikonur has averaged one launch a month, according to General Oleg Goryushkin, space center deputy commander. However, the space industry appears to be undergoing a crisis of confidence, and in view of Russia's economic crisis, the cost of maintaining Baikonur is being questioned. (UP, May 26/94)
U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry arrived in Kazakhstan from Russia. On March 20, he visited the formerly super-secret Baikonur space center. He saw a Soyuz space rocket being readied for an unmanned mission to Russia's Mir Space Station and the former Soviet Union's grounded Space Shuttle rockets. Baikonur had launched more than twice the 453 space launches of Canaveral since 1957. Bob Clarke, a NASA administrator who accompanied Perry, noted that ground crews for Soyuz-manned flights could prepare the pad for a new launch only six hours after one capsule took off whereas the Cape Canaveral turn-around time was one month. Admiral William Owens, vice chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, marveled at the workmanship of the welds on the Soyuz rocket being readied. (Reuters, Mar 19/94; AP, Mar 20/94; Reuters, Mar 20/94; W Post, Mar 21/94; NY Times, Mar 21/94; Moscow Times, Mar 22/94)
John Gibbons, White House science adviser, said that as a result of tight budgets the Government would combine the operations of civilian and military weather satellite systems: two belonging to the Defense Department and two belonging to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The combining should save as much as $300 million by the end of 1999. Under an interagency agreement, the Defense Department was to procure future weather satellites, the Commerce Department's Atmospheric Agency was to operate the system, and NASA was to conduct research on advanced technology to be incorporated into the new spacecraft. The program became a joint Defense Department-NASA project in 1993. NASA was to build and launch a Landsat 7 spacecraft to replace the aging Landsat 4 and 5 spacecraft. NASA also was to design a new generation of spacecraft to compete with foreign satellites that provide similar data. On May 11 John Morgan, Director of the European weather satellite operations (Eumetsat) said he would discuss with nations that participate in European satellite and space programs NOAA's invitation to join the combined weather satellite system. These agencies already cooperate with NOAA on developing a Joint Polar System. (AP, May 10/94; NY Times, May 11/94; W Post, May 11/94; O Sen Star, May 11/94; Fla Today, May 12/94)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center opened its Clean Room--the world's largest at 100 feet by 125 feet and nine stories high--for journalists to inspect the 15,000 pounds of parts removed from the Hubble Space Telescope and returned for examination, particularly the Wide Field/Planetary Camera. Hubble flight systems chief Frank Cepollina and NASA expert John Wood discussed both the signs of wear from three years in space and problems of controlling contamination here. (B Sun, Jan 27/94; AP, Jan 27/94)
In an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin concerning dangers to the proposed Space Station from man-made space junk, he said the danger of debris smashing through the Station shield was 20 percent over its expected 10-year life and that NASA would do whatever was necessary to get adequate safety. Because of the lengthy period the Space Station was scheduled to spend in space, the danger was greater that for a single Shuttle flight. William M. Shepherd, deputy manager for the Johnson Space Center in Houston, said that each module for astronauts was getting about 3,000 pounds of added shielding to help protect it from the greater velocity of orbiting junk. Goldin asserted that an international agreement for controlling the contamination of space was needed to deal with the situation. (NY Times, Jun 27/94; USA Today, Jun 27/94; C Trib, Jun 27/94; Fla Today, Jun 28/94)
On the 25th anniversary of the moon landing, President Clinton and Vice President Gore welcomed the three Apollo 11 astronauts: Neil Armstrong, Edwin "Buzz" Aldrin, and Michael Collins, at a White House ceremony. The U.S. Post Office also issued a stamp commemorating the 1969 event. (UP, Jul 20/94; Reuters, Jul 20/94; W Post, Jul 21/94; NY Times, Jul 21/94; B Sun, Jul 21/94; USA Today, Jul 21/94; P Inq, Jul 21/94; LA Times, Jul 21/94)
Joseph P. Martino, senior research scientist at the University of Dayton Research Institute, examined space launch costs in a study released by the Los Angeles-based Reason Foundation. Because of high costs, he noted that the United States was now farther away from having people on the moon than when President Kennedy launched the Apollo program. In 1994 it cost $3,500 per pound to put items into orbit. The cost increase started in the 1950s, when high performance of ballistic missiles was needed at any price and has been continued by NASA's policy of developing new technology for each new mission. Launch costs must be lowered and can be by three new approaches: use of commercial practices for vehicle construction, long production runs of single designs, and designing launchers to be reusable like aircraft instead of producing single-use like missiles. (W Times, Jan 25/94)
Nasa Administrator Daniel S. Goldin declared that, after five weeks of engineering checkout, optical alignment and instrument calibration, the Shuttle mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was fully successful. He spoke at a press conference at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, along with Dr. John H. Gibbons, Presidential Assistant for Science and Technology, and Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Chair of the Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies (including NASA), who unveiled two new HST pictures. The repairs have extended astronomers' view across the universe by ten times and enlarged the visible volume of space by 1,000 times. (NASA Release 94-7; W Times, Jan 14/94; B Sun, Jan 14/94; P Inq, Jan 14/94; WSJ, Jan 14/94; C Trib, Jan 13/94; NY Times, Jan 14/94; W Post, Jan 14/94; LA Times, Jan 14/94; Def Daily, Jan 14/94; AP, Jan 14/94; Reuters, Jan 13/94; UPI, Jan 13/94, USA Today, Jan 14/94; Htsvl Times, Jan 16/94; Time, Jan 24/94)
Astronaut Neil Armstrong made a rare public appearance at an airshow in New Knoxville, spoke briefly to reporters and signed autographs. He said he had accepted an invitation to the White House on the 25th anniversary of his moon walk. (Western Star, Jul 20/94)
Former General Electric Aerospace employee Vincent S. Maleche was sentenced to a two-month prison term and a fine for providing confidential NASA documents to an undercover agent. The charge of fraud occurred in connection with Operation Lightning Strike. On June 15, former Armstrong Laboratory employee at Brooks Air Force Base in San Antonio, William C Alexander, pleaded guilty to providing documents to an FBI undercover agent. (Reuters, Jun 14/94; UPI, Jun 15/94; H Chron, Jun 16/94)
The deed to NASA's Computer Complex in Slidell, Louisiana was transferred to the city of Slidell at a ceremony attended by NASA Acting Deputy Administrator General John R. Dafley among others. For more than 30 years, the Slidell complex had provided support for the Space Shuttle external tank program as well as other Office of Space Flight administrative and program activities. However, these functions recently were moved to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. Various plans were underway for ways in which the Slidell facilities could be used. (Sentry News, Dec 15/94)
NASA announced the crew of the STS-60 mission aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for flight from February 3 to 11, 1994: Mission commander, Charlie Bolden; Pilot, Ken Reightler; mission specialists, Jan Davis, Ron Sega, Franklin Chang-Diaz, and Sergei Krikalev, Russian cosmonaut with two long-duration flights aboard the Mir Station. His flight will begin a new three-phase era of cooperation: ten Shuttle--Mir missions, joint work on the core Space Station, and expansion of the Station to all other partners.
Over 200 scientists at a conference at the University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, planned observations of the coming impact of the newly discovered comet Shoemaker-Levy-9 into Jupiter. University of Maryland astronomer Lucy McFadden, the conference organizer, discussed the preparations. Twelve observatories in Europe and the United States were scheduled to work in a joint effort called the Comet Impact Network Experiment. The astronomers were organizing observations by nearly every large observatory on the Earth as well as by the Hubble Space Telescope, other orbiting observatories, and the Kuiper Airborne Observatory. Astronomer Michael A'Hearn compared the anticipated power of the impact of the comet's train of 21 two-mile-diameter fragments in terms of nuclear explosions with that of the 6-12-mile-diameter comet that hit Yucatan, Mexico, 65 million years ago. Harvard University astrophysicist George Field said each fragment would unleash energy equal to 10 million megatons of TNT. Paul Chodas of the California Institute of Technology discussed the problems of predicting the impact for observations by the Galileo spacecraft. Both visible, infrared, and spectrographic observations were to be performed. (B Sun, Jan 11/94; AP, Jan 12/94; W Times, Jan 12/94)
Dr. Edward Tagliaferri, a physicist and consultant for the Aerospace Corporation, an engineering firm in El Segundo, California, that helps the Air Force run its many satellite programs, was lead author of a report discussing declassified Air Force studies of meteors and their possible threat. The report is a chapter in a book edited by Dr. Tom Gehrels, a planetary astronomer at the University of Arizona, and published by the university. The potential threat is viewed in the light of occurrences such as the strike in Tunguska, Siberia, and the probable strike in Yucatan, Mexico. (NY Times, Jan 25/94)
William Baragar, Boeing Company's corporate director of congressional affairs, said that Boeing planned to help NASA develop a High Speed Arm Transport (HSAT) that could cut flying time from Los Angeles to Tokyo from 12 hours to four. Baragar said NASA had asked Congress for $220 million for research on the plane, which could fly at about 2.4 times the speed of sound or slightly faster than the Concorde and carry about 300 people. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin also discussed the project with a British newspaper. (Antelope Valley Press, May 17/94; Financial Times of London, May 30/94; LA Times, Jun 1/94)
In a report by the House Government Operations Committee it concluded that NASA's sloppy management had resulted in some $14 billion of NASA equipment--including computers and construction equipment--ending up in the hands of contractors. Moreover, NASA had failed to curb unallowable contract costs. Furthermore, NASA's recordkeeping was so bad that it was almost impossible to edit NASA's books. In addition, Committee chairman John Conyers, Democrat from Michigan, said NASA's "planning is so unrealistic that budgets are hopelessly optimistic." A report in another context concerning Houston's Johnson Space Center, dealt with equipment failures and human errors resulting from carelessness or stupidity. (Tampa Tribune, Nov 24/94; O Sen Star, Nov 24/94; H Post, Nov 30/94)
NASA scientist Michael Van Woert discussed plans for a satellite in NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, which was to be a follow-on to the U.S./French topex/Poseidon then in orbit. The successor, to be launched in 1998, would be smaller and cost $200 million. However, NASA cannot find the $120 million for its share, which was to include building the spacecraft bus and integrating the instruments. The French space agency, CNES, offered to build the bus if NASA would help with integration and launch it, which should save the United States some $50 million. (AvWk, May 30/94)
Ken Szalai, director of NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base, said that construction of the hypersonic National Aero-Space Plane (NASP), the X-30, and its first flight scheduled for 2000 were no longer goals. Funding for the plane runs out in 1994, but Szalai said research into supersonic flight would not end. John Bass, deputy program manager for the NASP consortium of government and industry, including five aerospace firms, the Department of Defense and NASA, considered the decision a great loss. The one area remaining a problem was that of propulsion, which engineers could not test because the scramjet engine required to power the X-30 needed an environment where wind speeds reach 25 times the speed of sound. (Bakersfield Californian, May 30/94)
Scientist John Bradley of MVA Inc. in Norcross, Georgia, said in a report in the journal Science that ancient space dust particles, composed of a black glassy substance embedded with metal, that zipped into Earth's atmosphere might be older than the solar system. Some of these tiny dust grains appeared to be similar to one of the major raw materials of the universe, interstellar dust grains, known as GEMS (glass with embedded metal and sulfides). Scientists collected GEMS, which they believed were left from a passing comet's wake, from a NASA U-2 airplane several miles above Earth. The GEMS were rare--only one or two were collected per hour of U-2 flight time--but showed signs of exposure to irradiation when studied under a transmission electron miscroscope. (UP, Aug 11/94)
Canadian Industry Minister John Manley said that Canada was cutting its contribution to the International Space Station program from $1.2 billion to $500 million. It could not afford the proposed level of funding and instead was focusing its energies on helping Canadian space industries. (H Post, Jun 7/94)
John F. Kennedy Space Center Director Robert L. Crippen announced he would leave NASA January 21 after more than 25 years with the Agency. Crippen indicated in a press conference that NASA budget slashing had made him uncomfortable and concerned about the safety of Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 94-211; C Trib, Dec 13/94; O Sen Star, Dec 13/94; Fla Today, Dec 13/94; H Post, Dec 14/94; CSM, Dec 14/94; Fla Today, Dec 14/94)
Russian Military Space Forces official Sergei Gorbunov said that Russia had decided to develop a new giant booster rocket that was to have a reusable first stage and burn a special, safer low-pollution fuel mixture. The rocket, Angara-24, would be appropriate for a new Far Eastern launch site if Russia decided to build it as an alternative to the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The booster was to be tested in 1998 and the first launch was planned for 2000. (Reuters, Apr 5/94)
In a patent case, Hughes Aircraft Company won $114 million from the U.S. Government (represented by the Defense Department and NASA) as opposed to the $4.8 billion it sought. At issue were royalties due under a patent developed by former Hughes engineer Donald D. Williams in 1959 for a single rocket nozzle for satellites. (NY Times, Jun 18/94; P Inq, Jun 19/94; W Times, Jun 19/94; WSJ, Jun 20/94)
White House officials said President Clinton was scheduled to name a civilian panel of scientists to independently review human radiation test data in hundreds of thousands of documents uncovered by a government-wide search and to determine whether ethical standards had been violated. Energy Department spokesman Michael Gauldin said the panel members would consist of health physicists, experts on radiology, and specialists in medical ethics. He also said that an interagency "working group" formed to coordinate the search of records in eight agencies and departments was trying to define more clearly what experiments should be included. He predicted it would take "months, perhaps years" to find all the records and analyze them. (W Post, Jan 12/94)
NASA Chief Engineer Michael Griffin, Director of NASA's former Exploration Office, planned to resign to join Space Industries International, Inc., as Senior Vice President of Program Development. (Def Daily, Jan 12/94)
NASA named John C. Lynn to head the new office of Chief Information Officer within the Office of the Administrator at NASA Headquarters in Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 94-199)
NASA announced that it and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) had signed an "Interim Agreement for the Conduct of Activities Leading to Russian Partnership in Permanently Manned Civil Space Station." The agreement governed Russian participation until an Intergovernmental Agreement and a NASA-RSA Memorandum of Understanding could be concluded. NASA and RSA also signed a separate $400 million contract under which NASA was to buy hardware and services from RSA for approximately $100 million annually through 1997 in support of a joint program involving the U.S. Space Shuttle and the Russian Mir Space Station. Key elements of the contract were spelled out. The agreement and contract were signed separately by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and RSA Director General Yuri Koptev at the end of the U.S.-Russian Joint Commission on Economic and Technological Cooperation meeting headed by Vice President Gore and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin. (NASA Release 94-101; AP, Jun 23/94; P Inq, Jun 24/94; C Trib, Jun 24/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin named Jay F. Honeycutt as Director of the John F. Kennedy Space Center upon the departure of Robert L. Crippen on January 21, 1995. (NASA Release 94-214; AP, Dec 15/94; Fla Today, Dec 16/94; O Sen Star, Dec 16/94; H Chron, Dec 16/94; H Post, Dec 16/94; AP, Dec 16/94; W Post, Dec 17/94; Fla Today, Dec 18/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94)
The Hammer award, developed by Vice President Al Gore as part of the Clinton Administration's "reinventing" government, was presented to John Muratore, chief of the Johnson Space Center's Control Center Systems Division, and his staff. They were honored for their innovative approach to establishing a high-speed, high-data-rate computer system that would enable the new NASA Mission Control Center to control a space shuttle, the Russian Mir Space Station as well as the planned International Space Station. They developed a strategy linking smaller, less expensive computers within the nearly 200 flight control work stations. (H Chron, Sep 30/94)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle astronaut William E. Thornton would retire from NASA on May 31. (NASA Release 94-87)
In discussing the training of two U.S. astronauts in Russia, William Saxe, NASA's representative in Moscow, was quoted as saying that when the astronauts arrived in February, they were refused maps or phone books of Star City, their training center, because these were considered top secret. However, the astronauts were not denied entrance to any of the buildings. The astronauts were not to begin training with Russian cosmonauts until the fall. (NY Times, Aug 21/94)
NASA announced that astronauts John E. Blaha and Shannon W. Lucid had been selected to train for the second of at least four scheduled astronaut stays aboard Russian Space Station Mir. The two were to begin training in Star City, Russia, in February 1995. (NASA Release 94-183)
In a hearing of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, chairman John Dingell, Democrat from Michigan, pressed NASA officials to explain why they had selected Boeing as prime contractor for the Space Station in late 1993 in spite of the firm's having failed NASA's own cost-control reviews. NASA officials admitted they did not know that Boeing was under 21 federal criminal investigations and was forced to pay the government $161 million in settlements. Testifying for NASA were Deirdre A. Lee, Associate Administrator for Procurements, and Deputy Administrator John R. Daily. In addition to the problems with Boeing, Michael Thibault, Assistant Director of the Defense Contract Audit Agency, said that an audit of charges by IBM, a subcontractor to McDonnell Douglas, one of the earlier Space Station contractors, found that about 20 percent of IBM's $490 million charges were not allowable under its contract. (LA Times, Jul 28/94; SP News, Aug 1-7/94)
Franklin Chang-Diaz, a Costa Rican immigrant to the United States, addressed the National Hispanic University mathematics and science convocation in San Jose to tell Hispanic students how he became the first Hispanic in space. He flew with the NASA five-person crew with Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev on Shuttle Discovery in February. (San Jose Mercury News, Mar 22/94)
Construction was getting underway on the Space Station project according to John Winch, Boeing Defense and Space Group manager in charge of building the habitation and laboratory models for the Station. Boeing workers were about to go on a three-shift, five-day week to expedite the program. (Fla Today, Dec 8/94)
After a closed door session of the House Space Committee, Chairman George Brown, Democrat from California, said he would support the Space Station. The growing support for the Space Station also was reflected in public opinion polls. However, James Sensenbrenner Jr., Republican from Wisconsin and senior Republican on the Committee, was angry at the response to his concern about Russian participation in the space program from White House science adviser John H. Gibbons. (H Chron, Jun 16/94; H Post, Jun 16/94; Fla Today, Jun 16/94; H Chron, Jun 17/94)
Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev planted a 12-foot live oak tree beside NASA's headquarters building at Kennedy Space Center. This was to commemorate his flight on Space Shuttle Discovery in January. In Russia, cosmonauts plant trees to commemorate each of their space flights. (Fla Today, May 25/94)
Jack Anderson's column reported that Margaret Barnes, a NASA employee, sent a confidential letter to Senator John Glenn, Democrat of Ohio, on September 2, 1993, alleging among other things, that women in NASA Inspector General Bill D. Colvin's office were treated like "second-class citizens." Barnes was called in and berated by Colvin who had a copy of the letter, which was apparently leaked by Glenn's office. NASA sources said GAO had added the Barnes/Glenn episode to its investigation of Colvin. (W Post, Apr 7/94)
NASA announced that in August 1994 scientists would have a chance to study how the Earth's global environment was changing when Space Shuttle Endeavour began its 10-day mission, carrying the Space Radar Laboratory on its second flight. The mission, which would feature various international scientific experiments, would be under the command of Michael A. Baker. (NASA Release 94-114)
NASA was consulting researchers in Canada, Europe, and Japan on how best to build on two successful Earth surveys by a Shuttle-borne set of complex, multifrequency radar instruments carried by the Space Radar Laboratory. NASA had asked the National Academy of Sciences to recommend the next step, such as the possibility of a reflight of the Laboratory. But a major objective was by international consultation to determine the potential for combining international efforts into a joint project to orbit a highly capable space radar system, according to William Townsend, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator in charge of the Office for the Mission to Planet Earth. (AvWk, Oct 17/94)
The publication of Moon Shot by Alan Shepard and Deke Slayton was set for release one month before the 25th anniversary of the Apollo 11 lunar landing. The book gives a history of space flight and includes many little-known anecdotes. (Fla Today, May 1/94)
The Pentagon announced that Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition John Deutch had agreed to hold $10 million in Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) funding pending the outcome of a Department of Defense (DoD) launch modernization study and a 60-day NASA-DoD review of the Delta Clipper-Experimental (DC-X) flight test program. (Defense Daily, Feb 2/94; NY Times, Feb 2/94; AP, Feb 2/94; H Post, Feb 3/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin and astronaut James D. Halsell gave a talk at California State University, Los Angeles (CSLA). Both men stressed the importance of education and discussed NASA's forthcoming projects. The talk ended with congratulations to CSLA electrical engineering professor Helen Boussalis, who won a $3.8 million grant for her project to design and build a model space segmented telescope. (University Times, Oct 27/94)
British astronomers reported in the journal Nature on finding new physical evidence of "ripples" in space, hot and cold spots confirming 1992 findings by NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) Satellite, that shed light on the origin of the universe. Rod Davies of the University of Manchester discussed studies done by radio telescope in the Canary Islands that revealed microwaves from when the universe was only 300,000 years old. Astrophysicist Joseph Silk of the University of California at Berkeley commented that the findings could offer the most intriguing possibility that the universe is open, i.e., would expand indefinitely. (W Post, Jan 27/94; USA Today, Jan 27/94; AP, Jan 27/94)
Shuttle Discovery blasted off from Cape Canaveral carrying for the first time a Russian cosmonaut, Sergei Krikalev, who already had spent 15 months aboard Mir Station, and five American astronauts. Discovery's eight-day research flight was to include deployment and retrieval of the Wake Shield Facility, designed for growing experimental semiconductor materials, and various microgravity and life science experiments. (AP, Feb 3/94; UPI, Feb 3/94; Reuters, Feb 3/94; LA Times, Feb 4/94; P Inq, Feb 4/94; W Times, Feb 4/94; W Post, Feb 4/94; NY Times, Feb 4/94; USA Today, Feb 4/94; WSJ, Feb 4/94; C Trib, Feb 4/94; AP, Feb 4/94)
A feature article gave high praise to the achievements of the Hubble Space Telescope quoting John N. Bahrall, professor of natural science at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton University, as saying "Hubble is bowling us over every day with what it does." A number of Hubble's discoveries were outlined, including data on the age of the universe, the Big Bang theory, and the size of the universe. (P Inq, Dec 12/94)
During a meeting in Moscow with U.S. Congressman James Sensenbrenner, Republican from Wisconsin and ranking member of the House space subcommittee, Russian First Vice-Premier Oleg Soskovets said that the International Space Station Project Alpha would benefit Russia from an economic viewpoint. A contract to create an International Space Station had been signed earlier by Russia's M.V. Khrunichev Space Research Center and the U.S. Lockheed Corporation. During Russian President Boris Yeltsin's recent visit to the United States, he gave the project a high appraisal. Soskovets drew the attention of the U.S. congressional delegation to the financial estimates of the project and to the need to invite China to participate. Sensenbrenner said the main problem was to convince the European Union and Canada first of the need for other participants to meet their commitments in financing the project. Russian Space Agency chief Yuri Koptev told Itar-Tass that the United States had already sent 72 NASA specialists to Moscow and assigned more than "$17,000 million for the elaboration of the project and $14,000 million for the Station's operation for 10 years." In answer to a media question on October 18, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that when he met recently with Chinese officials, the matter of the Space Station never came up. In mid-November, in discussing the possible inclusion of Goldin in a visit to China and Japan by a U.S. science and technology delegation, Richard DalBello, assistant director for aeronautics and space in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, said there would be no discussion during the trip of Chinese inclusion in the Space Station. (Itar-Tass, Oct 19/94; Defense Daily, Oct 21/94; SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
NASA announced the appointments of astronauts Kevin P. Chilton and William F. Readdy to command the third and fourth Space Shuttle/Mir docking missions respectively. The missions were scheduled for March and July 1996. (NASA Release 94-185)
NASA announced the selection of a team led by Lockheed Space Operations, Inc., Titusville, Florida, for a contract to provide propulsion test and technical services at the John C. Stennis Space Center in Hancock County, Mississippi. (NASA Release C94-aa)
