The U.S. Space Walk of Fame, based in Titusville, Florida, recognized with a two-day celebration the 20,000 men and women who worked on the Gemini space program. NASA had launched 10 Gemini missions between 1965 and 1966, each spacecraft carrying two astronauts. Many staff members and astronauts involved in the Gemini program went on to work on the Apollo Moon program. Gemini astronauts included Neil A. Armstrong, Jim Lovell, and Edwin E. “Buzz” Aldrin Jr. The event organizers celebrated the achievements of the Gemini missions, in addition to raising funds to establish a permanent monument to the Gemini program.(Marilyn Meyer, “History-Making Gemini Team To Reunite,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 8 June 1996.)
Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid returned to Earth after her record-setting space sojourn on Russia’s Mir space station. Space Shuttle Atlantis touched down at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, delivering Lucid home to a celebration honoring her 188 days spent in space, most of it aboard Mir. During her mission, Lucid had traveled 75 million miles (121 million kilometers), the equivalent of 157 trips to the Moon and back. Doctors stood by to greet the Shuttle, expecting Lucid to experience some muscle weakness as her body re-accustomed itself to the effects of gravity. President William J. Clinton called to congratulate Lucid, saying, “We are all so proud of you.”(Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 26 September 1996; Associated Press, “Remarks by President Clinton in Conversation with Astronaut Lucid,” 26 September 1996; United Press International, “Lucid’s Six-Month Mission Ends,” 26 September 1996.)
NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid became the first female resident of the Mir space station. Lucid traveled aboard Shuttle Atlantis to reach Mir, planning to remain on the Russian station for five months. She joined Russian cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev for the long-term stay. Atlantis’s crew unloaded more than 5,000 pounds (2,300 kilograms) of supplies and 1,000 pounds (450 kilograms) of experiment samples and equipment during the Shuttle’s docking. Lucid replaced U.S. astronaut Norman E. Thagard, who had spent 110 days with the Russian crew. Lucid’s arrival generated some controversy. In attempting to convey Russia’s openness to having a woman aboard Mir, cosmonaut Yuri N. Glazkov commented that the crew would appreciate Lucid’s presence, because “we know women love to clean.” Not surprisingly, some people resented his remark.(William Harwood, “U.S. Woman To Start Stay on Russian Space Station,” Washington Post, 24 March 1996; Associated Press, “Female Astronaut Settles In on Mir,” 25 March 1996.)
President William J. Clinton signed legislation ending funding for the federal helium reserve. The United States, through the Bureau of Mines, had bought and stockpiled helium since the 1960s⎯expending more than US$250 million. Experts estimated that the U.S. government’s helium reserve could supply the world for more than 10 years and the federal government for 80. The legislation to end the reserve, spearheaded by U.S. Representative Christopher Cox (R-CA), closed down the helium facility outside Amarillo, Texas. NASA planned to sell the helium slowly, over a period of 18 years, so that the sales would not destabilize the worldwide helium market. The closure had the potential to affect NASA, the federal government’s largest user of helium. At the time of the reserve’s closure, NASA was using about 70 million cubic feet (2 million cubic meters) of helium annually to pressurize Shuttle fuel tanks, among other uses.(Associated Press, “Clinton Signs Law Killing Federal Helium Reserves,” 9 October 1996.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin hosted members of Congress and other government and aviation industry leaders at a ceremony marking the start of NASA’s General Aviation Propulsion program. NASA launched the endeavor to encourage the development of technologies and manufacturing practices that would create more cost-effective and environmentally friendly aviation-propulsion systems. NASA selected as its partners William International and Teledyne Continental Motors, along with the Federal Aviation Administration and the Industry Advanced General Aviation Transport Experiments Consortium. Aviation leaders praised the collaboration as the beginning of a movement to revolutionize aircraft engines and, consequently, the aviation industry.(NASA, “Signing Ceremony To Initiate Development of Revolutionary Aircraft Engines,” news release N96-80, 10 December 1996.)
Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-77, scheduled to last 10 days. John H. Casper, making his fourth spaceflight, commanded the crew, and Curtis L. Brown Jr. piloted the Shuttle. Four mission specialists, Daniel W. Bursch, Marc Garneau, Mario Runco Jr., and Andrew S. W. Thomas, completed the flight crew. NASA planned various science experiments for the mission, including deployment of a retrievable satellite to test the feasibility of using satellites with inflatable parts. NASA’s Office of Space Access and Technology sponsored most of the payloads aboard Endeavour. The Shuttle also carried a privately developed SPACEHAB module, holding nearly 3,000 pounds (1,400 kilograms) of science experiments. NASA had contracted with SPACEHAB Inc. in 1990 to construct research laboratories. Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau was making his second trip into space.(Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Begins 10-Day Technology Flight,” New York Times, 20 May 1996; NASA, “Space Commercialization and Technology Demonstrations Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-77,” news release 96-83, May 1996.)
NASA released new images of Io, one of Jupiter’s moons, obtained by the Galileo spacecraft. Michael J. S. Belton of the National Optical Astronomical Observatories pointed out that radical changes had occurred on the moon during the 17 years between Galileo and the first observation of Io, via the Voyager spacecraft in 1979. According to Belton, active volcanoes had altered the color of the moon’s surface, forming deposits of sulfur and sulfur dioxide that painted the surface white.(NASA, “Galileo Finds Big Changes on Jupiter’s Volcanic Moon Io,” news release 96-143, 18 July 1996.)
NASA selected astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence to replace Charles J. Precourt as Director of Operations, Russia, making Lawrence the primary contact between NASA and Russian Space Agency officials. As Director of Operations, Russia, Lawrence became responsible for overseeing the training and preparation of U.S. astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center in Star City, Russia, outside of Moscow. Lawrence was the sixth astronaut to serve in this position.(NASA, “Lawrence To Replace Precourt as NASA Manager in Russia,” news release 96-49, 13 March 1996.)
DFRC test pilot Edward T. Schneider received the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Chanute Flight Test Award for his work testing the F-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle at extremely high angles of attack. The Institute honored Schneider at the World Aviation Congress and Exposition, held in Los Angeles, California. Schneider had participated in NASA’s Attack Research Program, meant to improve the control and maneuverability of high- performance aircraft. He tested the thrust-vectoring control system installed in the F-18, which allowed pilots to make high-angle motions and still maintain control of their planes. Schneider spent nine years testing the F-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle during his distinguished 18-year career as a test pilot. Schneider had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1996.(Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), “Dryden Pilot Receives Flying Award,” 25 October 1996, http://www.nasa.gov/lb/centers/dryden/news/Biographies/Pilots/bd-dfrc-p014.html (accessed 5 August 2007).)
The Boeing Company announced that it had purchased most of the aerospace and defense holdings of its competitor Rockwell International Corporation. The US$3 billion deal restructured the two companies in drastically different ways, permitting Boeing to increase significantly its potential to win government aerospace contracts, while Rockwell International turned its attention to the lucrative commercial market in automation. Whereas Boeing solidified its established dominance in the commercial jetliner construction business, Rockwell left behind its signature industry⎯the company had been nearly synonymous with NASA’s piloted space program. However, in the face of dwindling government contracts, Rockwell had been concentrating for years on developing its commercial product lines. Although the merger was not a surprise, the sale of the company responsible for engineering the Apollo spacecraft and the B-(NASA, “NASA Headquarters Regroups After Longest Federal Shutdown,” HQ Bulletin, 5 February 1996; John Makeio, “Federal Employees Face Backlog Here,” Houston Chronicle, 9 January 1996.)
President William J. Clinton awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to astronaut Shannon W. Lucid, the first woman to receive the award. Praising Lucid as a “determined visionary,” President Clinton presided over the Oval Office ceremony, as the fifty-three-year-old astronaut recounted her 188 days aboard the Mir space station. Lucid recalled fondly her time spent with the two Russian cosmonauts, a period characterized by “working together, laughing together, and having a good time together.” Lucid’s husband Michael attended the ceremony, along with U.S. Senators John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) and Conrad Burns (R-MT), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, and Russian Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov. The U.S. Congress had created the Space Medal of Honor in 1969, awarding it to eight astronauts before Lucid. The award is distinct from the Medal of Honor, awarded for the highest acts of military service and extraordinary heroism on the field of combat.(Associated Press, “President Clinton’s Remarks in Awarding Medal to Shannon Lucid,” 2 December 1996; Associated Press, “Clinton Gives Medal to Record-Setting Astronaut,” 2 December 1996. For more information, see NASA History Division, “Congressional Space Medal of Honor,” 28 April 2006, http://history.nasa.gov/ spacemedal.htm.)
New audio recordings, gathered from the excursion of NASA’s Galileo spacecrafts to Jupiter’s large moon Ganymede, contained a “soaring whistle and hissing static,” suggesting that the moon possesses a planet-like magnetosphere. According to Donald A. Gurnett, who had conducted the experiments using Galileo’s plasma wave instrument, the data “is kind of like looking at a musical score.” The sound patterns mimic those found on Earth, Saturn, and Jupiter. Gurnett suggested that the new findings would have broad significance for the scientific community, possibly allowing scientists to draw further conclusions about the interplay between magnetic forces and matter throughout the universe.(D. A. Gurnett et al., “Evidence for Magnetosphere at Ganymede from Plasmawave Observations by the Galileo Spacecraft,” Nature 384, no. 6609 (12 December 1996): 535; NASA, “Big Icy Moon of Jupiter Found To Have a ‘Voice’ After All; Europa Flyby Next for Galileo,” news release 96-255, 12 December 1996.)
Russia launched the Soyuz spacecraft carrying two cosmonauts. The Russian Space Agency intended the mission to Mir to bring Mir residents Yuri P. Gidzenko, Sergei V. Avdeyev, and Thomas Reiter back to Earth after their lengthy stay aboard the space station.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1996), p. 102.)
Shuttle Atlantis launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Hurricane Fran had delayed the launch and the subsequent Shuttle–Mir rendezvous. The mission was the fourth Mir docking mission for a U.S. Space Shuttle. William F. Readdy commanded the six-astronaut crew aboard Atlantis, including Pilot Terrence W. Wilcutt and Mission Specialists Jay Apt, Thomas D. Akers, Carl E. Walz, and John E. Blaha. During Mission STS-79, the Shuttle crew planned to retrieve astronaut Shannon W. Lucid from Mir, leaving astronaut John Blaha as her replacement. The Shuttle carried 4,600 pounds (2,090 kilograms) of supplies to Mir. Mission STS-79, the 17th flight of Shuttle Atlantis, entailed the largest transfer of supplies ever made to Mir.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-79—Press Kit,” news release 96-179, September 1996; William Harwood, “Shuttle Arrives for Astronaut’s Long-Awaited Pickup,” Washington Post, 19 September 1996.)
Russian officials announced that the necessity of cutting costs at the Russian Space Agency had caused a 40-day delay in returning cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev from the Mir space station to Earth. Russian budget cuts had slowed the production of the Soyuz booster rockets needed to fuel a return trip for the cosmonauts. Because Mir was deteriorating, Russia could not leave it without a crew. This was the second time that financial and technical difficulties had led Russia to delay the return of the two men. The episode signaled a deepening crisis for the Russian space program, the United States’ key partner in building the International Space Station (ISS).(USA Today, “Russian Cosmonauts,” 24 June 1996; Associated Press, “Moscow,” 21 June 1996.)
The Smithsonian Institution named former U.S. Navy pilot and aviation executive Donald D. Engen as Director of the National Air and Space Museum. Engen succeeded Martin O. Harwit, who had resigned amidst criticism of an exhibition about the Enola Gay atomic bomb mission. Some World War II veterans had deemed the exhibition too sympathetic to Japan, and some members of Congress had faulted the National Air and Space Museum for deviating from its mission of exhibiting the history of the United States’ aeronautical achievements. Smithsonian employees praised Engen’s appointment, suggesting that he would restore the museum’s credibility.
The Galileo spacecraft lost some of its collected data when a problem with one of its computer processors caused a shutdown of nonessential systems. Project Manager William J. O’Neil said that much of the lost data was of little consequence to researchers, but that data from Galileo’s continuous study of Jupiter’s magnetic field had suffered a significant loss, creating an information gap of about one week. The episode, which occurred in the midst of NASA’s string of impressive research achievements, highlighted the difficulty of directing a data-gathering probe thousands of miles from Earth’s surface.(Kathy Sawyer, “Spacecraft in Orbit Around Jupiter Loses Data,” Washington Post, 27 August 1996; Associated Press, “Computer Error on Spacecraft Exploring Jupiter,” 28 August 1996. See also Michael Meltzer, Mission to Jupiter: A History of the Galileo Project (Washington, DC: NASA, 2007).)
NASA astronauts Michael R. “Rich” Clifford and Linda M. Godwin made an historic spacewalk outside the orbiting Mir space station. For the first time, astronauts exited Mir with the Shuttle docked at the station. Clifford and Godwin, wearing jet packs as a precaution, scaled the passageway connecting Shuttle Atlantis with the Mir complex, installing several experiment boxes on the outside of the space station. Some of these boxes were “cosmic dust catchers,” meant to gather samples of the materials that might smash into orbiting space stations. The spacewalk and associated experiments were part of ongoing research in preparation for the construction of the new International Space Station. NASA regarded the spacewalk as more dangerous than usual, because the Shuttle was docked with Mir and, thus, unable to give chase quickly if one of the astronauts broke away from the spacecraft.(Associated Press, “Spacewalking Astronauts Venture Outside Atlantis-Mir Complex,” 27 March 1996; Todd Halverson, “Walkers Prepare for Historic Trek Outside Mir Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 March 1996. 50 Houston Chronicle, “United Space Alliance Taps New Top Officers,” 27 March 1996.)
While constructing a piping trench, two surveyors at NASA’s LARC located the fossil remains of a 3.5 million-year-old, 30-foot (9-meter) baleen whale. The workers found the whale’s skull, tympanic bulla, vertebrae, and rib fragments. Langley loaned the remains to the nearby College of William and Mary. Gerald H. Johnson, a geologist at the College of William and Mary, suggested that the discovery provided a clue to the history of the Langley site, indicating that the Atlantic shoreline probably used to be located 30−40 miles (48−64 kilometers) west of its present location.(NASA, “Ancient Whale Surfaces at NASA Langley,” news release 96-145, 22 July 1996.)
In Marshall Space Flight Center’s (MSFC’s) underwater weightless simulator, NASA began testing a remotely controlled robot created by a team of researchers from the University of Maryland. Team leaders nicknamed the robot Ranger, predicting that it would one day assist astronauts aboard the Shuttle or the ISS. Project Manager Joseph Parrish pointed out that astronauts often use valuable spacewalk time completing mundane tasks, such as collecting tools, establishing footholds, and cleaning up. Scientists hoped Ranger could perform such tasks under the command of an operator located in space or even that of an operator at NASA’s command center. The 8-foot-long (2.4-meter-long), 1,700-pound (770-kilogram) robot used gas thrusters, robotic arms, lights, and cameras. The academic project filled a void in experimental robot design, a program affected by NASA’s budget cuts. Allowing university researchers and professors to design and test the robot cost NASA about US$8 million, far less than NASA would pay for similar projects contracted through an aerospace firm. During the tests, the University of Maryland’s team operated Ranger remotely from its campus hundreds of miles away from MSFC’s facility in Huntsville, Alabama.(Martin Burkey, “Ranger Gets a Workout,” Huntsville Times (AL), 13 September 1996.)
Furloughed NASA employees returned to work at the end of a federal government shutdown of 14 to 21 days. NASA had allowed some critical employees to return before others. The government shutdown, resulting from a budget stalemate between the Republican Congress and the Democratic White House, forced NASA to cease operations and to clear thousands of its employees from field centers across the country. Upon resuming its normal proceedings, NASA faced a backlog of work because of the disruption. Workers returning to Houston’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) were especially anxious to catch up, because the Center had only three days to prepare for a scheduled Shuttle launch. A snowstorm delayed for a few more hours the return of workers to Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama.(NASA, “NASA Headquarters Regroups After Longest Federal Shutdown,” HQ Bulletin, 5 February 1996; John Makeio, “Federal Employees Face Backlog Here,” Houston Chronicle, 9 January 1996.)
Rockwell International Corporation pled guilty to charges of violating federal law in disposing of hazardous waste. Federal prosecutors had charged the company with violating the law after a 1994 explosion at a Rockwell rocket-testing facility in Southern California killed scientists Otto K. Heiney and Larry A. Pugh. Rockwell’s Chief Executive Officer Donald R. Beall called the incident “a corporate failure for which we accept responsibility.” By pleading guilty, Rockwell acknowledged liability and agreed to pay a US$6.5 million fine. According to the U.S. Department of Justice, the case was only one aspect of a long-term investigation into Rockwell’s compliance with environmental regulations, an investigation that Rockwell’s guilty plea did not end. Federal auditors were also looking into the possibility that Rockwell had overcharged NASA and the U.S. Department of Defense for disposal costs.(Andy Pasztor, “Rockwell Probe To Continue After Unit Pleads Guilty to Waste-Disposal Charge,” Wall Street Journal, 9 April 1996; Mark Reed, “Firm Agrees To Pay Fine in Fatal Blast,” Los Angeles Times, 9 April 1996. 54 New York Times, “NASA Research Plane Aids in Waste Cleanup,” 9 April 1996.)
Joseph B. Gurman of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center announced the pathbreaking discoveries of a team of scientists monitoring the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft. According to Gurman, SOHO had revealed unexpected activity on the Sun, as well as the best images yet of the plume-like structures, extending from the Sun. SOHO’s scientists were excited and surprised to find that “movies made from SOHO ultraviolet data show that there is continuous motion and action everywhere on the Sun.” The scientists observed that the Sun’s plumes extend more than 13 million miles (21 million kilometers) into space. NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) collaborated on the SOHO project.(NASA, “Unexpectedly Active Sun and New Insights into Solar Plumes Found,” news release 96-87, 2 May 1996. 68 U.S. Newswire, “Norman Y. Mineta Receives NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal,” 2 May 1996.)
Shuttle, allowing it to hover at this distance while the Shuttle maneuvered into position to pick it up.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-75—Press Kit,” news release 96-27, February 1996; William J. Broad, “Shuttle Blasts Off for High-Wire Act To Unfurl 12.5 Miles of Electrical Cable in Space,” New York Times, 23 February 1996; William Harwood, “Shuttle Begins Mission To Deploy Space Power Ball on 12.5-Mile Tether,” Washington Post, 23 February 1996.)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) scientists began the most comprehensive testing to date on how plants produce food and oxygen in space. The experiment, part of NASA’s development of a Controlled Ecological Life Support System, called for the analysis of 128 potato plants and 6,500 wheat seeds. NASA scientists planned for the study to last from one to three years. NASA agricultural engineer John Sager, praising NASA’s earlier success in producing crop species for space, explained the experiment’s significance: “If we plan to live in space . . . we must determine if this system will be as successful over longer periods of time.” Scientists were using KSC’s Biomass Production Chamber to test the crops in a space-like environment. NASA had begun in 1987 to test strains of crops and plants for their ability to produce oxygen and food in space.(NASA, “NASA Begins Study on Reliability of Space Life Support System,” news release 96-120, 12 June 1996. 86 Rowan Scarborough, “Engen To Head Air and Space,” Washington Times, 13 June 1996.)
An international team of researchers announced that, while tracking Comet Hyakutake in March 1996, they had discovered x-rays emitting from the comet. German scientists working at Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Garching, Germany, had collaborated on the project with NASA scientists based at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Konrad Dennryl, who had directed the use of Germany’s ROSAT (Röntgensatellit) for the project, called the discovery of the x-rays “a thrilling moment.” The comet emitted far stronger radiation signals than the scientists had expected, about 100 times brighter than anticipated. The scientists could not explain why the comet gave off such intense x-rays, but offered two preliminary hypotheses: 1) the gaseous molecules surrounding the comet absorbed x-rays from the Sun before reemitting the same x-rays; or 2) violent collisions between the comet material and the supersonic wind and particles from the Sun produced the extraordinarily strong x-rays. The scientists vowed to ascertain conclusively why the comet x-rays behaved as they did.(NASA, “First X-rays from a Comet Discovered,” new release 96-66, 4 April 1996; John Noble Wilford, “Scientists Seek Explanation for X-rays Seen from Comet,” New York Times, 5 April 1996.)
NASA named astronaut Michael Lopez-Alegria to replace astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence as NASA’s Director of Operations at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center in Star City, Russia. The job of the director was to coordinate the training of U.S. astronauts headed for the Mir space station and to act as liaison between NASA and the Russian Space Agency.
NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced that the United States and Russia had reached an agreement to extend the Shuttle–Mir collaboration until 1998, with both countries reaffirming their commitments to building the ISS. At the time of the agreement, Russia was continuing to negotiate with the international space community to maintain the Russian station Mir as a long- term portal to the ISS. Through additional Shuttle flights to the Mir outpost, the United States planned to deliver thousands of pounds of materials to space, which otherwise would have required Russian launches. The United States offered Russia this significant assistance in the hope that the cash-strapped country would be able to keep its commitments to the ISS project. Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin announced concurrently that U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would be the first crew members to live aboard the ISS.(NASA, “NASA and RSA Agree To Extend Shuttle–Mir Activities,” news release 96-18, 30 January 1996; Warren E. Leary, “U.S. To Help Defray Russia’s Expenses for the Space Station,” New York Times, 1 February 1996.)
NASA named the crew members for Mission STS-84, the sixth scheduled docking mission between the Space Shuttle and Russia’s Mir space station. NASA selected Charles J. Precourt as Mission Commander and Eileen M. Collins as Shuttle Pilot, with Mission Specialists Edward T. Lu and Carlos I. Noriega and European Space Agency astronaut Jean-François Clervoy rounding out the crew. The scheduled Atlantis mission also included Mission Specialist C. Michael Foale, who planned to stay on Mir for four months.(NASA, “Crew Named to Sixth Shuttle–Mir Docking Mission,” news release 96-139, 15 July 1996.)
NASA officials confirmed that tense negotiations with Russia over the composition of the first crew to travel to the International Space Station (ISS) had resulted in Russia’s withdrawing one of its most senior and well-trained cosmonauts from consideration. NASA had selected U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the 1998 mission and veteran space traveler Anatoly Y. Solovyev to accompany Shepherd. Each country strongly insisted that its own astronaut lead the international venture. In a letter to Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, Russian space officials stated, “Despite the Russian efforts to make experienced cosmonaut Solovyev the crew commander, the American side is [pre]emptorily insisting on the candidacy of American astronaut Shepherd.” Because the United States had insisted that Shepherd command the mission, Russian officials threatened that Russian Space Agency cosmonauts would not cooperate, claiming, “experienced Russian crew commanders doubt the expediency of their participation.” The standoff highlighted the diplomatic difficulty of holding together the international coalition necessary to construct the ISS.(Reuters, “Tug of War Knocks Cosmonaut off Crew,” 18 November 1996.)
