Shuttle Atlantis touched down at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, safely returning British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Earth after his 145-day stay aboard Mir. Foale’s tenure in space was among the longest in NASA’s history, surpassed only by Shannon W. Lucid’s 188-day mission. Although Foale was determined to return to Earth’s gravity in good physical condition, NASA doctors planned to keep the astronaut under medical supervision for several days.(Mark Carreau, “Astronaut Ends Marathon Ride; Foale Lands on Shuttle After 145 Days Aboard Russian Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 7 October 1997.)
Frank L. Culbertson Jr., NASA’s Manager for the Space Shuttle–Mir research program, announced that in the future NASA would likely require astronauts to have training in spacewalking. The announcement coincided with reports in the New York Times and other U.S. newspapers that David A. Wolf had replaced astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence as the next NASA representative aboard Mir. NASA had replaced Lawrence because of her small stature. At 5 feet, 3 inches (1.6 meters) tall, she was too small to fit into the bulky Russian Orlan spacesuits worn on Mir. In addition, she had received no training in spacewalking. Previously, NASA had planned for Wolf to replace Lawrence aboard Mir following her research stint. NASA and the Russian Space Agency addressed the sensitive issue of replacing Lawrence because of her size, explaining the need for flexibility aboard Mir during significant repairs to the station. Lawrence reacted professionally, despite the disappointment of her replacement less than two months before her planned once-in-a-career mission.(Warren E. Leary, “Future Astronauts Must Walk Before They Fly,” New York Times, 1 August 1997; Todd Halverson, “Mir Prerequisite: Spacewalking,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 August 1997; United Press International, “U.S., Russia Cite Logic of Replacing Female Astronaut,” 1 August 1997; Associated Press, “NASA: Decision To Replace Astronaut Difficult but Necessary,” 31 July 1997.)
Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced the agency’s support for a film company to shoot a Hollywood-style movie aboard Mir. Russian director Yuri Kara had submitted a proposal to bring actors and film crews to Mir to shoot the film, entitled “Space Flight Has a Price.” Although the Russian Space Agency had not officially approved the project, the cash-strapped agency welcomed the unique opportunity to earn money. The biggest obstacle to the project seemed to be finding financial backers willing to pay to send Kara’s crew into space. The prospect of filming a movie aboard Mir raised some concerns in the space community, but Kara noted that Russian cosmonauts already had acting experience, having filmed commercials aboard the space station for products, including Pepsi-Cola, Omega watches, and Israeli milk.(Associated Press, “Mir⎯the Movie,” 5 November 1997.)
President William J. Clinton awarded Congressional Space Medals of Honor to Edward H. White II and Roger B. Chafee, who died in the Apollo 1 fire. Clinton presented the medals to members of the men’s families in a ceremony in the Oval Office. White and Chafee were part of the three-man crew involved in the tragedy, which had occurred more than 30 years earlier. On 27 January 1967, the Apollo 1 space capsule had caught fire on the launchpad, killing the three men on board the spacecraft. The third member of the crew, Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, had received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1978. The accident had caused NASA to institute aggressive safety procedures, placing a premium on the well-being of its astronauts. Clinton noted the contributions of the fallen astronauts, “though they never got there, astronauts Chaffee, White, and Grissom’s footprints are on the moon.” Besides Apollo 1’s crew, only nine other astronauts had received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor.(Associated Press, “Apollo 1 Astronauts Honored: 3 Killed in 1967 Fire on Launch Pad,” 18 December 1997; Associated Press, “Clinton Gives Congressional Space Medal,” 17 December 1997.)
Reaffirming their commitment to the international consortium’s expensive and increasingly complicated task of constructing Mir’s replacement, NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced appointments to the first four crews that would live and work aboard the ISS. NASA chose astronaut William M. Shepherd as the first expedition commander. Russia selected cosmonauts Yuri P. Gidzenko and Sergei K. Krikalev to accompany Shepherd on the first increment crew. The second crew would have a Russian commander, Yury V. Usachev, accompanied by a crew of American astronauts, James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms. Each member of the first two crews possessed significant space experience. Moreover, the selection of the crews represented careful diplomatic choices meant to support the strong, but still strained, space partnership of the United States and Russia.(NASA, “U.S., Russia Name International Space Station Crews,” news release 97-269, 17 November 1997. 351 George Lardner Jr. and Walter Pincus, “Military Had Plan To Blame Cuba if Glenn’s Space Mission Failed,” Washington Post, 19 November 1997.)
NASA marked the one-year anniversary of the United States’ continuous presence in space, a tenure that began with the mission of astronaut Shannon W. Lucid aboard the Mir space station. Astronauts John E. Blaha and Jerry M. Linenger had followed Lucid’s stay. NASA planned to maintain a continuous presence aboard Mir until 1998.
Hubble scientists released their first reviews of the newly upgraded HST, concluding enthusiastically that the refurbished space telescope offered exciting new possibilities. The upgrades to the HST significantly improved the range and precision of the instrument. Scientists reported peering approximately 50 million light-years away and zeroing in on previously undetectable black holes. According to Edward J. Weiler, the head of NASA’s Hubble team, the added Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph, installed in February 1997, reduced the length of time it took to confirm the presence of black holes in the universe. Weiler called the HST a “census bureau” for black-hole hunting, allowing researchers to survey these objects as a population rather than as individual phenomena. Another new instrument installed in February, the Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS), enabled the HST to capture near-infrared wavelengths, beginning to penetrate the “dusty veil” that had prevented astronomers from studying the birth and death of stars. NASA engineers also disclosed that an early focusing problem with one of the three cameras used by the NICMOS system seemed to be correcting itself. Although the flaw could limit the life of the system, scientists were confident that NICMOS would still be able to gather and preserve all scientific data. During early testing of the NICMOS system, scientists had uncovered a region of the universe in which young stars eject material into a molecular cloud, a process that researchers had long hypothesized but had been unable to observe.(NASA, “Hubble’s Upgrades Show Birth and Death of Stars; Discover Massive Black Hole,” news release 97-93, 12 May 1997; Kathy Sawyer, “Improved Hubble Telescope Gets Rave Reviews at NASA,” Washington Post, 13 May 1997; Reuters, “Hubble Captures Star Birth,” 13 May 1997; Associated Press, “Upgrade Hubble Telescope Dazzles Astronomers,” 12 May 1997.)
Edward M. Purcell, 1952 Nobel Prize winner in physics and long-time researcher at Harvard University, died. Purcell discovered a means to detect the extremely weak magnetism of the atomic nucleus, making it possible to “listen to the whisperings of hydrogen through the universe.” Purcell had served as President of the American Physical Society. In 1967 Purcell had won the Oersted Medal of the American Association of Physics Teachers, and in 1979 he had won the National Medal of Science. At Harvard, Purcell held the position of Gerhard Gade University Professor, retiring from the university in 1977. Of his Nobel Prize–winning research Purcell commented, “We are dealing not merely with a new tool but with a new subject, a subject I have called simply nuclear magnetism.”
As the 50th anniversary of the alleged alien sighting neared, the U. S. Air Force released a 231- page report entitled The Roswell Report: Case Closed. The report explained that the U.S. Air Force had recovered test dummies from the Roswell, New Mexico, crash site in 1947, rather than the bodies of aliens. The U.S. Air Force had issued a report on the Roswell matter in 1994, in which researchers argued that the presumed spacecraft that had crashed in 1947 was actually an Air Force balloon used in a top-secret program called Project Mogul. When officials discovered evidence that the tests had used parachute dummies, however, the U.S. Air Force compiled an additional report with the new information. Military officials hoped that the Air Force’s explanation for the supposed UFO reported in 1994, as well as for the supposed bodies of aliens discovered in the crash, would temper the controversy surrounding the issue. U.S. Air Force Colonel John Haynes, presiding over the Pentagon news conference at the release of the report, showed reporters footage of a NASA test craft that, indeed, resembled a flying saucer. Colonel Haynes explained that during testing in the 1950s, Air Force balloons had transported dummies to altitudes of 98,000 feet (29,900 meters), releasing them to fall to the ground. Since the testing was secret, the sight of falling dummies “easily could have been mistaken for something they were not.”(U. S. Air Force Headquarters, The Roswell Report: Case Closed (Washington, DC, 1997); Associated Press, “Air Force Says Dummies Used in Parachute Tests Were Mistaken for Aliens,” 24 June 1997; Richard Leiby, “Alien Autopsy,” Washington Post, 25 June 1997.)
NASA announced that John C. Mather, a senior astrophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, had been elected to the National Academy of Sciences, often considered the highest recognition possible for scientists and engineers. Mather’s work at NASA had begun in 1974, specifically, on the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) spacecraft. He had served as a project scientist when NASA launched the spacecraft in 1989, and in 1992 he had participated in the COBE project, which effectively mapped primordial hot and cold spots in the cosmic microwave background radiation. The map demonstrated that radiation from the Big Bang conformed to theoretical predictions, providing new evidence for the long-standing Big Bang theory. Mather received his PhD in physics from the University of California at Berkeley in 1974.(NASA, “Goddard Scientist Selected for National Academy of Sciences,” news release 97-88, 2 May 1997. 245 NASA, “Heat-Resistant Material Licensed for High-Performance Pistons,” news release 97-91, 6 May 1997. 246 Associated Press, “Hubble-Look Back,” 9 May 1997.)
President William J. Clinton released his budget proposal, which included a request for US$75 million to develop the Space Infrared Telescope Facility. NASA had argued that the infrared telescope would aid scientists in answering some of the universe’s most fundamental questions including, what is the energy source for the universe’s brightest stars? and, where is the universe’s missing dark matter? Presidential support for the initiative led NASA to hope that it might finally receive the funding necessary to begin building the last of four space-based telescopes proposed as a part of the Great Observatories program. In addition to the highly publicized Hubble Space Telescope (HST), NASA had successfully placed in orbit the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and had immediate plans to launch the nearly completed X-ray Astrophysics Facility. NASA expected the four telescopes, using various kinds of cosmic radiation to survey the atmosphere, would provide an unprecedented view of the universe. The four telescopes operating together would allow us “to look at the universe at all ages at once,” explained Michael Werner, a scientist at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). Upon the program’s conception in 1991, the National Academy of Sciences had called the Great Observatories the “highest priority for any major new program in space-based astronomy,” but a steady stream of budget cuts had made it increasingly difficult to realize the project.(Paul Hoversten, “NASA Seeks $75 Million for Another Eye in the Sky,” USA Today, 6 February 1997.)
The Russian Space Agency paid cosmonauts Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin belated bonuses for their six-month Mir mission, payments that Russia had withheld until investigators had determined the two men’s roles during the troubled mission, which included the crash of a robotic cargo craft into Mir. S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), the company that built Mir, had blamed Tsibliyev and Lazutkin, suggesting that Russia deny the two cosmonauts their salaries. However, once the Russian government had determined that human error had been only one among many causes of the crash, RSC Energia’s President Yuri P. Semyonov had retracted the company’s demand that Russia punish the cosmonauts and had supported their right to receive payment. Tsibliyev received about US$100,000 and Lazutkin about US$80,000. Both men had expressed dismay at the negative reception they had received upon returning to Earth after the difficult mission.(Associated Press, “Mir’s Pay Day,” 25 December 1997.)
The Russian Space Agency celebrated the 36th anniversary of sending the first Russian, Yuri Gagarin, into space. At the same time, two cosmonauts and U.S. astronaut Jerry M. Linenger, who were on board Mir, reported that they had almost had to abandon the Russian space station twice over the past few months. Russia’s successful history of space exploration contrasted with the current struggles of the Russian Space Agency to obtain adequate funding for Mir and other space initiatives. When Russia launched its first piloted mission in 1961, the Cold War was driving an intense space competition between the Soviet Union and United States. In the days leading up to the anniversary, Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin expressed his support for increased funding to the Russian Space Agency in the future.
Space Shuttle Atlantis took off at dawn from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a crew of seven. Mission STS-84 was the fourth mission of 1997 and the sixth of nine planned missions to the Mir space station. Atlantis carried astronaut C. Michael Foale, who was to replace Jerry M. Linenger as the United States’ long-term resident aboard Mir. Charles J. Precourt served as Commander of Mission STS-84 and Eileen M. Collins as Pilot for the Shuttle. In addition, the crew included U.S. astronauts Carlos I. Noriega and Edward T. Lu and Mission Specialists Elena V. Kondakova of the Russian Space Agency and Jean-François Clervoy of the European Space Agency (ESA). Kondakova was the first Russian woman to fly aboard a NASA Space Shuttle. With the recent problems aboard Mir, many viewed the mission with special urgency. Concerned about the numerous breakdowns and the fire aboard the Russian space station, NASA even considered refusing to allow Foale to take his place aboard Mir. The Shuttle carried to Mir a new oxygen generator, which astronauts planned to unload almost immediately upon docking. Atlantis took into space more than 7,000 pounds (3,200 kilograms) of cargo for Mir and its crew.(NASA, “Atlantis Ready To Fly Sixth Shuttle–Mir Mission,” news release J97-15, May 1997; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 15 May 1997.)
In the first spaceflight of 1997, Shuttle Atlantis launched for a linkup mission with the Mir space station. Mission STS-81 was the fifth Shuttle voyage to bring supplies and new crew members to the Russian space station. Atlantis carried the SPACEHAB module in the payload bay of its orbiter, with experiments for Atlantis’s crew, as well as equipment for Mir. Michael A. Baker, making his fourth Shuttle flight, commanded the mission, with Brent W. Jett Jr. serving as Pilot. Astronaut Jerry M. Linenger was also aboard, set to replace astronaut John E. Blaha as the representative of the United States aboard Mir. Blaha had spent nearly four months aboard the orbiting station, roughly the same tenure planned for Linenger. So that Atlantis could rendezvous with Mir, the Shuttle had launched at precisely 4:27 a.m. (EST). Atlantis would spend two days orbiting, periodically firing its engines to draw closer to Mir, approximately 240 miles (386 kilometers) above Earth. The United States and Russia planned for the Shuttle–Mir missions to contribute to the international team’s development of procedures and techniques for use on the International Space Station (ISS). NASA and the Russian Space Agency referred to the missions as Phase I of the ISS effort.(NASA, “Fifth Shuttle–Mir Docking Flight Highlights STS-81 Mission,” news release 97-2, January 1996; William Harwood, “Atlantis Roars into Orbit, Begins Chasing Mir for Tuesday Linkup,” Washington Post, 13 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis en Route to Russian Station After ‘Gorgeous Launch’,” 12 January 1997.)
Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Commander James D. Halsell Jr. called Mission STS-94 a “once-in-a-career opportunity” for the seven-person crew, the same crew that had embarked upon Mission STS-83 in April 1997. NASA had cut short Mission STS-83 because of a fuel cell problem. The reflight gave NASA officials and the Shuttle crew a chance to undertake the experiments planned for the original mission, including testing hardware and procedures planned for the International Space Station. NASA was able to launch Columbia just 84 days after bringing the Shuttle home, at a cost of about 20 percent of the amount needed to set off a new Shuttle mission. The crew planned to carry out the original 33 experiments over the course of the 16-day science mission. Mission STS-94, NASA clarified, involved the same vehicle, crew, Microgravity Science Laboratory payload, and experiment schedule as the recalled mission. The mission was the first in the 36-year history of unpiloted spaceflight in which the same crew flew together in space more than once.(NASA, “Columbia and Crew Ready for Reflight of Microgravity Sciences Laboratory-1 Payload on Mission STS-94,” news release J97-21, June 1997; William Harwood, “Shuttle Begins Second Attempt at Mission,” Washington Post, 2 July 1997; Warren Leary, “Shuttle Roars Aloft To Complete Mission Interrupted in April,” New York Times, 2 July 1997; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Blasts Off on Repeat Science Mission,” 1 July 1997.)
Russia launched Progress M35, a supply spacecraft headed for Mir, filled with repair equipment needed to fix problems caused by the crash of another Progress cargo craft and to restore full power to the space station. According to Russian space officials, repairs would entail a lengthy spacewalk. The repair tasks appeared so daunting that the Russian Space Agency engineers pushed back the date of the work, to allow the Mir cosmonauts more time to train. C. Michael Foale, the American astronaut aboard Mir, was responsible for operating the Soyuz spacecraft docked at the station, so that in the event of a problem, the crew would be able to make a safe return to Earth.(Michael R. Gordan, “Russia Launches Supply Craft To Repair the Damaged Mir Space Station,” New York Times, 6 July 1997.)
In the most serious of a string of problems for the Russian Mir space station, the 7-ton (6,400- kilogram or 6.4-tonne) robotic cargo spacecraft Progress accelerated out of control while docking and crashed into Mir, damaging the Spektr module, tearing a solar-power array, and crumpling an exposed radiator. When the craft crashed into Mir, U.S. astronaut, British-born C. Michael Foale was inside the Spektr module, which he had been using as his sleeping and research quarters. Foale immediately abandoned the damaged module and slammed shut a hatch, sealing off the leaking Spektr. Spektr depressurized completely, and later the entire space station suffered a slight depressurization. When the collision occurred, Mir cosmonaut Vasili V. Tsibliyev was controlling the Progress manually, attempting to re-dock the craft, to test the updated manual-control system. The Progress had already docked with Mir a few days earlier, when the crew had unloaded cargo and filled the craft’s hold with trash. In addition to damaging Mir, the collision temporarily jarred the station off its normal flying orbit. Although the crew quickly remedied this problem, the three-man team had to work inside a darkened, partially powered station. Russian and American space officials estimated that Mir had lost half of its operating power from the collision. The collision heightened tensions between Russian and American space officials, as questions mounted about the safety of the crew aboard the failing space station. U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) met with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, urging NASA not to send American astronauts to Mir until the station’s safety standards had improved significantly. Yuri N. Koptev, Director General of the Russian Space Agency, responded angrily to Sensenbrenner’s suggestion.(Michael R. Gordon, “Russian Space Station Damaged in Collision with a Cargo Vessel,” New York Times, 26 June 1997; Kathy Sawyer, “Docking Crash Cripples Mir Space Station,” Washington Post, 26 June 1997; Associated Press, “Russians Slow To Announce Mir Crash, but More Forthcoming than in Past,” 25; David Hoffman, “U.S. Questions on Mir’s Safety Anger Russia,” Washington Post, 27 June 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Future of U.S.-Russian Mission Shaky,” USA Today, 26 June 1997.)
At the fourth Compton Symposium on Gamma Ray Astronomy and Astrophysics, scientists from Northwestern University and the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory announced the unexpected discovery of two clouds of antimatter in the Milky Way Galaxy. The researchers termed the material “antimatter annihilation radiation.” The team of researchers used NASA’s Compton Gamma Ray Observatory to discover the clouds, which scientists could not fully explain. “The origin of this new and unexpected source of antimatter is a mystery,” William R. Purcell of Northwestern University explained. The scientists postulated that the clouds might have resulted from starbursts, jets of material from a nearby black hole, or from the merger of two neutron stars. Attempting to explain the startling nature of the discovery, Charles D. Dermer of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory said, “It is like finding a new room in the house we have lived in since childhood. And the room is not empty⎯it has some engine or boiler making hot gas filled with annihilating antimatter.”(NASA, “Antimatter Clouds and Fountain Discovered in the Milky Way,” news release 97-83, 28 April 1997; Malcolm W. Browne, “Enormous Plume of Antimatter Alters View of the Milky Way,” New York Times, 29 April 1997.)
Educators, scientists, and politicians gathered to celebrate a new nationwide observance⎯Space Day⎯meant to carry on President John F. Kennedy’s call to the nation for space exploration. On 25 May 1961, Kennedy had urged the United States to “commit itself to achieving the goal before this decade is out of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to Earth,” sparking NASA’s successful development of human space travel. Advocates of Space Day argued that a day of celebrating previous achievements and calling for further advances would inspire future space explorers, particularly children. More than 1,900 schools across the nation participated in Space Day activities.(Martha Woodall for Knight-Ridder News Service, “Space Day Today To Renew Interest in Outer Space,” 22 May 1997.)
Mir’s main computer failed during a cargo craft docking, setting the Russian space station adrift. The malfunction postponed a planned spacewalk to begin repairs to Mir, forcing the crew to turn its attention to reorienting the space station toward the Sun. The crew shut down most of Mir’s operating systems to conserve power.(Shannon Tangonan, “Computer Shutdown Sends Mir Adrift,” USA Today, 19 August 1997; Michael Specter, “Computer Failure on the Mir Sends It Out of Control,” New York Times, 19 August 1997.)
Cosmonaut Vladimir G. Titov and Mission Specialist Scott E. Parazynski made a 5-hour spacewalk outside Mir to test jetpack systems and to retrieve experiments for return to Earth. The two men, who left Atlantis while the Shuttle remained docked with Mir, became the first Russian-American team ever to conduct a spacewalk from a NASA Shuttle. The joint spacewalk was also the first in which Mir crew members used NASA spacesuits rather than those provided by the Russian Space Agency. On this busy day of operations, two of the Russian crew also successfully installed a new guidance computer, which Atlantis had transported to the station.(Robyn Suriano, “Spacewalk,” USA Today, 1 October 1997; Mark Carreau, “Atlantis, Mir Crews Prepare for Spacewalk, Computer Task,” Houston Chronicle, 1 October 1997.)
European astronomers unveiled a new, more accurate map of the stars. Scientists immediately praised the 17-volume celestial guide as a milestone in astronomy. The ESA’s Hipparcos project had produced the map over 17 years, at a cost approaching US$1 billion. Astronomers called the release of the Hipparcos data the beginning of a new and fruitful debate. Hipparcos Project Scientist Michael Perryman said, “It’s a massive leap forward in our understanding. But the science of Hipparcos doesn’t stop here. For the scientific community it is just beginning.” In total, the map indicated the positions and motions of more than 118,000 stars.(Association Press, “Mapping the Heavens,” 15 May 1997.)
The Assignation Records Review Board made public more than 1,500 pages of classified records, including a memorandum detailing a plan to blame Prime Minister Fidel Castro and the government of the Republic of Cuba if astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.’s attempt to orbit Earth in the Mercury capsule was unsuccessful. The 2 February 1962 document stated, “by manufacturing various pieces of evidence which would prove electronic interference on the part of the Cubans,” the United States could shift the blame to Castro. Glenn’s safe return to Earth rendered any such plans unnecessary.
NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, for Mission STS-86. The launch took place only hours after an independent task force chaired by astronaut Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford II reported that the Mir mission was sufficiently safe for the American astronauts. Specifically, the panel had determined that sending astronaut David A. Wolf to replace C. Michael Foale aboard the Russian space station would be reasonable, as well as important to continuing scientific research. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the last-minute decision for the mission to go forward after weighing the panel’s findings against NASA’s risk reports and the opinions of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Committee Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) had been particularly aggressive in calling for the end of the program to place astronauts aboard Mir for significant periods. James D. Wetherbee served as Commander of Space Shuttle Atlantis, embarking on his fourth flight to space. The Shuttle also carried Jean-Loup Chrétien of the French Space Agency, Vladimir G. Titov of the Russian Space Agency, Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Wendy B. Lawrence, and David A. Wolf. The Shuttle carried the SPACEHAB module in its payload, with supplies for Mir research and logistical equipment aboard.(NASA, “Panels Give Astronaut a ‘Go’ for Launch to Mir,” news release 97-214, 25 September 1997; NASA, “Astronaut Wolf Continuing American Presence on Mir, Joint US-Russian Spacewalk Highlights STS-86 Mission,” news release J97-27, September 1997; Traci Watson, “Amid Controversy, Atlantis Lifts Off,” USA Today, 26 September 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Leaves for Tour on Mir,” 26 September 1997.)
The U.S. Capitol’s Statuary Hall installed a bronze statue of Apollo 13 astronaut John L. Swigert Jr., a native of Denver, to represent the state of Colorado. Each state chooses two statues for the hall to honor its most prominent citizens. Swigert was, perhaps, most famous for uttering the words, “Houston, we’ve had a problem.” Colorado had elected Swigert to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1982, but he had died of cancer before his swearing-in. Swigert’s statue took its place alongside that of fellow Coloradoan Florence Rena Sabin, who led the crusade for women’s admission to medical schools. Astronaut Thomas Kenneth Mattingly II, whom Swigert replaced only three days before the Apollo 13 launch, attended the statue dedication, along with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and other dignitaries.(Paul Leavitt, “New Statue,” USA Today, 23 May 1997; Associated Press, “Newest Congressional Statue: Apollo 13 Astronaut John Swigert,” 22 May 1997.)
The Mir space station nearly collided with a U.S. military satellite, forcing Mir’s crew to prepare hastily for an emergency exit. When the satellite came within 500 to 1,000 yards (457 to 914 meters) of Mir, U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and the two resident Russian cosmonauts sealed themselves in the Soyuz spacecraft so that they would be able to leave if the satellite hit the station. According to NASA, problems with space debris and close encounters between satellites are common, but usually miles, rather than yards, separated the rapidly traveling spacecraft. Russian space officials had taken a different approach to the situation than their American counterparts would have chosen. Rather than ordering Mir to adjust its position, as NASA had instructed Shuttle crews to do when debris approach, Russian officials had ordered Mir’s crew back into Soyuz, prepared to take off immediately. The near miss of Mir and the satellite was not the first time that Mir had received a collision alert. NASA had begun monitoring Mir’s path when American astronauts joined the permanent crew and reported that space debris passed within a few kilometers of Mir about once every six weeks.(Edmund L. Andrews, “Satellite Gives Mir One More Close Call,” New York Times, 17 September 1997; Shannon Tangonan, “Too-Close Satellite Gives Mir a Scare,” USA Today, 17 September 1997.)
NASA Administer Daniel S. Goldin praised the Clinton administration’s budget proposal for 1998 as a sign that NASA’s deep budget cuts were leveling off. NASA had braced itself for a budget as low as US$13.1 billion, and, therefore, found President William J. Clinton’s US$13.5 billion proposal a pleasant surprise. The request still entailed a US$200 million budget cut, and Congress might reduce the budget further. Nevertheless, Goldin responded to the proposed budget exuberantly, exclaiming, “Holy mackerel⎯this is a great program,” and remarking that for the first time during his five-year tenure, NASA could hope for budgetary stability. The proposal also projected that NASA’s budget in 2000 would be approximately US$13.2 billion, rather than the US$11.6 billion forecast in previous Clinton administration proposals. NASA planned to absorb the small reduction in funding by increasing efficiency, especially in the Shuttle program, having recently transferred management of the program to the privately held United Space Alliance. NASA officials believed that NASA could continue sending up seven or eight Shuttle missions annually, if budget trends continued to stabilize. On the day of the budget announcement, however, a NASA advisory panel warned once again that a drastic decrease in the Shuttle’s funding would compromise its safety. Nevertheless, Goldin maintained that the proposal would allow NASA to continue fostering “faster, better, cheaper” science.(Anne Eisele, “Budget Plan Brings Stability by 2000,” Space News, 10−16 February 1997; Larry Wheeler, “NASA Makes Do on Slimmer Budget, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 1997; Sean Holton, “NASA Cheers Budget that Cuts Agency Only a Bit,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 February 1997.)
NASA announced that an American astronaut would be the first commander of the planned International Space Station, settling a long-standing disagreement between NASA and the Russian Space Agency. NASA selected veteran U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the three-person crew, which also included Russian cosmonauts Sergei K. Krikalev and Yuri P. Gidzenko. Gidzenko said that he had no problem participating in a U.S.-led mission: “It doesn’t matter who will be commander, who will be the flight engineer or pilot. They all work together, and they will try to do their best.” NASA had selected Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev as a member of the crew, but Solovyev had refused to take part in an American-led expedition, opening the door to Gidzenko’s participation.(Todd Halverson, “American Astronaut Will Lead First Space Station Crew in ’99,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 May 1997.)
Routine medical testing of the crew aboard Mir revealed that the Russian commander of the space station, Vasili V. Tsibliyev, had an irregular heartbeat and, according to Russian Mission Control, a problem with his “cardiovascular system.” The tests, indicating that Tsibliyev was overtired and suffering from stress, did not surprise space officials, considering his traumatic experience of late June, when a cargo craft had crashed into Mir. Tsibliyev reported that he had felt “irregularities” while he was exercising and when he was trying to sleep. The news of crew health problems complicated further the arduous repair plan. A day after learning of Tsibliyev’s test results, Russian officials proposed that U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale take Tsibliyev’s place in the repair spacewalk. NASA subsequently deliberated over the request before granting Foale permission to participate. Ultimately, however, Russian Mission Control decided not to allow Mir’s exhausted crew to perform the tasks. Instead, Mission Control planned for the replacement crew scheduled to arrive in August 1997 to make the repairs. The response to the latest of Mir’s challenges demonstrated an increasingly dependent and trusting partnership between the Russian and American space agencies. During the Soviet-led race for space, few could have imagined Russian officials asking for the aid of an American crew member in a time of crisis.(Paul Hoversten, “Latest Mir Trouble: Commander’s Heart,” USA Today, 15 July 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russians Suggest American Take On Mir Repair Task,” New York Times, 16 July 1997; Associated Press, “Commander of Russian Space Station Shows Heart Irregularities,” 14 July 1997; Reuters, “Tests on Mir Commander Show Cardiovascular Problem,” 14 July 1997; Associated Press, “Backs to the Wall, Russians Ask for Help from American Astronaut,” 15 July 1997; Reuters, “NASA Approves Mir Spacewalk Training for Foale,” 17 July 1997; New York Times, “A Rescue Assignment for NASA,” editorial, 17 July 1997; Associated Press, “Mir Crew Gets Disappointing News; Next Crew To Do Key Repairs,” 19 July 1997.)
Astronaut and lawmaker U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), on the 35th anniversary of his journey as the first American to orbit Earth, announced that he would retire from the U.S. Senate at the conclusion of his fourth term. On 20 February 1962, Glenn had orbited Earth three times, symbolizing a hard-fought achievement in the United States’ effort to catch up with the Soviet Union in the space race. Glenn, first elected to the Senate from Ohio in 1974, made the announcement at Muskingum College in New Concord, Ohio, joking that since “there is still no cure for the common birthday,” he intended to retire at age 75.(Paul Souhrada, “Glenn, 75, Will Retire, Citing ‘No Cure for Common Birthday’,” Washington Times, 21 February 1997; NASA, “Glenn Orbits the Earth 35 Years Ago Today,” video advisory V97-12, 20 February 1997. 207 NASA, “Next Generation Internet a Million Times Faster than Home Computer Modems,” news release 97-29, 21 February 1997.)
Abe Silverstein received the Guggenheim Medal, honoring his significant contributions to the advancement of flight. Silverstein’s 40-year career at NASA had included a period as the Director of Lewis Research Center. The citation praised him for his leadership in the Mercury and Gemini programs and for “advancing technology of aircraft and propulsion performance,” as well as crediting him with proposing the name “Apollo” for the lunar landing mission. Previous winners of the Guggenheim Medal included Orville Wright, William E. Boeing, and Charles A. Lindbergh.(NASA, “Former NASA Official Receives Guggenheim Medal,” news release 97-177, 14 August 1997.)
Astronaut John E. Blaha, just returning from a four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, reported that he had experienced feelings of depression and anxiety during his long deployment in space. Blaha indicated that the conditions aboard Mir, rather than any elements of the space environment, had caused his difficulty. According to Blaha, the lack of private quarters for U.S. astronauts, who unlike the Russian cosmonauts did not have even small personal quarters, was one of the most difficult aspects of his stay aboard Mir. He also reported that, although relations with his Russian counterparts always had remained respectful, the tension of getting to know men who spoke a different language in such tight quarters created “another element of psychological pressure and stress,” aside from the inevitable feelings of isolation. Blaha reported that he had experienced psychological depression, especially during his first month aboard the Russian space station. He made these remarks aboard Shuttle Atlantis as it returned him to Earth, in the course of radio communications with four people living inside an airtight chamber at JSC in Houston, who were taking part in a 60-day experiment for future ISS deployments.(Associated Press, “Astronaut Tells of Down Side to Space Life,” New York Times, 22 January 1997.)
Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, embarking on a mission primarily to conduct research on microgravity. To understand the effect of the space environment on fire, and the potential danger of a fire to the astronauts, the mission crew planned to light more than 200 small, controlled fires during the mission. James D. Halsell Jr. commanded the Mission STS-83 crew, and Susan L. Still piloted Shuttle Columbia. Still was the second American woman to pilot a Space Shuttle. Mission Specialists Michael L. Gernhardt and Donald A. Thomas, Payload Commander Janice E. Voss, and Payload Specialists Roger K. Crouch and Gregory T. Linteris completed the crew. The Shuttle carried the Microgravity Science Laboratory in its payload, and the crew planned dozens of experiments, to “serve as a bridge to America’s future in space.” In the course of conducting these experiments, focused on processes necessary to carry out the long-duration research planned for the International Space Station (ISS), the astronauts hoped to create new research procedures and protocols. The STS-83 marked the 22nd mission of Columbia. The Shuttle’s launch took place after a one-day delay, so that engineers could install thermal insulation on two exposed Shuttle pipes.(NASA, “Microgravity Research Highlights Mission STS-83,” news release J97-8, April 1997; Associated Press, “Shuttle Leaves on a Mission To Study Fire,” 5 April 1997.)
Shuttle Atlantis safely docked with the Russian space station Mir, while both spacecraft orbited at speeds of more than 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour. Russian cosmonauts greeted the six-person American crew with the traditional Russian welcoming gift of bread and salt. Communication problems delayed the opening of the connection hatch temporarily, before American astronaut John E. Blaha, who had been aboard Mir for four months, was able to greet his fellow compatriots and his replacement. Blaha reported that the arriving Shuttle looked like a “shiny star” as it approached Mir. On hearing Atlantis’s approach, Blaha, ready to go home, reported, “All bags are packed. Ready for transfer.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin took the opportunity to congratulate Blaha on his contributions to space exploration and to improved international relations. “We spent 50 years aiming weapons at each other,” Goldin stated, and he praised the United States and Russia for cooperating in sustaining Mir and planning for the ISS.(Associated Press, “Atlantis and Mir Make Docking Astronauts Meet for Crew Swap,” 15 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis Closes in for Late-Night Docking with Russian Station,” 14 January 1997.)
British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev conducted a 6-hour spacewalk outside the Mir space station, to investigate further the damage caused by the June 1997 collision with a robotic supply craft. However, they were unable to find the puncture that space officials believed Mir had sustained. The exercise was only the second joint spacewalk of a U.S. astronaut and a Russian cosmonaut. During the excursion, Foale used a crane to hoist Solovyev toward the damaged region of the craft. The two crew members endured temperatures ranging from 200°F (93°C), when Mir was in the sunlight, to -150°F (-101°C), when it passed into the darkness. Although Foale had spent many hours preparing for the spacewalk, learning how to maneuver in the heavy Russian spacesuit, he still exercised extreme caution to avoid snagging the suit on of Mir’s jagged edges. NASA had approved Foale’s participation in the spacewalk only shortly before it occurred.(Michael R. Gordon, “Astronauts Fail To Locate a Puncture in Crippled Mir,” New York Times, 7 September 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russian and American Astronauts Begin Space Walk,” New York Times, 6 September 1997; Associated Press, “U.S. Astronaut Gets NASA’s Approval for Space Walk Outside Mir,” 5 September 1997. 311 Paul Hoversten, “Mars Surveyor Passes Key Test,” USA Today, 10 September 1997; Associated Press, “Craft Bound for Mars Clears Crucial Hurdle,” 10 September 1997.)
The international scientific community observed the 40th anniversary of Sputnik’s successful launch. On 4 October 1957, the Soviet Union had sent into orbit Sputnik I, a small sphere-shaped satellite, setting off a space race that continued throughout the Cold War. Although the United States had initially responded to the Soviet Union’s achievement with fear and apprehension, NASA commemorated the event 40 years later with a celebratory symposium. The United States had launched NASA itself less than one year after the USSR’s Sputnik success, partly because of the American public’s distress over the Soviets beating the United States into space. The son of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, Sergei N. Khrushchev, a prominent professor of International Studies at Brown University in Rhode Island, spoke at NASA’s Sputnik symposium. With the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia had unveiled to the world’s scientists many of the developmental plans of the Sputnik program. However, the end of communism had also precipitated enormous budget shortfalls for the Russian Space Agency. Kazakhstan’s President Nursultan Nazarbayev took the opportunity of Sputnik’s widely celebrated anniversary to complain publicly that Russia owed more than US$400 million in rent for Baikonur Cosmodrome⎯the site of Sputnik’s launch and of ongoing Russian space activity. When the Soviet confederation broke up, Russia had agreed to pay US$100 million annually for the right to continue using the launch facilities in Kazakhstan.(NASA, “Reconsidering Sputnik: Forty Years Since the Soviet Satellite,” news release N97-64, 5 September 1997; Associated Press, “Plea for Rent Marks Sputnik Anniversary,” 5 October 1997.)
Michael H. Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey announced that the Galileo spacecraft had captured images revealing iceberg-like structures, suggesting the presence of frozen water on Jupiter’s moon Europa. The discovery provided strong support for the theory that an ocean once existed on the moon’s surface. Astronomers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory called the discovery “mind-blowing” and “the clearest evidence to date that there is liquid water and melting close to the surface of Europa.” Ronald Greeley, the Arizona State University geologist who managed the Galileo imaging team, described the structures in the Europa images as “blocks of ice, similar to those seen on the Earth’s polar seas during springtime thaws.” Greeley concluded that a “thin icy layer covering water or slushy ice” might possibly exist on Europa’s surface. The images revealed one possible ice formation that spread across Europa’s surface in patches as wide as 4 miles (6.4 kilometers). Scientists disagreed on exactly how to interpret the images and on whether future exploration would be able to prove the presence of an ocean. Nevertheless, excitement over the findings spread throughout the research community. In its use of the Galileo probe to explore Europa, NASA continued its mission to search the universe for other environments suitable for life. The Galileo probe almost lost the images when an antenna on the craft jammed, slowing data transmission to Earth. Galileo came within 363 miles (584 kilometers) of Europa to capture the highly celebrated pictures.(Kathy Sawyer, “Signs of Ocean Found on a Jupiter Moon,” Washington Post, 10 April 1997; Associated Press, “Scientists Spot Water on Moon of Jupiter,” 10 April 1997; NASA, “New Images Hint at Wet and Wild History for Europa,” news release 97-66, 9 April 1997.)
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) issued a recommendation that NASA cancel its plan to replace C. Michael Foale aboard Mir with another astronaut. Sensenbrenner issued the bipartisan statement with U.S. Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA), calling on NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to alter the plan for the next Shuttle mission, retrieving Foale without delivering another American to the station. “I don’t think the increased risk is worth the benefit,” Sensenbrenner told reporters after a 4-hour hearing on Mir’s safety issues. Goldin testified that, despite some setbacks, NASA had no reason to suspect that sending an American astronaut to Mir was more dangerous than any other space exploration. NASA’s Shuttle–Mir Program Director Frank L. Culbertson Jr. responded to Sensenbrenner’s comments, “I take the safety of my friends [the astronauts] very seriously and would not send anyone on something that I would not do myself.” The hearing was the first time that NASA had formally defended the safety of Mir to Congress.(Larry Wheeler, “Panel to NASA: Stay Off Mir,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 September 1997; Knight- Ridder News Service, “Top Congressmen Say U.S. Astronaut Shouldn’t Board Mir,” 19 September 1997.)
John E. Blaha became the first astronaut to leave the U.S. Space Shuttle carried by medical personnel. Blaha was experiencing weakness upon his return to Earth’s gravitational conditions, and NASA’s doctors wanted to gauge immediately the effects of long-term weightlessness on his body. Blaha remarked upon landing that he could hardly move, saying that he was “absolutely stunned” at the difficulty of returning to a gravity-controlled environment. NASA’s doctors focused specifically on Blaha’s dizziness and on his weakened bones and muscles, hoping to learn how to improve health plans for astronauts living aboard the ISS. Blaha had maintained an arduous schedule of exercise aboard Mir, to mitigate the weakening effects of the weightless environment. In addition, he had made the return flight aboard Atlantis lying down in a Shuttle seat, to minimize the crush of gravity.(William Harwood, “Atlantis Astronaut Wobbly on His Return to Gravity,” Washington Post, 23 January 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Carried off Shuttle, a First for NASA,” 23 January 1997; Associated Press, “Returning Astronaut Sheds Right Stuff Image, Is Carried off Shuttle,” 22 January 1997.)
Space News reported that the Italian Space Agency had decided not to participate in construction of the International Space Station (ISS) because of NASA’s insistence that Italy meet previously established deadlines. The Italian firm Alenia Aerospazio had expressed interest in building, on behalf of Italy, two nodes, the pieces of hardware used to connect different sections of the orbiting laboratory. The Italian Space Agency had requested more time to investigate the feasibility of participating, after it determined that funding the $150 million project, solely in return for additional future use of the ISS, might strain its budget for other scientific projects. Gretchen W. McClain, Acting Director of Space Station Requirements, said that, although NASA regretted the loss of Italy’s participation in the ISS, placing the project on hold while the Italian Space Agency made its decision would result in significant schedule shortfalls. The development highlighted the difficulty of fostering international participation and, at the same time, maintaining the target delivery date of the ISS.(Peter B. de Selding and William Harwood, “Italian Nodes for Station Unlikely,” Space News, 3−9 February 1997.)
Astrophysicists William P. Blair, Robert A. Fesen, and Eric M. Schlegel presented to the American Astronomical Society the first images ever recorded of two supernovas colliding. The team used the Hubble Space Telescope to capture the images of the supernovas, more than 17 million light-years from Earth. Astronomers had suspected that collisions occurred between exploding stars, but had been unable to capture an image of the process, because it was so short- lived. Although the scientific community would continue to debate the implications of the image, Blair offered this assessment of its significance: “It indicates that not only is there a lot of star formation going on, but a lot of those stars are massive. They are evolving quickly, and they are exploding as supernovas.”
U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ) and Bill Frist (R-TN) sent a harshly worded letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, decrying NASA’s chronic cost overruns and promising investigative hearings before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. Although McCain and Frist both expressed support for NASA, and for space exploration in general, they wrote that “continual, unabated overruns undermine the public faith” in the space program.(Sean Holton, “Senators Blast NASA for Program Overruns,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 December 1997.)
President William J. Clinton used his newly bestowed line-item veto power to cut funding for a “reusable space plane.” The US$10 million appropriation was a priority of the U.S. Air Force Space Command and space officials. In total, Clinton’s line-item vetoes trimmed about US$144 million from the 1998 U.S. Department of Defense appropriations bill, less than one-tenth of 0.1 percent of the total bill.(John M. Broder, “Clinton Gently Vetoes $144 Million in Military Budget Items,” New York Times, 15 October 1997; David L. Chandler, “Clinton Veto Delays Space Plane Plans,” Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), 21 October 1997.)
