The X-38 atmospheric vehicle completed its first unpiloted test flight successfully. Project Manager John F. Muratore commented that the successful test was “the culmination of two years of hard work by a team from the Johnson Space Center and the Dryden Flight Research Center.” NASA had created the X-38, which could hold up to seven passengers, as an escape vehicle for the International Space Station (ISS). Described as a “whale-shaped, wingless vehicle with fins that look as if they were inspired by a 1956 Cadillac,” the X-38 was the first new spacecraft in more than 20 years to reach the flight-testing stage. Engineers had designed a fully automated craft, “so that even badly injured crew members could climb in, [the vehicle would] separate from the station, and the vehicle would then serve as an ambulance, using satellite-based navigation aids” to carry passengers directly back to a designated landing field on Earth.(NASA, “X-38 Atmospheric Vehicle Completes First Unpiloted Flight Test,” news release 98-44, 12 March 1998; David Colker, “Emergency Space Vehicle Model Takes To Test Flight,” Los Angeles Times, 13 March 1998.)
U.S. Senator Jeff Sessions (R-AL) offered an amendment to the Subcommittee on Veterans Administration, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies’ FY 1999 appropriations bill, adding US$33 million to the US$150 million budget for NASA already approved by the Senate Committee on Appropriations. The Senate defeated the amendment by a vote of 58 to 37. President William J. Clinton’s proposed budget had requested a US$183 million reduction in NASA’s budget.(Federal Document Clearing House, “Senator Sessions Offers Amendment To Increase NASA’s Budget by $33 Million,” government news release, 17 July 1998.)
The Russian government agreed to pay a US$44.5 million debt to the Russian Space Agency, to ensure that the agency would be able to complete a long-delayed component of the new space station. Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev said that the government had agreed to pay the debt in three installments, in October, November, and December.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Russian Government To Pay $44.5 Mln Debt to Space Agency,” 6 October 1998.)
NASA dedicated as a U.S. Air Force conference center the newly renovated, historic control center, Complex 14 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, the site of the Mercury program launches. The domed blockhouse with 10-foot-thick (3-meter-thick), reinforced concrete walls had protected launch controllers from possible explosions of Atlas rockets launched only 1,000 feet (305 meters) away. The renovation preserved the periscopes that controllers had used to safely view launches. The control center was at the launch site of the first piloted orbital flight of astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.(USA Today, “Cape Canaveral Restores Piece of Space Age History,” 11 May 1998.)
The Boeing Company appointed Michael T. Kennedy to a newly created position, Vice President for the Boeing Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle and Delta IV Programs. Since 1996, Kennedy had been Vice President of Delta III and had shown “his ability to manage launch vehicle development effectively by bringing Delta III on line for its first launch this summer.” As Kennedy moved into his new position, Boeing promoted Daniel J. Collins to Program Director for Delta III, and Jay L. Witzling became Vice President of Delta II and Titan Programs. Kennedy had joined Boeing in 1970, working on the Skylab, Saturn SIVB, Titan, Delta, SPACEHAB, and ISS programs.(PR Newswire, “Boeing Selects Vice President for EELV/Delta IV Program,” 26 March 1998.)
Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev responded to U.S. criticism of Russian delays in constructing components of the ISS, “NASA [is] trying to ‘concentrate attention entirely on Russia’s difficulties’ even though [NASA is] ‘three months behind’ in constructing a laboratory module.” Koptev stated that the Russian Space Agency had only received one-fifth of the US$100 million President Boris N. Yeltsin had allocated for construction of the service module, leading to a seven-month delay in the program. In an effort to improve the Russian Space Agency’s financial situation, Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin discussed the possibility of Russia’s launching more foreign commercial satellites, with the condition that Russia would “keep its promise to stop assisting Iran’s weapons program.”(Houston Chronicle, “Russian Official Blames NASA for Delaying Space Station,” 18 March 1998.)
Astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. and his crewmates returned to Earth aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. Despite concern that the landing might be rough, because of a missing door on Discovery’s drag chute, the craft landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The door had fallen off during the 29 October launch. Mission Control had warned Pilot Steven W. Lindsey that a braking chute might deploy unexpectedly, but it remained safely in place throughout the landing process.(Kathy Sawyer, “Glenn Floats Back to Earth on the Wings of Discovery,” Washington Post, 8 November 1998; NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-95,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/ sts-95.html (accessed 11 June 2007).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour Mission STS-89 successfully launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite forecasted thunderstorms. The crew of STS-89 included Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt, Pilot Joe F. Edwards Jr., Payload Commander Bonnie J. Dunbar, and Mission Specialists Michael P. Anderson, James F. Reilly, Salizhan S. Sharipov, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, who would replace David A. Wolf on Mir. This was the eighth Shuttle–Mir docking, but the first for an orbiter other than Atlantis and the first overseen by Launch Director David A. King. NASA had appointed two new rotational launch directors, David A. King and Ralph R. Roe Jr., following the retirement of veteran Launch Director James F. Harrington III.(USA Today, “Shuttle Lifts,” 23 January 1998; Seth Borenstein, “Weather May Keep Endeavour on Ground,” Huntsville Times (AL), 21 January 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-89,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/ shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-89.html (accessed 11 June 2007); NASA Kennedy Space Center, “KSC Launch Director Harrington To Retire; Successors Named,” news release 223-97, 17 December 1997, http://www- pao.ksc.nasa.gov/kscpao/release/1997/223-97.htm (accessed 5 August 2008).)
NASA announced that a long-exposure, infrared image, taken with a camera on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), had uncovered the most distant galaxies ever seen. HST’s Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS) had detected galaxies that might be over 12 billion light-years away, depending on which cosmological models scientists used. NASA’s Acting Associate Administrator for Space Science, Edward J. Weiler, deemed the discovery a major step toward fulfilling one of HST’s key objectives: to search for the “faintest and farthest objects in the universe.”(NASA, “Hubble Goes to the Limit in Search of Farthest Galaxies,” news release 98-179, 8 October 1998.)
Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman undertook a 41⁄2-hour-long spacewalk, to install 40 electrical and data connectors linking the U.S.-built connecting module Unity with the Russian-built power module Zarya. The pair also bolted handrails to the side of Unity and photographed two of Zarya’s backup docking antennas, which had failed to deploy. Russian ground controllers sent commands to power up Zarya, jump-starting Unity’s electrical systems. Ross and Newman then removed thermal covers from Unity’s outside computers to prevent overheating.(Paul Hoversten, “Spacewalkers Complete a Tricky Wiring Job,” USA Today, 8 December 1998.)
In a vote of 66 to 33, the U.S. Senate defeated Senator Dale Bumpers’s (D-AK) amendment to the appropriations bill for the Veterans Administration, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. The amendment would have cut the United States’ US$2.3 billion share of the FY 1999 budget for the International Space Station (ISS), cancelling the ISS program. During floor debate preceding the vote, Senator Bumpers, who had been trying to eliminate U.S. funding for the space station for the past eight years, referred to the previous month’s U.S. General Accounting Office report. The report had projected that the cost to develop, assemble, and operate the space station over several years would reach US$100 billion, in part because of recurring cost overruns. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) countered Senator Bumpers’s arguments against the space station, citing the “incredible scientific possibilities” that could result from research on the ISS, in such areas as neurology, sleep disorders, and balance.(Frederic J. Frommer for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 7 July 1998; Vickie Allen for Reuters, “International Space Station Survives Senate Vote,” 7 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, “Bumpers Amendment Would Ground Space Station,” government news release, 7 July 1998.)
The U.S. House of Representatives subcommittee responsible for allocating funding for the space program voted on a US$13.3 billion budget for NASA, US$138 million less than President William J. Clinton had requested and US$300 million less than the U.S. Senate subcommittee had approved. Subcommittee Chairperson Jerry Lewis (R-CA) stated that the House had reduced the budget allocation because NASA planned to fly fewer Shuttle missions in the next fiscal years and because of the delays in assembling the ISS. Unlike the Senate, the House did not vote to monitor the budget of the program by creating a separate account for space station funding.(Brett Davis, “House Panel Approves $300 Million Less for NASA Budget than Senate Panel,” Huntsville Times (AL), 19 June 1998.)
At a NASA news conference, astronomers discussed the discovery of the largest explosion ever sighted in space. The journal Nature published three papers about the event, detected on 14 December 1997. The explosion, a gamma-ray burst (GRB) designated GRB971214, had occurred 12 billion years ago and had “apparently outshone all the rest of the universe” for about 40 seconds. The Italian-Dutch orbiting gamma-ray observatory BeppoSAX had measured the sharp pulse of gamma rays and “pinpointed the position of the rays’ source.” The United States’ Compton Gamma Ray Observatory satellite had also detected the gamma-ray pulse, and scientific institutions around the world had monitored the after-effects of the explosion. Twelve hours afterward, John R. Thorstensen of Dartmouth College had used a 94-inch-diameter (49- centimeter-diameter) telescope at Kitt Peak Observatory in Arizona to detect a visible afterglow, which lasted for about two weeks. After the glow had faded, the scientists had discovered a faint galaxy in the same location. A team of American, Italian, and Indian astronomers, led by two California Institute of Technology scientists, used the Keck II Telescope in Hawaii to measure the distance from Earth to the source of the burst. No theorists were able to explain the explosion, and no existing models explaining GRBs could explain the amount of energy emitted from GRB971214. The scientists suggested the possibility that a superdense neutron star had ripped apart as it disappeared into a neighboring black hole, or that a violent merger of two black holes had caused the burst.(Malcolm W. Browne, “Astronomers Detect Immense Explosion 2d Only to Big Bang,” New York Times, 7 May 1998; NASA, “Most Powerful Explosion since the Big Bang Challenges Gamma Ray Burst Theories,” news release 98-75, 6 May 1998.)
Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman made their final spacewalk to free the second Russian docking antenna on Zarya, which had failed to unfurl. The pair also finished outfitting the station. The astronauts had required a total of 21 hours over three spacewalks to complete the work.(Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup.”)
NASA officially named U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), veteran astronaut of the Mercury program, as a crew member aboard Space Shuttle Discovery’s Mission STS-95 planned for October 1998. At age 77, Glenn would become the oldest person to fly in orbit. In 1962 he had been the first American to orbit Earth. NASA described the research planned during Glenn’s spaceflight, a joint effort between NASA and the National Institute of Aging of the National Institutes of Health. Scientists intended to supplement peer-reviewed research on sleep disorders, muscle atrophy, balance, and clinical evaluations of blood and heart function with data collected during Discovery’s planned October mission. Senator Glenn had undergone medical tests with NASA physicians, as well as with independent consultants, all of whom had determined that Glenn was medically qualified for spaceflight, with an excellent fitness level. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remarked that Glenn “brings a unique blend of experience to NASA. He has flight, operational, and policy experience.”(NASA, “Sen. Glenn Gets a ‘Go’ for Space Shuttle Mission,” news release 98-8, 16 January 1998. 386 Associated Press, “Russia-Space Station,” 18 January 1998.)
At the request of U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ) and Bill Frist (R-TN), the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report, analyzing the United States’ role in the ISS and the cost of the program. GAO estimated that life-cycle costs could reach US$96 billion, US$2 billion more than the 1995 estimate, and that these costs could increase further because of the potential for changes in the program. According to the report, “at the current estimated spending rate, the program would incur additional costs of more than [US]$100 million for every month of schedule slippage.” The report cited, as reasons for the cost increases, schedule slippage, delays in production of components, the need for additional flights to and from the space station, and NASA’s decision to change its tracking requirement for space debris. GAO’s report added as much as US$1 billion to the estimate overall, including crew-return-vehicle testing and resupply flights not part of the original NASA estimate. Although the report cited U.S. Department of Defense as the only agency with appropriate tracking equipment, its equipment would need as much as US$5 billion in upgrades to handle the new NASA requirements. The report also highlighted other issues including insufficient staff at KSC to handle nine Shuttle launches per year.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station U.S. Life-Cycle Funding Requirements: Statement of Allen Li, Associate Director, Defense Acquisitions Issues, National Security and International Affairs Division,” testimony before the House Committee on Science and Technology, report no. GAO/T-NSIAD-98-212, 24 June 1998; Armed Forces Newswire Service, “Space Station Costs Higher than Expected, GAO Says,” 17 June 1998; Tamara Lytle, “Space Station’s Costs Trouble 2 GOP Senators,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 June 1998.)
Cosmonauts Talgat A. Musabayev and Nikolai M. Budarin returned to Earth from a 207-day sojourn aboard Mir, along with former Kremlin aide Yuri M. Baturin, who had accompanied the cosmonauts’ replacements to the space station, spending 12 days in space. The two cosmonauts arrived in Russia to find a devalued ruble and the return of Viktor S. Chernomyrdin as Acting Prime Minister. Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin had not yet fired Chernomyrdin’s government at the time Musabayev and Budarin left for Mir, and the two cosmonauts had missed the entire four-month term of Prime Minister Sergei V. Kiriyenko. Yeltsin had dissolved Kiriyenko’s government the week before the cosmonauts’ return flight to Earth. Because Yeltsin had devalued the ruble, the two cosmonauts also found that their pay had diminished.
Michael I. Mott, NASA Associate Deputy Administrator (Technical), one of NASA’s top three managers, announced his decision to leave NASA to join Boeing Space Transportation in Seal Beach, California, as Vice President of Business Development. Mott had served as NASA Associate Deputy Administrator since January 1994.(NASA, “Michael I. Mott To Leave NASA,” news release 98-99, 8 June 1998.)
After a one-day delay, Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, James H. Newman, and Sergei K. Krikalev. The purpose of STS-88 was to connect the U.S.-built Unity module of the ISS to the first ISS component, Zarya. The Russian Space Agency had placed Zarya in orbit in November. Launch controllers had scrubbed the liftoff of Endeavour planned for 3 December, after the master alarm sounded in the cockpit with only 41⁄2 minutes remaining in the 10-minute countdown window. Engineers had determined that the alarm indicated momentary low pressure in the hydraulics system. The crew experienced no problems with the second launch, until another alarm sounded shortly after they had reached orbit, indicating that one of three hydraulic power units had overheated. The crew then switched to a backup controller to allow the overheated unit to cool before shutting down each unit as planned.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 4 December 1998; Brad Liston for Reuters, “NASA Hopes for Another Shuttle Try on Friday,” 3 December 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-88, First International Space Station Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-88.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Edward J. Weiler Acting Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Space Science, effective immediately. Weiler had acted in the position since Wesley T. Huntress Jr.’s departure on 28 September. Since March 1996, Weiler had served as Science Director of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems within the Office of Space Science. He had been a program scientist for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) since 1979.(NASA, “Weiler Named Associate Administrator for Space Science,” news release 98-204, 16 November 1998. 619 Paul Hoversten, “Space Storm Fizzles; Satellites Survive ‘Drizzle’,” USA Today, 18 November 1998.)
Minnie, the last living astro-chimp, died of old age at forty-one-years-old. Minnie had lived out her retirement at Holloman Air Force Base under the care of the Coulston Foundation. Minnie, an understudy for chimps Ham and Enos, was the only female chimpanzee to train for the Mercury Project in the early 1960s, but she had never flown in space. Ham had become the first chimpanzee in space when he had made a 15-minute suborbital flight in 1961, before Alan B. Shepard Jr.’s flight that May. Enos’s orbital flight had been a precursor to John H. Glenn Jr.’s flight in February 1962.(Los Angeles Times, “Minnie, Last of the Early U.S. Space Program ‘Astro-Chimps’, Dies at 41,” 28 March 1998. 439 Mike Billington for United Press International, “Hacker ‘Confederacy’ Hits Pentagon,” 20 March 1998; Michael J. Sniffen for Associated Press, “US-Israel-Analyzer,” 20 March 1998; Washington Post, “Five Teens Suspected of Hacking into Pentagon Computers,” 20 March 1998.)
U.S. astronomers studying star formation reported that a body resembling a pinkish star, at the center of the sword in the constellation Orion, was “a hotbed of star formation called the Orion Nebula,” the site of a gas cloud generating enough water “to fill the Earth’s oceans 60 times a day.” The team of astronomers, led by Martin O. Harwit of Cornell University, used the Infrared Space Observatory to observe the Orion Nebula, detecting “large amounts of water vapor within clouds of gas on their way to becoming stars in the nebula.” The discovery, which demonstrated for the first time “the vital role that water plays in star formation,” may “provide an important clue about the source of water in the [s]olar [s]ystem.” Michael Werner of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) emphasized the significance of the discovery, saying that the data confirmed, “that water is prevalent in space” and “plays a vital role in the chemistry and physics of interstellar clouds.”(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, “Massive Water Find Linked to Star Birth,” 9 April 1998. 462 Craig Covault, “Shuttle/Spartan Verdict Sparks Station Concerns,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 148, no. 16 (20 April 1998): 26; Seth Borenstein, “Astronaut Gets Blame Lack of a Signal Causes Satellite To Fail,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 April 1998.)
NASA officials appeared before a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology to explain the increasing price tag of the ISS. The anticipated cost of the ISS had increased to US$4 billion more than originally projected, drawing ire from supporters and opponents alike. NASA’s new Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg led the lawmakers through the reasons for the increasing budget, explaining the series of revised out-year estimates. He attributed part of the problem to cost overruns related to “recurring schedule and budget problems with the Russian [S]pace [A]gency,” and part to the fact that NASA’s primary contractor, the Boeing Company, was already US$600 million to US$817 million over budget. However, Rothenberg stated, “only a fraction of these revised out-year estimates are tied to actual overruns.”
The 16 countries involved in the International Space Station (ISS) agreed, for the second year in a row, to delay construction, naming 2004 as the new target date for completion. The delay was primarily the result of Russia’s inability to pay its share of the program’s costs. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg said that the new five-year schedule was “extremely tight and allows for few, if any, launch delays.” NASA estimated that the space station would require 43 flights for its assembly, two fewer flights than previously scheduled. Under the revised schedule, Russia planned to launch nine flights, three fewer than originally scheduled, and NASA intended to launch 34 Shuttle flights to transport parts, one more than originally planned. To save money, Russia canceled construction of two life-support modules and a stowage chamber.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 1 June 1998; New York Times, “Space Station Partners Approve Assembly Delay,” 1 June 1998.)
Alan B. Shepard Jr., the first American in space, died in his sleep at the age of 74 after a two- year battle with leukemia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remembered him for being “one of the original seven Mercury astronauts, for being the first American to fly in space, and for being one of only 12 Americans to step on the Moon.” A former U.S. Navy pilot, Shepard had first traveled to space on 5 May 1961, just 23 days after the Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human to orbit Earth. Shepard, the lone astronaut in the small space capsule, Freedom 7, rocketed 116 miles (187 kilometers) above Earth, as millions of people watched him live on television. Shepard’s spaceflight proved a significant morale-boosting moment for Americans, in the midst of the Cold War with the Soviet Union, which until then had appeared to be winning the space race. After the flight, President John F. Kennedy presented Shepard with the Distinguished Service Medal, challenging the nation to put a man on the Moon by the end of the decade. Shepard made history again in 1971, when he commanded Apollo 14 on its nine-day mission to the Moon. He delighted Americans watching the expedition on television, when, taking a break from collecting Moon rocks, he hit two golf balls with an improvised club. Shepard, who had retired from NASA and the U.S. Navy in 1974, received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1979. Shepard also engaged in philanthropic pursuits, such as investing in the establishment of the Astronaut Foundation, which provides scholarships. The Astronaut Foundation had also founded the Space Camp program for young people.(NASA, “Statement of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin on the Death of Alan Shepard,” news release 98- 128, 22 July 1998; NASA, “Alan Shepard, First American Astronaut, Dies at 74,” news release 98-131, 22 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, “John Glenn Remarks on Alan Shepard,” government news release, 22 July 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Shepard’s Ride Lifted USA into the Space Age,” USA Today, 23 July 1998; Jennifer Harper, “Alan Shepard, First American in Space, Dies at 74: ‘Pioneer’s Pioneer’ also Led Apollo 14, Golfed on Moon,” Washington Times, 23 July 1998.)
Russian Space Agency officials reported, for the first time since Zarya’s launch, that the module had experienced malfunctions. At a press conference, Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev explained that none of the module’s three minor malfunctions had any impact on the module’s overall operations. Koptev reported that one of the eight batteries storing energy collected from the module’s solar panels had not performed properly, but he emphasized that Zarya needed only four of the eight batteries to operate. Mission Control had detected an “unexpected abundance of humidity” inside the module, but engineers did not yet know its cause. The third problem involved a malfunctioning antenna in the craft’s automatic docking system, a device that the first ISS crew would not need until after their arrival in January 2000.(Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Minor Problems Plague New Space Station,” 25 November 1998.)
A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket, carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office of the Pentagon, exploded 1 minute after liftoff from Cape Canaveral, Florida. More than 20 stories high and weighing nearly 2 million pounds (907,000 kilograms), the Lockheed Martin–built Titan IV was the largest crewless rocket used in the United States. The rocket used solid-fuel boosters similar to those used to launch NASA’s Space Shuttle. The explosion destroyed about US$1.3 billion worth of hardware, making it one of the worst American rocket- launch failures to date. The rocket was about 20,000 feet (6,100 meters) above the Atlantic when it exploded, and the ocean carried the debris and toxic substances away from land. This was the second time a Titan IV had exploded during launch; the first explosion occurred in 1993.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Rocket Explosion,” 12 August 1998; Kathy Sawyer and William Harwood, “Rocket Explodes, Destroying Spy Satellite,” Washington Post, 13 August 1998.)
NASA officials announced that U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. would not participate in the melatonin portion of a sleep study planned for the upcoming Shuttle mission. The study’s principal investigator, Charles A. Czeisler of Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston said that Glenn had failed to meet one of the medical criteria for the study. Czeisler did not specify the reason, and Glenn declined to elaborate. Researchers had rated the melatonin experiment as one of two top priorities among the human studies to take place during Glenn’s Shuttle flight. Four members of the Shuttle flight for the Neurolab mission, which occurred earlier in 1998, had participated in the melatonin study, and Chiaki Mukai, a member of Glenn’s crew, would be a fifth participant. However, Glenn’s disqualification meant that the scientists would be unable to test two of their four hypotheses.(Lawrence K. Altman, “Glenn Unable To Perform Experiment Planned for Space Flight,” New York Times, 21 October 1998.)
NASA announced the discovery of a fast-spinning pulsar, providing evidence of an evolutionary link between strong-field, slower-spinning, energetic pulsars and weak-field, millisecond pulsars. Frank Marshall, William W. Zhang, and Eric V. Gotthelf of GSFC found the pulsar by examining x-ray emissions that NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer spacecraft had recorded in 1996. Observations of the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics spacecraft, a satellite jointly owned by Japan and the United States, confirmed the discovery. The scientists reported that the pulsar was spinning at a rate of 60 times per second, and that it could have been spinning as fast as 150 times per second when it formed 4,000 years ago. An astrophysicist at the U.S. Department of Energy’s Los Alamos National Laboratory remarked, “this is the fastest high-energy pulsar of its type we know about.” The research team reported that the pulsar is “likely associated with the remnant of a supernova (N157B) that exploded in the Large Magellanic Cloud about 4,000 years ago.” Comparing the pulsar found in N157B to the high- energy pulsar in the Crab Nebula, the scientists reported that the central source of x-ray light from N157B is this fast-spinning pulsar associated with a supernova remnant, proving the hypothesis that the weaker the magnetic field, the faster the pulsar spins at birth.(NASA, “Fast-Spinning Pulsar Discovery Provides Evolutionary Link,” news release 98-14, 26 January 1998.)
John S. Lewis, Codirector of the Space Engineering Research Center at the University of Arizona in Tucson, testified before the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics concerning the potential danger of nearby asteroids. His testimony supported the idea that any asteroid colliding with Earth in the next 100 years could only be an asteroid not yet known to scientists. Lewis argued that, since an international scientific effort could identify such an asteroid easily, he advocated “a systematic, globally-coordinated search and characterization program that costs less than a single small space mission.” Such a search, he argued, would “give us adequate warning of a threatened asteroid impact,” so that we would “have ample time to design, build, test, and deploy an effective defense against the threat.”(Federal Document Clearing House, “Asteroids: Perils and Opportunities,” government news release of testimony of John S. Lewis before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Washington, DC, 21 May 1998.)
NASA Launch Integration Manager Donald R. McMonagle announced that Space Shuttle Columbia’s tune-up would take place at the Boeing Company’s facility in Palmdale, California, rather than at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. NASA Launch Integration and Shuttle operator USA advised Boeing officials “to get ready to map out a plan for Columbia’s work in California.” The announcement, following the recent notification about significant job cuts, was more bad news for KSC officials. NASA officials had proposed in 1996 that KSC handle much of the Shuttle’s maintenance and modification but had decided that the facility was “too busy with launches to handle [S]huttle renovation.” Alan Buis, a Boeing representative, suggested that, because Columbia would be getting “a complicated internal glass cockpit, Palmdale is ‘a logical choice’.”(Seth Borenstein, “California Plant Gets Shuttle Work Again,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 January 1998.)
Russia announced it would retire the Mir space station during the summer of 1999, six months earlier than originally planned. The decision resulted from a meeting between Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev and Deputy Prime Minister Boris E. Nemtsov, who agreed that Russia had insufficient funds to continue to fly the station. The agreement allocated approximately US$100 million for Mir’s final year, including funds for “a series of rockets to direct Mir to an unpopulated area of the Pacific Ocean.” Nemtsov also agreed to pay the Russian Space Agency the US$600 million owed for Mir’s operations in 1997, using “unspecified ‘nonbudgetary sources’.”(Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Russia Agrees to Early End for Mir Space Station,” 2 July 1998; Anna Dolgov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 3 July 1998.)
Two competing teams using NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer (RXTE) discovered the first known accretion-powered millisecond pulsar. The scientists believed the pulsar to be the missing link between two known types of stars: 1) “old, accreting neutron stars, which are powerful sources of [x]-rays generated from the material they are gobbling up from their companions,” and 2) even older “radiowave emitting pulsars that are rotating very rapidly and slowing down gradually.” Because the new star, designated SAX J1808.4-3658, was both emitting x-rays and spinning rapidly, scientists believed it was the link between the accreting and the radiowaveemitting neutron stars. Michiel van der Klis and Rudy Wijnands of the University of Amsterdam found the new pulsar—called the “Holy Grail of X-ray astronomy”—and measured the time between its rapid x-ray pulses, to derive its rotation rate. Van der Klis explained that, based on the fact of accretion, astrophysicists had long theorized that millisecond pulsars existed, but this was the first time that one had been “caught in the act.” Accretion, the process of drawing gas from a nearby “companion” star, causes pulsars to heat up, emitting x-rays. After accretion ends, high-velocity beams of subatomic particles continue to “blow material off the companion,” eventually causing the companion to vanish. Deepto Chakrabarty and Edward H. Morgan of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology led the team that found the pulsar’s 2-hour orbital period, measured the orbit, and inferred the presence of the companion star. Tod E. Strohmayer, a member of the RXTE team at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, suggested, “[x]-ray and particle beam ablation may explain why millisecond pulsars are often found alone, despite the fact that they required a companion star to speed up.” Pulsars “vaporize” their companions, thus hiding the evidence, which is, as Strohmayer described it, the “stellar version of the perfect crime.”(NASA, “Newly Discovered Stellar Cannibal Provides Missing Link,” news release 98-129, 22 July 1998; Rudy Wijnands and Michiel van der Klis, “A Millisecond Pulsar in an X-ray Binary System,” Nature 394, no. 6691 (23 July 1998): 344–346; Deepto Chakrabarty and Edward H. Morgan, “The Two-Hour Orbit of a Binary Millisecond X-ray Pulsar,” Nature 394, no. 6691 (23 July 1998): 346–348.)
NASA named astronaut Terrence W. Wilcutt to replace James D. Halsell Jr. as NASA’s Manager of Operational Activities at Star City, Russia. Wilcutt was the 10th astronaut to serve in the rotational position, supporting the training and preparation of NASA astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center and acting as a liaison between NASA and Russian management. Wilcutt had flown on three missions: the first, in 1994, as the pilot on Mission STS-68, to study the Earth’s surface; the second, in 1996, as the pilot for the fourth Shuttle–Mir docking mission, STS-79; and the third, in 1998, as the commander of Mission STS-89, the eighth docking mission.(NASA, “Astronaut Wilcutt Replaces Halsell in Star City, Russia,” news release 98-127, 22 July 1998.)
At a NASA Advisory Council meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center, Jay Chabrow, an aerospace industry consultant, presented findings of a study conducted to determine the true costs of assembling and maintaining the future ISS. U.S. Senator John McCain (R-AZ) and other concerned lawmakers had tasked Chabrow and his seven-member team of private and government analysts with undertaking this investigation, conducted over five months. The analysts’ findings showed that the ISS could cost as much as US$6 billion more than NASA officials had estimated, reaching a total of US$24 billion, and that the outpost likely would not be ready to house a full crew until 2006. The report also provided estimates regarding the total cost of the space station over its entire lifetime. The analysts projected that Space Shuttle missions to assemble the station, resupply flights, and staff operating the Shuttle from the ground, would cost NASA US$94 billion. The study also found that planned caps on congressional spending were unrealistic, and that NASA and Boeing officials had been overly optimistic in their cost and schedule estimates. Factors driving costs higher included Russian nonperformance, software development and integration, construction of a crew return vehicle, and Boeing cost overruns. The report did not account for further cost increases in the event of a total Russian pullout.(Wheeler, “Station Cost Overrun.”)
Endeavour’s Commander Robert D. Cabana and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev, leading the four other crew members, entered the Unity module for the first time, via an airlock attached to the Shuttle. The crew checked air pressure and quality, turned on lights and systems, detached components that were stored in the modules, and set up a communications system, connecting internal components with the two antennas outside Unity. Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman had installed the two antennas on 9 December. The Shuttle crew spent 28 hours inside the modules before turning off the lights and closing the station.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Enter International Space Station,” New York Times, 11 December 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup with Space Station,” USA Today, 14 December 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-95 launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr.; Pilot Steven W. Lindsey; Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Stephen K. Robinson, and Pedro Duque; and Payload Specialists Chiaki Mukai and John H. Glenn Jr. The primary objectives of STS-95 included conveying a variety of science experiments inside the SPACEHAB module; deploying and retrieving the Spartan free-flyer payload; performing operations with the HST Orbiting Systems Test; and transporting the International Extreme Ultraviolet Hitchhiker payloads. The historic mission also returned veteran astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. to space. Thirty-six years after Glenn had first orbited Earth, the seventy-seven-year-old astronaut became the oldest person to fly in orbit. As a veteran of NASA’s early Mercury program, Glenn had been the first American to orbit Earth. On 20 February 1962, in a flight lasting 5 hours, Glenn had orbited Earth three times in a tiny capsule. After he had passed a battery of medical tests and participated in astronaut training, NASA had selected U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. as a crew member of STS-95, so that scientists could study “how space travel affects an aging astronaut’s body.”(Bill Sammon, “Senator Upholds Status as Hero with His Return to Orbit,” Washington Times, 30 October 1998; John Noble Wilford, “Pioneer Returns as Crewman in the Shuttle,” New York Times, 29 October 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-95, John Glenn’s Flight; SPACEHAB,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-95.html (accessed 20 October 2008).)
Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev announced that Russia had found the funds needed to continue participating in the ISS project. Although the Russian Cabinet had rejected Koptev’s request for additional funds, a meeting with Finance Minister Mikhail M. Zadornov and Deputy Prime Minister Boris E. Nemtsov had led to an agreement that funding for the ISS would come from a “special budget section.” However, the Russian Space Agency provided no details of the funding plan. Koptev also announced that the Russian Space Agency might scrap the Mir space station in the fall, a year ahead of schedule, to make more cash available for the ISS. Koptev suggested that the space agency would look for revenue sources outside of the government.(Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 29 May 1998.)
NASA regained control over SOHO and, after successfully thawing the craft’s fuel, determined that its rocket thrusters were useable. NASA spokesperson William A. Steigerwald of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) explained that flight controllers would check each individual system and instrument next, and would then reestablish full automatic gyroscopic control.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Solar Probe Back Under Control,” 17 September 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-91 launched on schedule from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite problems with the automatic steering system on Mir. The Shuttle’s mission was to retrieve the seventh and last American to live aboard Mir. The day’s temperature reached 97oF (36oC) during the countdown, making it the “hottest launch day anyone could remember.” The mood of the launch was tense, because NASA had never tested the new lightweight fuel tank during flight. According to NASA officials, the new tank worked well. Among the crew members aboard Discovery was Valery V. Ryumin, veteran cosmonaut and chief of the Russian operations in the Shuttle–Mir program. The Russian Space Agency had selected Ryumin to inspect Mir, so that Russian officials could make an informed decision regarding how long cosmonauts could safely continue to inhabit the space station. Other crew members included Commander Charles J. Precourt; Pilot Dominic L. P. Gorie; and Mission Specialists Wendy B. Lawrence, Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz, and Janet L. Kavandi. For the first time, the Shuttle carried the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS), designed to search for dark and missing matter (antimatter) in the universe.(NASA, “Discovery Launch to Mir on Mission STS-91 Set for June 2,” news release 98-85, 20 May 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-91, Ninth and Final Shuttle–Mir Docking,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-91.html (accessed 11 June 2007); Chicago Tribune, “Cosmonauts Fix Mir’s Steering; Now Shuttle Launch Can Proceed,” 2 June 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Soars on NASA’s Last Voyage to Mir,” 2 June 1998; Robyn Suriano for Gannett News Service, “Celebrated Cosmonaut Comes Out of Retirement for Shuttle Mission,” 1 June 1998.)
Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman undertook their second spacewalk, lasting 7 hours, to install two 100-pound (45.4-kilogram) communications antennas on each side of the Unity module. They hooked one of the antennas to a video cable running from the Zarya module. Then the two astronauts erected a folding sunshade over a computer outside of Unity, bundling loose cables that ran along the exterior of the module. Ross and Newman also removed the restraints that had stabilized the four Unity hatchways during the launch. Finally, Newman successfully tapped free one of Zarya’s stuck antennas, using a 10-foot-long (3-meter-long), extendable grappling hook.(Warren E. Leary, “2 Astronauts Make 2d Space Walk To Install Antennas on Station,” New York Times, 10 December 1998.)
Dr. William K. Douglas, the physician who had overseen the care of the seven Mercury astronauts, died of a viral infection at the age of 76. As part of his assignment to NASA’s Manned Spacecraft Center at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia, Dr. Douglas had been “personally responsible for the medical care and flight preparation of the seven Mercury astronauts.” He had cared for Alan B. Shepard Jr., Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, John H. Glenn Jr., and M. Scott Carpenter when they undertook the nation’s first four human spaceflights. After retiring from the U.S. Air Force in 1977, Dr. Douglas had joined the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, where he had helped design an orbiting space station before retiring in 1988. In 1992 Douglas was inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in Alamogordo, New Mexico.(Wolfgang Saxon, “William Douglas, 76, the Doctor for the Seven Early Astronauts,” New York Times, 24 November 1998.)
NASA named current Director of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) Joseph H. Rothenberg to head its Office of Space Flight, which oversees the Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise, which includes the Shuttle program and the planned International Space Station (ISS). Rothenberg replaced Wilbur C. Trafton, who had announced his resignation in November 1997. The Office of Space Flight accounted for about 40 percent of NASA’s US$13.6 billion annual budget. Rothenberg was the first Director of the Office of Space Flight who had no experience in military aviation, the astronaut corps, the Space Shuttle, or management of the space station program. However, he had a strong background in engineering and astronomy. Rothenberg was closely involved in planning and using the HST and had worked as a space engineer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz to succeed Rothenberg at GSFC.(Sean Holton, “NASA Picks an Outsider To Run Shuttles, Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 9 January 1998; Washington Post, “Rothenberg To Head Office of Space Flight,” 9 January 1998; NASA, “Diaz Named Goddard Space Flight Director,” news release 98-4, 8 January 1998.)
The U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies, responsible for allocating space funding, voted to back funding for NASA’s ISS obligations but “cautioned the space agency to control costs and ensure Russia’s commitment to the expansive project.” The subcommittee voted for a US$13.6 billion budget for NASA for the fiscal year, including US$2.3 billion for the space station. Senate Subcommittee Chairperson Christopher Bond (R-MO) said that, although the budget was US$150 million more than President William J. Clinton had requested, it was US$33 million less than NASA’s 1998 spending level.(Patrick Connole for Reuters, “US Senate Panel Backs Space Station, Cut Superfund,” 9 June 1998.)
NASA marked its second full year of “continuous human presence in Earth orbit” aboard Russia’s Mir space station. Shuttle Atlantis had launched on 22 March 1996, with U.S. astronaut Shannon W. Lucid aboard. Lucid then spent 188 days in space, an American record. She was the second NASA astronaut to live aboard Mir. Following her tenure, an unbroken succession of astronauts, John E. Blaha, Jerry M. Linenger, C. Michael Foale, David A. Wolf, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, had spent time on Mir. Norman E. Thagard, the first American astronaut to live on Mir, had arrived in March 1995, spending 115 days on Mir before Lucid’s stay. Nine months separated Thagard’s mission and Lucid’s. Frank L. Culbertson Jr., head of NASA’s cooperative human spaceflight program with Russia, commented, “an unbroken presence has been extremely valuable to our having an awareness of what it takes to fly a space station, to maintain an outpost on the frontier.”(Mark Carreau, “NASA Marks Second Year in Orbit: Continuous Human Presence in Space Accomplished Aboard Mir,” Houston Chronicle, 21 March 1998.)
NASA announced the selection of veteran cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev for the crew of Mission STS-88, the first American ISS assembly mission. In December 1998, Krikalev would join aboard Endeavour Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, and James H. Newman. NASA had assigned Mission STS-88 the task of attaching the U.S.-built Unity module to the Russian-built Zarya control module, scheduled to launch in November 1998. Krikalev had been a member of two Mir space station crews and had flown aboard the Space Shuttle as a member of the Mission STS-60 crew in February 1994. During Mission STS-60, Krikalev had operated the robotic arm and supported a variety of experiments in materials science.(NASA, “Future Space Station Resident Joins Assembly Crew,” news release 98-137, 30 July 1998.)
NASA named astronaut Eileen M. Collins to command Space Shuttle Columbia on the upcoming Mission STS-93 in December 2008. Collins was the first woman to command a Space Shuttle mission. NASA had selected her as an astronaut candidate in 1990, and she had become an astronaut in July 1991. She flew her first mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in February 1995. On that mission, Discovery came within 30 feet (9 meters) of Mir during a practice run for docking with the space station. Collins was also the first woman ever to pilot a Space Shuttle, flying Shuttle Atlantis in May 1997, to deliver British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Mir and to return astronaut Jerry M. Linenger to Earth.(NASA, “Collins Named First Female Shuttle Commander,” news release 98-37, 5 March 1998; Reuters, “Woman Air Force Officer To Command Shuttle CNN,” 4 March 1998.)
