After an unprecedented nine delays, Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. During Mission STS-103, the crew planned to restore the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) to working order and to upgrade its systems. Discovery’s crew comprised Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Scott J. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Steven L. Smith, C. Michael Foale, John M. Grunsfield, Claude Nicollier, and Jean-François Clervoy.
Former astronauts Michael J. McCulley, Vice President and Deputy Program Manager for USA, and William F. Readdy, NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics regarding wiring damage found in Space Shuttles Columbia, Discovery, Endeavour, and Atlantis. In its first official report since discovering that frayed wires had caused the short circuit 5 seconds into Columbia’s launch on 23 July, NASA informed committee members that wiring inspections and maintenance had cost US$350,000. NASA had not yet calculated the cost of the ongoing safety “stand down.” NASA also indicated that it did not intend to pay USA the US$2.5 million the company would have earned if it had punctually delivered the next Shuttle scheduled for launch. McCulley had indicated that his company accepted “full responsibility for wiring damage” found in all four Shuttles, despite the fact that the wiring problems might have stemmed from maintenance conducted before USA took over operational responsibility. Committee members expressed their concern that NASA planned to request more money for the repairs, but Readdy replied that such a scenario was unlikely, because USA would be responsible for making the repairs. Committee members also were worried about whether Shuttle launches and flights could maintain adequate safety levels when the Shuttle team had only a few opportunities to practice their skills. NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance Frederick D. Gregory responded that simulation launches, in combination with a flight rate of two launches per year, were sufficient to keep a launch team’s skills sharp.(Larry Wheeler, “Shuttle Wiring Inspections, Maintenance Cost $350,000,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 September 1999; Tamara Lytle, “NASA Officials Bring Wiring Problems to House Panel’s Attention,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 September 1999.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin selected NASA Chief Engineer Daniel R. Mulville to replace General John R. Dailey as Associate Deputy Administrator, effective 1 January 2000. Dailey was leaving to become Director of the National Air and Space Museum. NASA had appointed Mulville as Chief Engineer in 1995, responsible for overall review of technical readiness and for execution of all NASA programs. From 1990 to 1995, Mulville had been Director of the Engineering and Quality Management Division in NASA’s Office of Safety and Mission Assurance, and, from 1986 to 1990, he was Deputy Director of the Materials and Structures Division in NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. Before that appointment, Mulville had served as the Structures Technology Manager at the Naval Air Systems Command since 1979, where he led the development of structural design, testing, and certification methods, as Program Manager for the Development of Composites for the AV-8B and F/A-18 aircraft, and advanced aircraft and missile programs. Mulville had received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal, NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal, and NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal, among other awards. Goldin expressed his pleasure at Mulville’s acceptance of the position, remarking that, as Associate Deputy Administrator, Mulville would be his most senior advisor on NASA operations and commenting on Mulville’s outstanding work as NASA’s Chief Engineer.(NASA, “Mulville Named Associate Deputy Administrator,” news release 99-146, 14 December 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-146.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
Donald D. Engen, Director of the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum, and William Ivans, an internationally known, award-winning pilot from La Jolla, California, died when the motorized glider that Ivans was piloting broke apart and crashed. Investigators were attempting to determine the cause of the accident. Larry Sanderson, President of the Soaring Society of America, remarked that “both victims were top pilots in ‘an extremely well-built aircraft. So it had to be a very unusual set of circumstances that stressed the craft’.” Both Engen and Ivans were officers of the Soaring Society, and Ivans, a pioneer in the field, had won many awards for high-altitude soaring. Engen had retired from the U.S. Navy in 1978, with the rank of vice admiral and had been a test pilot for many years. After retiring from the Navy, he had served for two years on the National Transportation Safety Board and as administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration between 1984 and 1987. He became Director of the National Air and Space Museum in 1996, following the resignation of Martin O. Harwit.
Keith R. Hall, Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Air Force for Space and Director of the National Reconnaissance Office, and Edward C. “Pete” Aldridge Jr., Chief Executive Officer of the Aerospace Corporation, which provides technical analysis for the United States and international space programs, testified before the U.S. House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence’s Subcommittee on Technical and Tactical Intelligence, regarding three rocket-launch failures. All of the launch failures⎯an explosion after launch in August 1998, a missile-warning satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 9 April 1999, and a military communications satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 30 April 1999⎯had involved Lockheed Martin Titan IV rockets. The three mission failures had cost taxpayers “at least [US]$3 billion.” Hall explained that the U.S. Air Force had traced the three launch failures to human error. The investigators had traced the most recent failure specifically to a misplaced decimal point. Aldridge, whose company had been responsible for checking U.S. Air Force rockets for defects prior to launch, explained that the mistake “got through,” despite the system in place to prevent such occurrences. Aldridge remarked that his company’s workforce of engineers, scientists, and support personnel had decreased by 30 percent since 1993, and that the recent launch failures had caused further delays, resulting in increased costs for the Titan program. Both Aldridge and Hall requested federal funding. House Subcommittee Chairperson Michael N. Castle (R-DE) asked whether the military rocket program, which receives less supervision than NASA, needed greater congressional oversight. Castle announced that the subcommittee would hold further public hearings on the failures.(Stephen Sobek for Gannett News Service, “Human Error Called Culprit in 3 Rocket Launch Failures,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 16 June 1999.)
In the second-longest spacewalk in NASA’s history, lasting 8 hours and 15 minutes, Steven L. Smith and John M. Grunsfeld successfully replaced all six of HST’s gyroscopes and had “just enough time to equip each of the telescope’s six batteries with a voltage regulator to prevent overheating.” NASA believed corroded wires had caused the gyroscope failures. To avoid repeating the failure, engineers used pressurized nitrogen rather than air to force fluid into the new gyroscopes. Smith and Grunsfeld alternated working inside the tight space housing the gyroscopes. Because of his long arms, NASA assigned the 6-foot-3.5-inch-tall (1.9-meter-tall) Smith, who had worked on HST during its last service call in 1997, the task of replacing the two sets of gyroscopes on the sides, which were more difficult to reach. The spacewalk lasted 2 hours longer than scheduled. Although Smith and Grunsfeld went to work an hour early and quickly organizing their tools in the cargo bay, the pair needed extra time to open coolant-line valves on a disabled infrared camera and encountered difficulty latching the doors of the cargo bay holding the equipment.(Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Hubble Gets a Transplant: Initial Check Says New Parts Are Working,” Los Angeles Times, 23 December 1999, Associated Press, “Crew Replaces All 6 Hubble Gyroscopes,” Washington Times, 23 December 1999.)
Astronauts Steven L. Smith and John M. Grunsfeld completed the HST servicing mission, replacing a nonfunctioning radio transmitter and an outdated tape recorder. The spacewalk again exceeded 8 hours and, for the third time, ran behind schedule. As the pair prepared to begin their spacewalk, Grunsfeld encountered a mechanical problem with his suit and had to exchange it before exiting Discovery’s airlock. Grunsfeld also faced the most difficult task, replacing the transmitter, which was not easy to service in space. The job required him to disconnect and reconnect a series of thin coaxial cables while wearing bulky pressurized gloves. NASA had designed a special tool for the job, but even so, the task required more than an hour, and Grunsfeld needed to stop to rest his hands. The eight-day repair flight had accomplished all of the mission’s major objectives, although NASA cancelled a fourth spacewalk, preventing the astronauts from installing all six steel sunshades that protect HST from solar damage.(Michael Cabbage, “Good Job: Hubble Looks Fit as Fiddle at the End of a Happy Day in Space, the Astronauts Sent Holiday Greetings to Earth,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 25 December 1999; Reuters, “Astronauts Wrap Up Work on Hubble: Christmas Eve Mission Replaces Bad Transmitter,” Washington Times, 25 December 1999; Associated Press, “Repairs Done, Shuttle Crew Makes Plans for Landing,” New York Times, 27 December 1999.)
Following a series of launch failures, Lockheed Martin Corporation announced management changes in three of its business sectors. Raymond S. Colloday, President of Lockheed Martin Astronautics, retired, effective immediately, and G. Thomas Marsh, Executive Vice President of Missiles and Space, succeeded him. Lockheed named the President of Missiles and Space, K. Michael Henshaw, as President and Chief Operating Officer of the Energy and Environment Sector, effective 1 June. In that position, Henshaw succeeded Robert J. Stevens, who had served in dual positions but was directed to “devote his full attention” to his role as Corporate Vice President of Strategic Development. Albert E. Smith, President of Aerospace Electronics Systems and of Sanders, a Lockheed Martin company in Nashua, New Hampshire, succeeded Henshaw as President of Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space of Sunnyvale, California. Lockheed named Walter P. Havenstein President of Sanders and Acting President of Aerospace Electronics System, a promotion from his former position as Executive Vice President. In addition to the recent launch failures, Lockheed had been “bedeviled” by problems in its space business, including a 10 percent reduction in sales in its Space and Strategic Missiles Sector and a 17 percent decline in operating profit, after inadequate preparation and cancellations had caused the delay of commercial satellite launches.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Announces Management Changes,” news release, 11 May 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LockheedMartinAnnouncesManagementCh.html (accessed 6 February 2008); Tim Smart, “Lockheed Revamping 2 Units: New Leaders Named After Series of Launch Failures,” Washington Post, 12 May 1999.)
NASA announced the establishment of a review panel to examine the overall safety of Shuttle maintenance and refurbishment practices following the discovery of maintenance-related damage to the Shuttle fleet’s electrical wiring. NASA had named Director of ARC Henry McDonald to chair the panel. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg indicated that the other team members, not yet named, would include top maintenance experts from NASA, the military, the commercial aerospace industry, and the commercial aircraft industry. NASA required the team to assess NASA’s standard practices and recommend improvements, with preliminary findings due in October.(NASA, “NASA Forms Independent Industry-Government Team To Review Shuttle Maintenance and Refurbishment Practices,” news release 99-104, 20 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99- 104.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
Mission controllers indicated that chances of ever contacting the US$165 million Mars Polar Lander were “remote at best,” after they failed to detect a signal during their “last best chance” of communicating with the probe. NASA officials announced that the loss of Lander meant that NASA would need to drop the timetable for future Mars missions and rethink the entire Mars exploration program, including the scheduled launch of the next lander in 2001. NASA had already spent US$193 million on the planned 2001 launch. Edward J. Weiler, head of NASA’s Office of Space Science, indicated that NASA would convene a panel of experts to diagnose the Mars Polar Lander failure and to suggest a “new architecture” for its Mars program. Although they had set no dates, members of Congress said that they planned to hold hearings about NASA’s procedures and budget.(Down Jones Newswire, “NASA Fails To Detect Signal from Mars Polar Lander,” 7 December 1999; Peter Kendall and Vincent J. Schodolski for the Chicago Tribune News Service, “Mars Exploration Put on Hold: NASA Scraps Its Timetable, and the Launch of a $193 Million Lander Set for 2001 Is Uncertain,” Oregonian (Portland), 8 December 1999.)
The Federal Laboratory Consortium appointed Donald J. Campbell, Director of Glenn Research Center (GRC), as the 1998 Laboratory Director of the Year for Technology Transfer. The Consortium honored Campbell, NASA’s first African American center director, for his “exemplary contributions to the overall enhancement of technology transfer for economic development.” Industries had created at least 20 new products from GRC-developed technologies in the previous five years. Campbell had also led the Center in establishing the Lewis Incubator for Technology, to help entrepreneurs and start-up companies commercialize NASA-developed technologies, as well as the Garrett Morgan Commercialization Initiative, to help small businesses in Ohio and the Great Lakes region use NASA technologies to become more competitive.(NASA, “Campbell Named Laboratory Director of the Year,” news release 99-32, 4 March 1999.)
NASA announced that NASA scientists and other weather researchers had “gained intriguing new information about upper-level winds that drive hurricanes and about the storms’ devastating impact as they collide with mountains.” The research findings were the result of a seven-week study conducted by NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and several universities during the previous summer, as part of the Third Convection and Moisture Experiment (CAMEX-3). The study’s purpose was to gauge the strength of Atlantic hurricane winds and rainfall. CAMEX-3 researchers had used data collected with special laser instruments aboard NASA’s DC-8 aircraft, which flew through hurricanes Bonnie, Danielle, Earl, and Georges; data collected from NASA’s ER-2 high-altitude aircraft, which flew above the hurricanes to collect “first-of its-kind data”; and data from the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission satellite. Edward J. Zipser of Texas A&M University remarked, “the multi-aircraft datasets obtained by NASA aircraft in these hurricanes are unprecedented in their comprehensiveness.”(NASA, “NASA Hurricane Study Reveals Intriguing Results,” news release 99-4, 15 January 1999.)
An international team of astronomers, led by Wendy L. Freedman of the Carnegie Observatories, held a news conference to announce their findings regarding the age of the universe. Freedman’s team had concluded that the universe was between 12 billion and 13.4 billion years old, at least 1 billion years younger than predicted. Freedman’s international team had studied eight years of calculations, made observations using NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope (HST), and used a range of celestial measurements to recalculate the age of the universe. Among those measurements was the “Hubble constant,” used in mathematical equations to “gauge the speed at which galaxies are accelerating away from each other.” Named for Edwin Hubble, who had discovered 70 years ago that the universe is expanding, the Hubble constant is an essential piece of the equation determining the age and size of the universe. The team’s findings drew criticism from other astronomers. Although the Australian physicist Charles H. Lineweaver had conducted separate research with the same result as that of Freedman’s team, some astronomers associated with the Carnegie Observatories and Harvard University did not agree with the Freedman team’s conclusions. Allan Sandage of the Carnegie Observatories stated that he believed that the team’s methodology contained systematic errors and that the final number was not correct. Harvard University astronomer Robert P. Kirshner had led a third team, using the Hubble constant to study the age of the universe, but although he calculated a different age than the other teams, Kirshner downplayed the differences in their results, remarking that “what was once a very big disagreement is now narrowing down.”(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Hubble Completes Eight-Year Effort To Measure Expanding Universe,” news release H99-65, 25 May 1999, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/releases/1999/H99-65.html (accessed 2 January 2008); Robert Lee Hotz, “Scientists Calculate Most Precise Age Yet for Universe; Astronomy: New Data, Hubble Telescope Help Two Separate Teams Put Range at 12 Billion to 13.4 Billion Years,” Los Angeles Times, 26 May 1999.)
NASA selected winners of its Government Inventor of the Year and Commercial Invention of the Year awards. Charles E. Clagett, Associate Head of the Component and Hardware Systems Branch at GSFC, won the Government Inventor of the Year Award for his Apparatus for Providing Torque and for Storing Momentum Energy. Clagett had developed the apparatus, known more commonly as the SMEX Reaction/Momentum Wheel, for NASA’s Small Explorer program. NASA had used the apparatus successfully in the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer and the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite. Paul M. Hergenrother, Joseph G. Smith Jr., and Brian J. Jensen of Langley Research Center won the Commercial Inventor of the Year Award for their Phenylethynyl Terminated Imide Oligomers, fifth composition, known as PETI-5, which is a type of glue that holds fibers together. The Langley team had developed PETI-5 as an adhesive for use in various aerospace and commercial applications. Used in high- speed, high-temperature aircraft, PETI-5 had netted US$10 million in sales since becoming commercially available.(NASA, “NASA Selects Top Inventions of the Year,” news release 99-42, 12 March 1999.)
President William J. Clinton signed into law the FY 2000 appropriations bill for the Department of Veterans Administration, Housing and Urban Development, and Other Agencies, which included the US$13.65 billion NASA budget. Congress had approved NASA’s budget on 7 October. In keeping with the President’s original request, the final appropriation included full funding for the International Space Station and the Space Shuttle program; US$80 million for Spaceliner 100, an MSFC program to find new propulsion technology; US$25 million for Shuttle upgrades; US$5 million for the National Center for Space Research and Technology, a joint venture including MSFC, the University of Alabama in Huntsville, and private industry; and US$3 million to continue research into tether-guided satellites. The U.S. House of Representatives’ version of the bill had cut US$900 million from NASA’s funding, but the U.S. Senate had approved a budget equal to NASA’s FY 1999 budget: US$13.6 billion. House Republicans had voted to eliminate funding for Triana, a controversial Earth-observing satellite first envisioned by Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr., but the House and Senate conference committee had voted on a compromise, providing for the National Academy of Sciences to review the program and forbidding NASA from launching Triana until 1 January 2001.(Brett Davis, “Congress Approves Full NASA Budget,” Huntsville Times (AL), 8 October 1999; Stephen Koff and Tom Diemer, “Cleveland NASA Unit, CMHA Get Funding,” Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 21 October 1999.)
Lockheed Martin announced a “sweeping reorganization” of key leadership positions, in response to recommendations of the review panel chaired by A. Thomas Young. The Young Panel had urged the company to make structural changes to correct quality-control problems at Astronautics, the unit responsible for Atlas, Titan, and Athena rocket development. In response to the panel’s recommendation to divide the two tasks of product assurance and mission success, Astronautics President G. Thomas Marsh appointed John P. Mari as Vice President of Product Assurance and Roman Matherne as Vice President for Mission Success. Marsh named John Parker, President of the former Mission Success and Product Assurance Section, to head the operations post in Lockheed Martin’s VentureStarTM Program, which the company hoped to develop into a future reusable launch vehicle with the potential to replace the Space Shuttle. Marsh appointed Joel S. Porter as Vice President for Business Development and Advanced Programs for Astronautics, succeeding Matthew B. Foster, who resigned. Other changes at Astronautics included the appointment of Claude McAnally as Vice President of Operations; the appointment of Grover W. Hall Jr. as Vice President of Technical Operations; and the separation of Technical Operations from Manufacturing Operations to better delineate responsibility and accountability, according to the recommendations of the Young Panel. Lockheed tasked Gareth D. Flora, under Marsh’s supervision, with developing, managing, and improving subcontract management. In addition, Flora became responsible for ensuring that the company properly implemented the recommendations of the investigating team, as well as those of a separate U.S. Air Force review of the aerospace industry.(Jeffrey Leib, “Lockheed Replaces Key Staff in Astronautics Unit,” Denver Post (CO), 21 September 1999.)
British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and Swiss astronaut Claude Nicollier installed a new central computer on HST, 20 times faster than the telescope’s previous one, and a refurbished, 550-pound (250-kilogram), fine guidance sensor. At 8 hours and 10 minutes, the pair’s spacewalk was the third longest in NASA’s history.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-103,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts- 103.html (accessed 25 March 2008).)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg announced several immediate management changes in the Office of Space Flight. NASA appointed William F. Readdy, former Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, as Deputy Associate Administrator, with primary responsibility for daily management of personnel and program activities. Having participated in Shuttle missions in 1992, 1993, and 1996, Readdy was an astronaut on flight status, eligible for future Shuttle missions. NASA appointed W. Michael Hawes, a former chief engineer for the ISS, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Development (Space Station), responsible for directing the space station budget, establishing and implementing station policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners. Norman B. Starkey replaced Readdy as Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, assuming responsibilities that included directing the Space Shuttle budget, establishing and implementing Shuttle policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners.(NASA, “NASA Selects Key Space Flight Managers,” news release 99-71, 16 June 1999.)
Celebrating the anniversary of the flight of Yuri Gagarin on 12 April 1961, Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin presented state medals to several dozen cosmonauts and space officials during a Cosmonaut’s Day ceremony. Yeltsin briefly praised Mir’s achievements in his remarks at the Kremlin, but when Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev presented him with a model of the new ISS, Yeltsin asked Koptev whether Mir would stay aloft. Koptev responded in the affirmative, but explained during a press conference afterward that private investors had not yet produced funds for Mir’s continued operation. Vitaly I. Sevastyanov, a lawmaker and former cosmonaut, called on Russians to contribute money to a charity formed to keep Mir in orbit.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 12 April 1999.)
During a spacewalk lasting nearly 6 hours, cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyev and Sergei V. Avdeyev searched for the source of a leak that was slowly causing pressure loss in Mir; they also attempted to install an antenna needed for an experiment. Both efforts failed. The leak, first detected in late June 1999, was “above the allowable limit.” Although it posed no immediate threat to the space station, if the leak continued for three more months, the station would become uninhabitable.(Nikolai Pavlov for Reuters, “Mir Crew Spacewalks To Seek Pressure Leak,” 23 July 1999; Kansas City Star (MO), “Antenna Failure Prevents Mir Test: Two Cosmonauts Give Up After Trying To Fix It for Six Hours,” 24 July 1999.)
NASA announced the departure of Gretchen W. McClain, a senior space station official at NASA Headquarters, naming as her replacement in an acting capacity, W. Michael Hawes, NASA’s Chief Engineer for the ISS. In 1997 NASA had appointed McClain as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Development (Space Station). In that position, she was responsible for directing the space station budget, establishing and implementing station policy, coordinating external communications, and undertaking liaison activities with the executive branch, Congress, industry, and international partners. McClain left NASA to return to private industry.(NASA, “McClain To Leave NASA; Hawes Named Acting Chief of Space Station,” news release 99-50, 8 April 1999.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin officially announced the change of the name of Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio, to “John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field.” George W. Lewis had been the research director for the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASA’s predecessor agency, which built the research facility in 1941. Shortly after Lewis’s death in 1948, NACA had named the facility “Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory” to commemorate him. NASA had modified its name to “Lewis Research Center” in 1958, when the facility became part of the newly formed National Aeronautics and Space Administration. U.S. Senator R. Michael DeWine (R-OH) had proposed the most recent name change for the facility in the FY 1999 appropriations bill for the Departments of Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. Congress had enacted the bill into law on 21 October 1998 (Pub. L. No. 105-276). Goldin remarked that naming the Center for both George W. Lewis and John H. Glenn Jr. was an appropriate tribute to “two of Ohio’s famous names⎯one an aeronautic researcher and the other an astronaut legend and lawmaker.”(NASA, “NASA Announces Field Center Name Change,” news release 99-29, 1 March 1999. 187)
The U.S. Air Force announced that Brigadier General Kevin P. Chilton would not replace Brigadier General F. Randall Starbuck as Commander of the 45th Space Wing at Patrick Air Force Base, but would lead the 9th Reconnaissance Wing at Beale Air Force Base near Sacramento, California. Starbuck was to remain in command of the 45th Space Wing indefinitely until the Air Force had chosen another successor. The change followed “the U.S. launch industry’s worst string of accidents in more than a decade,” including “three consecutive failures of Air Force Titan rockets” launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The Air Force also reported that, earlier in May, a military navigation spacecraft had sustained US$51 million in damage during a thunderstorm. The Air Force announced that it had opened a formal investigation into that incident, in addition to the investigation President William J. Clinton had ordered into the string of launch failures. The President had appointed the CIA, the U.S. Department of Defense, and NASA to carry out that investigation.(Robyn Suriano, “Chilton Not Coming to Cape; Starbuck To Remain Indefinitely,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 21 May 1999.)
Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution I. Michael Heyman announced the appointment of General John R. Dailey, U.S. Marine Corps (Retired), Associate Deputy Administrator of NASA, as Director of the Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum, effective January 2000. Dailey succeeded Vice Admiral Donald D. Engen, U.S. Navy (Retired), who had died suddenly in a glider accident in July after serving as the museum’s director for three years. Dailey had begun work at NASA in 1992, after retiring from 36 years of highly decorated service in the U.S. Marine Corps. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remarked that Dailey’s leadership at NASA had been unparalleled, and that he had “shaped and strengthened the [A]gency, and was responsible for developing an infrastructure that [would] carry NASA into the new millennium.” Secretary Heyman commented on Dailey’s selection from a strong field of candidates, describing him as “a most impressive individual,” who had earned confidence and admiration throughout the air and space community and would continue the strong, dedicated leadership expected at the museum. In addition to managing 260 employees and a US$25 million budget, Dailey’s appointment placed him in charge of construction of the museum’s new 710,000-square-foot (66,000-square-meter), hangar-style facility, expected to open at Dulles International Airport in December 2003. The Smithsonian had conceived the idea of the new facility to display its vast aeronautics and space holdings; the original National Air and Space Museum building was too small to house the additional collection of more than 180 aircraft and 100 spacecraft.(Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, “New Director of the National Air and Space Museum To Take Office in January,” news release, 24 November 1999, http://www.nasm.si.edu/events/pressroom/releaseDetail.cfm? releaseID=97 (accessed 19 March 2008); Peter Carlson, “New Air & Space Chief: General Succeeds Director Killed in Crash,” Washington Post, 24 November 1999.)
Two Russian cosmonauts carried out a successful 51⁄2-hour spacewalk outside Mir, installing equipment and opening the antenna that they had failed to unfold properly in a previous spacewalk. Russian space officials said that the spacewalk was most likely the last to occur at Mir. This was the seventh spacewalk for Mir Commander Viktor M. Afanasyev and the eighth spacewalk for Flight Engineer Sergei V. Avdeyev, who had spent a record-making, cumulative total of 717 days in space.(Reuters, “Mir Cosmonauts Make Final Spacewalk,” 28 July 1999.)
Space Imaging Inc., a private company owned by Lockheed Martin and based in Thornton, Colorado, released a photograph taken from space of the intersection of 14th Street, NW, and Constitution Avenue in Washington, DC. President William J. Clinton had approved the development of private space cameras in 1994, but Space Imaging had been the first company to successfully build and launch a spacecraft with such a camera, launching its Eastman Kodak– built camera on 24 September and testing it on 30 September. The commercial image rivaled the products of military spy technology, showing objects as small as 3 feet (0.9 meter) wide. Space Imaging’s test image showed the Washington Monument, part of the Ellipse, and the buildings of the U.S. Department of Commerce and the Museum of American History.(William J. Broad, “Giant Leap for Private Industry: Spies in Space,” New York Times, 13 October 1999. 228)
NASA successfully launched its Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) telescope aboard a Delta II rocket. FUSE’s three-year mission was to measure the abundance of deuterium, or heavy hydrogen, which stars consume every day and convert to helium. Astronomers hoped that the study of deuterium would help them understand better “what the universe was like moments after creation.” The FUSE scientists sought to determine how much deuterium still exists and how much of it stars consume regularly, thereby calculating “the original makeup of the universe.” NASA had nearly cancelled the FUSE project in the early 1990s, because of cost overruns and missed deadlines, but in 1994 NASA had asked Johns Hopkins University to manage the project. Project managers at Johns Hopkins had scaled down the scientific instrument and used existing equipment instead of developing new technologies. The Canadian Space Agency had provided the camera, the French Space Agency had provided the spectrograph, and other U.S. universities had provided various parts for the telescope. Orbital Sciences Corporation had built the spacecraft using an existing design to reduce costs further. NASA considered the spacecraft and its launch a success; NASA’s Science Director Edward J. Weiler remarked, “We have never had a satellite as sensitive as FUSE.”(Washington Times, “Special Telescope To Look for First Signs of Creation,” 25 June 1999; Steven Young for Reuters, “NASA Launches Telescope To Seek Universe’s Origin,” 24 June 1999.)
Cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyev and Sergei V. Avdeyev departed Mir with their French colleague Jean-Pierre Haigneré, leaving the station empty for the first time in 131⁄2 years. On 2 August, in preparation for the departure, the crew had installed a new computer, which provided orientation and docking management systems to keep the station in orbit during the absence of a crew. The crew had also installed a ground-controlled backup system, which would prevent the station from crashing to Earth if a malfunction occurred on board the station.(David Hoffman, “Cosmonauts Abandon Mir: Russian Space Station Faces Demise After 13 Years Aloft,” Washington Post, 28 August 1999; Andrei Shukshin for Reuters, “Russia’s Mir Has New Computer in Control,” 2 August 1999; Reuters, “Russia’s Mir Crew Fit Equipment To Leave Station,” 6 August 1999.)
NASA scientists lost contact with the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft as it entered its Martian orbit and disappeared behind the planet, a little less than a year after the launch of its Mars mission in December 1998. Mars Surveyor Project Manager John B. McNamee said that the orbit-insertion burn, a 16-minute-long burn to slow the spacecraft down as it enters orbit, had begun on time. The team of NASA scientists observed 5 minutes of the burn before the craft went behind Mars. At that point, the craft stopped communicating. Communication did not resume at the time the team expected the craft to reappear from the far side of the planet. McNamee reported that the latest navigation results showed that the craft had entered its orbit lower than his team had planned, indicating that NASA’s navigation predictions at the tracking station may have been incorrect. Carl B. Pilcher, Science Director for Solar System Exploration at NASA Headquarters, commented that, although losing the spacecraft was very serious, the loss was “not devastating to the Mars Surveyor Program as a whole,” because the mission of Mars Polar Lander, scheduled to arrive at Mars two months after Mars Climate Orbiter, was independent of that of Orbiter.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “NASA’s Mars Climate Orbiter Believed To Be Lost,” news release, 23 September 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mcolost.html (accessed 3 March 2008); Reuters, “NASA Loses Contact with Mars Orbiter,” 23 September 1999.)
Joseph G. Beerer of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory stated that all of the instruments aboard Mars Global Surveyor were operating, and that the craft had begun mapping Mars, approximately one year later than originally planned. NASA had launched the craft in November 1996, and Surveyor had entered orbit around Mars in September 1997. NASA had delayed the mapping portion of the mission when scientists detected a structural problem with one of the craft’s solar panels. To avoid placing excessive stress on the panel, the flight team had opted to proceed cautiously in aerobraking. Aerobraking, a pioneering operation, was necessary to position the spacecraft for its Mars mapping mission.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Mars Global Surveyor Successfully Completes Aerobraking,” news release 99-006, 4 February 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mgsbrake.html (accessed 27 December 2007).)
