Administrator Daniel S. Goldin became NASA’s first head to serve three different presidents when George W. Bush assumed the presidency of the United States. Although some had speculated that Goldin’s tenure would end when President William J. Clinton left office, President George W. Bush asked Goldin to remain in his position indefinitely, while the new administration reviewed possible candidates to replace him. Originally appointed by President George H. W. Bush in 1992, Goldin had instituted vast changes at NASA with his “faster, better, cheaper” approach. During his tenure, Goldin had reduced the number of NASA employees from 24,000 to 18,000 while overseeing the successful building and deployment of the International Space Station (ISS).(Frank Morring Jr., “Goldin Sees Station, Innovation as Legacies of His NASA Tenure,” Aerospace Daily, 8 January 2001; Brian Berger, “Goldin Responds to Presiding over NASA Through Bush Team Transition,” Space News, 23 January 2001; Bryant Jordan, “NASA’s Goldin Likely Gone,” Federal Computer Week, 11 January 2001, http://www.fcw.com (accessed 11 January 2001).)
The Russian spacecraft Soyuz lifted off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan propelled by a Soyuz-U rocket. The spacecraft carried one of the most controversial space travelers in historyAmerican businessman Dennis A. Tito. Tito had paid the Russian Space Agency for the opportunity to accompany cosmonauts Talgat A. Musabayev and Yuri M. Baturin on the mission to the ISS. Many space officials, regarding the endeavor as unsafe and capricious, had opposed Tito’s presence on the flight. Only days before the launch, Tito had gained the final approval of the consortium of nations building the ISS, becoming the highest profile space tourist to fly into orbit.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 570, 1 May 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx570.html (accessed 24 July 2008); Warren E. Leary, “Russia Wins Fight To Be First Space Travel Agent,” New York Times, 25 April 2001.)
Space Shuttle Discovery STS-102/ISS-5.A.1―comprising Commander James D. Wetherbee, Pilot James M. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Andrew S. W. Thomas and Paul W. Richards―launched from NASA’s KSC carrying the three-person crew of Expedition 2 to the ISS for their four-and-one-half-month stay. The members of Expedition 2―Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev and NASA astronauts James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms―would replace the first ISS research team. The transfer also entailed a change of command aboard the orbiting research center. American William M. Shepherd, Commander during the first research period, had led a crew of two Russian cosmonauts in installing and calibrating ISS equipment. With many of the initial installation problems resolved, the second crew planned to devote more time to research. The Russian cosmonaut who was to take command aboard the ISS had plenty of space experience. Commander Usachev had spent 376 days on Mir and had performed numerous spacewalks. Although Voss and Helms had both flown on Shuttle missions before, this voyage was their first time traveling to space for a significant research period. The primary purpose of the Shuttle’s 14-day mission was to deliver the new crew, but Discovery also carried, for the first time, the Leonardo Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM). The Italian Space Agency had constructed the module to serve as a “moving van” for carrying experiments and supplies back and forth between Earth and the ISS.(NASA, “Discovery Returns Expedition One to Earth; Launches Second Crew,” news release 01-34, 6 March 2001; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-102,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-102.html (accessed 2 February 2009); Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Primed for Crew-Exchange Mission to Station,” New York Times, 7 March 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Blasts Off with Next Space Station Crew,” 8 March 2001; Reuters, “USA: CorrectedShuttle Discovery Launched on Space Station Mission,” 8 March 2001.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis STS-104/ISS7A lifted off from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, bound for the ISS. Steven W. Lindsay served as Flight Commander, Charles O. Hobaugh piloted the spacecraft, and Mission Specialists Janet L. Kavandi, Michael L. Gernhardt, and James F. Reilly rounded out the crew. The launch was the first using NASA’s upgraded hydrogen turbopumps in the Shuttle’s three main engines. The pump was the last in a series of Shuttle improvements that NASA had made to reduce maintenance and improve safety of the Shuttle.
The U.S. Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space held a hearing on safety and workforce issues related to NASA’s Space Shuttle Program. According to newspaper reports, much of the testimony addressed the effects of budget cuts on the safety improvements for the Space Shuttles. Subcommittee members and witnesses reportedly were critical of the budget cuts and concerned about their possibly detrimental effects on Shuttle safety. Individuals providing testimony at the hearing were NASA Deputy Associate Administrator William F. Readdy, Allen Li of the General Accounting Office (GAO), Michael James McCulley of United Space Alliance, Richard D. Blomberg, chair of the ASAP, and Bryan D. O’Connor, former chair of the NRC’s Committee on Space Shuttle Upgrades.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space, Shuttle Safety, 107th Cong., 1st sess., 6 September 2001; Tamara Lytle, “Experts Fear for Shuttle Safety as NASA Budget Is Trimmed,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 September 2001.)
An international team of astronomers presented compelling new evidence that comet impacts had played a significant role in the formation of life on Earth. The researchers, led by Michael J. Mumma of NASA’s GSFC and Hermann Boehnhardt, working at the European South Observatory in Chile, presented their findings in an issue of Science devoted to the burgeoning field of comet research. The astronomers had used orbiting space telescopes, as well as telescopes throughout the world, to provide unprecedented coverage of comets passing Earth. In the course of their observations, the team had witnessed the breakup of the Comet LINEAR, thereby gaining new knowledge about the organic materials contained in comets. This new understanding of the composition of comets led to new information about the impact of comets on Earthespecially during the collisions between comets and planets that occurred long ago. Mumma explained the significance of the new discoveries about the composition of comets: “The idea that comets seeded life on Earth with water and essential molecular building blocks is dramatic, and for the first time, we have seen a comet with the right composition to do the job.” The researchers concluded that comets had formed from dust, ice, and glass, and that, in colliding with other celestial bodies, comets had transferred fundamental building blocks to them.(Hermann Boehnhardt, “The Death of a Comet and the Birth of Our Solar System,” Science 292, no. 5520 (18 May 2001): 13071308; NASA, “In Coming Apart, Comet Linear Exposes Its Deepest Secrets,” news release 01-94, 17 May 2001; Peter N. Spotts, “Comets Give Clues to Solar System’s Infancy: New Studies Chronicle the Break Up of a Comet That Sheds Light on Early Planet Information,” Christian Science Monitor, 18 May 2001.)
John F. Yardley, who had worked at the McDonnell Aircraft Corporation, serving as the Launch Operation Manager for the Mercury and Gemini spacecraft and the Technical Director for the Gemini program before joining NASA in 1974, died at the age of 76. NASA had awarded Yardley its Public Service Medal in 1963 and in 1966 for his work on the Mercury and the Gemini. From 1981 to 1989, Yardley had been President of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called Yardley “as responsible as any individual for getting the Space Shuttle Program off the ground.(NASA, “John F. Yardley, Human Space Flight Pioneer, Dies,” news release 01-130, 27 June 2001; Wolfgang Saxon, “John Yardley, 76, Dies; Had Central Role in Space Flight,” New York Times, 28 June 2001.)
On the 15th anniversary of the launch of the Mir space station and with its doom imminent, Russian scientists and other space enthusiasts protested the plan to use a controlled descent to destroy the aging vessel. Once a point of pride for the Soviet space program, Mir had remained in use far beyond its planned lifespan and had fallen into disrepair. Russian Space Agency Chief Yuri Koptev attempted once again to explain why Mir had to come down: “The Mir has lived a wonderful life and must end it in a graceful way. We must discard it while we are still capable of controlling it, not turn its descent into roulette that threatens the entire global community.” Russia had planned to initiate Mir’s final descent in mid-March 2001.(Associated Press, “Report: Russia Puts Off Dumping of Mir for a Week,” 15 February 2001; Associated Press, “Russia Marks Mir’s 15th Anniversary by Assuaging Fears of Its Demise,” 19 February 2001; Associated Press, “Scientists Protest on Mir’s 15th Anniversary,” 20 February 2001.)
NASA announced the inauguration of a program focused on designing a probe that could collide with a comet traveling at speeds of more than 22,000 miles (35,000 kilometers) per hour. Researchers had created the Deep Impact Mission program in the belief that the collision might enable measurement of the materials comprising the comet. The plan called for a 770-pound (349-kilogram) impactor, featuring cameras and an infrared spectrometer, to collect data from the comet. NASA selected Michael A’Hearn of the University of Maryland as Project Leader, with NASA’s JPL and Ball Aerospace Technology Corporation as the designers of the probe. The effort targeted Comet Tempel 1, discovered in 1867, which orbits Earth every five and one- half years. Following in the wake of several comet-related discoveries, the Deep Impact Mission focused on analyzing the composition of comets and determining how they might have affected the rest of the universe. NASA had designated a budget of US$279 million for the project.(NASA, “NASA Gives Green Light for Deep Impact Mission Development,” news release 01-99, 24 May 2001. 67 SpaceRef.com, “Galileo Millennium Mission Status,” 24 May 2001, http://www.spaceref.com/news/ viewsr.html?pid=2913 (accessed 30 July 2001); NASA, “Galileo Gets One Last Close Encounter with Jupiter’s Callisto,” news release 01-97, 22 May 2001.)
Michael A. Chowdry, the founder and chairperson of Atlas Air Inc., and Jeff Cole, the aerospace editor for the Wall Street Journal, died in a plane crash, which occurred minutes after takeoff from the Front Range Airport in Watkins, Colorado. Chowdry had formed Atlas Air in 1992, to lease jumbo cargo jets and to provide flight crews to the airfreight industry. Since 1999, readers of the Wall Street Journal had known Cole for his detailed and insightful coverage of the defense and aerospace industries. After interviewing Chowdry, Cole had accepted his invitation to ride aboard a Czech fighter jet. Chowdry was piloting the jet when it crashed.(Wall Street Journal, “Crash Kills Atlas Air Chairman and Journal’s Aerospace Editor,” 25 January 2001.)
NASA announced a partnership with John Deere and Company of Moline, Illinois, to allow farmers to use NASA’s global positioning technology to navigate their fields and monitor their soil. Using a system developed at NASA’s JPL, farmers would be able to access GPS data to locate points as small as 4 inches (10 centimeters) wide. Specifically, according to the agreement, NASA and John Deere’s NavCom Technology Inc. had created a partnership to explore further the uses of GPS in farming. Scientists in NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise believed that GPS might prove especially useful in the area of natural hazard monitoring, providing farmers with images of their land in the event of a tornado, fire, or other disaster. The pathbreaking agreement resulted from the activities of the Commercial Technology Office at JPL, which focused on exploring new ways that technologies developed by American space programs could benefit other American industries.(NASA, “NASA Satellite Technology Goes Down on the Farm,” news release 01-62, 8 May 2001.)
NASA announced the selection of crew members for three missions to the ISS scheduled for 2002. Mission STS-112, scheduled for launch in July 2002, would comprise Commander Jeffrey S. Ashby and crew members Sandra H. Magnus, Pamela A. Melroy, Piers J. Sellers, David A. Wolf, and Fyodor N. Yurchikhin. The crew for STS-113, scheduled to depart in August 2002, would consist of Commander James D. Wetherbee and crew members John Bennett Herrington, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and Christopher J. Loria. The mission would also transport Expedition 6 crew members Valery G. Korzun, Sergei Y. Treschev, and Peggy A. Whitson to the ISS, returning to Earth Expedition 5 crew members Kenneth D. Bowersox, Nikolai M. Budarin, and Donald A. Thomas. Finally, the crew of STS-114 would include Commander Eileen M. Collins and crew members James M. Kelly, Soichi Noguchi, and Stephen K. Robinson. STS-114, scheduled to leave for the ISS in November 2002, would transport Expedition 7 crew members Edward T. Lu, Yuri I. Malenchenko, and Sergei I. Moschenko.(NASA JSC, “NASA Names 23 Astronauts and Cosmonauts to Shuttle Flights in 2002,” news release H01-167, 17 August 2001.)
Maxwell W. Hunter II, one of the world’s leading rocket designers and space engineers, died at the age of 79. Hunter had graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1944 and had worked for Douglas Aircraft. While at Douglas, he had designed several of the company’s missiles, including the Nike and the Thor, as well as many of its space projects, including the Delta rocket and the Saturn S-IV stage of the Apollo Moon rocket program. Hunter had later worked for Lockheed Missiles and Space Company. Among his achievements with Lockheed was the design of the Space Shuttle. Hunter had also advised Presidents John F. Kennedy and President Lyndon B. Johnson on space programs and space policy and had been a noted proponent of nuclear-powered spacecraft and a space-based laser defense program. In addition, Hunter had authored nearly 60 technical papers and had received the National Space Society’s Wernher von Braun Memorial Award in recognition of his contributions to the development of missiles, rockets, and spaceflight.(Dennis McLellan, “Maxwell Hunter II, 79; Pioneer Rocket Scientist,” Los Angeles Times, 17 November 2001. 146 Mark Carreau, “International Crew Completes Cable Task on Final Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 13 November 2001.)
NASA collaborated with George Washington University’s Space Policy Institute to host a symposium commemorating 40 years of human spaceflight, an era that had dawned with Alan B. Shepard Jr.’s 15-minute suborbital flight on 5 May 1961. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin opened the conference, followed at the speaker’s podium by astronauts and space experts. The conference, “Looking Backward, Looking Forward,” provided a valuable forum, not only for discussing the accomplishments of the United States’ space program, but also for considering space exploration’s possible future evolution.(NASA, “NASA Conference To Commemorate 40 Years of Human Space Flight,” news release N01-28, 1 May 2001; NASA and Space Policy Institute, “Looking Backward, Looking Forward: Forty Years of U.S. Human Spaceflight,” (program, symposium organized by Space Policy Institute, Elliott School of International Affairs, George Washington University, in collaboration with NASA History Office, NASA Office of Policy and Plans, American Astronautical Society, and National Space Society, Washington, DC, 8 May 2001), http://history.nasa.gov/40hsconf.pdf (accessed 29 July 2008).)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-100/ISS-6A launched into orbit carrying a Canadian-built robotic arm for the ISS and one of the most diverse crews ever assembled. The Canadian Space Agency had developed and built Canadarm2 at a cost of nearly US$1 billion. With a reach extending to 57 feet (17 meters), Canadarm2 was the centerpiece of Canada’s contribution to the ISS. Once in place, the new robotic arm would allow the ISS crew to lift spacewalkers to every part of the ISS’s exterior to perform maintenance and repairs. During the mission, the crew planned to install the arm, as well as to transport to the ISS a logistics carrier developed by the Italian Space Agency. The seven-person crew―Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Jeffrey S. Ashby, and Mission Specialists Chris A. Hadfield, Scott E. Parazynski, John L. Phillips, Umberto Guidoni, and Yuri V. Lonchakov―included astronauts representing the space agencies of Canada, Europe, and Russia. STS-100 was the Shuttle’s fifth flight in six months, setting a record for the most spaceflights performed during such a short period in NASA’s history.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-100,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-100.html (accessed 2 February 2009); NASA, “Endeavour’s International Crew Delivers Space Station Helping Hand,” news release 01-73, 16 April 2001; Mark Carreau, “Endeavour Lifts Off To Attach Arm to Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 20 April 2001; NASA, “Endeavour’s Mission Will Extend Space Station’s Reach with Next-Generation Robotics; Launch Set for April 19,” news release 01-67, 6 April 2001.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, returning to Earth the crew of Expedition 1―Commander William M. Shepherd, Flight Engineer Sergei K. Krikalev, and Soyuz Commander Yuri P. Gidzenko. The Expedition 1 crew had lived and worked aboard the ISS since 31 October 2000. Commander James D. Wetherbee and Pilot James M. Kelly guided Discovery to a smooth night landing, the 17th night landing in the history of the Space Shuttle program and the 12th in the history of KSC.(NASA JSC, “STS-102, Mission Control Center Status Report # 27,” 21 March 2001, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/reports/sts102/STS-102-27.html (accessed 2 February 2009).)
The crew of Space Shuttle Atlantis successfully installed the Destiny laboratory on the ISS. Using the Shuttle’s robotic arm, astronaut Marsha S. Ivins moved the module from the Shuttle’s payload area to its place on the side of the ISS. After patching up a small leak from one of the module’s coolant lines, two spacewalking astronauts connected electrical, fluid, and data lines between the ISS and the Destiny laboratory. After carefully completing the installation, astronauts opened a hatch connecting the new module to the rest of the ISS. The additional 3,750 cubic feet (106 cubic meters) of space made the ISS the largest spacecraft ever. Astronaut Kenneth D. Cockrellalong with William M. Shepherd, the first to enter the Destiny modulereported, “The lab looks and feels and smells great, and looks like all the hard work has really paid off. It’s a beautiful piece of hardware in here.”(William Harwood, “Spacewalking Astronauts Attach Lab Module to Space Station,” Washington Post, 11 February 2001; USA Today, “Space Station Module Gives Crew More Space,” 12 February 2001; Washington Post, “Astronauts Open Hatch to Destiny Laboratory; Alpha Now Largest Orbiting Outpost,” 12 February 2001; Associated Press, “Astronauts Install Lab on Station,” 12 February 2001.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-108/UF-1 launched at 5:19 p.m. Eastern Standard Time (EST) from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The crew members were Commander Dominic L. Gorie, Pilot Mark E. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Linda M. Godwin and Daniel M. Tani; and ISS Expedition 4 crew members, Daniel W. Bursch, Carl E. Walz, and Yuri I. Onufrienko. One of the main objectives of the mission was to transport the Expedition 4 crew to the ISS and return Expedition 3 crew members to Earth. Another mission objective was to transport approximately 3 tons (2.7 tonnes or 2,700 kilograms) of supplies to the ISS. Much of the payload was contained in an Italian-built Multi-Purpose Logistics Module (MPLM) called Raffaello. In addition, Endeavour carried a host of scientific payloads, including some experiments created by schools and universities in the United States and numerous other countries.(NASA KSC, “STS-108 (107),” http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/sts-108/mission-sts-108.html (accessed 12 December 2008); NASA KSC, “Space Shuttle, Mission Archives: STS-108,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-108.html (accessed 12 December 2008). 156 NASA, “It’s About TIMED: NASA Spacecraft Will Use Lofty Perch To Study Gateway to Space,” news release 01-226, 19 November 2001; Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, “TIMED: A Mission To Explore One of the Last Frontiers in Earth’s Atmosphere: Mission,” http://www.timed.jhuapl.edu/WWW/mission/mission.php (accessed 6 January 2009).)
The NEAR Shoemaker spacecraft landed on the 433 Eros asteroid, becoming the first probe ever to accomplish such a feat. The landing was a bonus. NEAR had already successfully completed a 1 billion-mile mission, which had provided pictures of Earth, comet Hoylake, and the asteroid 253 Mathilde. After a carefully scripted 5-hour descent, NEAR touched down safely, traveling at about 4 miles (6 kilometers) per hour. The spacecraft, which engineers had not designed for the impromptu landing mission, did not have a parachute to lessen its impact on the asteroid’s unknown surface. By firing the spacecraft’s engines five times during descent, NASA controllers were able to slow the craft to a safe landing speed. As NASA’s Chief Scientist Edward J. Weiler explained, “If you were an Erosian watching this thing come in, it should have a velocity about that of a walking individual.” Scientists landed the craft to demonstrate that the landing was possible, as well as to gather additional information. NASA engineers reported detecting a faint signal from the probe even after it had landed. The environment is harsh on the asteroid, which measures 21 miles (34 kilometers) long and 8 miles (13 kilometers) wide. Moving through space at more than 40,000 miles (64,300 kilometers) per hour, Eros reaches a temperature of 400°F (204°C) daily and has only weak gravity. Researchers believed that the asteroid is composed of material older than Earth and might have been part of another planet at one time.(Mike Toner, “Discover: Rendezvous with Eros Matchup Planned Monday for Asteroid, Spacecraft,” Atlanta Journal-Constitution (GA), 11 February 2001; Reuters, “Space Probe Set To Land on Asteroid Eros,” Washington Post, 12 February 2001; Dan Vergano, “Probe Lands on Gigantic Near-Earth Asteroid,” USA Today, 13 February 2001; Regina Holtman, “Signals from Surface,” Washington Times, 13 February 2001; Kathy Sawyer, “Spacecraft Lands on Asteroid; NASA Probe’s Historic First May Yield Wealth of Data,” Washington Post, 13 February 2001. 21 Associated Press, “Atlantis Astronauts To Conduct 100th Spacewalk in U.S. History,” 14 February 2001; Los Angeles Times, “Spacewalk Improves View from Space Station Lab,” 13 February 2001; Dow Jones International News, “Window Shutter Gives US Spacewalkers Views of Earth,” 12 February 2001.)
Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 572, 1 July 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx572.html (accessed 4 August 2008). The mission called for the astronauts to attach the new American-made Joint Airlock to the ISS and to conduct important repairs to the station during three separate spacewalks. The design of the new airlock permitted the ISS crew access to and from space, wearing either Russian or American spacesuits. During the days leading up to the launch, Mission Specialist Michael L. Gernhardt explained: “The term Joint Airlock means that it’s applicable to both the U.S. [space]suit, the EMU [Extravehicular Mobility Unit], and to the Russian suit, the Orlan suit. The main objectives of our flight are to install four High Pressure Gas Tanksthat would be two oxygen, two nitrogento activate and check out the airlock and then to make the first spacewalk from the Joint Airlock and demonstrate the viability of the whole process and sort of usher in the space station era of EVA.”(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573, 1 August 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx573.html (accessed 11 August 2008); William Harwood, “Atlantis Heads for Space Station; Crew To Install Airlock, Expanding Capabilities,” Washington Post, 13 July 2001; NASA, “NASA Prepares To Open a New Doorway to Space,” news release 01-138, 9 July 2001.)
Crew members of Space Shuttle Atlantis accomplished the primary objective of Mission STS- 104, successfully installing the Joint Airlock on the ISS. The crew used the space station’s massive, Canadian-made robotic arm, which had not operated properly for several months, to hoist the enormous entryway out of the Shuttle’s cargo bay and to move it into position for installation. Astronaut Susan J. Helms commanded the robotic arm, while spacewalking astronauts Michael L. Gernhardt and James F. Reilly helped line up the hatch for its final installation. The robotic arm successfully accomplished its first construction task, drawing applause from NASA’s Mission Control, as did the opening of the US$164 million Joint Airlock. Although the ISS Partnership planned improvements and additions to the space station far into the future, the mission marked the end of a major stage of assembly for the ISS.(New York Times, “2nd Entry Installed on Space Station,” 16 July 2001.)
A research team led by John Bally of the University of Colorado and Henry Throop of the Southwest Research Institute announced that the team had used the HST to observe the first direct evidence of the snowballing theory of planet birth. According to the scholars’ findings, later released in Science, dust grains in the midst of a cloud of dust and gas located in the Orion Nebula, which is approximately 1,500 light-years from Earth, had accreted into a single nucleus of gas and dust, thereby forming an embryonic planet. The researchers observing the occurrence speculated that a similar process might have formed the known planets of the universe. In describing the volatile environment in which the snowballing process occurs, Throop used the analogy of “trying to build a skyscraper in the middle of a tornado.” The researchers surmised that, although snowballing may have caused many embryo planets to begin forming, the complete process of forming a full-fledged planet might have occurred more rarely than scientists previously had speculated.(Kathy Sawyer, “Astronomers Observe Forming of Infant Planet for First Time,” Houston Chronicle, 6 May 2001; Henry B. Throop et al., “Evidence for Dust Grain Growth in Young Circumstellar Disks,” Science 292, no. 5522 (1 June 2001): 16861689.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced his resignation, effective 17 November 2001. Goldin, who had become the head of NASA on 1 April 1992, was NASA’s longest-serving Administrator. During his tenure, Goldin had overseen numerous successes for NASA, including the launch of Mars Pathfinder, the repair of the HST, and the redesign of the ISS. Goldin stated that he was leaving for personal reasons and that he had accepted an interim position at the Council on Competitiveness, an organization promoting U.S. economic competitiveness, both at home and abroad. However, newspapers noted that Goldin had made the announcement during a time of budgetary difficulties for NASA. Moreover, media reported that White House officials had already sought candidates to replace Goldin, although, according to NASA, President George W. Bush had not yet selected his replacement.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin Announces Resignation,” news release 01-191, 17 October 2001; William Harwood, “NASA Chief to Step Down,” Washington Post, 18 October 2001.)
