NASA released topographic data collected during its Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM), which had lasted from 11 to 22 February 2000, producing three-dimensional measurements of more than 80 percent of Earth’s landmass between 60° north and 56° south of the equator. Because of South America’s proximity to the equator and its frequent tropical cloud cover, traditional satellites had encountered difficulty acquiring imagery of its topography, but the cloud-penetrating radar on board the SRTM had produced information with scientific and commercial value that would help improve life on the continent. SRTM Project Scientist Michael Kobrick of NASA’s JPL remarked that the data would assist governments to prepare for natural hazards like earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, landslides, and floods. In addition, the information would help improve aviation safety in mountainous areas, and would help land-use planners make better-informed decisions about the development of critical infrastructure. The mission was a cooperative project of NASA, the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) of the U.S. DOD, and the German and Italian space agencies.(NASA, “South America Shines in NASA’s Latest Space Radar Map Release,” news release 03-204, 19 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03204_S_Amer_Space_Radar.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
The Boeing Company named John Elbon to replace Joe Mills as Vice President and Program Manager of Boeing’s ISS NASA Systems. In his new position, Elbon would lead Boeing’s efforts as prime contractor of the ISS, holding the central role in the space station’s design, testing, and building, as well as working with the 16 participating countries. Boeing had appointed Mills to lead its newest space initiative, the Jupiter Icy Moon Orbiter Program, part of NASA’s development of nuclear-power and electronic-propulsion technologies intended to revolutionize space exploration.
NASA named astronaut and veteran Shuttle Commander James D. Halsell Jr. to lead its Return to Flight Team, which would prepare for the first Shuttle launch since the loss of Columbia, to occur as early as September 2003. Halsell had logged more than 1,250 hours in space on five Shuttle missions and, most recently, had served as Manager of Shuttle Launch Integration at NASA’s KSC. Before the Columbia disaster, NASA had assigned Halsell to STS-118, a mission to the ISS scheduled for later in 2003.(Larry Wheeler, “NASA Names Shuttle Leader,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 April 2003.)
American astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit undertook a 61⁄2-hour spacewalk at the ISS to finish preparing the station for the arrival of a new crew. In the second spacewalk of their four-month mission, Bowersox and Pettit worked on power connections, replaced lighting for a transport trolley, reconfigured cables on a navigational gyroscope, and secured covers on the station’s thermal control system. Cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin monitored the astronauts’ work from inside the ISS.(Reuters, “Astronauts End Space Walk from Orbiting Station,” 9 April 2003. 126)
Returning from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-1, American astronauts, Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit, and Russian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin, touched down in the steppes of Kazakhstan 276 miles (444 kilometers) off course. The landing was the first time American astronauts had returned to Earth in a foreign spacecraft. Budarin, Bowersox, and Pettit had arrived at the ISS in November 2002 aboard Endeavour, scheduled to return to Earth aboard another Shuttle flight on 11 March. However, the Columbia disaster in February had grounded the remaining three Shuttles in NASA’s fleet, prolonging the crew’s stay aboard the ISS. Russian search teams took 2 hours, using a helicopter and fixed-wing aircraft, to find the crew. The last radio contact between the capsule and Mission Control Center in Moscow had occurred after the craft’s parachutes opened, about 15 minutes before landing. Failure to reestablish contact had caused concern for the trio’s welfare. Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced that a special commission would investigate the causes of the malfunctions during landing.(Mark Carreau, “Anxiety as Astronauts Miss Target for Landing,” Houston Chronicle, 5 May 2003; Sharon LaFraniere, “Space Station Crew Returns Home in Russian Soyuz,” Washington Post, 5 May 2003.)
John E. Riley, a 33-year member of NASA’s Public Affairs Department, broadcast voice of NASA’s Mission Control for the Apollo program, and NASA spokesperson, died of cancer at the age of 78. He had begun working for NASA in 1959 and, as a member of the Apollo program team, had provided commentary during the first moonwalk. Riley had also initiated the practice of encouraging astronauts’ interviews with media and had traveled with astronauts internationally.(Matt Schwartz, “Obituary: Riley, 78, Longtime Spokesman for NASA,” Houston Chronicle, 21 April 2003.)
Soyuz TMA-3/ISS-9S launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan transporting to the ISS the Expedition 8 crew―American Mission Commander C. Michael Foale, Russian Flight Engineer Alexander Y. Kaleri, and Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque. Foale and Kaleri were traveling to the ISS for a 200-day mission, replacing American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko who were completing a six-month stay aboard the orbiting station. Duque would conduct 10 days of scientific experiments on the ISS and would return to Earth with Lu and Malenchenko.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Dmitry Solovyov for Reuters, “ISS Crew Blasts Off at Baikonur,” 20 October 2003; Justin Ray, “New Station Residents Arrive at Their Orbiting Home,” Spaceflight Now, 21 October 2003.)
NASA announced the new charter and new members of its Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP). All members of the previous ASAP, which the U.S. Congress had initially chartered in 1967 following the Apollo 1 fire, had resigned in late September 2003 in the wake of the Columbia accident investigation. The original charter had intended the panel to act as an independent body to advise NASA’s Administrator on safety issues, but over the years, additional administrative procedures had governed the panel’s work. In the new charter, NASA revoked those procedures to enable the panel to develop its agenda in accordance with CAIB findings. The ASAP’s original 1967 charter formed the foundation of the new charter, with the following revisions: 1) the ASAP would make quarterly reports, instead of annual; 2) new members would have two-year terms, extendable to a maximum of six years; 3) members would have staggered terms to ensure fresh perspectives at regular intervals; and 4) the ASAP would focus on industrial and systems safety, risk management, trend analysis, and management of NASA’s safety and quality systems. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named, as new members of the ASAP, Rear Admiral Walter H. Cantrell, Vice Admiral Joseph W. Dyer, Augustine O. Esogbue, Major General Francis C. Gideon Jr., Deborah L. Grubbe, Rosemary O’Leary, John C. Marshall, Steven B. Wallace, Rick E. Williams, and ex officio member, Brigadier General Joseph A. Smith. The new members represented academic, military, and industrial sectors; no member was a current or former NASA employee or contractor.(NASA, “NASA Names New Safety Advisory Panel,” news release 03-370, 18 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03370_asap.html (accessed 5 February 2009); Patty Reinert, “NASA Safety Panel Takes Flight Again with New Members,” Houston Chronicle, 19 November 2003.)
NASA announced the selection of William W. Parsons Jr., Director of NASA’s SSC, to succeed Ronald D. Dittemore as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program. Dittemore had announced his resignation on 23 April. NASA appointed SSC Deputy Director Michael U. Rudolphi to serve as interim Director of SSC.(NASA, “NASA Selects New Space Shuttle Program Manager,” news release 03-164, 9 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HP_news_03164.html (accessed 2 December 2008); Michelle Krupa, “No 2 Man Takes Helm at Stennis Center: Ex-director Moves Up to Shuttle Position,” New Orleans Times- Picayune, 13 May 2003.)
NASA announced the resignation of Space Shuttle Program Manager Ronald D. Dittemore. A 26-year veteran of NASA, Dittemore had supervised the Space Shuttle Program for more than four years. Dittemore had joined NASA in 1977 as a propulsion-systems engineer, working on orbital maneuvering and reaction-control systems for the Space Shuttle before his selection as a Space Shuttle Flight Director in 1985. In 1993 NASA had appointed him Deputy Manager for the Space Shuttle Program Integration and Operations Office in the Space Shuttle Program Office. He had also served as Manager of Space Shuttle Program Integration and as Chairperson of the Space Shuttle Mission Management Team before his selection in 1996 to manage the Space Shuttle Vehicle Engineering Office. He had become Space Shuttle Program Manager in 1999, assuming responsibility for the overall management, integration, and operation of the program. In announcing his departure, Dittemore remarked that, before the Columbia tragedy, he had been struggling over whether to leave NASA and had decided to resign in the spring of 2003. However, after the Columbia accident, he had immediately postponed his departure. Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Shuttle Program Michael C. Kostelnik and NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe credited Dittemore with keeping communications open between NASA and the public in the wake of the tragedy. Dittemore planned to remain in his position until the CAIB had finished its work and established a return-to-flight program, to enable NASA to make a smooth management transition.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Manager Decides To Leave Post,” news release 03-149, 23 April 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/apr/HP_news_03149.html (accessed 19 September 2008); Paul Recer for Associated Press, “Shuttle Director Dittemore To Leave NASA,” 23 April 2003.)
NASA named Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASA’s KSC, to head NASA’s LaRC in Hampton, Virginia, effective 10 August. Bridges, a retired U.S. Air Force Major General and former astronaut who had piloted STS-51F in 1985, was a “natural selection to lead the Agency’s premiere center for aviation and space research,” according to William F. Readdy, Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA Headquarters. Bridges had been Director of KSC since 1997 and, before that, had held various key aerospace positions, serving as Commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California, as well as Commander of the Eastern Space and Missile Center at Patrick Air Force Base in Florida and Commander of the 412th Test Wing at Edwards Air Force Base. With his appointment as Director of LaRC, Bridges replaced Delma C. Freeman Jr., who had planned to retire but had been serving as Acting Director until NASA found a permanent director. Freeman planned to retire. In transferring Bridges to LaRC from KSC, NASA hoped to strengthen its engineering department in preparation for resuming Shuttle flights.(NASA, “Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director,” news release 03-197, 13 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03197_bridges.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Kennedy Space Center Director Transferred,” 13 June 2003.)
NASA released a flight-deck videotape, which the crew of STS-107 had recorded on 1 February between 8:35 and 8:48 a.m. (EST). NASA had recovered the videotape from the Shuttle’s crash site near Palestine, Texas. The video showed flight-deck activity as Columbia passed over the south central Pacific Ocean at an altitude of approximately 500,000 feet. Filmed with a small on- board camera, mounted to the right of Pilot William C. McCool and then passed to Mission Specialist Laurel B. Clark, the videotape showed Commander Rick D. Husband, Pilot McCool, Mission Specialist Kalpana Chawla, and Mission Specialist Clark on the flight deck during reentry. The astronauts were conversing among themselves as they worked through routine checklist activities with flight controllers at NASA’s Mission Control.(NASA, “NASA Releases Columbia Crew Cabin Video,” news release N03-23, 28 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_n03023.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
The White House unveiled the U.S. Commercial Remote Sensing Policy, which President George W. Bush had approved on 25 April to replace former President William J. Clinton’s 1994 Presidential Decision Directive-23. The new policy loosened government restrictions on the collection and sale of commercial satellite imagery, directing military and civilian agencies first to approach the commercial sector to fulfill satellite imagery needs. The NSC had created the new guidelines as part of a review of U.S. national space policy, which the White House had directed the NSC to conduct in June 2002 with the support of the Office of Science and Technology Policy. The new policy retained the government’s ability to restrict operations of commercial satellite imaging companies for national security reasons, but emphasized that the U.S. military should plan actions in the knowledge that adversaries also had access to commercial satellite imagery. The policy encouraged companies to use the most capable systems possible. However, at the same time, the government retained the right to restrict the sale of the most advanced imagery to U.S. government customers. The policy named the U.S. National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) as the interface between government and industry for national security applications of commercial satellite imagery. The U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Department of Interior, and NASA would fulfill that role for civilian applications.(Jason Bates, “White House Loosens Curbs on Commercial Satellite Imaging,” Space News, 13 May 2003; Dan Caterinicchia, “Commercial Satellite Policy Released,” Federal Computer Week, 15 May 2003.)
Senator John McCain (R-AZ), chair of the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, and U.S. Representative Sherwood Boehlert (R-NY), chair of the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, cochaired a joint hearing of congressional leaders, focusing on the Space Shuttle Columbia accident. Recommendations resulting from the hearing prompted NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe to issue a second amendment to the charter of the Space Shuttle Accident Investigation Board, an independent panel led by retired U.S. Navy Admiral Harold W. Gehman Jr. and known as the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB) or, informally, as the Gehman Board. The amendment removed any requirement, real or perceived, instructing Gehman to “coordinate or await approval from NASA for any dimension of the panel’s investigation.”(NASA, “Joint Congressional Hearing Results in Second Charter Amendment for Gehman Board Columbia Accident Briefing,” news release 03-069, 12 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03069.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
Edward J. Weiler, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space about Project Prometheus, a proposed nuclear technology program. The proposal called for NASA to spend US$3 billion between 2003 and 2008, developing more powerful radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) to convert energy from the decay of radioactive material into electricity and to explore the use of fission to power spacecraft and their instruments. A strong supporter of the program, NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe, a former Secretary of the Navy, hoped to apply lessons learned from the nuclear submarine program to spacecraft. Weiler stated that nuclear fission was necessary for sending spacecraft to scrutinize the outer planets of the solar system, such as Jupiter, and could open the door to human spaceflight to Mars. NASA hoped to use the powerful RTGs developed in Project Prometheus for a robotic mission to Mars in 2009. NASA proposed to make a mission to Jupiter’s moons as its first use of fission technology in space exploration.(Gwyneth K. Shaw, “Advice to NASA Supports Nuclear-Fueled Spaceflight,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 4 June 2003.)
NASA Chief of Staff and White House Liaison Courtney A. Stadd announced his resignation, effective 4 July 2003, to pursue opportunities in the private sector. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced the appointment of John D. Schumacher to succeed Stadd as Chief of Staff. Stadd had led President George W. Bush’s NASA transition team and had worked with two NASA administrators to help cast NASA’s strategic direction. Schumacher brought invaluable experience and perspective to his new position. Since June 1995, he had served as NASA’s Assistant Administrator for External Relations, with responsibility for NASA’s interaction with Executive Branch offices and agencies, for international relations, and for administration of export and international technology-transfer control. In addition, he had served as a liaison with NASA’s History Office, advisory councils, and commissions.
As part of Expedition 6, American astronauts Donald D. Pettit and Kenneth R. Bowersox undertook a spacewalk outside the ISS, each spacewalking for the first time, while their Russian colleague Nikolai M. Budarin monitored their work from inside the station. Pettit had replaced Budarin in the spacewalk lineup because NASA doctors were concerned about Budarin’s known cardiovascular issues. In the summer of 2003, Pettit had served as backup for another astronaut in an ISS mission, because NASA doctors were worried about that astronaut’s radiation exposure. NASA had decided to replace Budarin even though Russian doctors disagreed, because NASA was in charge of this spacewalk. During the 7-hour spacewalk, the two astronauts successfully completed their primary tasksreleasing locks on a recently installed radiator and cleaning a docking ring. However, they were unable to erect a light on a boom, because a protruding pin prevented the boom from swinging out of its stowed position.(Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk, Including a Late Substitute Who Frees the Space Station’s Sticky Hatch,” 15 January 2003.)
NASA successfully launched its Space Infrared Telescope Facility (SIRTF) aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The Lockheed Martin–built SIRTF was the fourth and final of NASA’s Great Observatories, following the HST, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, and the Chandra X-ray Observatory. NASA had designed the 110-pound (50-kilogram), 33.5-inch (85-centimeter) telescope to measure heat from celestial objects. SIRTF would study some of the same deep space objects as the other Great Observatories, as well as studying other parts of the cosmos. Michael Jura, SIRTF interdisciplinary scientist for planetary science at the University of California at Los Angeles, remarked that one of SIRTF’s main scientific goals was to develop a better understanding of star and planet formation. The project, originally proposed in the mid- 1970s, had faced repeated budgetary cutbacks and delays. NASA planned for SIRTF’s mission to last a minimum of 30 months, at an anticipated cost of US$1.19 billion.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598; Associated Press, “NASA Launches Rocket with Infrared Scope,” 25 August 2003. 154)
In the CAIB’s second public hearing, expert witnesses discussed what they knew about the reentry of Space Shuttle Columbia on 1 February. William H. Ailor III, Director of the Center for Orbital and Reentry Debris Studies at the Aerospace Corporation, explained to the CAIB that part of the difficulty of deciphering the precise cause of the orbiter’s breakup was that space agencies had done little work over the past years in reconstructing spacecraft breakups. The lack of a systematic effort to retrieve debris from such incidents compounded the problem. R. Douglas White, Director for Operations Requirements, Orbiter Element Department for United Space Alliance, the prime contractor for NASA’s Space Shuttle Program, provided a “dramatic portrayal of Columbia’s troubled trajectory from orbit.” He drew attention to the behavior of Columbia’s aileron, the hinged control surface attached to the craft’s trailing edge, remarking that its behavior was a first indication that “something odd was happening to the space plane.” Paul Hill, Space Shuttle and ISS Flight Director at NASA’s JSC and leader of the team piecing together the still and video images of the Shuttle’s final minutes, told the CAIB about the work of the image analysts. Hill also expressed gratitude to the public for submitting amateur photographs and videos for analysis.(Leonard David, “Columbia Board Hearing: ‘Clues, Critical Events’ Destroyed on Reentry,” Space.com, 18 March 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_caib_030318.html (accessed 29 August 2008).)
The National Inventors Hall of Fame in Akron, Ohio, inducted 17 aviation and aerospace inventors, among them Harold A. Rosen, recognized for his pioneering work in developing the world’s first 24-hour commercial communications satellite and for his subsequent contributions to satellite communications. Rosen had led the Boeing Satellite Systems team that had begun developing the geostationary Syncom in 1959. The team had planned for Syncom to communicate directly and continuously with any ground station in its line of sight, in contrast to the communications satellites in use at the time, which required expensive tracking computers. The first Syncom had failed to launch successfully, but Syncom 2 had reached its synchronous orbit on 26 July 1963. Later that year, Syncom 2 had relayed by satellite the first live two-way call between heads of state―a phone call between President John F. Kennedy in Washington, DC, and Nigerian Prime Minister Abubaker Balewa in Africa. Syncom 3 had brought live coverage of the 1964 Tokyo Olympics to U.S. viewers. The satellites had remained active through 1966, surpassing their one-year design life. David L. Ryan, Vice President and General Manager of Boeing Satellite Systems, remarked that contemporary satellites that deliver video, voice, and data communications are all descendants of Syncom, and “when Harold Rosen and his colleagues launched Syncom, they launched a revolution and changed the world.”(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Satellite Pioneer Harold Rosen Inducted to National Inventors Hall of Fame,” news release, 1 May 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030501n.html (accessed 21 November 2008).)
U.S. Representative William L. Jenkins (R-TN) announced that NASA had awarded East Tennessee State University a grant valued at US$363,310 to study light patterns of stars located hundreds of light-years away. The award would grant researchers of the university’s physics and astronomy department access over the next five years to data from COBEthe Cosmic Background Explorer satellite. The scientists would use the COBE data to study the infrared variability of asymptotic giant branch stars, “older stars with shells of gas and dust around them.” During its mission in 1989 and 1990, the COBE satellite had surveyed the sky on 10 infrared wavelengths, observing the cosmic backlight of the universe, as well as asymptotic giant branch stars. Although astronomers in the field had conducted significant research on the backlight data, they had done little with COBE’s infrared data on the stars.(Sam Watson, “NASA Grant To Fund ETSU Study of Stars,” Johnson City Press (TN), 9 January 2003.)
A telecommunications satellite jointly owned by the United States and Japan―known as Horizons 1 or Galaxy 13―launched aboard a Sea Launch Zenit 3-SL rocket from a platform in the equatorial Pacific Ocean. Connecticut-based PanAmSat and Tokyo-based JSAT corporations launched the craft to provide digital video, Internet, and data transmission services to Hawaii and to Central America and North America. PanAmSat owned the satellite’s C-band payload Galaxy 13 and planned to use it as part of the company’s Galaxy cable constellation. President and CEO of PanAmSat Joseph R. Wright Jr. remarked that the addition of Galaxy 13 to the company’s fleet would create the first high-definition neighborhood and would help to meet the growing demand for high-resolution television. The two companies would jointly operate the satellite’s Ku-band payload Horizons 1, which would offer a variety of digital video, Internet, and data services, as well as creating new IP-based content-distribution networks.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600, 1 November 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx600.html (accessed 27 January 2009); Justin Ray, “Communications Satellite Launched from Pacific Ocean,” Spaceflight Now, 2 October 2003.)
NASA released the first pictures from its Space Infrared Telescope Facility and officially renamed the craft Spitzer Space Telescope. NASA had named the telescope for one of the 20th century’s most influential scientists, Princeton University astronomer Lyman Spitzer Jr., who in 1946 had first proposed placing telescopes in space. Spitzer had been a major force behind the 1990 launch of the HST, the first of NASA’s Great Observatories. With the release of the Spitzer Space Telescope’s first observations―a glowing stellar nursery; a swirling, dusty galaxy; a disc of planet-forming debris; and organic material in the distant universe―Project Scientist Michael Werner of NASA’s JPL remarked that the telescope was working extremely well. The fourth of its Great Observatories, NASA had designed the craft with powerful infrared detectors to capture never-before-seen cosmic features. Unlike its predecessor Great Observatories, which circle Earth, NASA had deployed the Spitzer Space Telescope in a novel trajectory that placed it in an orbit closely trailing that of Earth.(NASA, “NASA Releases Dazzling Images from New Space Telescope,” news release 03-411, 18 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03411_newly_named_prt.htm (accessed 23 March 2009); Patty Reinert, “Stargazer’s Delight: NASA’s New Space Infrared Telescope Puts On a Dazzling Show,” Houston Chronicle, 19 December 2003.)
NASA released its first preliminary return-to-flight plan, briefing reporters at JSC in Houston, Texas. The 158-page report, which Associate Administrator William F. Readdy called “an evolving document,” indicated that 11 March 2004 was the earliest possible date for a Space Shuttle to return to flight. However, Readdy emphasized that NASA would be safety-driven, not schedule-driven, in its efforts to launch the first Shuttle to fly since the Columbia disaster. NASA had tentatively scheduled Atlantis for a launch between 11 March and 6 April 2004. In the preliminary plan, NASA indicated that it had changed Atlantis’s original mission of ferrying supplies and a new crew to the ISS. Instead, the mission would be a developmental flight during which the crew would test the new procedures and safety equipment that the CAIB had recommended. Although the ISS would still be Atlantis’s destination, the mission would not carry ISS replacement crew. NASA’s Space Shuttle Program Manager William W. Parsons Jr. said that the greatest challenges for future Shuttle missions would be developing methods to minimize the shedding of foam from the orbiter’s external tank and to repair tile and protective heat panels while in space. In addition, NASA would have to install cameras and sensors on the Shuttles and on the ISS robotic arms, to detect vehicle damage.(John Schwartz and Warren E. Leary, “NASA Says It Won’t Rush Shuttle Back to Space,” New York Times, 9 September 2003.)
Soyuz TMA-2 launched aboard a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying one Russian cosmonaut and one American astronaut for a six-month stay at the ISS. American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko would replace the three-person crew that had lived at the space station since November 2002. An expert on solar flares, Lu had flown to Russia’s space station Mir in 1997 and to the fledgling ISS in 2000 on STS-106. Malenchenko and Lu had been fellow crew members aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis on STS-106. During that mission, Lu and Malenchenko had teamed up in a spacewalk to hook up exterior cables.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Chris Kindler, “Soyuz Capsule Includes NASA-Required Features,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronaut, Cosmonaut Named for Space Station Mission,” 2 April 2003, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-106,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
On the 35th anniversary of the accident that killed Yuri Gagarin, the Russian daily Komsomolskaya Pravda published extracts of a secret investigation of Russia’s KGB (the Soviet-era Office of State Security) into the cause of the Soviet cosmonaut’s death. Gagarin and his instructor had died on 27 March 1968, during a routine training exercise at the Chkalovsky Air Base outside Moscow. The government had ordered three official investigations, one by the civilian government and two military, but all three had ruled out sabotage. An inspection of Gagarin’s MiG-15 had identified no mechanical failures and investigators had concluded that the fighter “went into a spin after either hitting birds or suddenly swerving to avoid a weather balloon or another aircraft.” The circumstances of his death had since “been cloaked in mystery and rumours that the Communist Party had Gagarin killed because of his love of drink and women.” The KGB’s counterintelligence unit had conducted its own secret investigation, finding that ground staff’s actions had “amounted to a ‘dangerous violation’ of standing instructions,” leading to the death of Gagarin and his instructor.(Ben Aris, “KGB Held Ground Staff To Blame for Gagarin’s Death,” Daily Telegraph (UK), 28 March 2003. 400 Kathy Sawyer, “Columbia’s Last Seconds Recorded,” Washington Post, 28 March 2003)
NASA scientist Robert Michael Hornstein died of a brain tumor at the age of 57. Hornstein had worked for NASA since 1968, directing its worldwide network of antennas used for communicating with orbiting spacecraft. Hornstein, who had joined NASA during the Apollo program to design programs for ground tracking systems, was “recognized for helping save the Apollo 9 mission from being aborted shortly after launch when he modified tracking software to compensate for a computer malfunction in the launch vehicle.” As Ground Networks Director, Hornstein had helped administer network-tracking facilities during Space Shuttle orbits, the Voyager program, the Galileo recovery effort and mission to Jupiter, the Magellan program, and the international Halley’s Comet tracking program. He had helped manage the upgrade of Deep Space Network facilities in Australia, California, and Spain and had acted as NASA’s primary representative in arranging cooperative tracking efforts with other countries. NASA had awarded Hornstein its Outstanding Leadership Award and Exceptional Service Medal, and the Soviet Union had honored him with membership in its Federation of Cosmonautics.(Washington Post, “Robert Hornstein; NASA Scientist Ran Tracking System,” 28 March 2003.)
NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale, living aboard the ISS, set a new U.S. space record―Foale had spent more time in orbit than any other American had achieved. During four Shuttle missions, an expedition aboard Russia’s former space station Mir, and his current residence at the ISS, Foale had spent more than 231 days in space, surpassing Carl E. Walz’s previous record for an American in space―230 days, 13 hours, 3 minutes, and 37 seconds. Walz had participated in four Shuttle missions and one ISS expedition in 2002. Along with astronaut Daniel W. Bursch, Walz continued to hold the U.S. record for the longest, single spaceflight―196 days.(NASA, “NASA Astronaut Breaks U.S. Space Endurance Record,” news release 03-400, 9 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03400_Foale_record.html (accessed 23 March 2009); Todd Halvorson, “Astronaut Michael Foale’s 231 Days in Orbit Sets Record,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 December 2003; Associated Press, “Astronaut Sets Record for Time in Space,” 9 December 2003.)
NASA announced the appointment of John M. Grunsfeld to succeed Shannon W. Lucid as NASA’s Chief Scientist, effective immediately. NASA tasked Grunsfeld with ensuring the scientific merit of NASA’s programs. Grunsfeld, an astronomer, astrophysicist, and veteran astronaut, had been an integral member of two Space Shuttle–servicing missions to the HST. Lucid had served as Chief Scientist since February 2002. NASA’s Administrator Sean O’Keefe had asked her to return to NASA’s JSC in Houston, Texas, to help with return-to-flight efforts. During her tenure as Chief Scientist, Lucid had updated NASA science policy, a project that NASA had not undertaken since 1996. One of her most important tasks had been working with the Offices of Biological and Physical Research, Earth Science, Space Science, and Space Flight to develop a comprehensive plan for prioritizing research projects on board the ISS.(NASA, “Astronaut John M. Grunsfeld Succeeds Shannon Lucid as NASA Chief Scientist,” news release 03-280, 3 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03280_Grunsfeld.html (accessed 28 January 2009).)
Progress M1-10 launched successfully from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying 2,400 kilograms (5,300 pounds) of fuel, canned food, water, oxygen, and equipment for scientific experiments to the ISS. Yuri P. Semyonov of RSC Energia (S.P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation), the company leading Russia’s participation in the ISS, remarked that Progress M1-10 carried a supply of extra water because NASA had canceled all Shuttle flights in the wake of the Columbia disaster. The ISS Expedition 7 would have a staff of two, rather than three crew members―Russian Flight Commander Yuri I. Malenchenko and U.S. Flight Engineer Edward T. Lu―to save fuel and water until Shuttle flights resumed.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Agence France-Presse, “Russian Supply Vessel Docks with International Space Station,” 11 June 2003; Reuters, “Russian Rocket Sends Fuel, Food to Space Station,” 9 June 2003.)
NASA confirmed that its satellites’ observations had provided the first evidence that the rate of ozone depletion in Earth’s upper atmosphere was decreasing, a possible indication of the first stage of ozone-layer recovery. Scientists had analyzed data that NASA’s first and second Stratospheric Aerosol and Gas Experiment (SAGE) and Halogen Occultation Experiment (HALOE) satellite instruments had collected, discovering a decrease in ozone depletion after 1997. The scientists had found that the rate of depletion was consistent with the decline in abundance of the human-made chemicals that contribute to ozone destruction. However, according to Michael J. Newchurch of the University of Alabama, the lead scientist for the study, ozone depletion was still occurring, although its rate had decreased. Joseph M. Zawodny, a scientist on the SAGE II satellite-instrument science team at NASA’s LaRC, remarked that the finding would not have been possible if the two satellites had not lasted so long past their normal mission lifetimes. SAGE II was approaching its 19th launch anniversary, and HALOE had returned data for 11 years. Scientists had also used international ground networks to corroborate the satellites’ data. The findings indicated the effectiveness of international treaties in encouraging countries to curb pollutionspecifically the 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer and its amendments.(NASA, “NASA Observations Confirm Expected Ozone Layer Recovery,” news release 03-253, 29 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03253_Ozone_Recovery.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Peter N. Spotts, “After 30 Years, Ozone Is Recovering,” Christian Science Monitor, 1 August 2003.)
NASA released the final report of the Hubble Space TelescopeJames Webb Space Telescope (HST-JWST) Transition Plan Review Panel, an advisory panel assembled to review NASA’s plans for removing the HST from service as early as 2011, when NASA was preparing to launch the JWST. John N. Bahcall of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, had chaired the independent panel of astronomers. The panel recommended three options to NASA: 1) to launch two additional Shuttle-servicing missions to the HST in 2005 and 2010, to maximize the scientific productivity of the telescope; 2) to launch one Shuttle-servicing mission before the end of 2006, to replace gyroscopes and, possibly, to install a propulsion device to de-orbit the craft once scientific operations had become impossible, or, alternatively, to de-orbit the craft using an autonomous robotic system; and 3) if no Shuttle missions were possible, to launch a robotic mission to install a propulsion module to bring down the HST in a controlled descent once scientific operations had become impossible. The panel also described various ways to extract maximum scientific return from the HST if NASA opted for any of the recommended three scenarios.(NASA, “Panel Identifies Three Options for Space Telescope Transition,” news release 03-264, 14 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03264_telescope_transition.html (accessed 23 January 2009); NASA Space Telescope Transition Plan Review Panel, “Report of the HST-JWST Transition Panel: Executive Summary” (report, Washington, DC, August 2003), http://www.nasa.gov/ audience/formedia/features/ MP_Public_Reports.html (accessed 23 January 2009); Sam Silverstein, “Hubble Review Panel Urges Second Extra Servicing Mission,” Space News, 19 August 2003.)
For the first time, NASA quantified the costs related to the loss of the Shuttle, stating that, in the six months since the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster, it had spent US$152.4 million to conduct the investigation and recover debris. The figure included US$111.9 million for NASA to support the CAIB’s inquiry with research and analysis, including the expensive high-speed, foam-impact tests at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas, which had provided evidence that foam striking Columbia after lift off had caused the hole in the left wing. NASA had spent US$18.7 million to fund the 13-member investigative board, paying the salaries of the five civilian members, office rent, travel expenses, and the expense of holding public hearings and maintaining the CAIB’s Web site. NASA had also spent US$21.8 million recovering debris from the Columbia accident, compared to the US$30 million it had spent salvaging pieces of Challenger. Shortly after the tragedy, the U.S. Congress had approved US$50 million to cover expenses, and it was considering a supplemental appropriation of US$50 million. John Scofield, spokesperson for the House Committee on Appropriations, remarked that nobody had criticized NASA’s spending, because nobody wanted to do the necessary work “on the cheap.” Scofield added that the committee was conducting its own analysis to confirm that NASA had correctly estimated its expenditures, but that Congress would likely reimburse NASA for much of the cost. NASA had spent a total of US$62 million (adjusted for inflation) to investigate the 1986 explosion of Challenger.
Harold W. Gehman Jr. delivered the CAIB’s final report to NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe, presenting its findings and recommendations. The CAIB found that a 1.7-pound (0.77-kilogram) piece of foam insulation, traveling at more than 500 miles (804.6 kilometers) per hour, had damaged Columbia’s wing during launch, ultimately leading to its disintegration during reentry. The report stated that management decisions during Columbia’s flight reflected missed opportunities, ineffective communication channels, flawed analysis, and ineffective leadership. When cameras tracking Columbia provided two grainy images showing the foam striking the wing, engineers had immediately begun to discuss obtaining further images of the Shuttle or initiating a spacewalk to check for damages. However, mission managers had “adjourned for a holiday weekend and did not discuss the foam strike.” Upon returning to work on 21 January, the managers had assessed the strike as a postlanding maintenance problem, because smaller foam strikes had left harmless dents in Shuttles during all previous missions. The CAIB’s Executive Director John L. Barry remarked that, among NASA’s competing goals of maintaining costs and meeting schedules, safety had lost out. The Board directly criticized Administrator Sean O’Keefe for increasing pressure to meet a February 2004 launch deadline, thereby creating a pattern similar to that which had led to the Challenger disaster in 1986. The CAIB recommended that NASA implement 15 actions before the next Shuttle flight, including creating an independent safety-and-engineering organization to help establish satisfactory safety margins. Upon receiving the Board’s final report, O’Keefe reiterated NASA’s intention to comply fully with the recommendations.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Accepts Columbia Accident Report,” news release 03-276, 26 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03276_AOK_Acpt_CAIB.html (accessed 29 December 2008); Mark Carreau, “Columbia Accident Board Casts Wide Net of Blame,” Houston Chronicle, 27 August 2003; Kathy Sawyer and Eric Pianin, “Report Blames Flawed NASA Culture for Tragedy,” Washington Post, 27 August 2003. 504 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598; Justin Ray, “Resupply Ship Bound for the International Space Station,” Spaceflight Now, 28 August 2003.)
Progress M-48 12P launched on a Soyuz FG rocket, carrying 2.6 tonnes (2.87 tons or 2,600 kilograms) of food, fuel, water, and equipment to the ISS. Among the supplies Progress M-48 carried were an Iridium satellite phone and GPS equipment for the use of the Expedition 7 crewRussian Commander Yuri Malenchenko and NASA Science Officer Edward T. Luwhen they returned to Earth in the Soyuz TMA-2 spacecraft in October. The Russian Space Agency had added the satellite phone and GPS equipment to the supplies because Soyuz TMA-1 had experienced an internal glitch while returning the Expedition 6 crew to Earth, resulting in a long, tense search for the craft and crew.
At 8:47 p.m. (EST), Soyuz TMA-2 landed safely in the steppes of Kazakhstan, returning to Earth the ISS Expedition 7 crew, American astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko. Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque of ESA was also aboard the flight, returning from a 10-day mission performing scientific experiments in the ISS lab. The Soyuz TMA-2 flight was equipped with a GPS and satellite phones, which NASA had donated to prevent a disruption in communications between the crew and Mission Control Center in Moscow. Such a disruption had occurred in May 2003, when a Soyuz craft returning from the ISS had landed 250 miles (402.3 kilometers) off course because of a computer malfunction.(Mara D. Bellaby of Associated Press, “Soyuz Crew Safely Returns to Earth from Space Station,” 27 October 2003.)
X Prize contestant SpaceShipOne successfully carried out its first glide flight after the White Knight carrier craft towed it to an altitude of 47,000 feet (14,326 meters) and released it. Pilot Michael W. Melvill guided the craft to a desert landing. Scaled Composites, which had built SpaceShipOne, issued a report of the test indicating that the two vehicles had separated cleanly, that handling qualities of the craft had correlated closely with ground-based simulations, and that on-board avionics and cockpit displays had performed flawlessly.(Leonard David, “X Prize Contestant Scaled Composites’ SpaceShipOne Flies,” Space News, 9 August 2003.)
NASA announced the selection of Donald J. Campbell, Director of GRC at Lewis Field, as Special Assistant to the Deputy Administrator for Nuclear and Alternative Power Generation Systems, effective 1 October 2003. In his new position, Campbell would lead the development and integration of high-power generation systems for propulsion, considered fundamental building blocks for sustained robotic and human exploration in outer space and deep space. Campbell had directed GRC since January 1994. Local political and community leaders had criticized Campbell for his leadership style, which had not galvanized the GRC workforce or fully leveraged the Center’s economic potential. NASA named Deputy Director of GRC Julian M. Earls to succeed Campbell as GRC’s Director.(NASA, “Glenn Research Center’s Donald J. Campbell Selected as NASA Deputy Administrator Special Assistant,” news release 03-260, 8 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/ HQ_03260_Campbell.html (accessed 29 December 2008); NASA, “Dr. Julian M. Earls Selected To Lead NASA Glenn Research Center,” news release 03-261, 8 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03261_Earls.html (accessed 29 December 2008); John Mangels and Michael O’Malley, “NASA Glenn Chief Leaves; Deputy Gets Job,” Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 9 August 2003.)
NASA announced that Administrator Sean O’Keefe had appointed three new members to the CAIB in compliance with a request from CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. The new members were Douglas D. Osheroff, the J. G. Jackson and C. J. Wood Professor of Physics and Applied Physics at Stanford University and a 1996 Nobel Prize Laureate in Physics; Sally K. Ride, a physicist and professor of Space Science at the University of California, San Diego, as well as a former NASA astronaut and the first American woman in space; and John M. Logsdon, Director of the George Washington University Space Policy Institute. O’Keefe had also appointed NASA astronaut retired U.S. Air Force Colonel Michael J. Bloomfield, in response to Gehman’s request that Bloomfield replace former astronaut Bryan D. O’Connor as Astronaut Advisor to the Board. O’Connor would return to NASA Headquarters in his role as NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance.(NASA, “New Members Added to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board,” news release 03-097, 5 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03097.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
Chinese taikonaut Yang Liwei successfully completed his 21-hour mission of 14 orbits around Earth aboard the Shenzhou 5, landing safely in the Gobi Desert in Mongolia. From aboard the ISS, American astronaut Edward T. Lu, speaking in Chinese, had welcomed Yang to space and wished him a safe journey and success. Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko had told Mission Control in Houston that he was glad to have someone else in space besides himself and Lu, congratulating the great accomplishment of thousands of people in the People’s Republic of China who had worked together to send Yang into space. After emerging from his capsule, Yang stated that Shenzhou 5 had operated very well, that he felt well, and that he was “proud of the motherland.”(John Pomfret, “China’s First Space Traveler Returns a Hero: Craft Made 14 Orbits in 21-Hour Mission,” Washington Post, 16 October 2003; Ching-Ching Ni, “China Completes Spaceflight: Nation’s First Astronaut, Lt. Col. Yang Liwei, Returns from Earth Orbit,” Los Angeles Times, 16 October 2003.)
Progress M-47/ISS-10P docked with the ISS, delivering 2.75 tons (2.5 tonnes or 2,495 kilograms) of supplies, which would enable the Expedition 6 crew to remain at the station until June without Shuttle support. The crewRussian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin and American astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettithad served at the outpost for 73 days, and NASA had scheduled their return to Earth on Shuttle Atlantis for 1 March. However, in the wake of the Columbia disaster, NASA had grounded all Shuttles indefinitely. Although the suspension of Shuttle flights did not place the ISS crew in danger, it did affect the schedule of space station construction and interrupted NASA’s plan to install a high-speed gyroscope at the station in March, to replace one that had broken down in June 2002. With only three operational gyroscopes, the ISS would continue to drift, but NASA did not consider the matter a time-critical problem.(Todd Ackerman, “Cargo Craft Resupplies Outpost Crew Hanging in Orbit,” Houston Chronicle, 5 February 2003; NASA, “Spaceflight 2003: International Space Station Goals and Objectives,” http://www.nasa.gov/directorates/somd/reports/2003/iss.html (accessed 13 November 2009).)
NASA announced the names of three additional members of the crew of the Space Shuttle Program’s Return to Flight Mission STS-114. In 2001 NASA had named four astronauts to STS- 114―Mission Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialist Stephen K. Robinson, and Mission Specialist Soichi Noguchi of JAXA. The four were already training for the flight, scheduled to launch no earlier than September 2004. Astronauts Andrew S. W. Thomas, Wendy B. Lawrence, and Charles J. Camarda rounded out the mission’s crew of seven. NASA had originally planned for STS-114 to have a seven-member crew, but in the wake of the Columbia accident, NASA had changed the mission objective to focus on testing and evaluating new procedures for flight safety, rather than on ISS logistics and crew rotation. Thomas and Lawrence were veteran astronauts―Thomas was the second-highest-ranking member of NASA’s Astronaut Office, and Lawrence had flown on the Shuttle three times. Camarda was a rookie making his first orbital flight. NASA had assigned Robinson and Noguchi to conduct spacewalks on the flight.(NASA, “NASA Names Crew Members for Shuttle Return to Flight Mission,” 7 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03360_STS_114_crew.html (accessed 5 February 2003); Todd Halvorson, “Astronaut Veterans, Rookie Fill Return-to-Flight Shuttle Crew,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 10 November 2003; Jim Banke, “NASA Names Additional Crew for Return to Flight Mission,” Space.com, 7 November 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts114_ crew_)
