A group of astronomers led by Michael E. Brown of the California Institute of Technology announced the discovery of a new planet in the solar system. The scientists had temporarily called the planet 2003 UB313 until the International Astronomic Union could formally approve the name that the scientists had proposed, but had not yet disclosed to the public. Although the scientists did not yet know the planet’s exact size, they believed it was larger than Pluto, which astronomers estimate is 1,400 miles (2,300 kilometers) in diameter. In addition, the newly discovered planet, which the scientists believed to be composed of rock and ice, was the furthest known object in the solar system, with a 560-year elliptical orbit around the Sun at distances ranging from 3.3 to 9 billion miles (5.3 to 14 billion kilometers) from the Sun. By comparison, Pluto’s orbit ranges from 2.7 to 4.6 billion miles (4.3 to 7.4 billion kilometers) from the Sun. The astronomers had also discovered that the orbit of 2003 UB313 is quite different from that of most planets in the solar system―it possesses an orbit skewed at an angle 44o from Earth’s orbit, whereas most planets orbit in planes that are close to that of Earth.(Kenneth Chang and Dennis Overbye, “Planet or Not, Pluto Has Far-Out Rival,” New York Times, 30 July 2005; NASA, “World Book at NASA: Pluto,” http://www.nasa.gov/worldbook/pluto_worldbook.html (accessed 2 July 2009); Richard A. Kerr, “Newfound ‘Tenth Planet’ Puts Pluto Behind the Eight Ball,” Science 309, 5736 (5 August 2005): 859.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin released to the public NASA’s detailed master plan for meeting goals established under the Vision for Space Exploration, including transporting humans to the Moon, Mars, and elsewhere in the solar system. The US$104 billion plan, called the Exploration System Architecture Study, addressed the technologies and strategies that NASA planned to use to transport crews to the ISS, the Moon, and Mars. NASA proposed to replace the Space Shuttles with a Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) similar in design to the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft, but incorporating new fuels and technologies.
The House Committee on Science held a hearing entitled The Future of NASA in preparation for a subcommittee to consider, on the following day, legislation reauthorizing NASA’s aeronautics, human spaceflight, and science programs through FY 2006 (H.R. 3070). President George W. Bush had requested US$16.5 billion in funding for NASA for FY 2006. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony to the committee about NASA’s intentions regarding issues contained in the President’s budget request, including NASA’s plans for human and robotic space exploration, the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV), and Space Shuttle safety. Griffin told the committee that, despite the fact that NASA had not yet complied with all 15 of the CAIB’s critical recommendations, NASA was preparing to launch Shuttle Discovery on 13 July 2005, pending the results of NASA’s own inspection. Furthermore, Griffin discussed President Bush’s intention to amend the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which had effectively prevented NASA from purchasing or bartering for space on Russian spacecraft. The amendment of the act would permit NASA to send astronauts to the ISS after April 2006.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 28 June 2005, 3–5; Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Says Shuttle Should Be Ready on July 13,” Washington Post, 29 June 2009. 813 NASA, “NASA Researchers Discover Planet with Largest Solid Core,” news release 05-169, 30 June 2005; Bun’ei Sato et al., “The N2K Consortium. II. A Transiting Hot Saturn Around HD 149026 with a Large Dense Core,” Astrophysical Journal 633, no. 1 (1 November 2005): 465–473.)
William W. Parsons replaced Thomas Q. Donaldson as Director of NASA’s SSC. Parsons had served as Director of SSC from August 2002 to May 2003 before leaving SSC to serve as Space Shuttle Program Manager from May 2003 to September 2005. Donaldson had left SSC to serve on a Federal Emergency Management Agency special assignment concerning recovery efforts for areas affected by Hurricane Katrina in August 2005.(NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/ director.html (accessed 9 July 2009); NASA, “NASA Names New Stennis Center Director,” news release 05-260, 13 September 2005.)
NASA announced that the U.S. Senate had confirmed the nomination of Michael D. Griffin as NASA’s 11th Administrator. Griffin replaced Sean O’Keefe, who had resigned in February to become Chancellor of Louisiana State University. Since 2004, Griffin had served as the Space Department Head at Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in Baltimore, Maryland. Before holding that position, he had served as President and Chief Operating Officer of In-Q-Tel and had held several positions within Orbital Sciences Corporation. Earlier in his career, he had served as Chief Engineer at NASA and as Deputy for Technology at the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization. Griffin held a doctorate in aeronautical engineering and five master’s degrees, credentials that had led Senator Barbara A. Mikulski of Maryland, ranking Democrat on the Appropriations Subcommittee, which oversees NASA, to introduce Griffin as the ideal person to lead NASA. During his confirmation hearing before the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee, Griffin had stated that, as Administrator, he would reevaluate NASA’s decision not to send astronauts to repair and service the HST. He had named his priorities for NASA, including the Space Shuttles’ safe return to flight. Furthermore, he had stated that he planned to speed up NASA’s development of a replacement craft for the Shuttle, so that the United States could continue to send humans into space. Griffin had stated that the United States’ dependence on other nations to ferry astronauts to space was unacceptable in terms of national security. Griffin had also testified that he supported President George W. Bush’s Vision for Space Exploration, which included returning humans to the Moon and, ultimately, sending human explorers to Mars and beyond.(NASA, “Michael D. Griffin To Become NASA Administrator,” news release 05-250, 13 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05250_griffin_confirmed.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Warren E. Leary, “NASA Nominee Says He’ll Reassess Decision Not To Send Astronauts To Fix Hubble Telescope,” New York Times, 13 April 2005.)
Scientists published research based on data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, which provided the first observational evidence that black holes not only destroy stars, but also create them. Sergei Nayakshin of the University of Leicester in the United Kingdom and Rashid A. Sunyaev of the Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics in Garching, Germany, compared x-ray emissions from stars in the Orion nebula with x-ray emissions from stars orbiting within one light-year of the central Milky Way’s black hole Sagittarius A*. According to current scientific theories, a black hole’s immense gravity is able to pull millions of stars close to the black hole and to destroy stars. However, Nayakshin and Sunyaev had discovered that Sagittarius A* is not consuming its surrounding stars. Furthermore, the number of stars near the black hole is around 10,000, far less than scientists would expect if the black hole’s gravity had drawn the stars toward it. Therefore, the scientists had concluded that the Chandra data supports an alternative theory of why stars are near black holes. This theory holds that dust around a black hole creates dense gas clouds. The gravity of the clouds counteracts the gravity of the black hole, thereby creating an environment in which stars form.(NASA, “NASA’s Chandra Reveals New Star Generation,” news release 05-344, 10 October 2005; Sergei Nayakshin and Rashid Sunyaev, “The ‘Missing’ Young Stellar Objects in the Central Parsec of the Galaxy: Evidence of Star Formation in a Massive Accretion Disc and a Top-Heavy Initial Mass Formation,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters 364, no. 1 (13 October 2005): L23–L27.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, who had been in his new position for only one month, appeared as the sole witness before the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, and Science, to testify regarding NASA’s FY 2006 budget request. Key issues that the panel discussed with Griffin included several related to the Space Shuttle Program: the four-year gap between the planned decommissioning of the Space Shuttle in 2010 and the first scheduled flight of the new Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) in 2014; the United States’ obligation to complete the ISS before the retirement of the Space Shuttle; and servicing the HST. In his responses, Griffin stated that, in mid-July, he would release a plan for the first flight of the new CEV. He suggested that, if the ISS partners postponed some scheduled on-board scientific research, they could complete the ISS before the Shuttle’s retirement, without cancelling any research programs. Regarding the HST, Griffin stated his opposition to a robotic servicing mission and said that he wished to assess the first two Shuttle flights before making a decision. The panel also discussed recommended cuts in Earth Science research. Griffin responded that NASA had listened to the concerns of the scientific community and was reexamining that area. Griffin clarified that NASA would not cut science programs to fund the spaceflight program.
The crew of Expedition 11 returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft, landing at 9:09 p.m. (EDT) in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 11 were Russian cosmonaut Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American astronaut John L. Phillips. The two men had spent 179 days in space, during which time they had performed a variety of scientific experiments and maintenance tasks at the ISS. Accompanying Krikalev and Phillips on their return was American contractor Gregory Olsen, who had spent eight days on the ISS performing research under a commercial agreement with the Russian Space Agency.(NASA, “Expedition 11 Safely Returns from International Space Station,” news release 05-340, 10 October 2005.)
Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts Soichi Noguchi and Stephen K. Robinson completed a final spacewalk during which Robinson performed an unprecedented maneuver to complete a critical operation of the orbiter’s thermal protection system. The principle objective of the spacewalk was to remove two pieces of protruding heat shielding―called gap fillers―from the bottom of the orbiter. NASA was concerned that the fillers might add extra heat to the orbiter’s heat- shielding tiles upon reentry into Earth’s atmosphere, thereby threatening the mission. Astronauts James M. Kelly and Wendy B. Lawrence used the robotic arms of the Shuttle and those of the ISS to lower Robinson to the underside of Discovery, while Noguchi monitored the operation. Despite concerns that Robinson might lose communication with the other astronauts, the operation was a success. The maneuver was the first time that an astronaut had worked on the underside of an orbiter while in space. During the spacewalk, Noguchi and Robinson also installed an external stowage platform and a new iteration of an experiment to test materials in the environment of space.(NASA, “NASA’s Spacewalking Astronaut Completes Unique Repair,” news release 05-212, 3 August 2005; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-114,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-114.html (accessed 24 June 2009).)
The Soyuz TMA-6 crew arrived at the ISS. After greeting the new arrivals, the Expedition 10 crew held a safety briefing to familiarize the Expedition 11 crew and Roberto Vittori, the Italian astronaut visiting the ISS, with emergency escape procedures. The mission was Commander Sergei K. Krikalev’s third long-term space assignment and his second aboard the ISS. Krikalev was the first person to serve more than one tour at the station.(NASA, “11th Crew Arrives at Space Station” (International Space Station Status Report SS05-020, 17 April 2005), http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_ss05020_ISS_status_report.html (accessed 29 June 2009); John Kelly, “New Crew Arrives at Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2005.)
Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, NASA’s Fiscal Year 2006 Budget Proposal, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 17 February 2005. route to their destination and assisted traffic managers in managing in-flight aircraft collaboratively; and new communication and visualization technologies, which helped airline industry personnel better understand air-traffic patterns and future trends. Michael R. Landis, Manager of the AATT project, remarked that NASA would incorporate many of the technologies and concepts developed by the AATT project into the Next Generation Air Transportation System, the initiative of the government and industry to modernize the National Airspace System.(NASA, “NASA Developed Tools for Successful Air Travel Program,” news release 05-058, 24 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05058_Improving_Air_Travel.html (accessed 19 August 2009).)
NASA announced the completion of the most extensive global topographic map ever created, using data collected during Endeavour’s Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) in February 2000. NASA and the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) had processed the collected data for more than four years, creating digital elevation maps that encompassed 80 percent of Earth’s landmass and revealed, for the first time, large, detailed swaths of topography previously obscured by persistent cloud cover. The data covered Australia and New Zealand in unprecedented, uniform detail, as well as the more than 1,000 islands comprising much of Polynesia and Melanesia in the South Pacific and the islands in the South Indian and Atlantic oceans, including many that geographers had never topographically mapped. The low topography typical of the islands makes them vulnerable to tidal effects, storm surges, and long- term rise in sea level. Mission Project Scientist at NASA’s JPL, Michael Kobrick, remarked that the maps would help mitigate the effects of future disasters of the magnitude of the Indian Ocean tsunami, because scientists would now be able to see where rising waters would go. Kobrick also commented that the SRTM was among the most significant missions the Shuttle had performed and, probably, the most significant mapping mission of any single type.(NASA, “NASA Goes ‘Down Under’ for Shuttle Mapping Mission Finale,” news release 05-007, 6 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/jan/HQ_05007_srtm_update.html (accessed 11 May 2009).)
NASA announced the successful completion of flight tests above a virtual forest fire to evaluate new flight-control software on board two small UAVs. The software experiment had sought to guide the UAVs simultaneously around obstacles, using principles derived from studies of the movements of fish and birds. Engineers and technicians from NASA’s ARC and DFRC had conducted the flight tests over a remote area of Edwards Air Force Base in California, to investigate cooperative flight strategies for atmospheric sampling and for airborne monitoring and surveillance of natural disasters. John E. Melton of ARC, Principal Investigator for the Networked UAV Teaming Experiment, explained that his team had used two autopilot-equipped APV-3 UAVs, each with a 12-foot wingspan, to flight-test several novel approaches for assisting wildfire-suppression crews. The two craft had flown along computer-generated paths to demonstrate their ability to avoid obstacles in a cooperative and synchronized manner, without the assistance of flight personnel. Melton commented that the technology could eventually enable swarms of aircraft to move safely from one area to another as a group, collecting air samples on scientific missions or helping ground personnel monitor natural disasters.(NASA, “New Software Allows UAVs to Team Up for Virtual Experiments,” news release 05-078, 17 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05078_UAV_Software.html (accessed 6 June 2009).)
President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-112, the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which effectively allowed U.S. astronauts to continue flying on Russian spacecraft, thereby maintaining the United States’ access to the ISS. The terms of the original act, passed in 2000, did not permit U.S. government agencies to make “extraordinary payments” to Russia, including purchasing space on Soyuz spacecraft, unless the President of the United States had certified that Russia was not exporting missile and nuclear technologies to Iran. However, at the time that Congress had passed the original act, Russia had an agreement with the United States to provide 11 free voyages on Soyuz spacecraft to U.S. astronauts, so that NASA did not have to purchase space on Soyuz. In September 2005, American astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. had become the 11th U.S. passenger on a Soyuz, and, subsequently, Russia had required payment for any carriage of U.S. astronauts. Therefore, NASA had asked Congress to amend the act so that it could buy space on Russian spacecraft.(Guy Gugliotta, “U.S. Access to Space Station Is Preserved,” Washington Post, 11 November 2005.)
The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) announced that it considered the Space Shuttle Discovery safe enough to fly again, even though NASA had not undertaken some steps recommended by the CAIB to ensure the Shuttle’s safe launch. NASA had planned to launch Discovery as the first Shuttle flight since the Columbia accident in 2003 and had established the Task Group to review NASA’s compliance with the CAIB’s critical recommendations. Task Group members stated that, although NASA had not complied with all of the CAIB’s 15 critical recommendations, the Space Shuttle was ready to resume flight, and NASA was responsible for making the final decision to launch the Shuttle. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin was unclear about how the Task Group’s findings would influence Shuttle launch plans.(Traci Watson, “Safety Panel: NASA Failed To Fix Critical Issues with Shuttle,” USA Today, 28 June 2009. 252)
The U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to examine NASA’s proposal to reduce spending on aviation research by 20 percent over five years, which would necessitate the closure of some wind tunnels and other centers. Overall, the Bush administration had proposed a 2.4 percent increase in NASA’s budget, with most of that increase directed toward funding travel to the Moon and Mars, initiatives requiring NASA to eliminate or reduce its other programs, such as aviation research. NASA’s Associate Administrator for Aeronautics Research J. Victor Lebacqz defended the program, remarking that the United States remained a global power in aviation and had developed technologies to improve safety, reduce environmental impact, and increase efficiency of aviation operations. However, Lebacqz stated that NASA needed a clearer vision for the goals of the program. John M. Klineberg, a retired NASA official and industry executive, who had headed a National Research Council (NRC) study group in 2004, testified before the committee. The NRC study group had published a review of NASA’s aeronautics programs. Klineberg warned against using the group’s recommendations out of context to justify major cuts in programs. He testified that NASA’s proposed aviation-research budget was a disaster, putting the program at risk of becoming irrelevant to the future of aeronautics in the United States and throughout the world. In an interview following the hearing, Klineberg emphasized that the study group had suggested consolidating and focusing programs but did not support budgetary cuts eliminating entire areas of research.(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Proposal To Reduce Spending for Aviation Research by 20% Dismays Experts,” New York Times, 17 March 2005; Malia Rulon for Associated Press, “Lawmakers Question Proposed NASA Cuts,” 17 March 2005; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, The Future of Aeronautics at NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 16 March 2005.)
Russian cosmonaut and ISS crew member Sergei K. Krikalev set a world record of 748 days for total time spent in space. Krikalev had begun his cosmonaut training in 1985 and had first served as a crew member of Russia’s Mir space station in 1988. Krikalev had served on the Mir crew again in 1991 and had later become a member of the first ISS crew comprising both Russian cosmonauts and U.S. astronauts. In addition, he had been the first Russian to travel on a NASA Space Shuttle, achieving that distinction on Shuttle Discovery in 1994. The ISS partners had scheduled Krikalev’s return to Earth for October 2005―by then he would have spent 814 days in space.(Mark Carreau, “Russian Cosmonaut Sets a World Record of 748 Days in Space,” Houston Chronicle, 17 August 2005.)
Officials of the Personal Spaceflight Federation announced the newly formed organization’s establishment. The Federation’s stated purpose was to design and uphold the standards and processes necessary to ensure public safety, while promoting the growth of the private spaceflight industry. Pursuant to landmark legislation signed by President George W. Bush in December 2004Pub. L. No. 108-492, the Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004the industry group planned to work with federal regulators to draft rules and standards for suborbital space tourism. The new federation brought together visionary space entrepreneurs, including SpaceShipOne designer Burt Rutan, whose team had won the US$10 million X Prize in October 2004 for conducting the first private suborbital spaceflight, and video-game developer John D. Carmack II, whose Armadillo Aerospace team had been among the leading contenders for the X Prize. Executive Director of the X Prize Foundation Gregg E. Maryniak, serving as the Federation’s spokesperson, remarked on the law’s new mandate that government and industry work together to develop safety standards. Maryniak stated that the Federation believed strongly that private industry must devise a suborbital product considerably safer than that of the current civil space program.(Personal Spaceflight Federation, “Space Entrepreneurs Resolve To Create Industry Group To Promote Safety Standards and Growth of the Personal Spaceflight Industry,” news release, 8 February 2005, http://www.commercialspaceflight.org/pressreleases/PSF%20Press%20Release%20- %20Original%20Announcement.pdf (accessed 27 August 2009); Alan Boyle, “Space Racers Unite in Federation: Industry Group Will Follow Up on New Law,” MSNBC.com, 9 February 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/6936543/ (accessed 28 August 2009).)
Former NASA astronaut Michael L. Coats became Director of NASA’s JSC, replacing Jefferson D. Howell Jr., who had left to become a visiting professor at the University of Texas in Austin. Coats had begun working at NASA in 1978 and had flown three Space Shuttle missions before retiring from NASA in 1991. Before becoming JSC Director, Coats had worked for Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado.(NASA JSC, “NASA Names Former Astronaut New Johnson Center Director,” news release J05-055, 7 November 2005; NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” 14 April 2009, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/director.html (accessed 21 July 2009).)
Soyuz TMA-6 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying the Expedition 11 crew of three to the ISS. Russian Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American Flight Engineer John L. Phillips would replace Leroy Chiao and Salizhan S. Sharipov. Italy’s Roberto Vittori, also aboard, would conduct scientific experiments at the ISS before returning to Earth with Chiao and Sharipov.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Chris Kridler, “Soyuz Rocket Blasts Off to Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 April 2005.)
NASA announced that it would remove the potentially problematic foam insulation ramps from the Space Shuttles’ external fuel tanks before the next Shuttle launch, which NASA had scheduled for 2006. NASA had examined the foam ramps after a portion of foam had separated from Discovery during its July 2005 launch, nearly striking the Shuttle. The event was similar to the one that had contributed to the destruction of Columbia in 2003. Engineers had designed the foam ramps―formally called Protuberance Air Loads (PALs)―to protect Shuttle tanks’ fuel- pressurization lines and electrical cables from potentially damaging winds during launch. NASA technicians remained unsure of why the foam ramp had separated from Discovery, but inspections conducted in November 2005 had revealed small cracks in a PAL. The PAL with the cracks was on a tank that NASA had tested before Discovery’s launch but had not used for that mission.(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Plans To Remove Some Foam from Shuttle,” New York Times, 16 December 2005; Michael Cabbage, “Shuttle To Lose Fuel-Tank Foam,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 December 2005.)
Both crew members of the ISS, NASA astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev, performed a spacewalk to prepare the ISS for the first assembly work since the 2003 accident of Space Shuttle Columbia, which had led to the suspension of construction on the station. The two removed broken and disused equipment and installed a new television camera, designed to aid in the assembly of additional truss segments for the ISS. McArthur and Tokarev were performing these tasks to prepare the ISS for the future installation of a new solar power module, planned for 2006.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS05-051,” status report SS05-052, 8 November 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/nov/HQ_SS05052_station_status-html (accessed 19 July 2009); Mark Carreau, “Camera Installed, Despite a Few Snags,” Houston Chronicle, 8 November 2005.)
ISS Expedition 12 crew members William S. McArthur Jr. and Valery I. Tokarev left the ISS temporarily unoccupied so that they could relocate the orbiting station’s Soyuz spacecraft from the Pirs module’s docking compartment to the Zarya module’s docking port. The Soyuz spacecraft had remained docked at the ISS to serve as a return vehicle to Earth and an emergency escape vehicle. McArthur and Tokarev were relocating the Soyuz so that Pirs could serve as an airlock for future spacewalks.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS05-054,” status report SS05-054, 18 November 2005. 858 H.R. Rep. 109-272, at 169 (2005) (Conf. Rep.); NASA, “NASA Administrator’s Statement of Passage of FY 2006 Budget,” news release 05-407, 16 November 2005.)
France and the United States agreed to establish a Space Shuttle landing site in southern France. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and French Ambassador Jean-David Levitte signed the agreement, which covered NASA’s Space Shuttle support for the ISS. Under the agreement, France would permit Shuttles encountering problems during launch to land at Istres Air Base 125, near Marseilles, and allow the U.S. government to conduct additional support activities for Space Shuttles on French soil, such as weather monitoring and search-and-rescue operations.(NASA, “U.S. and France Agree To Establish NASA Shuttle Landing Site,” news release 05-143, 7 June 2005. 803 Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Safety Issues Unresolved,” Houston Chronicle, 9 June 2005; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Near to Meeting Safety Requirements for Launching in July,” New York Times, 9 June 2005.)
During a hearing of the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics―Live from Space: The International Space Station―NASA astronaut John L. Phillips became the first person to provide congressional testimony while in space. The Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics had convened the hearing to gather information on numerous topics concerning the ISS, such as current activities on the ISS, scientific and research accomplishments resulting from ISS operations, and long-term human spaceflight. At the time of the hearing, Phillips was aboard the ISS serving as a member of Expedition 11, along with Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev. Former ISS crew members E. Michael Fincke and Peggy A. Whitson also provided testimony at the hearing.(NASA, “NASA Astronaut Gives First Congressional Testimony from Space,” news release 05-152, 14 June 2005; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Live from Space: The International Space Station, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 14 June 2005, 3.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to examine options for the HST. Astronauts had serviced the HST four times since its entry into orbit in 1990. NASA had scheduled a fifth servicing mission for 2004, planning to make repairs and upgrades. However, because it had grounded the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, NASA had not performed the scheduled servicing mission. The decision about whether to service or to decommission the telescope hinged upon the expense of the mission and on NASA’s budgetary allocation of funds for the mission. Joseph H. Taylor of Princeton University, head of the National Academy of Sciences committee that set priorities for planning astronomy missions for the first decade of the 21st century, testified that his committee had identified the servicing mission to the HST as a priority for NASA’s space program, but only if the cost of the mission did not exceed US$400 million. Taylor stated that he would not support the mission if it would delay other programs or if NASA would have to rearrange its priorities to fund the mission. Newly revised NASA estimates placed the total cost of a fifth servicing mission at US$1 to US$2 billion, a cost that NASA’s Space Science Division could not sustain on its own. Experts testifying before the committee agreed that, if the Office for Human Space Flight and the Space Sciences Division could share the expense, the mission would be well worth it.
The Russian Space Agency launched the crew of ISS Expedition 12 in a Soyuz spacecraft at 11:55 p.m. (EDT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 12 were American astronaut Commander William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev. The two men would replace the crew of Expedition 11, comprising Russian cosmonaut Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American astronaut John L. Phillips. The ISS partners planned for the new crew to remain at the station for nearly six months. The launch also included American executive Gregory Olsen, who would conduct scientific experiments under a commercial contract with the Russian Space Agency. Olsen planned to return to Earth with the Expedition 11 crew on 10 October 2005.(NASA, “Expedition 12 on the Way to International Space Station,” news release 05-292, 30 September 2005. 843 NASA, “Langley Center Director Lesa B. Roe,” 3 October 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/ about/roe_bio.html (accessed 13 July 2009); NASA, “Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director,” news release 03-042, 13 June 2003.)
