Over the course of 10 hours, NASA’s Mission Control remotely unfurled the S3/S4 solar arrays located on the new truss segment. Tip to tip the solar arrays spanned a distance of 240 feet (73 meters). With the solar arrays added to the left and right sides of the new power module, the ISS achieved an unprecedented symmetry in its appearance. In the midst of the solar-array- deployment operation, a fire alarm sounded in the Russian sector of the ISS, but crew and mission managers quickly determined that a computer malfunction was the cause. Russian computers, working in conjunction with American computers, had failed, and attempts to reboot the Russian computers had triggered the false fire alarm. However, because of the computer failure, the small maneuvering jets on Atlantis had assumed control of the ISS’s attitude, placing the station’s solar panels in a poor position for gathering sunlight and causing power levels to drop. Mission Control ordered the crew to turn off some nonessential equipment until the ISS regained attitude control. Thereafter, engineers successfully reestablished gyroscope control, and the left-side array began tracking the Sun properly.(Houston Chronicle, “New Solar Array,” 13 June 2007; John Schwartz, “Glitch Blamed for Fire Alarm on Orbiter,” New York Times, 13 June 2007; William Harwood, “Computer Glitches Impact Station Attitude Control,” Spaceflight Now, 12 June 2007.)
Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX), a private company based in El Segundo, California, launched its Falcon-1 rocket from Omelek Island in the Kwajawlein Atoll in the Pacific Ocean. The 70-foot-long (21.3-meter-long), two-stage rocket, powered by liquid oxygen and kerosene, successfully reached space, accomplishing stage separation and second-stage ignition before reentering the atmosphere. Although the rocket failed to reach its desired orbit of 425 miles (684 kilometers), SpaceX’s founder Elon Musk, also the cofounder of PayPal, considered the launch a success because the rocket had successfully achieved many of the riskiest milestones of launching and entering space. The company’s first attempt at launching a Falcon-1 rocket in 2006 had failed when leaking fuel caught fire just after liftoff. SpaceX had designed the most recent mission—Demo 2—to gather flight data for the company’s main customer, DARPA, which was seeking more economical means of reaching space. The typical commercial launch service cost US$30 million, but Musk had pledged to launch satellites for US$7 million.(John Antczak for Associated Press, “SpaceX Launches New Rocket Into Space,” 21 March 2007; John Schwartz, “Private Rocket Lost Shortly After Launch,” New York Times, 21 March 2007.)
Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski and Douglas H. Wheelock conducted the third EVA of STS-120, which lasted 7 hours and 8 minutes. With the assistance of an orbital crane, the two astronauts installed the P6-truss segment, which had a 17.5-ton (15.9-tonne or 15,900-kilogram) solar-power girder. They also installed a 40-foot (12.2-meter) radiator, to dissipate heat generated by station systems, and a spare main-bus switching unit on a stowage platform, for future use. The astronauts deployed the first solar array without incident, but discovered a 2.5- foot (0.76-meter) tear in a solar blanket during deployment of the second array. With solar-array deployment at 80 percent, Mission Control decided to halt the process to allow engineers the opportunity to analyze the situation and to recommend next steps. Despite its 80 percent 160 deployment, the array was already producing 97 percent of its power-generation capability.
ISS Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko undertook a spacewalk to prepare the space station for the relocation of the Harmony module, a pressurized compartment designed to serve as a docking port for European and Japanese laboratories. NASA had scheduled the Discovery astronauts to conduct this spacewalk as the fifth and final EVA of their mission to the ISS. However, the discovery and repair of tears in a critical solar-power module had taken precedence. During this EVA, Whitson and Malenchenko cleared cables from Harmony’s destined location and disconnected electrical and fluid connections. Mission STS- 120 had delivered the module to the ISS in October, and the crew had installed Harmony at a temporary location. Completion of Harmony’s transfer would require three spacewalks and extensive robotic work. Astronauts living aboard the ISS would need to reposition the module before NASA launched its next Shuttle mission, scheduled for early December 2010. That mission would carry Europe’s laboratory Columbus to the ISS.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk at Station,” 9 November 2007; Mark Carreau, “Space Station Crew Tackles Next Phase of Remodeling,” Houston Chronicle, 10 November 2007; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Astronauts Move Shuttle Docking Port,” Space.com, 12 November 2007, http://www.space.com/ missionlaunches/071112-expedition16-dockingport-move.html (accessed 9 November 2010).)
Expedition 14 Commander Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Flight Engineer Sunita L. Williams conducted their second spacewalk in four days, to finish connecting cooling lines to a permanent system of the ISS. Working for just over 7 hours, the astronauts rerouted a series of two electrical cables and four quick-disconnect fluid lines to the Destiny laboratory’s permanent cooling system; retracted the aft heat-rejecting radiator on the P6 Truss; and finished disconnecting and stowing the second of two fluid lines for the Early Ammonia Servicer. Lopez- Alegria photographed the starboard solar array and the blanket box into which it folds, so that engineers could analyze the photos and finalize plans for its retraction during the Shuttle Mission STS-117, scheduled for March 2007. He also removed a sunshade that the crew no longer needed from a data-relay box, folding the sunshade to bring it inside the ISS, so that the crew could dispose of it later. At the conclusion of the spacewalk, Williams and Lopez-Alegria again followed precautionary decontamination procedures in the ISS’s airlock, as they had on 31 January, because they had seen ammonia flakes early in the spacewalk. Williams set a record for spacewalking time accrued by a woman—22 hours and 37 minutes—surpassing the record that NASA astronaut Kathryn C. Thornton had set in 1993.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS07-06”; Marc Carreau, “Spacewalkers Finish Job; Astronauts Sets Record,” Houston Chronicle, 5 February 2007.)
NASA announced that NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics Kenneth J. Krieg had signed the National Partnership for Aeronautical Testing (NPAT) Agreement. NASA and the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) would use the integrated national strategy NPAT to manage their respective aeronautical test facilities, including wind tunnels, propulsion-test facilities, simulation facilities, and open-air ranges. The agreement fulfilled one element of the two agencies’ response to the National Aeronautics Research and Development Policy, which President George W. Bush had signed in December 2006. In addition to expanding the dialogue beyond the test-and-evaluation communities, to include industry, academia, and the science and technology programs of NASA and DOD, the agreement established a council responsible for developing projects to streamline and economize management of aeronautical test facilities. Lisa J. Porter, Associate Administrator of NASA’s Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate, and John B. Foulkes of DOD’s Test Resource Management Center would cochair the council.(NASA, “NASA and Department of Defense Partner for Aeronautical Testing,” news release 07-52, 26 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_07052_DoD_MoU_aero.html (accessed 14 October 2009); United Press International, “NASA Signs Defense Department Agreement,” 28 February 2007.)
NASA released images that its New Horizons spacecraft had captured 28 February 2007, when the craft passed within 1.4 million miles (2.2 million kilometers) of Jupiter on its way to Pluto. The images provided “never-before-seen perspectives” of the giant planet’s atmosphere, rings, moons, and magnetosphere, including the first close-up scans of Jupiter’s second-largest storm Little Red Spot, which had formed during the previous decade when three smaller storms merged. Harold A. Weaver Jr., New Horizons Project Scientist for the John Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in Laurel, Maryland, remarked that the image was “the best look ever of a storm like this in its infancy.” New Horizons had also captured the clearest images to date of the tenuous Jovian ring system, including images revealing a series of unexpected arcs and clumps
Space Shuttle Atlantis launched from NASA’s KSC on an 11-day mission, designated STS-117, to continue construction of the ISS. The crew consisted of Commander Frederick W. Sturckow; Pilot Lee J. Archambault; Mission Specialists James F. Reilly II, Patrick G. Forrester, Steven R. Swanson, and John D. Olivas; and Flight Engineer Clayton C. Anderson, who would replace Sunita L. Williams on board the ISS as a member of ISS Expeditions 15 and 16. The launch was nearly flawless. Only one potential problem occurred several minutes into the flight, when on- board cameras captured an image that appeared to show foam flaking off the Shuttle’s external fuel tank, just after the solid rocket boosters (SRBs) had separated from the orbiter. According to Shuttle Program Manager N. Wayne Hale Jr., NASA’s preliminary analysis of the incident indicated that the foam had not struck the craft. NASA planned further analysis.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis Begins Mission to the Space Station,” news release 07-136, 8 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07136_Atlantis_launch.html (accessed 13 April 2010); NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight),” NASAfacts, http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/177714main_STS-117.pdf (accessed 21 May 2010), John Johnson Jr., “Flawless Launch, At Last, For Atlantis,” Los Angeles Times, 9 June 2007.)
Jeffrey P. Bezos, founder of Amazon.com and the commercial spaceflight company Blue Origin, released images of the 13 November 2006 test launch of the space capsule Goddard, the first vehicle of Blue Origin’s New Shepard program. Goddard was a vertical-takeoff, vertical-landing vehicle, shaped like a cone, with a square base sitting on four legs. During the successful test launch, which lasted 25 seconds, the craft ascended to 300 feet (91.4 meters) before descending to land gently on the launchpad, approximately 120 miles (193 kilometers) east of El Paso, Texas. Bezos, who had founded Blue Origin in 2000, planned for the craft eventually to carry several astronauts into suborbital flight. However, he clearly stated that he intended for these plans to proceed slowly, choosing as Blue Origin’s motto “Gradatim Ferociter” or “Step by Step, Fiercely.”(Jeff Bezos, “Development Flight, and We Are Hiring,” Blue Origin, 2 January 2007, http://www.blueorigin.com/ letter.htm (accessed 9 November 2009); Aero-News Network, “Bezos Releases Details of November’s Goddard Launch,” 5 January 2007; Stefanie Olsen, “Bezos Unleashes Space Rocket Prototype,” New York Times, 4 January 2007.)
NASA announced that, for the fifth time, it would extend the missions of the Mars Exploration Rovers Spirit and Opportunity. The twin rovers had landed on Mars in January 2004, embarking on missions originally planned to last 90 days. John L. Callas, Mars Rover Project Manager at NASA’s JPL in Pasadena, California, remarked that, although Spirit and Opportunity were showing some signs of aging, they remained “in good health” and capable of continuing to collect scientific data. At the time of the announcement of the missions’ extension, Spirit had driven 4.5 miles (7.3 kilometers) and had returned more than 102,000 images. Opportunity had driven 7.2 miles (11.6 kilometers) and had returned more than 94,000 images.(NASA, “NASA Extends Operations for Its Long-Lived Mars Rovers,” news release 07-208, 15 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_072088_Mars_Rovers_Funding_Ext.html (accessed 8 September 2010).)
Mission Specialist Scott E. Parazynski and Flight Engineer Daniel M. Tani undertook the second EVA of STS-120, disconnecting cables from the P6 truss, to remove the P6 truss from the Z1 truss. Tani and Parazynski made progress outfitting the new Harmony module, mating the power and data grapple fixture, and reconfiguring connectors on the S1 truss, in preparation for the later deployment of the radiator on S1. Tani also inspected the SARJ, collecting fine metal shavings on part of a wheel with solar panels attached to it. The discovery of the metal shavings enabled engineers to identify the source of friction that had caused the wheel to begin slowing down in September. Engineers had designed the wheel to spin freely so that the solar panels pointed toward the Sun; the panels generated electricity to operate the ISS’s computers, oxygen- producing machine, and other systems. Tani reported that, in addition to collecting the metal shavings, he had observed that parts of the wheel’s surface appeared discolored, a possible sign of corrosion. To prevent further damage to the wheel, engineers stopped it from spinning, thereby reducing the amount of electricity that the panels generated. The spacewalk lasted 6 hours and 33 minutes.(NASA, “NASAfacts; STS-120”; Traci Watson, “Damaged Component Could Thwart Space Station Plans,” USA Today, 29 October 2007; John Schwartz, “Astronauts Discover Damage to Space Station,” 29 October 2007.)
Expedition 14 Commander Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Flight Engineer Sunita L. Williams conducted a spacewalk outside the ISS, lasting 7 hours and 55 minutes, which exceeded the planned time of 6 hours and 30 minutes. The two astronauts moved half of the ISS’s coolant lines to a permanent cooling station on the station’s Port 6 (P6) Truss. Several flakes, either of toxic ammonia or of paint, floated away from a cooling-line cap as the astronauts disconnected two of the fluid lines connected to an ammonia reservoir, preparing to stow them away. Time constraints prevented the astronauts from stowing both of the fluid lines. Moreover, the astronauts failed to accomplish tasks that would enable them to “get ahead,” such as photographing a solar array that the ISS partners planned to retract during the next Shuttle mission in March. Because of the suspected leak during stowage of the fluid line, Mission Control required Lopez-Alegria and Williams to remain in their spacesuits for an additional 25 minutes once inside the ISS’s airlock, as a precaution against contaminating the station with ammonia.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS07-06,” 4 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_SS0706_station_status.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Warren E. Leary, “Spacewalkers st Start Switch of Station’s Cooling System,” New York Times, 1 February 2007; Mike Schneider, “Astronauts Take 1 of 3 Spacewalks,” Associated Press, 1 February 2007.)
The Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee held a hearing to discuss planned budget cuts to weather and environmental satellite programs, reductions that could significantly affect scientists’ ability to study Earth’s climate. Antonio J. Busalacchi, Director of the Earth System Science Interdisciplinary Center of the University of Maryland, spoke extensively about the causes of the delays and cost overruns in the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS), a joint project of DOD, NASA, and NOAA. The partner agencies, intending for NPOESS to replace NASA’s QuikSCAT satellite, which had launched in 1999 with a three- to five-year life expectancy, had originally scheduled NPOESS satellites to begin launches to replace aging satellites in 2008. However, at the time of the hearing, the partners had postponed the launches, now scheduled to occur during 2013−2026. Busalacchi characterized the status of the program as “one giant leap backward for mankind,” and Commerce Committee Chair Clarence William “Bill” Nelson (D-FL) called the implementation of the NPOESS program a disaster. David A. Powner of the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) testified that, although the initial cost estimate for the program had been US$6.5 billion for six satellites, the projected cost had since reached US$12.5 billion, with two satellites and some instruments dropped from the program. The report also found that the agencies had not coordinated effectively and had not filled critical NPOESS jobs. Mary Ellen Kicza, Assistant Administrator for Satellite and Information Services at NOAA, testified to the committee that the agencies had already addressed many of the problems that GAO had identified.(U.S. Congress, Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, U.S. Weather and Environmental Satellites: Ready for the 21st Century? 110th Cong., 1st sess., 11 July 2007; see also statements of Ellen Kicza, David A. Powner, and Antonio J. Busalacchi, http://commerce.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?p=Hearings (accessed 29 October 2010) ; Wes Allison, “Politics Aging Satellite Won’t Cripple Storm Trackers,” St. Petersburg Times (FL), 12 July 2007; Jessica Gresko for the Associated Press, “Senate Committee Hears Recommendations on Weather Satellites,” 11 July 2007.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin named Richard J. Gilbrech as Associate Administrator for the Exploration Systems Mission Directorate, succeeding Scott J. Horowitz, who had announced in July his intention to leave NASA by 1 October. The Directorate was responsible
TMA-10 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 17:31 (UT), carrying Expedition 15 Commander Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov, as well as Charles Simonyi, who had paid US$25 million to travel to the ISS as a tourist. After joining Microsoft Corporation in 1981, Simonyi had led the development of the computer software programs Word and Excel, but he had since left Microsoft to start International Software Corporation of Bellevue, Washington. Simonyi planned to participate in several medical and engineering experiments during his 11-day visit to the ISS and to update the blog for his student- oriented Web site, www.charlesinspace.com, among other educational activities. Simonyi remarked that his one goal was to educate students about the science of space travel. The Russian space agency Roskosmos had scheduled Simonyi to return to Earth on 20 April, with Expedition 14 Commander Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Flight Engineer Mikhail V. Tyurin. Lopez- Alegria and Tyurin had been aboard the ISS since September 2006. Flight Engineer Sunita L. Williams, who had served with Expedition 14 since December 2006, would remain aboard the ISS as a member of Expedition 15 until later in 2007.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report SS07-18,” 7 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/homehqnews/ 2007/apr/HQ_SS0718_station_status.html (accessed 16 February 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642, 1 May 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx642.html (accessed March 1, 2010); Marc Carreau, “5th Space Tourist Goes into Orbit on $25 Million Ticket,” Houston Chronicle, 8 April 2007; Scott Gutierrez, “Developer of Word on Way to Space Station,” Seattle Post-Intelligencer (WA), 9 April 2007.)
NASA to present a credible plan and accompanying timetable for implementing the NASA Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee’s recommendations, including the most controversial one, related to the allegations that some astronauts had drunk alcohol shortly before flight. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, who had compared the alcohol allegations to urban legends, testified that NASA was already in the process of addressing the committee’s concerns. At the time of the hearing, NASA was preparing an anonymous survey to assist in identifying its employees’ continuing concerns about safety issues and about other review committee findings.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, “Subcommittee Questions NASA on Health Care of Astronaut Corps,” news release, 6 September 2007, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?browsePath=110%2FHOUSE%2FCommittee+on+Science+ and+Technology&granuleId=CHRG-110hhrg37640&packageId=CHRG-110hhrg37640&fromBrowse=true (accessed 11 January 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, NASA’s Astronaut Health Care System—Results of an Independent Review, 110th Cong., 1st sess., 6 September 2007; Eun Kyung Kim, “Fear May Be NASA Problem,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 September 2007.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from KSC in Florida at 11:38 a.m. (EDT) on STS-120, a 14- day mission to continue ISS construction. The STS-120 crew consisted of Commander Pamela A. Melroy; Pilot George D. Zamka; and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Douglas H. Wheelock, Stephanie D. Wilson, Daniel M. Tani, and ESA astronaut Paolo A. Nespoli. Mission Specialist Tani would join Expedition 16 Commander Peggy A. Whitson and Flight Engineer Yuri I. Malenchenko, replacing Clayton C. Anderson, who had lived aboard the ISS for five months. Mission goals included installing the Harmony connecting module (Node 2) and moving the P6 segment of the ISS truss, with its solar arrays, to a permanent position at the end of the
In one of the most difficult and dangerous spacewalks ever attempted, NASA astronaut Scott E. Parazynski successfully cut loose a tangled set of wires that had prevented a solar array at the ISS from unfurling properly on 30 October. Parazynski rode on the end of the robotic arm extension, which at 90 feet (27 meters) barely reached the damaged solar wing. The extension placed Parazynski farther away from the ISS than any astronaut had ever been. After 1 hour riding the extension out to the power grid, Parazynski worked for 2 hours, cutting hinge wires and guide wires. Once cut, the 90-foot (27-meter) guide wire retracted smoothly into its reel at the base of the solar wing. Throughout the operation, Parazynski used an L-shaped Teflon stick wrapped in insulating tape to keep the solar wing away, protecting himself from electrical shock. The spacewalk was the fourth and final EVA for the Discovery astronauts.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Fix Ripped Solar Wing,” 4 November 2007; Liz Austin Peterson for Associated Press, “Astronauts Revel in Wing Repair Success,” 4 November 2007.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and Roskosmos head Anatoly N. Perminov signed agreements in Moscow allowing two Russian scientific instruments to fly aboard NASA spacecraft. According to the agreement, the Lunar Exploration Neutron Detector (LEND) would fly aboard NASA’s LRO, which was scheduled to begin a yearlong mission in October 2008. In addition, the Dynamic Albedo of Neutrons (DAN) instrument would travel to Mars aboard NASA’s Mars Science Laboratory (MSL), a robotic rover scheduled to launch in 2009. Designed to search for evidence of water ice, LEND would map concentrations of hydrogen at the lunar surface, or just below it. The DAN instrument would conduct similar investigations on Mars— measuring hydrogen to analyze the interaction of neutrons with the Martian surface.(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft To Carry Russian Science Instruments,” news release 07-219, 3 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07219_combined_Russian_MOU.html (accessed 8 September 2010).)
NASA announced that it had signed a MOU with the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH), entering into an agreement that would enable American scientists to access the ISS to pursue research about human health and disease. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and NIH Director Elias A. Zerhouni stated that the partnership could pave the way for research advances in cancer, Alzheimer’s disease, osteoporosis, and other medical conditions. The MOU marked the first time that NASA had formed a partnership with another agency to use the U.S. segment of the ISS as a national laboratory.(NASA, “NASA and NIH Partner for Health Research in Space,” news release 07-190, 12 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07190_NASA_NIH_MOU.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Michelle Mittelstadt, “NIH, NASA Finish Deal for Research Lab in Space,” Houston Chronicle, 13 September 2007. 135 X Prize Foundation, “Google Sponsors Lunar X Prize To Create a Space Race for a New Generation,” news release, 13 September 2007, http://www.googlelunarxprize.org/lunar/press-release/google-sponsors-lunar-x-prize- to-create-a-space-race-for-a-new-generation (accessed 9 August 2010); John Schwartz, “$25 Million in Prizes Is Offered for Trip to Moon,” New York Times, 14 September 2007.)
108NASA, “X-48B Blended Wing Body Research Aircraft Takes First Flight,” news release 07-165, 26 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07165_BWB_First_Flight.html (accessed 8 June 2010); Boeing Company, “Boeing Flies Blended Wing Body Research Aircraft,” news release, 26 July 2007, http://www.boeing. com/news/releases/2007/q3/070726c_nr.html (accessed 8 June 2010). committee recommended that NASA determine the scope of alleged alcohol-related incidents. The Review Committee had previously reported anecdotally that several astronauts had violated the rule prohibiting members of the flight crew from drinking alcohol or working under the effects of alcohol during the 12 hours before launch. Concurrent with the Review Committee’s study, Director of NASA’s JSC Michael L. Coats had led an internal assessment of behavioral medicine practices for astronauts. The JSC Astronaut Health Care System Review Committee had evaluated JSC’s extensive health care programs for astronauts and had recommended improvements to those programs, such as adding a more extensive behavioral health assessment to the annual flight physical examinations for all astronauts.(NASA, “NASA Releases Findings of Astronaut Health Review,” media advisory 07-92, 26 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_M07092_Astro_Reports.html (accessed 11 June 2010); NASA, “Opening Remarks: NASA Deputy Administrator Shana Dale,” 27 July 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/ 183223main_Shana_Dale%20_opening%20_statement_7-27-07.pdf (accessed 14 July 2010).)
Expedition 14 Commander Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Flight Engineer Mikhail V. Tyurin undertook a spacewalk outside the ISS lasting 6 hours and 18 minutes. In undertaking his 10th spacewalk, Lopez-Alegria set another U.S. record, surpassing Jerry L. Ross’s nine spacewalks. Although Tyurin initially encountered problems with his spacesuit’s cooling system, causing his visor to fog up, he and Lopez-Alegria accomplished several tasks, including repairing an antenna. The antenna had failed to retract on 26 October 2006, when a Russian Progress vehicle docked at the ISS’s Zvezda service module. To ensure the antenna would not interfere with the undocking of the craft in April, Lopez-Alegria and Tyurin partially retracted the stuck antenna and secured
Two U.S. astronauts, Mission Specialists John D. Olivas and James F. Reilly II, conducted the first extravehicular activity (EVA) of STS-117. During the 6-hour-and-15-minute spacewalk at the ISS, the astronauts made power, data, and cooling connections on a new 16-tonne (17.6-ton or 16,000-kilogram) truss segment containing solar arrays. One of STS-117’s objectives was to deliver the new US$367 million solar-power module to the ISS. The ISS partners intended for the arrays to increase the ISS’s power generation substantially and to serve future European and Japanese science modules. Mission managers decided to extend STS-117 two days, in case the crew needed to repair the fabric heat shield on the orbiter’s left tail section. Managers feared that Atlantis’s tail section had sustained damaged shortly after launch.(NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight)”; Jean-Louis Santini for Agence France-Presse, “US Atlantis Astronauts Step Out on Space Walk,” 12 June 2007; Houston Chronicle, “New Solar Array Being Unfurled on Space Station,” 13 June 2007.)
NASA astronauts Michael E. Lopez-Alegria and Sunita L. Williams undertook their third spacewalk outside the ISS in nine days. Over 6.5 hours, the astronauts accomplished their primary task—jettisoning two large thermal covers, folding them with smaller shrouds that had covered an electronics box, and tossing them away from the ISS, so that they would eventually burn up in Earth’s atmosphere. The astronauts also connected cables to a new system that would allow the ISS to share power with a docked orbiter; added a platform intended to hold a storage container; and photographed the docking port. Lopez-Alegria set a new U.S. spacewalking record of 61 hours and 22 minutes. The all-time record of more than 82 hours belonged to Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyov. Sunita L. Williams extended the spacewalking record she had set on 4 February to 29 hours and 17 minutes. The series of spacewalks that had begun on 31 January marked the first time that ISS crew had conducted three spacewalks within such a short time, without a Space Shuttle docked at the ISS.(Mike Schneider, “Astronaut Sets U.S. Spacewalking Record,” Associated Press, 9 February 2007. 8)
Russian cosmonauts Fyodor N. Yurchikhin and Oleg V. Kotov restored two of the three data channels on each of the two computers that had failed on 12 June during the deployment of the solar arrays on the ISS’s new power module. Russian engineers had determined that backup- power supplies for the computers had also failed. While Yurchikhin and Kotov worked on restoring the computers, U.S. astronauts James F. Reilly II and John D. Olivas conducted the third scheduled EVA of the Atlantis Mission STS-117. During a spacewalk lasting 7 hours and 58 minutes, Reilly installed a hydrogen vent on the ISS’s Destiny laboratory, and Olivas repaired a 4-by-6-inch (10.2-by-15.2-centimeter) piece of thermal blanket on Atlantis’s left orbital- maneuvering-system pod. The thermal blanket had loosened during launch. Together, Olivas and Reilly also finished retracting the old solar panels.(NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight)”; Thomas H. Maugh II, “Cosmonauts Reboot Space Station Computers,” Los Angeles Times, 16 June 2007; Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Complete To-Do List on Shuttle, Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 16 June 2007.)
Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski and Douglas H. Wheelock embarked on the first EVA of STS-120. The astronauts installed the Harmony module in a temporary location; prepared the P6 truss for relocation, a task that NASA had scheduled for the second EVA; retrieved a failed radio-communications antenna; and secured one of Harmony’s window covers, which had opened during launch. The spacewalk lasted 6 hours and 14 minutes.(NASA, “NASAfacts; STS-120 (23rd Space Station Flight) Discovery,” http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/216375main_ STS-120.pdf (accessed 29 September 2010).)
Russia marked the 50th anniversary of the launch of Sputnik with veterans of the Soviet space program laying flowers at the grave of Sergei P. Korolev, the man who had created Sputnik, the tiny satellite that launched the space race between the United States and the U.S.S.R. Korolev’s name had remained a secret while he was alive. Ceremonies also included the unveiling of a monument to Sputnik near Moscow, a tour of S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia for schoolchildren, and Roskosmos’s announcement of a special film about the 1957 launch. President Vladimir V. Putin congratulated Russia’s space scientists, reminding them, “the launch of the Earth’s first satellite was a truly historic event, which started a space age.” The RIA Novosti news agency quoted First Deputy Prime Minister Sergei B. Ivanov as stating, “Fifty years in cosmic terms is a mere instant, and yet it fundamentally changed the nature of all humanity.”(Agence France-Presse, “Russia Marks Sputnik Anniversary,” 5 October 2007.)
Soyuz TMA-11 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome at 13:22 (UT) carrying three astronauts—a Russian, an American, and a Malaysian—to the ISS. Upon their arrival at the ISS, American astronaut Peggy A. Whitson, as Commander of Expedition 16, would become the first woman to command the space station. Veteran Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko would join Whitson as a member of Expedition 16, each of the two replacing crew members of Expedition 15. Russian cosmonauts Fyodor N. Yurchikhin, Expedition 15 Commander, and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov, who had been aboard the ISS since 9 April 2007, would accompany Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor on the return flight to Earth. Shukor, an orthopedic surgeon from Malaysia, would conduct experiments on board the ISS, studying diseases and the effects of microgravity and space radiation on cells and genes. Shukor was Malaysia’s first astronaut.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 648, 1 November 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx648.html (accessed 13 September 2010); Mansur Mirovalev for Associated Press, “Rocket Lifts Off for International Space Station,” 11 October 2007.)
The House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing on NASA’s fiscal year (FY) 2008 budget request, receiving testimony from NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin. On 5 February, President George W. Bush had presented to Congress NASA’s proposed US$17.3 billion budget for FY 2008, as a component of the federal budget, including US$4 billion for five Space Shuttle flights and US$2.24 billion for ISS activities. Administrator Griffin urged Congress to fund NASA’s FY 2008 Exploration Systems request fully, enabling NASA to develop the Orion and the Ares-1 crew vehicles. He cautioned that NASA was unlikely to succeed in bringing new exploration capabilities online by 2014 because of several factors, including the cost of retiring the Space Shuttle and making the transition to the new vehicle, the cost of supporting the ISS, and the impact of the overall reduction in funding for NASA mandated by the FY 2007 Continuing Resolution. However, Griffin stated that NASA would continue to “transition the workforce, infrastructure, and equipment from the Space Shuttle to new Exploration systems.” Committee Chair Bart Gordon (D-TN) criticized the Bush administration’s failure to recommend the funding levels necessary to support the exploration initiative, the ISS, the termination of the Space Shuttle program, and the upgrade of the aging Deep Space Network.(U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “NASA’s Fiscal Year 2008 Budget Request,” 110th Cong., 1st Sess., 15 March, 2007, 28, http://origin.www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110hhrg33803/ pdf/CHRG-110hrg33803.pdf (accessed 20 December 2010); U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, “NASA’s ‘Lean’ Budgetary Outlook Will Have Wide-Ranging Impact on Agency Programs,” press release, 15 March 2007, http://science.house.gov/press/PRArticle.aspx?NewsID=1724 (accessed 28 September 2010).)
The House Science and Technology Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to discuss the status and future of the ISS in the context of NASA’s FY 2008 budget request. Subcommittee Chair Mark E. Udall (D-CO) expressed concern about the significant cutbacks in NASA’s ISS research program, warning that these cuts had “potentially serious implications for the productivity of the station as a research facility once it is assembled.” Christina T. Chaplain of GAO testified that NASA had planned 15 more Space Shuttle launches—an average of one every 2.7 months—through 2010, when NASA intended to end the Space Shuttle program. Compared to the existing launch schedule of once every 10.8 months, the new Shuttle schedule would provide little allowance for delays related to mechanical failure or weather. Thomas W. Holloway, Chair of the IISTF, expressed doubt that commercial space vehicles under development would be ready to ferry supplies to the ISS when the Space Shuttle retired. Associate Administrator of NASA’s Space Operations Mission Directorate William H. Gerstenmaier testified that, after the first test flights of the commercial cargo vehicles, scheduled for 2008, NASA would be better able to judge their readiness. Subcommittee Ranking Minority Member Thomas Charles “Tom” Feeney III (R-FL) expressed concern about the loss of skilled KSC workers when NASA ended its Shuttle Program and shifted its focus to the Moon and Mars programs, warning, “We can’t repeat past mistakes—like the Apollo-to-Shuttle transition— where America frittered away hard-earned space-faring skills, which are almost impossible to replace.”
Associate Administrator for NASA’s Exploration Systems Mission Directorate Scott J. Horowitz announced that he planned to leave NASA in December to spend more time with his family. A retired U.S. Air Force colonel and test pilot, Horowitz had logged over 1,138 hours of spaceflight, serving as commander or pilot on four Space Shuttle missions—STS-75 (1996), STS-82 (1997), STS-101 (2000), and STS-105 (2001). At the time he decided to depart NASA, Horowitz was leading NASA’s efforts to develop the next generation of spacecraft, intended to return astronauts to the Moon by 2020. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin accepted Horowitz’s resignation, praising the former astronaut’s tireless contribution to the Vision for Space Exploration. Griffin attributed NASA’s decision to pursue the Ares-1 CLV to Horowitz, calling it his brainchild. NASA planned to use Ares 1 to launch the Orion CEV, the capsule-style successor to the Shuttle. Horowitz had left NASA in 2004 to serve as the director of exploration and space transportation at the aerospace firm ATK. While he was at ATK, he had vigorously supported using the Space Shuttle’s reusable SRB as the basis for the first stage of the Ares-1 CLV. NASA had chosen that design over the Atlas-5 and Delta-4 expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) before Horowitz returned to NASA as its exploration chief in 2005. Griffin had not yet named a successor to Horowitz.(NASA, “Scott Horowitz Announces Departure from NASA,” news release 07-154, 13 July 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_07154_Horowitz_departs_NASA.html (accessed 9 June 2010); NASA Johnson Space Center, “Scott J. ‘Doc’ Horowitz, Ph.D. (Colonel, USAF, Ret.), NASA Astronaut (Former),” http://www.jsc. nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/horowitz.html (accessed 10 June 2010); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s Exploration Chief To Step Down for Family,” Space.com, 13 July 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070713_nasa_ horowitz_updt.html (accessed 10 June 2010).)
Florida police released on bail Lisa M. Nowak, a NASA astronaut and U.S. Navy captain. The police had arrested Nowak the day before, after she threatened Colleen M. Shipman, a captain in the U.S. Air Force. Nowak had perceived Shipman as a romantic rival. NASA placed Nowak on 30-day leave and removed her from her mission duties. Nowak had flown her only mission as a crew member on STS-121 in July 2006, aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. NASA spokesperson Nicole Cloutier-Lemasters explained that, according to its past policy, NASA had screened crew members assigned to the ISS, before, during, and after missions, but had not screened Shuttle crews flying for two-week stints. Although Cloutier-Lemasters said that NASA did not plan to conduct an investigation of Nowak, NASA’s Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale stated that NASA had begun a review of its screening policy. NASA hoped to determine whether it had overlooked indications for concern in Nowak’s case. Dale explained that NASA intended the review process to reveal whether or not astronauts were receiving adequate psychological and medical care and attention.(Mike Schneider and Erin McClam, “Astronaut Charged with Attempted Murder,” Associated Press, 7 February 2007; John Schwartz, “Astronaut’s Arrest Spurs Review of NASA Testing,” New York Times, 8 February 2007.)
NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin selected Christopher J. Scolese to succeed Associate Administrator Rex D. Geveden, who would leave NASA at the end of July to accept the position of President of Teledyne Brown Engineering in Huntsville, Alabama. Geveden had joined NASA in 1990 and had served as Associate Administrator, the number three position in NASA, since August 2005. Before Geveden’s appointment, the position had been vacant for several decades, but Griffin had reestablished it, to provide programmatic integration between NASA’s mission directorates and field centers. At the time of his appointment to succeed Geveden, Scolese was serving as NASA’s Chief Engineer. Scolese had joined NASA in 1987 and had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s GSFC and Deputy Associate Administrator in NASA’s Office of Space Science. In the Office of Space Science, he had directed NASA’s Space Science Flight Program, mission studies, technology development, and the overall contract management of NASA’s JPL in Pasadena, California.
NASA announced the official appointment of William W. Parsons Jr. as Director of NASA’s Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Florida. Parsons became KSC’s ninth director, succeeding James W. Kennedy, who was retiring from NASA. Parsons had served as KSC’s Deputy Director since February 2006. After the Columbia tragedy in 2003, Parsons had led NASA’s Return to Flight effort as Space Shuttle Program Manager at KSC and had contributed to the success of STS-114 in 2005. Parsons had also served as Director of NASA’s Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi and as Deputy Director of NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin remarked that Parson’s experience as a program manager and center director, in addition to his knowledge of NASA’s human spaceflight community, made him the “right person to take Kennedy Space Center through the end of the Shuttle era and into the era of lunar exploration.”(NASA, “Parsons Assumes Role as NASA’s Kennedy Space Center Director,” news release 07-01, 4 January 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jan/HQ_0701_Parsons_KSC.html#at (accessed 14 October 2009); Aero- News Network, “Upgraded: Parsons Tapped as Kennedy Space Center Director,” 8 January 2007.)
The People’s Republic of China launched NIGCOMSAT-1—a communications satellite that China had manufactured for Nigeria—aboard a Long March-3B rocket from Xichang Launch Center in Sichuan Province. The launch marked the first time that China had built and launched a satellite under a contract with another country. China had reportedly secured the US$311 million contract in 2004, in a bidding process that had included 21 companies, in addition to China. The 5.2-tonne (5.7-ton) craft carried four C-band, eighteen Ku-band, four Ka-band, and two L-band transponders, for providing voice, video, and data links to all of Africa, southern Europe, and parts of the Middle East. News reports described the launch as a symbol of China’s broad network of economic relations with African nations, suggesting that the launch signaled China’s wish to cooperate with developing countries in the peaceful use of outer space. Nigerian officials hailed the launch as a breakthrough that signaled the end of the nation’s exclusive reliance on oil. Hammed Rufai, Managing Director of the NIGCOMSAT-1 project for Nigeria, remarked that the satellite would help Nigeria develop knowledge-based industries.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 643; Edward Cody, “China Builds and Launches a Satellite for Nigeria,” Washington Post, 14 May 2007.)
