Astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and A. Christer Fuglesang undertook the third and final spacewalk at the ISS for STS-128. The pair unreeled 60 feet (18.29 meters) of cable in preparation for the Tranquility residential chamber that ISS partners planned to add to the station in early 2010. They also connected GPS satellite antennas and completed a variety of small mundane tasks. Fuglesang, a native of Sweden, became the first astronaut from outside the United States or Russia to participate in more than three spacewalks.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Mission’s 3rd and Final Spacewalk,” 5 September 2009; Agence France-Presse, “Astronauts Conduct Final Spacewalk of Discovery Mission,” 5 September 2009.)
Astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and A. Christer Fuglesang undertook the second spacewalk of STS-128, lasting 6 hours and 39 minutes. The pair collected a new 1,700-pound (771- kilogram) ammonia tank from Discovery, attached it to the ISS, and connected the electrical and fluid lines. The new tank contained 600 pounds (272 kilograms) of fresh ammonia, which would help cool the station’s electrical systems. Olivas and Fuglesang then anchored the old ammonia tank inside Discovery in preparation for its return to Earth on the Shuttle. They had removed the old tank during their spacewalk on 1 September. The pair also had a few “get-ahead” tasks to complete. Fuglesang installed protective covers over cameras on the ISS robotic arm and positioned a portable foot restraint on a solar-power truss, to assist future assembly crews. Olivas was unable to complete his get-ahead task because a cable that he needed was not where flight controllers had expected it to be.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Spacewalk Performed Despite Approaching Space Junk,” 4 September 2009; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Spacewalkers Install Bulky Coolant Tank: Space Junk Not a Threat,” 4 September 2009; William Harwood, “Spacewalk No. 2 Complete,” Spaceflight Now, 4 September 2009.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis launched at 2:10 p.m. (EDT) from NASA’s KSC. The seven-member crew was on the final servicing mission for the HST. STS-125, also known as Servicing Mission 4, comprised Commander Scott D. Altman, Pilot Gregory C. Johnson, and Mission Specialists K. Megan McArthur, John M. Grunsfeld, Michael J. Massimino, Andrew J. Feustel, and Michael T. Good. The mission plan called for the crew to make five spacewalks, to replace gyroscopes and batteries, as well as the Wide Field Camera 2, which had captured most of the images of deep space that had made HST famous. The crew would also attempt repairs of the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS) and of a spectroscope that breaks down the light of stars. Because NASA had not designed those instruments with the intention of repairing them, NASA was uncertain that the repairs would succeed. NASA had developed 116 tools specifically for Servicing Mission 4. HST was located in an orbit 375 miles (603.5 kilometers) above Earth, in a region containing large amounts of space junk. NASA had placed Space Shuttle Endeavour on the launchpad in preparation for a rescue mission, in the event Atlantis sustained damage.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis Launches on a Final Mission to Hubble,” news release 09-104, 11 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-104_Atlantis_launches.html (accessed 20 June 2011); John Johnson Jr., “Atlantis Blasts Off for Final Hubble Mission,” Los Angeles Times, 12 May 2009.)
2011); John Johnson Jr. “NASA Moon Crash Did Kick Up Debris Plume as Hoped,” Los Angeles Times, 17 October 2009. NASA’s ongoing, planned development activities; to consider potential alternative activities; and to formulate options for a safe, innovative, affordable, and sustainable human spaceflight program, once the Space Shuttle Program came to an end. The committee found that NASA had selected the wrong type of rocket and the wrong destination for this program. In the committee’s opinion, NASA should have concentrated on building larger rockets and exploring new places, such as a nearby asteroid or one of Mars’s moons. Augustine explained that NASA could have accomplished either of those goals more quickly than the goals NASA had chosen instead—first, to return to the Moon, within 15 years, and, second, to explore Mars—plans that had appeared sound when NASA developed them in 2005. Because of subsequent budgetary diversions, NASA now lacked sufficient funding for these ventures, and, by September 2014, NASA would need an additional US$3 billion per year for astronauts to travel beyond Earth’s orbit. The commission recommended that NASA extend the life of the Space Shuttle Program until 2011, to complete deliveries to the ISS, and extend the life of the ISS from 2015 to 2020, to allow for more scientific experiments. The report’s main recommendations involved options for the United States’ path forward in space exploration. Three of the committee’s eight members suggested alternative options involving a so-called flexible path, with no Moon or Mars landings. Augustine pointed out that landing on a near-Earth object could occur as soon as the early 2020s. Because of the Moon’s gravity, landing on and returning from an asteroid would require much less fuel than traveling to the Moon. Augustine suggested that NASA might return to the Moon later, not as a major destination, but for training. The committee determined that, if Congress did not make additional funding available, NASA would need to adopt a modest program, involving little or no exploration.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Panel Says NASA Should Skip Moon, Fly Elsewhere,” 23 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, “For NASA, Possible Shifts in Direction,” New York Times, 23 October 2009; see also Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “Seeking a Human Spaceflight Program Worthy of a Great Nation” (report, NASA, Washington, DC, October 2009), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/396093main_HSF_Cmte_FinalReport.pdf (accessed 4 November 2011); Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “See What the Committee is Doing,” http://www.nasa.gov/offices/hsf/related_documents/what-the-committee-is-doing.html (accessed 8 November 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Options and Issues for NASA’s Human Space Flight Program: Report of “Review of U.S. Human Space Flight Plans” Committee, 111th Cong., 1st sess., 15 September 2009, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname= 111_house_hearings&docid=f:51928.pdf (accessed 18 January 2012).)
NASA astronauts Michael J. Foreman and Robert L. Satcher Jr. undertook the first spacewalk of STS-129. They installed a replacement communications antenna on the ISS’s central truss, connected cables and a handrail, and lubricated the wire snares of two devices that grab and move cargo. Because preliminary checks of tiles and panels covering the Shuttle’s wings, nose cap, and underside did not show any signs of serious damage from launch, NASA considered a more detailed inspection unnecessary. Finding themselves 2 hours ahead of schedule, Foreman and Satcher also released a cargo platform—a task that NASA had designated for the second spacewalk. The spacewalk lasted a few minutes longer than its scheduled 6 hours and 30 minutes.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Get Extra Work Done in 1st Spacewalk,” 20 November 2009; James Dean, “Astronauts Finish First Spacewalk,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 20 November 2009.)
ISS Expedition 18 Commander E. Michael Fincke and cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov successfully completed all scheduled tasks in a spacewalk lasting almost 5 hours. Fincke and Lonchakov installed EXPOSE-R (studies of exobiological processes in outer space), a joint European-Russian scientific experiment involving biological materials. They placed the experiment outside the Zvezda service module, which astronauts had been unable to activate during a December spacewalk because of an internal cable problem. NASA astronaut Sandra H. Magnus assisted in the installation of EXPOSE-R from inside the ISS. Fincke and Lonchakov also rotated a container holding a scientific experiment involving Russian materials and trimmed a set of six straps positioned near the Pirs docking compartment, to prevent their interference with incoming Russian vehicles needing to dock. In addition, they photographed the Zvezda module, as part of a survey to assess its condition after nine years in orbit. The spacewalk was Lonchakov’s second, Fincke’s sixth, and their second spacewalk as a team. Fincke had undertaken all of his six spacewalks wearing a Russian spacesuit.(James Dean, “Live in Orbit: ISS Spacewalk Complete,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 March 2009; Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Upgrade Space Station,” Space.com, 10 March 2009, http://www.space.com/6396- spacewalkers-upgrade-space-station.html (accessed 12 May 2011).)
Astronauts Michael J. Massimino and Michael T. Good undertook the fourth spacewalk at HST, attempting to fix the spectrograph and to replace worn insulation on the telescope. To fix the spectrograph, Massimino first needed to remove a handrail, but a stripped bolt hampered his work. Even using various specially designed tools, he was unable to remove the bolt for 2 hours. As a last resort, after engineers at GFSC conducted two tests on a mock-up, Mission Control in Houston instructed Massimino to “use his muscles.” After successfully pulling the bolt off, Massimino tried to install a special plate to remove 111 tiny screws that held the spectrograph’s cover in place, but the battery of one of the tools became depleted. Massimino returned to the Shuttle, swapped out the batteries, and recharged his oxygen supply, but this task set the spacewalk another half hour behind schedule. After Massimino had successfully replaced the spectrograph’s internal electronics power-supply card, the astronauts still faced more than 90 minutes of cleanup and closeout work. Therefore, spacewalk coordinators decided to delay the insulation task until the fifth and final spacewalk. The spacewalk lasted more than 8 hours, the sixth longest in NASA history.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Stuck Bolt, Dead Battery Bedevil Hubble Repairs,” 18 May 2009.)
With the assistance of K. Megan McArthur, who operated the robotic arm, astronauts John M. Grunsfeld and Andrew J. Feustel undertook a spacewalk to upgrade HST for the first time in seven years. The mission was Grunsfeld’s third visit to HST and Feustel’s first space mission. The team’s primary task was to replace the 16-year-old Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 with the new Wide Field Camera 3. Feustel and Grunsfeld struggled with a pair of bolts on the old camera, setting them 30 minutes behind schedule. However, Feustel managed to work the bolts loose without breaking them, which would have blocked installation of the new US$132 million camera.(Mark Carreau, “Spacewalkers Equip Hubble with New Computer,” Agence France-Presse, 15 May 2009; Traci Watson, “Hubble Repair Passes ‘Speed Bump’,” USA Today, 15 May 2009.)
Three new ISS residents arrived at the space station aboard a Russian Soyuz capsule, bringing the outpost’s full staff to six for the first time in its 10-year history. Also, for the first time, each of the major space station partners had a representative on board: Roman Y. Romanenko and Gennady I. Padalka of Russia, Michael R. Barratt of the United States, Koichi Wakata of JAXA, Belgian astronaut Frank De Winne of ESA, and Robert B. Thirsk of CSA. The first ISS crew had arrived in the year 2000, two years after the launch of the first part of the station. Since that time, the ISS had expanded to nine rooms, including three full-scale laboratories, five sleeping compartments, two toilets, two kitchens, and two mini-gyms, making the station 81 percent complete. The increased crew size also ushered in a new era of station operations that would allow astronauts and cosmonauts to focus on scientific research rather than on the assembly and maintenance of the ISS.(Marcia Dunn, “Space Station Crew Finally at Full Staff of 6,” Agence France-Presse, 30 May 2009; Todd Halvorson, “At Space Station, the House Is Packed,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 June 2009.)
Human Space Flight Review Committee Chair Norman R. Augustine held a press conference to present the committee’s findings and final report. The committee had formed in June 2009 at the request of John P. Holdren, Assistant to the President for Science and Technology and Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy. Its purpose was to examine independently
NASA astronauts Nicole P. Stott and John D. “Danny” Olivas undertook the first spacewalk of STS-128, which lasted 6 hours and 30 minutes. The pair completed the EVA early, with all objectives accomplished. They removed from the ISS’s central truss an ammonia tank that had been in use since 2002. Olivas lifted the 1,300-pound (589-kilogram) tank, which measured 5 feet by 7 feet by 4 feet (1.52 meters by 2.13 meters by 1.22 meters), onto the end of the station’s robotic arm, where it would remain until the installation of a fresh pair of tanks during the next spacewalk. The pair also retrieved from ESA’s Columbus laboratory two sets of experiments, so that the Shuttle could return them to Earth. After removing the ammonia tank, Olivas noticed that the index finger of his right glove had begun to fray. Mission Control evaluated the problem and, after determining that the frayed stitching was minor, decided that Olivas could remain outside and continue the EVA. A few minutes later, Stott noticed a high reading of her carbon dioxide levels. She reported that she was not experiencing any symptoms. Mission Control decided that Stott’s suit was operating fine, and that she, too, could remain outside. The astronauts also experienced a 30-minute communication outage with Mission Control because of a thunderstorm at a satellite-relay station in Guam. The spacewalk was Stott’s first. She was KSC’s third employee to become an astronaut and the center’s first employee to embark on a spacewalk.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Spacewalkers Tackle Hefty Tank Removal in Orbit,” 2 September 2009; James Dean, “Ex-KSC Engineer Works Outside ISS,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 September 2009; Stockton Record (CA), “Astronauts Embark on Their First Spacewalk,” 2 September 2009.)
ISS Commander Gennady I. Padalka and NASA Flight Engineer Michael J. Barratt carried out a 12-minute spacewalk inside the station, tying the record for the shortest spacewalk. The record dates to 1965, the first spacewalk ever conducted. Although the men remained inside the ISS, NASA considered the activity a spacewalk because they were working in a vacuum, wearing their Orlan MK spacesuits, connected to umbilicals. Padalka and Barratt’s task was to connect a port in the Zvezda command module, in preparation for the arrival of a new docking module, the MRM 2. The new module, the fourth Russian docking port, would support the increased traffic at the station associated with the full-time crew of six.(William Harwood, “Crew Performs Unusual Spacewalk Inside Station,” Spaceflight Now, 10 June 2009.)
The U.S. Department of Transportation’s Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) announced the finalization of amended certification standards requiring makers of transport category aircraft to have automatically activating icing-protection systems or to provide a method of alerting pilots to turn on the aircraft’s icing-protection system. FAA Administrator J. Randolph “Randy” Babbitt explained that the new rule added another level of safety to prevent the occurrence of a situation in which the pilots of an airplane were unaware of ice accumulation on the craft or did not think ice accumulation on the aircraft was significant enough to warrant activation of ice- protection equipment. The fatal crash of an American Eagle ATR 72 near Roselawn, Indiana, in 1994, had initiated a decade of research by the FAA, NASA, and other entities, leading to the new rule. Ice build-up on the American Eagle’s wings had caused the crash.(U.S. Federal Aviation Administration, “FAA Mandates Timely Activation of Ice Protection Systems for New Designs,” FAA news release, 3 August 2009, http://www.faa.gov/news/press_releases/news_story.cfm?newsId= 10679 (accessed 12 September 2011); John Croft, “FAA Toughens Icing Protection Standards,” Air Transport Intelligence, 4 August 2009.)
NASA astronaut E. Michael Fincke, Russian cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov, and spaceflight participant Charles Simonyi, who had visited the ISS for the second time, landed safely in a Soyuz spacecraft in the steppes of southern Kazakhstan after undocking from the station on 7 April. The Russian federal space agency Roscosmos had delayed the landing for one day after discovering that spring flooding had affected the original landing site. Roscosmos had moved the landing to a location further south. Fincke and Lonchakov were returning from Expedition 18. During that expedition, the ISS had gained full power and had begun water-supply recycling in preparation for the station’s first six-person crew. In addition, the crew of Expedition 18 had performed scientific experiments, including many experiments designed to gather information about the effects of long-duration spaceflight on the human body.
Astronauts Steven R. Swanson and Richard R. Arnold II successfully completed a 6-hour spacewalk, installing the 31,000-pound (14,061-kilogram, or 14-tonne), 45-foot-long (13.7- meter-long) girder with solar arrays, to complete the final piece of the ISS’s structural backbone. Swanson and Arnold helped align the truss while, inside the station, astronaut John L. Philips used a robotic arm to lower the truss into place on the starboard end of the station. Then, Arnold used a high-technology ratchet wrench to link the two pieces of the station. With the new addition, the solar power truss measured 356 feet (108.5 meters). The ISS crew had assembled the truss from nine large segments that the Space Shuttles had delivered between 2000 and 2009. Before reentering the ISS, Arnold and Swanson disposed of four thermal covers from the new framework by tossing them out into space, and then watched the accordion-style radiator on the segment unfold.(Robert Block, “Discovery Astronauts Install Solar Wings,” Los Angeles Times, 20 March 2009; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Go Spacewalking, Install Last Set of Solar Wings at International Space Station,” 20 March 2009; Mark Carreau, “First Space Outing a Walk in the Park,” Houston Chronicle, 20 March 2009.)
NASA astronaut Michael R. Barratt, Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka, and U.S. software engineer Charles Simonyi launched aboard a Soyuz spacecraft from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:49 a.m. (CDT), on a flight to the ISS. Barratt and Padalka would join JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata to form the Expedition 19 crew at the space station. The first space tourist to make a second flight to the ISS, Simonyi had previously visited the station in April 2007. He was flying under a commercial agreement with the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos. Simonyi would return to Earth with Expedition 18 Commander E. Michael Fincke and Flight Engineer Yuri V. Lonchakov, who had been aboard the station since October 2008. The Expedition 19 crew would continue conducting scientific investigations and preparing for the arrival of the station’s first six-person crew.
Astronauts Michael J. Massimino, a mechanical and robotics engineer on this third spacewalk, and Michael T. Good, a former U.S. Air Force test pilot on his first space mission, undertook the second of five planned spacewalks to repair the HST. The spacewalk agenda consisted of the most important task of the 11-day mission—to replace the gyroscopes that kept the telescope pointed in the correct direction—and to replace three batteries. Working from inside the telescope, Good and Massimino had difficulty installing the second set of new gyroscopes and resorted to using a spare that did not initially fit either. The extra work extended the spacewalk to 8 hours—1.5 hours longer than scheduled—making it the tenth longest spacewalk on record.(Dennis Overbye, “Astronauts Work on Replacing Hubble’s Gyroscopes,” New York Times, 16 May 2009.)
ISS Commander Gennady I. Padalka and NASA Flight Engineer Michael J. Barratt undertook a 4-hour, 54-minute spacewalk to install a pair of antennas for automated rendezvous equipment. The astronauts undertook the work to prepare for the arrival of the Russian Mini Research Module 2 (MRM 2), which would serve as an additional docking port for Russian vehicles. Padalka and Barratt also connected each antenna to a series of power cables and photographed them from aboard the long Strela extension pole. Padalka operated the Strela boom, while Barratt took pictures from multiple vantage points, to allow Russian mission control to analyze the antennas and to ensure that the crew had installed them correctly.
Astronauts Steven R. Swanson and Joseph M. Acaba undertook the second STS-119 spacewalk at the ISS, primarily to lighten the workload for future crews. As their first task, the pair loosened bolts holding down batteries at the end of the ISS’s power-grid framework, in preparation for the batteries’ replacement during the next Shuttle visit, scheduled for June 2009. As Swanson and Acaba finished that task, the gyroscopes maintaining the position of the ISS- Shuttle complex became overloaded, setting off an alarm in the ISS. Discovery quickly assumed control with its thrusters, and Mission Control ordered Swanson and Acaba to continue with their tasks. The two astronauts had trouble with their next task, deploying an equipment-storage platform, because Acaba accidentally inserted a pin upside down. Mission Control instructed them to move on to other tasks—installing a global positioning system (GPS) antenna and using an infrared camera to photograph a pair of radiators, one of which had a peeling cover. Before reentering the ISS, Swanson tied down the equipment-storage platform to prevent it from moving around. NASA assembled a team to determine a means of prying or hammering the pin loose during the spacewalk scheduled for 23 March.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Go on 2nd Spacewalk at Space Station,” 22 March 2009; Mark Carreau, “To-Do List Keeps Astronauts Busy on 2nd Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 22 March 2009.)
Astronauts John M. Grunsfeld and Andrew J. Feustel undertook the fifth and final spacewalk of the HST servicing mission. They successfully renewed the telescope’s batteries, which provide power when the solar panels are not receiving light; replaced a fine-guidance sensor; and fitted three thermal blankets to protect the craft’s electronics. The spacewalk was Feustel’s third and Grunsfeld’s eighth—with 58 hours and 30 minutes of spacewalking time, Grunsfeld became the world’s fourth most experienced spacewalker during the HST servicing mission.(BBC News, “Fifth Spacewalk Energises Hubble,” 19 May 2009; Tariq Malik, “Astronauts Give Hubble Telescope One Last Hug,” Space.com, 18 May 2009, http://www.space.com/6714-astronauts-give-hubble-telescope-hug.html (accessed 19 July 2011).)
Progress 32 successfully carried out an automated docking at the ISS Pirs docking compartment, with Flight Engineer Yuri V. Lonchakov monitoring the process from a terminal inside the space station. The two spacecraft linked up flawlessly and the docking required no intervention from Lonchakov.(Tariq Malik, “New Russian Cargo Ship Docks at Space Station,” Space.com, 13 February 2009, http://www. space.com/4777-russian-cargo-ship-docks-space-station.html (accessed 10 March 2011).)
NASA announced that, using NASA’s Aqua satellite, researchers had conducted the first global analysis of the health and productivity of ocean plants. Ocean scientists had used Aqua’s Moderate Resolution Imagine Spectroradiometer (MODIS) to measure remotely the amount of fluorescent redlight emitted by phytoplankton. This research marked the first time that scientists had observed redlight fluorescence over the open ocean on a global scale. The measurements enabled the researchers to assess how efficiently the microscopic plants had been conducting photosynthesis. The data could also enable researchers to study the effect of global environmental changes on phytoplankton. Scientists consider phytoplankton to be the center of the ocean food web, accounting for half of all photosynthetic activity on Earth and playing a critical role in the balance of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Michael J. Behrenfeld, a biologist at Oregon State University, explained that the amount of fluorescent light emitted is not constant but, rather, changes with the health of the plant life in the ocean. Scott C. Doney, a marine chemist from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, added that fluorescence provides insight into how well phytoplankton are functioning within the ecosystem. The new measurement revealed that large areas of the Indian Ocean contain phytoplankton that are experiencing stress from iron deficiency. Scientists observed that phytoplankton fluorescence increases as the amount of iron decreases. Therefore, large portions of the ocean “light up” seasonally, as phytoplankton respond to the lack of iron in their diet.(NASA, “NASA Satellite Detects Red Glow To Map Global Ocean Plant Health,” news release 09-124, 28 May 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-124_Ocean_health.html (accessed 20 June 2011).)
NASA astronauts Michael J. Foreman and Randolph J. Bresnik undertook the second spacewalk of STS-129. The spacewalk, which began late because of false alarms on the ISS overnight, was Bresnik’s first. The pair installed a set of antennas on the Columbus laboratory. The antennas would track ships at sea, relocate a device that measured the build-up of electrical charge outside the ISS, and deploy a cargo-storage platform outside the station. Working ahead of schedule, the astronauts also installed a wireless video system for the cameras used in the helmets of spacewalkers; completed a few odd jobs, such as reconnecting a power cable for a space-to- ground antenna that crew had installed on the previous spacewalk; and deployed a second storage platform outside the ISS, a task that NASA had scheduled for the third spacewalk of STS-129. The excursion lasted 6 hours and 8 minutes.(James Dean, “Second Atlantis Spacewalk Complete,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 November 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “Astronauts Speed Through Second Spacewalk,” Space.com, 21November 2009, http://www.space. com/7579-astronauts-speed-spacewalk.html (accessed 21 November 2011).)
NASA astronauts Michael R. Barratt and Kevin A. Ford used a robotic arm to remove the 13.5- ton (12.3-tonne, or 12,247-kilogram) Leonardo cargo module from Space Shuttle Discovery’s cargo bay. An hour later, the astronauts had successfully attached the module to the Harmony module’s Earth-facing port and had begun the process of checking for leaks and pressurizing a vestibule between Harmony and the cargo module.(William Harwood, “Cargo Module Mounted to Space Station for Unloading,” Spaceflight Now, 1 September 2009.)
NASA announced that a team of NASA and university scientists had achieved the first definitive detection of methane in the Martian atmosphere, confirming that Mars is either biologically or geologically active. Using NASA’s Infrared Telescope Facility and the W. M. Keck telescope at Mauna Kea, Hawaii, the team had detected three spectral features called absorption lines—a definitive signature of methane. Michael J. Mumma of NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, lead author of an article in Science Express, explained that the Martian atmosphere quickly destroys methane in a number of ways. According to Mumma, the discovery of substantial plumes of methane in the northern hemisphere of Mars in 2003 indicated that an ongoing process was releasing the gas. The plumes had dispersed, covering the entire planet, and had dissipated within three years. Mumma explained further that the research team did not have enough information to determine whether a biological process, a geological process, or a combination of the two was producing the methane.(NASA, “Discovery of Methane Reveals Mars Is Not a Dead Planet,” news release 09-006, 15 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-006_Mars_Methane.html (accessed 14 January 2011); Dan Vergano, “Methane Plumes Spotted on Mars May Be a Sign of Life,” USA Today, 16 January 2009.)
Boeing consultant H. Gary Pippin, and other scientists associated with MISSE, a joint project of NASA and DOD, opened two suitcase-like boxes containing samples of mirror and window material, solar materials, paints, polymers, and other materials. Crew members had attached these materials to the ISS in March 2008, and NASA astronauts John D. “Danny” Olivas and Nicole P. Stott had retrieved the materials on 1 September 2009 during an STS-128 spacewalk. Space Shuttle Discovery had returned the materials to Earth on 11 September 2009. Opening the samples in a clean room at LaRC, MISSE scientists saw that some had fared well. However, others appeared bleached or discolored, and some had surface traces of small meteorite impacts. Observing their change in color, Pippin remarked that some samples had failed. The full assessment of the contents of the boxes, requiring ultraviolet light, magnifiers, and the analysis of 50 data recorders, would help NASA scientists select materials for use on future missions. Retired MISSE Chief Scientist William H. Kinard explained that NASA had flown approximately 5,000 samples on the ISS before using them in the design of a space vehicle or satellite. The experiment’s purpose was to determine which materials could survive the extreme conditions of space. With the upcoming retirement of the Space Shuttle, the contents of the two boxes represented the final MISSE mission for NASA’s LaRC.(Diane Tennant, “NASA Opens Suitcase from Space,” Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 21 October 2009; NASA Langley Research Center, “MISSE Suitcases Return Home: Media Invited To View Grand Opening,” LaRC news release 09-083, 14 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/news/releases/2009/09-083.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from NASA’s KSC at 11:59 p.m. (EDT) on STS-128, to deliver supplies, equipment, and a new crew member to the ISS. The STS-128 crew comprised Commander Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow; Pilot Kevin A. Ford; and Mission Specialists Patrick G. Forrester, Jose M. Hernandez, John D. “Danny” Olivas, and ESA astronaut A. Christer Fuglesang. Also aboard was Nicole P. Stott, who would begin a three-month mission in residence at the ISS, replacing NASA’s Timothy L. Kopra. Discovery carried in its cargo bay the Leonardo Multi-Purpose Logistics Module, a pressurized “moving van” that the crew would temporarily install at the ISS. Leonardo would deliver storage racks, materials and fluids science racks, a freezer to store research samples, a new sleeping compartment, an air purification system, and a treadmill named after comedian Stephen Colbert. Colbert had received the most entries in NASA’s online poll to name the station’s Node 3, but NASA had named Node 3 “Tranquility.” As a consolation prize for Colbert, NASA had decided to name the treadmill COLBERT (Combined Operational Load Bearing External Resistance Treadmill).(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Launches To Enhance Space Station Science,” news release 09-196, 29 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-196_STS-128_Launch.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
NASA astronauts David A. Wolf and Thomas H. Marshburn made the second of STS-127’s five scheduled spacewalks, transferring to storage a spare KU-band antenna, a backup 1,300-pound (590-kilogram) coolant-system pump module, and a robotic-arm-transporter drive motor. The tasks were part of an effort to stow critical spare parts, to ensure that the ISS had everything it needed when the Shuttle fleet retired. The 6-hour-and-53-minute spacewalk took longer than expected, causing flight controllers to instruct Wolf and Marshburn to defer their final planned task of installing a television camera on the new JEF platform. Instead, Marshburn installed insulation on cables used to route station power to the Shuttle, and Wolf packed up tools and equipment. Marshburn experienced one potentially dangerous incident during the spacewalk when he lost track of his 85-foot (26-meter) safety tether, but he remained safely attached to the ISS with his 55-foot (17-meter) tether.(Todd Halvorson, “Station Stocks Up on Parts,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 21 July 2009; William Harwood, “Spacewalk No. 2 Ends,” Spaceflight Now, 21 July 2009.)
In the third spacewalk at HST, John M. Grunsfeld and Andrew J. Feustel carried out a set of unprecedented tasks—no astronaut had ever tried to take apart any of HST’s scientific instruments in space. The work proceeded smoothly, unlike the two previous spacewalks, and the astronauts completed all tasks within the allotted 6.5 hours. Grunsfeld and Feustel successfully connected the US$88 million Cosmic Origins spectrograph, a task that required them to remove the corrective lenses that had restored HST’s vision in 1993. The newer scientific instruments had built-in corrective lenses, rendering the 1993 lenses unnecessary. Grunsfeld then fixed the ACS using a set of specially designed tools. Working from a dark work site at an odd angle and wearing stiff, heavily padded space gloves, Grunsfeld cut off a grate and removed 36 tiny fasteners and four circuit boards. The new cards and the power supply pack slid smoothly into place.(Marcia Dunn, “Spacewalkers Pull Off Toughest Hubble Repairs Yet,” Agence France-Presse, 17 May 2009; Traci Watson, “Spacewalkers Easily Pull Off Tricky Hubble Fix,” USA Today, 17 May 2009.)
NASA announced the selection of Dina E. Contella, Scott Stover, and Edward Van Cise as new flight directors to manage and carry out Shuttle flights and ISS expeditions. John A. McCullough, Chief of the Flight Director Office at JSC, remarked that all three new flight directors were senior flight controllers with lead management experience and an average of 10 years of flight-control experience. McCullough added that this group would help NASA transfer the knowledge and experience from the existing human spaceflight programs into the development and execution of the next-generation exploration program with the new Orion spacecraft. Contella had worked for NASA since 1990, when she had begun working in NASA’s cooperative education program while she completed her bachelor’s degree in aerospace engineering. She had served as Space Shuttle and ISS Flight Controller and Astronaut Instructor since 1995, responsible for planning, training for, and executing spacewalks. Since 2008, Stover had supported six Space Shuttle flights for ISS assembly and had led the team that managed the ISS electrical power system. Van Cise had worked with NASA since 2000 in a variety of roles. He had been a member of the Operations Support Officer (OSO) team that coordinated ISS repair, maintenance, and assembly operations; served as Special Assistant to the Director of Mission Operations; led the Mechanisms and Maintenance Training Group, training astronauts and flight controllers in skills and techniques related to the repair, maintenance, and assembly of the space station; served on staff in the Flight Director Program Integration Office; and worked as an ISS Flight Controller for the OSO and for the Telemetry, Information, Transfer, and Attitude Navigation (Titan) groups.(NASA, “NASA Chooses Three New Flight Directors To Lead Mission Control,” news release 09-133, 12 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-133_New_Flight_Directors.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Doug Messier, “NASA Chooses 3 New Flight Directors,” Parabolic Arc, 15 June 2009.)
Former science teachers and rookie NASA astronauts Richard R. Arnold II and Joseph M. Acaba undertook the third and final spacewalk of STS-119 at the ISS. The spacewalk, which lasted nearly 6.5 hours, was the second spacewalk for both astronauts, their first spacewalk together, and their first without Steven R. Swanson. One of their priority tasks was to free the pin that had prevented Swanson and Acaba from deploying an equipment-storage platform during the previous spacewalk on 21 March. Arnold managed to free the pin, but the platform remained stuck. Mission Control ordered them to use four straps to secure the partially deployed platform to the port side of the ISS’s central truss and then to move on to other tasks. Acaba, riding on the end of the ISS’s robotic arm, moved a rail cart from one side of the station’s central truss to the other, in preparation for future assembly and maintenance work. Arnold and Acaba also performed maintenance work on the robotic arm, including lubricating the grappling end of the arm with grease.(Houston Chronicle, “Spacewalkers Leave One Item for Next Team,” 24 March 2009; Todd Halvorson, “Platform Causes Trouble in Space,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 March 2009; Tariq Malik, “Space Teachers Team Up in Spacewalk,” Space.com, 23 March 2009, http://www.space.com/6478-space-teachers-team-spacewalk.html (accessed 13 May 2011).)
NASA announced plans to fund the development of a prototype system to provide aircraft with updates about severe storms and turbulence as they fly across ocean regions. Scientists from the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) based in Boulder, Colorado, in partnership with colleagues at the University of Wisconsin, had developed the system, which combined satellite data and computer weather models with artificial intelligence techniques to identify and predict rapidly evolving storms and other areas of turbulence. One of the system’s artificial intelligence techniques was the so-called random forests technique, a method of short-term forecasting that had proven useful for predicting thunderstorms over land. John A. Haynes, Program Manager in the Earth Science Division’s Applied Sciences Program at NASA Headquarters, explained that turbulence was the leading cause of injuries in commercial aviation. Haynes said that NASA considered the new technique of critical importance to pilots because it used key space-based indicators to detect turbulence associated with ocean storms. Designed to help steer pilots away from intense weather, the prototype system would identify areas of turbulence in clear regions of the atmosphere, as well as in storms. Scientists were incorporating into the system a variety of observations from NASA spacecraft, including data from NASA’s Terra, Aqua, Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM), CloudSat, and Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observations (CALIPSO) satellites. NASA planned to test the prototype system in 2010.
A Russian Soyuz craft launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 10:34 (UT), carrying Canadian Space Agency’s (CSA’s) Robert B. Thirsk, Russia’s Roman Y. Romanenko, and ESA’s Frank De Winne of Belgium on a landmark mission to expand the crew of the ISS from three crew members to six. At the ISS, the Soyuz crew would join ISS Commander Gennady I. Padalka of Russia and Flight Engineers Michael R. Barratt of NASA and Koichi Wakata of JAXA. De Winne, scheduled to replace Padalka as station commander in October, would be the first ESA astronaut to take command of the ISS.(NASA, “New Station Crew Launches on Soyuz; Briefing from Space on June 1,” media advisory M09-094, 27 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_M09-094_ISS_crew_briefing.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Peter Leonard, “Russian Capsule Blasts Off for Space Station,” Associated Press, 28 May 2009; Benoit Finck, “Astronauts Blast Off To Double Space Station Crew,” Agence France-Presse, 28 May 2009; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 667.)
Space Shuttle Discovery launched from NASA’s KSC at 7:43 p.m. (EDT). STS-119 carried the fourth and final set of solar-array wings, which would complete the ISS’s truss when installed. The schedule for the 13-day mission included three spacewalks to install the S6-truss segment on the starboard side of the ISS and to deploy the solar arrays. The seven-member crew was composed of Commander Lee J. Archambault, Pilot Dominic A. “Tony” Antonelli, and Mission Specialists Joseph M. Acaba, Steven R. Swanson, Richard R. Arnold II, John L. Phillips, and JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata. Wakata would remain at the ISS, replacing Expedition 18 crew member Sandra H. Magnus, who had been aboard the station for more than four months. Acaba and Arnold, former teachers who had become fully trained NASA astronauts, were on their first mission, scheduled to undertake critical spacewalking tasks. STS-119 was one month behind schedule; NASA had delayed the launch four times because of fragile valves inside the Shuttle’s propulsion system. On 11 March, NASA had postponed Discovery’s launch because, during fueling, engineers had detected a leak associated with the gaseous hydrogen venting system. Because of the delays, NASA had shortened the STS-119 mission by one day and had dropped one of the four spacewalks originally scheduled.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Launches To Fully Power Space Station,” news release 09-060, 15 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-060_Discovery_launches.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Robert Block, “Discovery Heads to International Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 March 2009.)
Commander Gennady I. Padalka and Flight Engineer Michael J. Barratt, of ISS Expedition 20, landed safely on the steppes of Kazakhstan in the Soyuz TMA-14 spacecraft, following a six- month residency at the space station. During their mission, Padalka and Barratt had presided over the inauguration of the station’s six-person crew, as well as two Space Shuttle assembly and resupply missions. The two missions had included the delivery of new science facilities for expanded research and the arrival of the first Japanese HTV. Also aboard Soyuz TMA-14 was Cirque du Soleil founder Guy Laliberté, who had launched on 30 September with the Expedition 21 crew to spend nine days aboard the ISS. Laliberté had hosted a global Web cast from aboard the space station, to promote his One Drop Foundation. The mission of the One Drop Foundation was to preserve the world’s water resources and to provide global access to clean water. With Padalka’s departure, ISS Expedition 21 Commander Frank DeWinne became the first European to take command of the ISS.(NASA, “Soyuz Landing Caps Historic Space Station Increment,” news release 09-237, 11 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09_237_Soyuz_Lands.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Douglas Birch for Associated Press, “Russian Spacecraft with Circus Tycoon Lands Safely,” 13 October 2009; Todd Halvorson, “European Takes Command of Space Station, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 10 October 2009.)
