X-15 (No. 1) rocket airplane with interim engines established new unofficial world speed record of 2,106 mph, with Joseph Walker, NASA test pilot, at the controls. This topped Captain Apt’s speed of 2,004 mph attained in the X-2 on September 27, 1950.
NASA fired a Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Fort Churchill, Manitoba, Canada, containing an Instrumented payload to measure data on energetic particles during a period of low solar activity.
Parachute designed to slow reentry speed of space capsules successfully tested at a speed of 2,000 mph nfter rocket boost to 30-mlle altitude, over ISglln A1'3, Fla.
Founded in 1912 by Glenn L. Martin, the Martin Co. delivered its last air-plane, a P5M-2, to the Navy, having produced more than 12,000 aircraft and entering the missile/space business with the NRL Viking research rocket in 1948.
X-15 (No. 1) with interim engines and with MaJ. Robert M. White (USAF) at the controls, established a new altitude record for a manned vehicle of 136,506 feet. This topped Captain Klncheioe’s record altitude of 126,-200 feet attained on September 7, 1956, in the X-2 rocket research aircraft.
Aerobee 150-A, a new type, fired from new launch tower at Wallops Station, reached an altitude of 150 miles and achieved rocket performance objectives as well as micrometeorite impact counts.
Exos four-stage rocket launched reached 68-mlle altitude at Bglln AFB, Fla.
USAF Blue Scout rocket fired from Cope Canaveral placed instrumented payload 16,600 miles above the earth, the first of 11 such tests, but no data were received due to radio malfunction.
First Spnrrowbee sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station, lifting 56-pound University of Michigan payload to 260-mile altitude.
U.S. proposed upper atmosphere rocket probes from Woomern Rocket Range In Australia.
Second Iris rocket roso to 140 miles with a payload of 125 pounds from Wallops Station.
Successful firing of a solid-propellant rocket motor using "building block” method was announced by NASA.
NASA LITTLE JOB test flight of Mercury capsule, capsule did not separate from booster.
Army Ordnance five-stage Strongarm sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station, reaching an altitude of 300 miles, although fifth stage did not function.
Unmanned Project Mer-cury spacecraft launched by modified Redstone booster (MR-1) in a suborbital trajectory, impacting 235 miles down-range after reaching an altitude of 135 miles and a speed of near 4,200 mph. Capsule was recovered about 50 minutes after firing.
NERV (Nuclear Emulsion Recovery Vehicle) experiment successfully launched from Point Arguello, Calif., by an Argo D-8 rocket, the first NASA launching at PMR. NERV instrumented capsule reached an altitude of 1,260 miles before landing 1,300 miles downrange where lt was picked up by Navy ships 3 hours later. It reached the highest known altitude that any manmade object had attained to be recovered successfully from space.
Second experimental reactor (Kiwl-A Prime) In the Project Rover nuclear rocket program was successfully tested at full power and duration at Jackass Flats, Nev.
EXPLORER VIII launched into an eUlptlcal orbit from AMR by four-stage Juno It, containing instrumentation for detailed measurements of tbe ionosphere. This was tbe 10th time that JPL-developed upper stage rocket clusters had successfully placed satellites or deep space probes into orbit. (Sec Appendix A.)
NASA announced selection of Plasmadyne Corp. for contract negotiations on a 1-kilowatt electric arc jet rocket engine.
Secretariat of COSPAR released official Soviet data on 27 U.S.S.R. rockets launched in a series of high-altitude ex-periments from a research ship in the Pacific, and a total of 73 rocket launch-ings in the first half of the year I960.
Soviet Taut announced that Russia last month successfully launched a new 4,400-pound-thrust rocket carrying n rabbit and two dogs to a reported altitude of 124.8 miles.
TRANSIT III-A navlga- . tlon satellite, with two Instrumented pay-loads, was destroyed 40 minutes after launch from AMR by Thor-Ablc-Star booster. During November: Under arrangements of tbe AACB (Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board), NASA will utilize existing NASA tracking stations for initial Ceutaur development vehicles and switch to the Advent network (which Is to be planned, funded, and constructed by DOD) when Centaur is operational, perhaps ns early as tbe fourth of 10 development launchings of Centaur.
Javelin four-stage sounding rocket reached an altitude of 600 miles from Wallops Station.
Initial experimental Investigation of the plug-nozzle rocket engine was completed by General Electric, a NASA contractor.
AEC-NASA Nuclear Propulsion Office announced selection of TALANT Industrial team proposal to conduct study of the requirements for a National Nuclear Rocket Engine Development Facility.
NASA selected Avco Manufacturing and General Electric to conduct engineering and development studies on an electric rocket engine.
X-15 (No. 1) rocket research airplane was delivered by North American to NASA for further testing.
U.S.S.R. announced safe resites.	covery of biologic payloads of SPACECRAFT II after 17 orbits, and reported August 15: NASA announced selection of • that 2 dog passengers were in excellent Plasmadyne Corp. for contract negotia- physical condition. This was the first tions on a 1-kilowatt electric arc Jet	successful recovery of life forms from rocket engine.	orbit
AEO briefing held at the Nevada Test Site at Jackass Flats, NeT., for representatives of 26 companies for proposals to study the requirements for a National Nuclear Rocket Engine Development Facility. Existing test facilities are fully committed to tbe development of nuclear reactors.
Kiwi-A No. 3 static test of nuclear rocket propulsion was successfully conducted at A EC Nevada test site, resulting in NASA-AEC call for bids for industrial development phase of Project Rover on November 1,1960.
First flight of NASA's Iris sonudlng rocket successful, designed for 100-pound payloads to altitudes of about 200 miles, from Wallops Station.
