NASA announced that Government-owned Michoud Ordnance Plant near New Orleans would be the site for fabrication and assembly of the first stage of Saturn as well as for making stages for larger booster.
NASA fired Nike-Asp rocket carrying aluminum thermite and sodium pellets to an altitude of 34 miles, one of a series of sodium cloud firings in connection with similar launchings in Italy.
NASA selected Vitro Engineering Co. for negotiation of a design contract for an engine maintenance and disassembly building, one of the facilities to be a part of the National Nuclear Rocket Development Center.
An eight-engine static test firing of the Saturn test booster (SA-Tl) for 113 seconds was completed at Marshall Space Flight Center. During January: International Committee on Geophysics, successor organization to the IGY, meeting in Paris, endorsed proposal for Quiet Sun Year during 1964-65. (IGY had been selected for its intense sunspot activity.)
NASA announced that Ira H. Abbott, Director of Advanced Research and Technology, would retire in January after 32 years service with NACA and NASA. Beginning with the Langley Aeronautical Laboratory in 1929, Abbott became internationally known for his aerodynamic research, in more recent years as supervisor of X-15, supersonic transport, nuclear rocket, and advanced reentry development programs.
At autumn meeting of the National Academy of Sciences in Los Angeles, Dr. Hilde Kallmann-Biji reported on Committee on Space Research report by an international studies group on data discovered by Soviet and American satellites as well as sounding rocket observations including those of Britain and West Germany. Findings indicated that 500 miles in space, temperatures may fluctuate 1,000° F., and that the Earth’s upper atmosphere has distinct day and night variations in density and pressure. During October: A series of some 50 supersonic flights to analyze the characteristics, intensity, and air and ground effects of supersonic booms began at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., under joint sponsorship of the USAF, FAA, and NASA.
Navy YFNB barge was obtained by NASA to serve as a replacement for the Palaemon in transporting of the Saturn booster to Cape Canaveral.
Titan II, an advanced ICBM and the booster designated for NASA’s two-man orbital flights, was successfully captive-fired for the first time at the Martin Co.’s Denver facilities. The test not only tested the flight vehicle but the checkout and launch equipment intended for operational use.
U.S.S.R. announced that third flight of current series of Pacific tests of new multistage carrier rocket was successful.
Pravda article stated that the day was “not far distant when a Soviet human being will rocket into space.”
NASA bidders conference on a contract to produce the booster (S-I) stage of the Saturn vehicle was held at the Municipal Auditorium, New Orleans.
The American Rocket Society presented its major annual awards as follows: Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Medal to Dr. Weraher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center; Astronautics Medal to Comdr. Alan B. Shepard, Mercury astronaut, for his MR-3 flight of May 5; James H. Wyld Memorial Medal to Harrison A. Storms, Jr., of North American Aviation; Propulsion Medal to Robert B. Young of Aerojet-General Corp. for his role in development of Titan II engine; G. Edward Pendray Award to Kraft Ehricke for his contribution to astronautical literature; and Research Medal to Dr. James Van Allen of State University of Iowa for basic research.
U.S.S.R. revealed first details concerning Cosmonaut Gagarin’s orbital space flight on April 12, when application was made to the International Aeronautical Federation (FAI) to have flight made an official world record: Duration, 108 minutes; maximum altitude, 203 miles; launch site, cosmodrome at Baikonur (near Lake Aral); landing site, near village of Smelovka in Seratov region; launch booster, six-engine rocket with total boost of 20 million horsepower.
Plans for the development of a two-man Mercury capsule were announced by Robert Gilruth, Director of NASA's Manned Spacecraft Center. The two-man capsule, to be built by McDon-nel Aircraft Corp., would be similar in shape to the Mercury capsule but slightly larger and two to three times heavier. Its booster rocket was announced to be the USAF Titan II, scheduled for flight test early in 1962. One of the major objectives in the two-man capsule program would be a test of orbital rendezvous, in which the two-man capsule would be put into orbit by the Titan II and would attempt to rendezvous with an Agena stage put into orbit by an Atlas rocket. Total cost for a dozen two-man capsules plus boosters and other equipment was estimated at $500,000,000. Program name later announced as Gemini.
In speech at the American Rocket Society, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson stated: “If I could get one message to you it would be this: The future of this country and the welfare of the free world depend upon our success in space. There is no room in this country for any but a fully cooperative, urgently motivated all-out effort toward space leadership. No one person, no one company, no one Government agency, has a monopoly on the competence, the missions, or the requirements for the space program. It is and it must continue to be a national job.”
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) awarded contracts to North American Aviation and Ryan Aeronautical to develop paraglider recovery system for the Saturn booster, based upon concept developed by Francis M. Rogallo of NASA’s Langley Research Center.
NASA fired a four-stage solid-fuel Trailblazer rocket from Wallops Station, Virginia, in the first of a series of reentry tests. Two stages boosted the rocket to 167 miles; then the other two drove the nose cone down through the atmosphere at 14,000 miles per hour.
First flight model of Saturn booster (SA-1) installed on static test stand for preflight checkout, Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville.
Aerojet-General test-fired large solid-propellent rocket motor which generated a half million pounds’ thrust, at Sacramento, Calif.
First of four scheduled Skylark rocket firings was launched from Woomera in the joint United States-Australian ultraviolet survey of the southern skies.
NASA Aerobee research rocket with University of Michigan payload shot to 252-mile altitude from Wallops Station.
Power run completed the test series on the Kiwi B-1A reactor system being conducted at the Nevada Test Site by AEC’s Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory. Fourth in a series of test reactors in the joint AEC-NASA nuclear rocket propulsion program, Kiwi B-lA was disassembled for examination at the conclusion of the test runs.
NASA Explorer IX placed in orbit by four-stage Scout booster from Wallops Station, the first satellite launching from Wallops, and the first satellite boosted by a solid-fuel rocket. Explorer IX was a 12-foot diameter sphere after inflation at orbital altitude.
Small rocket lift device demonstrated publicly for the first time at Fort Eustis, Va., a rocket belt developed by Bell Aero-systems, which lifted Harold M. Graham in a controlled free flight to an altitude of 15 feet and "a standup landing 150 feet from his starting point.
Ballute (balloon braking system) reentry test of 500-pound Cree vehicle, launched by three-stage Nike rocket, reaching an altitude of 28 miles and a speed of near 1,900 miles per hour, at Eglin Air Force Base, Fla.
Saturn booster firing of 30 seconds using timer at predetermined setting was successful in flight qualification test. During April: The Navy reactivated the former NACA hydrodynamic research facilities at Langley Research Center, to conduct R. & D. on hydrofoils, air-cushion vehicles, hydroskis, catamarans, STOL seaplanes, torpedoes, and underwater rockets. NASA continued investigations at other facilities of Langley of ditching and water landing of space vehicles.
announced that it had fired new, powerful carrier rocket more than 7,400 miles to within less than five-eighths of a mile from its Central Pacific target.
National Rocket Club President H. A. Timken announced proposal to Secretary of the Treasury Dillon to consider a special series of savings bonds and savings stamps to finance the U.S. space program, to be known as series S bonds for space.
Small liquid-fuel rocket was fueled and fired while floating in ocean off Point Mugu in Aerojet-General demonstration of this launching technique.
NASA Administrator James E. Webb and Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric signed letter of understanding confirming the national launch vehicle program, the integrated development and procurement of space boosters by NASA and DOD. It was agreed that neither DOD nor NASA would initiate the development of a launch vehicle or booster for use in space without written acknowledgment of the other agency.
has scheduled “at least two more manned space flights this year, one to circle the Earth, the other perhaps the Moon,” according to Dr. Grigori A. Tokaty, head of Northhampton College of Advanced Technology, London, England. Former director of Russia’s long-range rocket group, Tokaty also stated that the U.S.S.R. was planning to establish “one or two” unmanned lunar stations in 1962.
The Soviet Union announced it had fired fifth multistage rocket 7,500 miles into the Central Pacific, with all stages functioning perfectly and with the nose cone landing in the target area with a high degree of accuracy.
NASA Administrator Webb, speaking to the American Rocket Society, said NASA scientists “are going to consider the rendezvous technique with great care before going ahead with Nova.” Decision on whether to give priority to the rendezvous technique would probably be made by the end of 1961, he said.
Solid-propellent rocket motor generating nearly 500,000 pounds of thrust was fired in a static test of 80-second duration by United Technology Corp. at Sunnyvale, Calif., under USAF contract.
NASA Juno II launched S-45 I ionosphere beacon satellite which did not achieve orbit due to malfunction shortly after booster separation.
Development time schedule for Dyna-Soar was reduced when DOD authorized the USAF to move directly from B-52 drop tests to unmanned and then manned orbital flights. This eliminated the previous interim stage of suborbital flights to be powered by the Titan II booster. USAF announced it was canceling the Titan II development contract held by the Martin Co. and negotiating a new contract for a larger booster.
Saturn SA-T2 booster successfully static tested for 111 seconds at Marshall Space Flight Center.
State Department ruled that Soviet space scientists would not be allowed to visit the American Rocket Society’s Space Flight Report to the Nation in New York on October 9-14, a reciprocal action prompted by Soviet restrictions on American scientists in the U.S.S.R.
First Saturn (SA-1) booster began water trip to Cape Canaveral on Navy barge Compromise after overland detour around Wheeler Dam.
Largest known rocket launch to date, the Saturn 1st stage booster, successful on first test flight from Atlantic Missile Range. With its eight clustered engines developing almost 1.3 million pounds of thrust at launch, the Saturn (SA-1) hurled water-filled dummy upper stages to an altitude of 84.8 miles and 214.7 miles down range. In a postlaunch statement, Administrator Webb said: “The flight today was a splendid demonstration of the strength of our national space program and an important milestone in the buildup of our national capacity to launch heavy payloads necessary to carry out the program projected by President Kennedy on May 25. We in NASA deeply appreciate the contribution by the military services and American industry in achieving this important milestone. * * *” Development of Saturn had begun under Advanced Research Projects Agency auspices in 1958.
Successful test of a new way to steer large-size rockets was announced by United Technology Corp., an experimental method called liquid thrust vector control (TVC), in which a gas or liquid is sprayed into the exhaust path of a rocket engine, deflecting the exhaust and thereby turning the vehicle. The test was made with a 450,000-pound-thrust solid-fuel engine.
Final NASA report on the study proposed for Saturn for use as Dyna-Soar booster was presented to the Air Force.
Static test of 111 seconds’ duration of Saturn booster was successful, the final SA-1 flight qualification test of the S-I stage.
USAF fired an Aerobee sounding rocket from Point Arguello, Calif., out over the Pacific 1,300 miles high and 900 miles toward Hawaii, at which point the rocket released three sets of flares to be photographed from California, Hawaii, and Alaska. Purpose was to provide a more precise knowledge of the location of Hawaii with respect to the North American mainland by means of photogrammetric triangulation of the flare photos.
AEC-NASA jointly announced plans to negotiate with an industrial team for a first-phase contract for the development of the Nerva nuclear rocket engine. Team selected for the Nerva part of Project Rover consisted of Aerojet-General Corp. and Westinghouse Electric Corp.
F-l rocket engine tested in first of firing series of the complete flight system.
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center selected Chance Vought Corp. to build 42 fuel and liquid oxygen tanks for the Saturn booster program.
Enormous reception for Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov in Red Square, Moscow. That evening at a Kremlin reception, Premier Nikita Khrushchev made an impromptu speech in which he asserted that the Soviet Union could construct a rocket with an explosive warhead equivalent to 100 million tons of TNT.
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket fired from Eglin Gulf Test Range by Cambridge Research Laboratory with micrometeorite counting payload.
NASA-AEC Space Nuclear Propulsion Office invited industry to submit proposals for participation in development of Nerva (nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application), a part of Project Rover initiated in 1955 by USAF-AEC.
Atlas booster 111-D, to be used for Ranger I, was erected on the launch pad at Cape Canaveral.
Republic of China announced plans to initiate a rocket research
Segmented solid-propellent rocket engine fired by United Technology Corp. at Sunnyvale, generating over 200,000 pounds of thrust in 80-second firing. Developed under NASA contract, center section of engine contained over 55,000 pounds of propellant, the largest single piece yet manufactured in the United States.
Mercury-Redstone booster for MR-4 flight was erected on pad 5 at Atlantic Missile Range.
Collapse of a lock in the Wheeler Dam below Huntsville on the Tennessee River interdicted the planned water route of the first Saturn space booster from Marshall Space Flight Center to Cape Canaveral on the barge Palaemon.
launched fourth multistage rocket 7,500 miles into the Pacific.
National Bureau of Standards broke ground for new research facility at Gaithersburg, Md., which will include a megapound deadweight testing machine to provide measurement standards for multimillion rocket thrust requirements.
USAF fired a Blue Scout rocket from Point Arguello, Calif., aimed at a point some 27,600 miles out in space and over the South Pole, to measure low-energy protons originating from the Sun.
USAF Atlas E missile made successful 5,000-mile flight at Atlantic Missile Range. The payload included the guidance equipment for the Centaur rocket, radiation sensors, and a nose cone intended for the Minuteman. Data capsule was recovered.
NASA announced decision to launch manned lunar flights and other missions requiring Saturn and Nova class vehicles from expanded Cape Canaveral facilities. Based upon national space goals announced by the President in May, NASA plans call for acquisition of 80,000 acres north and west of AFMTC, to be administered by the USAF as agent for NASA and as a part of the Atlantic Missile Range. Decision followed intensive NASA-DOD survey for launching facilities, including trajectory advantages, overflight or booster impact hazards, air and water transportation, instrumentation support, and cost, time, and land availability advantages. Expansion of Cape Canaveral was noted as first of three major steps in accelerating the U.S. space program, the remaining two steps being a manned space flight research center, and a booster fabrication and test facility.
Soviet Marshal Kiril S. Moskalenko, chief of rocket forces, declared that 95 percent of all Soviet rockets fired reached their targets. (Article in Red Star timed to coincide with first firing of new rocket series in the Pacific.)
NASA Administrator Webb, speaking at the 20th American Assembly, said the accelerated space program was necessary or else “we would see the Russians, with the advantage of their advance position in booster thrust, stay continuously ahead. * * * The cost over the 10 years of the accelerated program will very probably be less than if it were stretched out over 15 years.”
NASA fired first seven-stage Trailblazer rocket from Wallops Station, first three stages firing meteorite to 175-mile altitude and next four stages back through the atmosphere in a high-speed reentry experiment.
NASA selected GE’s Space Sciences Laboratory and Avco Corp. for negotiation of contracts to study feasibility of magneto gas dynamic electric rocket or thermal arc jet rocket engines.
NASA Administrator Webb accepted one of the three President’s Safety Awards for accident prevention during 1960. He pointed out that NASA’s activities involved test flying of experimental aircraft, untried highly explosive fuels, high-voltage electricity, and highly pressurized air and superheated temperatures, in addition to rocket and spacecraft tests and launching and the operation of two nuclear reactors and a cyclotron.
NASA announced that a complete F-l engine had begun a series of static test firings at Edwards Rocket Test Center, Calif.
Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy for 1961 announced as going to three winners for the first time—X—15 rocket research airplane pilots: A. Scott Crossfield, of North American; Joseph A. Walker, of NASA, and Maj. Robert A. White, U.S. Air Force.
In his second state of the Union message President Kennedy reported to Congress regarding the space program: “With the advice of the Vice President, who is Chairman of the National Space Council, we have examined where we [United States] are strong and where we are not, where we may succeed and where we may not. * * * Now is the time to take longer strides— time for a great new American enterprise—time for this Nation to take a clearly leading role in space achievement which in many ways may hold the key to our future on Earth.” President Kennedy set forth an accelerated space program based upon the long-range national goals of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth; early development of the Rover nuclear rocket; speed up the use of Earth satellites for worldwide communications; and provide “at the earliest possible time a satellite system for worldwide weather observation.” An additional $549 million was requested for NASA over the new administration’s March budget requests; $62 million was requested for DOD for starting development of a solid-propellant booster of the Nova class.
Army successfully fired a Nike-Zeus antimissile missile from White Sands Missile Range in the first flight test of all three rocket motors. During November: Studies by General Electric’s Space Sciences Laboratory, under NASA contract, disclosed that the heat barrier encountered by vehicles returning from deep space will be at least 2% times more severe than previously estimated. During November: Textron’s Bell Aerospace Corp. completed 81 flight tests with cold gas one-man propulsion system in USAF C-131 aircraft flying “Keplerian trajectories.”
NASA Robert H. Goddard Space Flight Center officially dedicated at Greenbelt, Md., dedication address delivered by Dr. Detlev Bronk, President of the National Academy of Sciences. It was the 35th anniversary of Dr. Goddard’s successful launching of the world’s first liquid fuel rocket. Mrs. Robert H. Goddard accepted the congressional medal honoring her husband.
After a series of six static firings, the Saturn SA-T2 booster was removed from the static test tower at Marshall Space Flight Center.
In the message of President Eisenhower accompanying his budget for fiscal year 1962, it was said: “In the program of manned space flight, the reliability of complex booster capsule escape and life support components of the Mercury system is now being tested to assure a safe manned ballistic flight into space, and hopefully a manned orbital flight in calendar year 1961. Further test and experimentation will be necessary to establish if there are any valid scientific reasons for extending manned space flight beyond the Mercury program.”
House Science and Astronautics Committee approved $126.6 million additional to the President’s space budget, marking most of the increase for the Apollo program.
The second static firing of the Saturn SA-T2 test booster was successfully completed at Marshall Space Flight Center in an eight engine test of 119 seconds’ duration.
In a luncheon address to the American Rocket Society, Gen. Bernard A. Schriever said: “I have been, am being, and, if the situation is not changed, will continue to be inhibited if our space efforts continue to be carried out under an unnecessary, self-imposed national restriction; namely, the artificial division between space for peaceful purposes and space for military purposes.” Asserting USAF management experience in space systems, General Schriever added: “There is no short cut to the creation of a team of dedicated and experienced men with a tradition of accomplishment.”
Swedish scientists fired a U.S. Areas rocket to 55.8-mile altitude from Arctic Circle test range at Vidsel.
Army Nike-Zeus fired from White Sands Proving Ground met all test objectives, including controlled high-velocity in the atmosphere and evaluation of solid-fuel rocket motors and guidance system.
Army launched Speedball rocket successfully from the island of Roi-Namur on Kwajalein atoll in the Southwest Pacific, the first target rocket to be used in Nike-Zeus development.
Two experiments to measure atmospheric winds, temperature, and density in relatively high altitudes conducted from Wallops Island in two four-stage Argo D-4 rocket launches. Sodium clouds were released at near 120 statute miles and again at 228 miles in first launch, and at 118 and 230 miles in the second launch. French scientists participated by using special optical instruments to observe the brilliant orange and yellow clouds which stirred a rash of public inquiries to newspapers from hundreds of miles around.
Israel fired a multistage solid-propellent Shavit (Meteor) II rocket to an altitude of 80 kilometers, releasing a sodium-cloud meteorological payload.
Iris rocket, new solid-propellent single-stage sounding rocket, failed to attain programed flight from Wallops Island, reaching only 86 miles’ altitude instead of 160 miles.
Marshall Space Flight Center announced that 1,640,000 pounds thrust was achieved in test of F-l rocket engine thrust chamber static firing at Edwards, Calif., a record thrust for a single chamber.
First Italian launching of scientific sounding rocket in cooperative program with United States, a Nike-Cajun launched from a range in Sardinia to a height of over 100 miles, and released a cloud of sodium vapor visible for many miles.
USAF launched an unnamed satellite with an Atlas-Agena booster from Point Arguello, Calif., in first unannounced U.S. satellite launching.
Scientists at Nagoya University, Japan, were reported to be training monkey for space flight next year, hopefully in conjunction with Japanese Government-financed rocket program carried out by Tokyo University’s Institute of Industrial Science.
NASA Administrator Janies E. Webb stated that President Kennedy had ordered a thorough review of the Nation’s space programs. During February: Acoustic test chamber for recording sound of rocket operations and to study human stress limits completed at Environmental Simulation Laboratory, Naval Missile Center, at Pacific Missile Range.
Navy barge Compromise, carrying first Saturn booster, stuck in the mud in the Indian River just south of Cape Canaveral. Released several hours later, the Saturn was delayed only 24 hours in its 2,200-mile journey from Huntsville.
NASA Nike-Cajun rocket launched from Wallops Station, carrying 60-pound payload ejecting explosive charges, which fired at intervals from 20- to 80-mile altitude to provide data on density of the atmosphere.
Aerojet-General Corp. announced first successful underwater launching of a liquid-fueled rocket, an Aerobee fired from a water test basin at Azuza, Calif.
announced completion of its series of Pacific rocket tests with a successful shot of 7,500 miles. Since series began on September 13, Tass had announced a total of eight shots, emphasizing the accuracy of what was described as a “fundamentally new type of guidance system.”
NASA Argo D-4 rocket was launched from Wallops, reaching an altitude of 585 miles and landing 817 miles out in the Atlantic, to gather data on the density of electrically charged helium atoms in the upper atmosphere.
NASA selected United Aircraft to make feasibility study of ion rocket application for long space flights.
Japan’s launch facilities for its rocket research program would be moved from Akita on the northwest coast of Honshu to Kagoshima on the southern tip of Kiushu, according to an announcement by Hideo Itokawa at the Thul International Symposium on Rockets and Astronautics in Tokyo.
Goddard Space Flight Center and Geophysics Corp. launched Nike-Cajun rocket from Wallops Station with 60-pound payload that reached 90-mile altitude in a study of electron density and temperature in the upper level of the atmosphere.
Army Nike-Zeus antimissile rocket with active second stage successfully fired at Point Mugu, Calif.
NASA-USAF-USN rocket research X-15 flown to 169,600 feet by Joseph A. Walker, NASA pilot, the highest altitude ever reached by man and which included 2 minutes of weightlessness at the top of his climb. The X-15, powered by XLR-99 rocket engine designed to thrust it to 50 miles altitude and speeds of up to 4,000 miles per hour, was only run at three-quarters throttle. March SO: USAF announced reduction of the B-70 program contract commitments to North American, Westinghouse, and other firms. Five major subcontracts were canceled and four others sharply reduced.
NASA announced that instrumented Venus probe to be launched next year would be launched by an Atlas-Agena B rather than a Centaur rocket as originally planned.
Discoverer XXXII was placed into polar orbit; its capsule contained components of USAF satellite systems. This marked the 100th successful firing of the Thor booster rocket.
Reported that Navy had been launching telephone poles with rocket boost in test of floating launching requirements.
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator, said in a radio interview that a second Venus probe had been added to NASA’s 1962 program as insurance for the first probe scheduled in August. Both probes would be the Mariner R, the reduced-weight version resorted to because of time slippage in the Centaur booster program. Dr. Seamans also said the United States plans three attempts to land instrumented packages on the Moon in 1962. During December: General Electric announced operation of the largest solar thermionic power system at GE’s solar test facility near Phoenix, Ariz. Early tests generated an output of 12.18 watts and unit has potential efficiency of 15 to 20 percent of the total solar energy input.
NASA Bios (biological investigation of space) payload launched by Argo D-8 booster rocket from Pacific Missile Range, but veered sharply off course 57 seconds after launch.
Plans to launch a Japanese Kappa 6 sounding rocket within a year announced by Yugoslavia.
NASA announced the completion of the preliminary flight rating test of the Nation’s first liquid-hydrogen rocket engine. The engine, the RL-10, was designed and developed by Pratt and Whitney, of United Aircraft, for the Marshall Space Flight Center, and 20 captive firings were completed within 5 days under simulated space conditions, consistently producing 15,000 pounds of thrust. RL-10, previously known as XLR-115, was initiated in October 1958 and over 700 firings were conducted in its development.
