aec-dod jointly announced that repair work on launch facilities at Johnston Island would delay further high-altitude nuclear tests for some weeks. Damage occurred July 25 when Thor rocket and its nuclear warhead were deliberately destroyed on the pad.
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of nasa Biotechnology and Human Research, told conference of Manufacturing Chemists’ Association that nuclear rocket fuel “. . . may eventually make it an attractive matter to bring lunar ore to the earth for processing. . . .” Nuclear fuel would reduce the cost of each pound of payload.
Alexander V. Topchiev, vice president of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, died in Moscow. Winner of the 1949 Stalin Prize and twice winner of the Order of Lenin, Topchiev was believed to have played a major role in the development of new rocket fuels and had attended many important international conferences since 1960. He had recently declared that “war is no longer possible” and had advocated East-West collaboration on nuclear space propulsion.
Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, presented cash invention awards totaling $1,750 to 5 employees on behalf of the nasa Inventions and Contributions Board. Award of $750, highest at msfc to date, went to engineer Billy C. Hughes for feeder restrictor for gas-bearing gyros to be used for Saturn guidance platform. Other inventors honored were John R. Rasquin and Robert J. Schwing-hamer ($500 jointly) for device that electronically measures roll during rocket assembly; Wilhelm Angole and Hans G. Martineck ($400 jointly) for an electrical cabling system; and Martineck ($100 singly) for plug and connector for miniaturized circuits.
usaf announced launch of unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena booster from Vandenberg afb. This was 100th launch with Thor as space booster, 93 of which were considered successful. To date, Thor launched more satellites and probes into space than all other boosters combined, including pioneer i space probe, explorer vi scientific satellite, pioneer v space probe, and tiros i weather satellite as Thor-Able vehicle; and echo i balloon-satellite, oso i, ariel, telstar, and four Tiros satellites as Thor-Delta. Thor-Able-Star (Vanguard-derived upper stages) combination launched series of usn navigation satellites, Army communications satellites, and tri-service anna geodetic satellite. With Agena upper stage, Thor boosted series of usaf satellites as well as Canadian alouette satellite for nasa.
In regular press conference, President Kennedy announced that the U.S.S. Skate and U.S.S. Seadragon, nuclear-powered submarines based in different oceans, had made underwater rendezvous beneath the ice at the North Pole. In answer to questions on the present and future significance of the flights of vostok iii and iv, President Kennedy said: “Well, we are second to the Soviet Union in long-range boosters. I have said from the beginning—we started late; we’ve been behind. It’s a tremendous job to build a booster of the size that the Soviet Union is talking about, and also of the much larger size which we're presently engaged in in the Saturn Program. “So we are behind. We’re going to be behind for a while. But I believe that before the end of this decade is out, that the United States will be ahead. But it’s costing us a tremendous amount of money. We’re putting a tremendous effort in research and development; but we just might as well realize that when we started—we started late. “Last year, as you know, we made a decision to go to the moon, with bipartisan support, and it’s going to take us quite a while to catch up with a very advanced program which the Soviets are directing . . . thereV no indication the Soviets are going to quit .... “But we’re in for some further periods when we’re going to be behind. And anybody who attempts to suggest that we’re not behind misleads the American people—we’re well behind—-but we are making a tremendous effort. “We increased, after I took office, after four months, we increased the budget for space by 50 per cent over that of my predecessor. The fact of the matter is that this year we submitted a space budget which was greater than the combined eight space budgets of the previous eight years .... “. . . we are spending for military purposes in space three times what we were in 1960—about $1,500,000,000. The two, at least at present, the two important points that should be kept in mind are the ability to build a large booster which can put a large satellite into atmosphere. That is being done, nasa is doing that, though there has been, of course, under Titan III contract, a booster program for the military. “In addition, the guidance, navigation, etc., that’s extremely important. That we are making a major effort in. And so that I recognize that there are those who oppose this program and then suddenly a month later say we ought to suddenly go ahead on a different basis. “The fact of the matter is that 40 per cent of the R and D funds in this country are being spent for space. That’s a tremendous amount of money and a tremendous concentration of our scientific effort. “I’m not saying that we can’t always do better. But I think the American people ought to understand it’s billions of dollars we’re talking about which I believe a month ago a prominent— mentioned as a great boondoggle. “I think it’s important, vital and there is a great interrelationship between military and peaceful uses of space. But we’re concentrating on the peaceful use of space which wlli also help us protect our security if that becomes essential. . . .”
Test flight of first Atlas-Centaur rocket canceled because of heavy cloud-cover at Cape Canaveral.
Astronomer Dr. Carl Sagan told American Rocket Society, meeting in Los Angeles, that there was a statistical likelihood that earth had been visited at least once by intelligent beings from other worlds. In interview, he suggested that successful planetary civilizations endure for perhaps a hundred mlliion years and that, as the societies advance, they reach farther from their respective planets into space. He predicted man would begin interstellar travel in about 100 years—in star ships, powered by hydrogen-fusion ramjet engines and built in space.
nasa announced establishment of an on-site management unit of some 100 persons at the Space and Information Systems Division Plant of North American Aviation at Downey, Calif. It will be an element of the nasa Western Operations Office of Santa Monica. The Downey office is to expedite nasa contractor decisions and actions essential to development contracts such as the Apollo lunar-landing spacecraft and the second stage for the Advanced Saturn booster.
First International Symposium on Rocket and Satellite Meteorology opened in Washington, D.C. Attended bv some 500 delegates from more than 20 nations, the conference was sponsored by the World Meteorological Organization, the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, and the Committee on Space Research of the International Council of Scientific Unions. It was hoped that the symposium would lead to an international sounding rocket program during the International Year of the Quiet Sun in 1964-65.
aurora 7 with Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) as pilot, launched on MA-7 orbital mission by Atlas booster from Cape Canaveral, the second U.S. manned orbital flight and the fourth U.S. manned space flight. Almost faultless countdown, launch was delayed only briefly by ground fog, and Mercury spacecraft was placed into orbit at 17,532 mph (apogee: 167.4 miles; perigee: 99 miles; period: 88.3 minutes). Astronaut Carpenter performed series of space science and technical development experiments including visual and photographic observations of star fields and “white particles,” consumption of solid foods, release of tethered multi-colored balloon to test sighting, and observation of separated Atlas booster. 81,200-mile flight featured attitude stabllization and control pilotage for completion of three orbits, and monitoring of control-systems fuel for proper retrofire attitude. Re-entry caused landing impact point over 200 miles beyond intended area and beyond radio range of recovery forces. After landing, Carpenter egressed through top of capsule and climbed on inflated raft awaiting rescue, to be joined by two usaf paramedics, Airman John T. Heitsch and S/Sgt. Ray E. McClure, who inflated Stulken collar to prevent capsule from sinking. After three hours on water, Astronaut Carpenter was picked up by a helicopter from U.S.S. Intrepid, and his capsule was retrieved by the destroyer Pierce. Astronaut Carpenter was reported in good physical condition, and flown to Grank Turk Island in the Bahamas for 48-hour debriefings and medical examinations.
nasa launched Aerobee research rocket with 213-lb. payload containing four scientific experiments from Wallops Station. Reaching an altitude of almost 125 statute miles, the nose cone was recovered by an S-62 helicopter some 52 miles down range.
Unnamed dod spokesman said dod was preparing a list of exceptions to its ban against disclosing information on military space shots. New list of exceptions would provide for information about both launch and subsequent performance of usaf, usn, and U.S. Army scientific research vehicles. Specifically included were X-20 (Dyna Soar) manned space vehicle; Project West Ford (orbiting metallic filaments); space projects to gain scientific data; Transit navigational satellite; Project Anna geodetic satellite; and U.S. Army scientific rocket launchings from White Sands Missile Range, N.M.
Two-stage Caleb rocket successfully air-launched over pmr from Navy F4H Phantom jet piloted by Lt. A. Newman (usn), Caleb reaching an altitude of 1,000 miles with 120-lb. nrl payload designed to measure ion composition of the earth’s upper atmosphere. Project Hi-Hoe, of which this shot was a part, was a series of inexpensive air-launched high-altitude probes under development by the Naval Ordnance Test Station, China Lake.
nasa’s tiros vi weather satellite was placed in orbit by three-stage Delta vehicle launched from Cape Canaveral at 4:45 PM edt (apogee, 442 mi.; perigee, 425 mi.; period, 98.7 min.; inclination, ranging between 58.3° north and south latitude). Orbit was believed too low for satellite’s 9,120 solar cells to be unduly damaged by artificial radiation zone created by U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion in July. By midafternoon, pictures taken by tiros vi’s two television cameras were being incorporated with ground data into conventional weather forecasts. Weather Bureau reported quality of the photographs was “as good, if not better than that of any taken by the five previous Tiros satellites.” The launching marked the sixth straight success in Tiros program and the eleventh straight successful satellite launching by the Delta rocket.
X-15 No. 2 flown at 3,511 mph and to about 73,000 feet by Major Robert Rushworth (usaf) with 103 seconds of rocket power in heat resistance test. Temperature of tail surface was reported to have reached near 1,250° F.
Saturn SA-3 reached 104-mi. altitude in ballistic flight from Cape Canaveral, the fully-fueled S-I stage performing as planned. Upper stages were filled with water simulating weight of live stages. At peak altitude, rocket was detonated by radio command and the ballast water was released into the ionosphere, forming massive cloud of ice particles several mi. in diameter. From the cloud experiment (Project Highwater II) scientists hoped to gain data on atmospheric physics. This was third straight test-flight success of nasa’s Saturn and first flight with maximum fuel onboard. Vehicle generated 1.3 million-lb. thrust on flight of 4 min., 55 sec.
Launching of telstar marked tenth straight successful flight of the 3-stage Delta rocket. The history of Delta goes back to the Thor-Able and the earlier Vanguard, from which it acquired its upper stages. Originally designed as an interim booster when nasa ordered twelve Deltas from Douglas Aircraft in April 1959, it achieved what nasa Administrator Webb called “the greatest level of reliability of any of our launch vehicles . . . .” The following satellites were orbited by Delta boosters: echo i, tiros ii, iii, iv, and v; explorers x and xii; oso i; ariel i; and
High-altitude nuclear test in U.S. Operation Dominic was made in Pacific test area, the sub-megaton device carried by Thor rocket to estimated altitude of 30 to 40 miles, aec reported two Soviet nuclear explosions also occurred, one a high-altitude test over central Asia and the other an atmospheric test over Soviet Arctic.
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, nasa Deputy Administrator, said in first annual Theodore von K arm an Lecture of the American Rocket Society: “The costs of the presently approved [space] program increase next year to about six billion dollars if current time schedules are maintained. It would not be possible to include the development of a [manned] space station now without still larger resources assigned to the space program. I personally believe that the next large manned space flight project [after Project Apollo manned lunar landing] will be this one rather than extensive exploitation of the moon or manned expeditions to the planets. This might change if the early lunar exploration returned surprises in the form of natural resources of use on earth. “I think it will now be appreciated that the present rather arbitrary subdivisions of our program will coalesce, for the manned space station wlli be useful for both manned and unmanned scientific exploration and could be the site of observation of weather or of communications relay stations . . . .”
In Cleveland ars meeting, Associate nasa Administrator Robert Seamans stated that decision on the lunar-orbit rendezvous (lor) would allow time to develop a larger Nova booster than previously contemplated.
Maj. Robert M. White (usaf) was awarded the Flying Tiger Pilot’s Trophy in recognition of his record 314,000-ft.-altitude flight in the X-15 rocket research aircraft.
During Fiscal Year 1962, ending this date, North American Aviation, Inc., received highest dollar-value contracts from nasa— $199.1 million worth of contract awards. Other top contractors were McDonnell Aircraft Corp., with $68.4 mlliion; Douglas Aircraft Co., $68.3 million; and Aerojet-General Corp., $66.3 million. During June: fa a proposed a regulation to restrict firings of the 5,000	amateur rocket clubs in the U.S. Beyond firing safety precautions, faa is con 1	''	' 1	' '	^	‘ " altitude of over five miles.
Attempt to launch Anna geodetic satellite by Thor-Able-Star rocket was unsuccessful.
nasa selected Sverdrup and Parcel of St. Louis as contractor for the design criteria and initial master planning for the Mississippi Test Facility, the 13,500-acre site that would eventually contain 6 or more static test stands for testing booster stages of Saturn and Nova vehicles.
Ranger III lunar shot postponed because of technical difficulties with Atlas booster rocket.
Donald F. Conaway, national executive secretary of American Federation of Television and Radio Artists, announced he had requested a conference with European counterparts to discuss minimum pay scales for performers appearing on future Telstar satellite relays. He added: “Telstar is a great challenge. We cannot realistically set an international rate for performers until many problems are settled with the countries.” During July: Outfitted in pressure suits in a simulated space environment, five nasa scientists of msfc and msc completed study determining how an astronaut could work on J-2 rocket engine during actual space flight, at Rocketdyne. Maintenance, repair, replacement, and adjustment of components of the hydrogen-fueled J-2 were performed along with research on the design of special tools and pressure suits.
In speech to the National Rocket Club in Washington, George Low, nasa’s Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, outlined the three methods of manned lunar missions (direct, earth-orbit rendezvous, and lunar-orbit rendezvous) and indicated that a nasa decision would shortly be forthcoming as to which would be used in the Apollo program.
usaf announced that an unidentified statellite using a Thor-Agena B booster was launched from Vandenberg afb.
usaf launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., a satellite employing a Thor-Agena B booster combination, nasa Satellite Situation Report indicated this satellite attained orbit and decayed on July 7, 1962.	'
usaf selected proposals submitted by United Technology Corp. for the 120-inch solid motor and stl-arma for the guidance efforts to be placed in Titan III which wlli serve as a large space booster. Contracts were contingent upon final program approval.
nasa Aerobee 100 sounding rocket launched at White Sands Missile Range (wsmr) by Jet Propulsion Laboratory (jpl), the rocket reaching 46-mi. altitude in successful experiment to measure ultraviolet ray airglow spectrum.
National Rocket Club announced the establishment of the Dr. Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award, an annual competition in the history of rocketry and astronautics, the first such competition in the field of history.
Sweden launched U.S. Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, first of series of U.S.-Swedish cooperative program for peaceflli exploration of the upper atmosphere, the rocket reaching 68-mi. altitude after launch from KronogSrd range in northern Sweden. Fifteen minutes after launch, canister containing sample cloud particles was recovered; particles would be analyzed to provide information on composition and origin of noctilucent clouds.
Reported in Tass that a Soviet expert on rocket propulsion, not mentioned by name, had said: “The creation of powerful rockets has been full of pitfalls. Our investigations and experiments have not always been successful—far from it. There have been difficulties ...”
tiros v launched into orbit by Thor-Delta booster from Cape Canaveral, faulty guidance system placing it into elliptical orbit (apogee: 604 mi.; perigee: 367 mi.; period: 100.5 min.) instead of 400-mi. circular orbit. Cloud-cover pictures transmitted to tracking station at Wallops Station on early orbits were of excellent quality, tiros v was expected to chart the origin, formation, and movement of hurricanes, typhoons, and other storms during the August-September peak tropical storm period.
Composite I, the Navy’s 5-in-l satellite package, was launched from amr but failed to achieve orbit when the 2nd stage of the Thor-Able-Star booster rocket misfired.
Drew Pearson referred to Cosmonaut Titov’s recent denial of Pearson’s report of February 23, 1962, that five Russian cosmonauts had been lost in previous manned space flight attempts. He pointed out that the unsuccessful attempts were not orbital shot, rather were suborbital “rocket rides” such as that of Cdr. Alan Shepard.
Tave (Thor-Agena Vibration Experiment), flown with Thor-Agena launching alouette satellite on Sept. 29, measured low-frequency vibrations to Agena stage and spacecraft interfaces during Thor boost phase, it was reported. Tave provided “. . . data verifying the techniques used by Goddard and Lockheed in predicting the launch vibration environment of the Thor-Agena B rocket. Demonstration that these techniques were sound is most important in designing future experiments and structures for the Thor Agena vehicles,” Goddard project experimenter James Nagy said. Goddard Space Flight Center had designed, built, tested, and shipped 200-lb. Tave in only 20 days.
First successful reactor tests using liquid hydrogen as coolant were performed by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory at the Nuclear Rocket Development Station (nrds), Jackass Flats, Nev. “Cold flow” series of reactor tests involved operation of Kiwi-B reactor, previously conducted only with gaseous hydrogen. Liquid hydrogen as a propellant is planned to power the Nerva nuclear engine being developed for Projects Rover and Rift.
In an interview with fourteen American newspaper editors, the text of which was released, Premier Nikita Khrushchev asserted that showing of documentary film on the Soviet antimissile missile to the Communist-sponsored Peace Conference last week had been overruled by those who felt its showing “might have been misunderstood” as a warlike gesture. “Had the people been shown this film,” Khrushchev said, “they would have seen what kind of a machine it is. You can say our rocket can hit a fly in outer space.”
Technical difficulties with third stage of Thor-Delta booster postponed launching of Oso satellite at amb.
United Technology Corp. fired 35-ton segmented solid booster for a duration of 130 seconds, developing thrust of slightly more than 100,000	lbs for the entire burning time.
Second successful high altitude U.S. nuclear test in Operation Dominic was conducted near Johnston Island in the Pacific, a low-yield explosion at altitude of between 20 and 30 mi. Specially-built rocket with Sergeant motor was used to loft the nuclear warhead.
usaf announced launching of an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, Calif., using a Thor-Agena B booster.
In a Pentagon ceremony, Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., was awarded the Navy’s astronaut wings and a new Marine Corps device—a winged rocket superimposed on a globe—that would also be given to all future Marines who orbited the earth in a space capsule.
Faulty valve in MA-8 spacecraft was replaced by technicians, a repair which required removal of Mercury capsule from the Atlas booster. Astronaut Walter M. Schirra’s orbital space flight was planned for October 3.
Premier Khrushchev claimed that the U.S.S.R. had a new “invulnerable global rocket,” announced the orbiting of cosmos i (the 16th Russian satellite), and stated that the U.S.S.R. would carry out new atmospheric nuclear tests if the U.S. resumes its atmospheric tests. Tass released a news story on the new satellite, giving its orbital data as apogee, 609 mi.; perigee, 135 mi.; period, 96 min.; and inclination, 49° to the equator. A scientific payload included measurements of meteoric impacts, low-energy solar radiation, earth’s radiation belts, cosmic rays, earth’s magnetic field, short-wave radiation from sun and other celestial sources, and atmospheric cloud patterns.
Second joint U.S.-Sweden sounding rocket launched from Kronog&rd site in project to gather data on noctilucent clouds, the Nike-Cajun rocket sending instrument-packed nose cone 43.4 miles (70 km.) high before it parachuted back to earth.
In a speech to the American Ordnance Association, Dr. Glenn Seaborg, aec Chairman, said that nuclear energy provided the most feasible means of accomplishing long voyages in space: “To perform long-range, manned missions, it is essential that we increase the specific impulse (amount of thrust per pound of propellant) of the propulsion system well beyond the values that can be achieved with chemical combustion. . . .” He stated that a hydrogen-fluorine rocket system, now in research phase, can provide up to approximately 475-lbs. thrust per pound of propellant (kerosene-oxygen—300 lbs.). A nuclear rocket, which utllizes hydrogen (through its heat exchanger system) could provide highest specific impulse of 800 and above. He reviewed progress of Project Rover and Nerva.
Fifty-five delegates from the U.N. toured the Atlantic Missile Range at the invitation of the State Department. Six Communist countries were represented, but delegates from the U.S.S.R. had declined at the last minute. Among the sights were the U.S.-U.K. satellite scheduled for launch that day but postponed because of trouble in the second stage of the Thor-Delta booster, the Saturn rocket being prepared for launching, and the Project Mercury site and control room.
Third successful static-test firing of “Old Salty”—an H-l engine that had been submerged in salt water for four hours before each of its test runs. Purpose of tests was to determine feasibility and costs of recovering, rebuilding, and reusing booster engines as opposed to cost of new engines. Early results indicated that engines could be recovered and rebuilt at a cost of about 10% of new engines.
At Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson pointed out areas in which international cooperation should begin in outer space. “As we attempt to look 25 years into the future, we catch visions of breathtaking journeys in large man-made planets around the sun to Mars and Venus—of a new freedom of movement of man across millions of miles of space—of a permanent colony on the moon and of large space stations or space forts at key locations for the conduct of space research, for aid to space navigation, and for rescue operations.” Major awards of the National Rocket Club were presented: the premier Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy was presented by Mrs. Esther C. Goddard and the Vice President to Robert R. Gilruth, director of Project Mercury; the National Rocket Club Award was given to the New York Times; the Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Memorial Award was given to the Radio Corp. of America for its design and construction of the Tiros meteorological satellites; and the Astronautics Engineer Award was given to William G. Stroud of nasa’s Goddard Space Flight Center for his contribution to the technology of meteorological satellites.
Samuel K. Hoffman, President of Rocketdyne Division, naa, received the Spirit of St. Louis Medal from the American Society of Mechanical Engineers for his “contributions to aviation, aerospace and rocket industries through the development of the first major long-range rocket engine.”
Titan I liquid-fueled engine strapped to the side of a 175-ton solid-fuel rocket engine and the configuration test-fired by Aerojet-General Corp. to evaluate the compatibility of liquid and solid engines for the usaf’s Titan III space booster. The configuration generated 700,000 lbs. of thrust.
An Australian rocket with five cameras was launched from Woomera as tiros iv passed overhead. The rocket’s camera took photographs of clouds from 80-mile altitude while tiros iv made simultaneous photography of cloud cover from 400-mile altitude.
Thomas F. Dixon, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, in a speech on the Apollo Program at San Jose, California, outlined nasa’s progression of flight programs leading to goal of a manned lunar mission before 1970, relating the X-15, Ranger, Surveyor, Mercury, Gemini, and rocket propllision developments to the Apollo program.
16th of Project Firefly series of high-altitude rocket launchings was conducted at Eglin afb, Fla., the two-stage Nike-Cajun rocket releasing chemicals at about 50-mi. altitude. Chemicals caused formation of artificial cloud which ground stations tracked to determine upper atmosphere movements.
U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, meeting in Geneva, set up a ten-nation working group under the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee to examine international exchanges of scientific information on outer space. Takeo Hatanaka of Japan was named chairman; other nations represented were the U.S., U.K., U.S.S.R., Belgium, Chad, France, Hungary, Romania, and the United Arab Republic. Another group, chaired by W. A. Sarabhai of India, was set up to examine the U.S. proposal of an international research rocket range to be established near the Equator.	...	.
nasa launched three-stage, solid-fuel Ram-B (Radio Attenuation Measurement) rocket from Wallops Station, Va., all contact with the vehicle lost 11 sec. after second-stage ignition. Project Ram was designed to provide information on communications blackout during space vehicle re-entry.
nasa launched 2-stage Aerobee sounding rocket from Wallops Station to an altitude of 130 miles to obtain planning data for future solar physics projects.
Dynamic model” study on one-fifth-scale Saturn rocket at nasa’s Langley Research Center offered useful concept for testing structural characteristics of the future Nova rocket. As reported by Homer G. Morgan, application of varying frequencies to the “Baby Saturn” while suspended as if in free flight provided clues on structural vibration capable of transmitting false indications into the vehicle’s guidance system. The two successful test firings of the Saturn demonstrated value of this research. After test of a “Baby Nova” for structural efficiency, Morgan said, construction of an operational booster could be expedited. A full-scale Saturn model had been similarly tested at msfc.
Israel Finance Minister, Levi Eshkol, speaking in Washington, D.C., said that the “missile race has entered the Middle East” and Israel must be prepared to defend itself “no matter what the cost.” He said: “When Colonel Nasser stands by Egyptian rocket launchers and boasts they are trained in our direction, we dare not mistake this for an idle propaganda boast.”
U.S.S.R. Presidium of the Supreme Soviet declared April 12, anniversary of the first Soviet space flight, to be a national annual holiday in Russia. In announcing ceremonies for Cosmonautics Day m the Soviet Union, Leonid Korneyev reviewed the U.S.S.R.’s space program from its beginning in April 1932, with the formation of a group to study jet propulsion. Between 1932 and 1941, Korneyev pointed out, the U.S.S.R. had developed 118 different liquid-fuel rocket engines.
United Technology Corp. experimented with hypergolic ignition system, spraying highly reactive fluid into nozzle end of solid-propellant rocket motor. Fluid immediately ignited the motor, which developed more than 100,000-lbs. thrust in the test.
usaf launched its fifth unidentified satellite employing an AtlasAgena B booster, from Point Arguello, Calif. In Washington, the State Department said the satellite would be registered with the U.N. if it went into orbit and stayed in sustained orbit.
Japanese Foreign Ministry announced it had filed protest with U.S.S.R. against Soviets’ establishing of restricted areas in the Pacific for its rocket tests. Japan said barring ships and aircraft from the areas violated rights of other nations to the open seas.
nasa-aec designated the Jackass Flats area of the aec Test Site as the Nuclear Rocket Development Station. Placed under management of the joint nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo), the new station has been used since 1959 for ground tests of Kiwi reactors.
Announced that Georgia Nuclear Laboratories’ nuclear reactor had been licensed by aec to operate at one megawatt. Laboratories would participate with Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. in development of nasa’s Rift rocket stage.
Atlantic Research Corporation introduced new Archer solidpropellant sounding rocket for use during International Year of the Quiet Sun (iqsy), 1964-65. Archer successfully completed its initial flight to 75-mi. altitude carrying 35-lb. payload, at Pt. Mugu, California. Flight testing would be completed early in
First of a series of 80 rocket probes to determine wind patterns over Cape Canaveral initiated by nasa with launch of a single-stage Nike to 80,000 ft. where it laid down a white smoke screen for subsequent photographic study.
dod announced successful static firing of the Thiokol-developed acceleration rocket for usaf’s X-20 manned space glider. X-20 previously known as Dyna Soar.
usaf Titan II rocket flew 5,000 miles in its third success of five test launchings. All test objectives were met on the 30-min. flight from Cape Canaveral to target area near Ascension Island in the South Atlantic Ocean.
Escape-velocity payloads with the nuclear-engine Rift as the 3rd stage on an Advanced Saturn booster wollid be more than double that of a 3-stage, all-chemical Advanced Saturn and higher than that of the Nova 12-mlliion-pound-thrust vehicle, according to testimony given to a subcommittee of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics by Harold B. Finger, nasa’s Director of Nuclear Systems.
nasa and Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Eglin Gulf Test Range, Fla. Intended to measure winds by sodium vapor method, rocket rose to 117-mi. altitude and emitted a fair vapor trail.
usaf launched unidentified satellite with an Atlas-Agena B booster from Point Arguello, Calif.
Paresev (Paraglider Research Vehicle) flown at nasa Flight Research Center. First manned vehicle designed to be towed aloft and released like a conventional glider, Paresev was towed to 6,000-ft. altitude by Stearman biplane. Released, the craft was flown back to Rogers Dry Lake bed in 3 min. 44 sec. by nasa project pilot, Milton 0. Thompson. Paresev flight program provided data on (1) flare and landing capabilities; (2) stability and controllability; and (3) pilot training. Possible uses of the paraglider concept included recovery of future spacecraft and rocket boosters.
Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., and Cosmonaut Gherman S. Titov visited the White House and toured the Mall in Washington, D.C. At joint press conference at the National Academy of Sciences, Glenn and Titov both spoke about possible international cooperation in manned space flight, Titov suggesting that the diplomats would first have to reach agreement on disarmament. Titov said that the Soviet press conference on August 14, 1961, held at Ludnicki, at which the President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Matislav Keldysh discussed the rocket boosters of vostok ii, contained all useful information available on the Soviet rockets. Titov also said that the released photograph of vostok ii was of a mockup.
Air Force announced the award of a contract to Pan American World Airways for operation and logistic support of a Rocket Range Test Facility at Fort Churchill, Canada. Operated by the U.S. Army for the past five years, the Fort Churchill Test Range wlli transfer to usaf operational contract on July 1 of this year and will be managed by the Office of Aerospace Research. The facllity was originally established as a joint Canadian-U.S. project to support the International Geophysical Year.
European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) formally came into being when a convention was signed in London between Great Britain, France, West Germany, and Italy to develop the rocket vehicle to launch a satellite from Woomera, Australia, in 1965. First stage would be the British Blue Streak rocket, second stage the French Veronique, third stage would be developed by West Germany. The Netherlands, Belgium, and Australia were expected to join the organization soon.
nasa signed three letter contracts with naa’s Rocketdyne Division for further development and production of the F-l and J-2 rocket engines. The contracts provided: (1) $1 million for long lead-time items in F-l engine r&d; (2) $3.4 million for early production effort on 55 F-l engines; and (3) $1.7 million for early production work on 59 J-2 engines. Ultimate value of the final contracts, extending through 1965, would be about $289 million.
Thor booster carrying nuclear warhead for atmospheric test (Operation Dominic) was destroyed on pad at Johnston Island; reportedly there were “no injuries to personnel” and “no hazard from radioactivity.”
David J. Mann of Thiokol Chemical Corp. told American Chemical Society that Thiokol was developing new rocket fuel, oxygen difluoride, 15% more powerful than current rocket fuels. Used as oxidizer with such substances as diborane or monomethylhy-drazine, oxygen difluoride could save 7 ft. in length and 350 lbs. in weight on an Apollo-type launch vehicle. Other claimed advantages were improved storability and capacity to remain in liquid form under wider range of conditions than possible with liquid hydrogen/liquid oxygen. New fuel’s density would permit large amounts to be stored in smaller volume.
Revealed that world’s first attempt to flight-test an ion rocket engine was made on usaf Scout launching from pmr during the past week (perhaps 12/18/62), according to the Washington Post. Malfunction limited value of the test but launching marked beginning of new phase of space flight. Electric propulsion, with low thrust over long periods of time and of light weight, can propel large payloads, once boosted into space, for long distances at greater speeds than heavier chemical rockets with heavy fuels.
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, Calif., using a Thor-Agena B booster.
U.S.S.R. announced it had launched mars i, a 1,970-lb. space probe on seven-month flight to Mars. Launched with an “improved booster” into parking orbit around the earth, mars i was hurled into escape trajectory when vehicle engines re-ignited. Tass reported mars i was flying as planned on its course toward Mars. “All systems are functioning normally and orders sent to the station [i.e., probe] are well received and obeyed.” Main tasks of the probe were interplanetary exploration, establishment of interplanetary space radio communications, photographing the Martian surface and relaying the photographs back to earth by radio. “Telemetric, measuring, and scientific instrumentation will be automatically activated in conformity with the flight program by radio commands from the earth,” Tass said. The flight had been preceded by an unsuccessful launch attempt the previous week, unidentified dod sources said, (nasa Administrator James E. Webb stated in September that two Soviet attempts to launch Mars probes had failed in October 1960.)
afcrl scientists launched a second artificial meteor by means of a multistage rocket fired from Wallops Island. The meteor traveled at a re-entry speed of 12 kilometers per second, exceeding that attained in the previous experiment of April 21, 1961.
usaf revealed that three “plastinauts,” plastic dummies of human astronauts, were undergoing tests at Kirtland afb preparatory to being sent into space. Plastinauts in space would be used to determine radiation hazards to astronauts. During early October: J-2 liquid-hydrogen rocket engine successfully completed its first full-duration static firing (more than four minutes) at Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc. J-2 engines will be clustered to power S-II stage of Advanced Saturn vehicle.
Atlas rocket for manned orbital flight MA-8 was static-fired successfully for 11 seconds at Cape Canaveral.
Radio signals to Venus probe mariner ii, nearly 1.5 million mi. from earth, repositioned the craft and fired an onboard rocket to send the probe on desired trajectory toward Venus. Launched August 27, the 447-lb. interplanetary probe would have missed Venus by 233,000 mi. if the mid-course maneuver had not corrected its path. Signals from jpl’s Goldstone Tracking Station were sent after 24-hr. delay for scientists to determine that the spacecraft’s antenna was pointing to earth and not the moon. Assuming that its corrected course was nominal, it was estimated that mariner ii would come within 9,000	mi. of Venus December 14, covering about 180,200,000 mi. through space and relaying scientific data on interplanetary space and Venusian atmosphere.
nasa launched first two of six tests of the performance of the Canadian Black Brant sounding rocket. The first carried a payload to an altitude of 58 miles above Wallops Station, the second reached 62 miles altitude.
Sparobee sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station with 90-lb. payload to measure electron and neutral particle temperatures at 75 to 225-mi. altitudes. Vehicle reached peak altitude of 214 mi. and payload impacted in Atlantic Ocean about 217 mi. away. Secondary objectives were measurement of ion and neutral particle density and flight testing of newly designed Thermosphere Probe system. Experiment was joint project of University of Michigan and nasa Goddard Space Might Center.
Thomas Dixon, Deputy Associate Administrator of nasa, told Liquid Propulsion Symposium in San Francisco that nasa was studying large liquid-propellant rocket engines, beyond the 1.5 million-lb.-thrust F-l engine, that would be necessary for manned planetary flight. Pointing out the unacceptability of simply scaling up the F-l engine to produce the required 20 to 30 million-lb. thrust, since it would then measure about 60 ft. high and 45 ft. nozzle diameter, Dixon cited need for “new and imaginative approaches for propulsion in the future .... nasa will emphasize advanced research that could culminate in the development of these giant engines for the future.” He added that current nasa research projects in advanced propulsion were making progress. “These studies wlli assess current work on advanced propulsion concepts and point out areas where new concepts need to be investigated.”	_	_
nasa confirmed Rift nuclear rocket stage would be manufactured in renovated dirigible hangar at Moffett Field nas, Calif. To be used to flight-test nasa-aec Nerva engine, Rift was being developed under technical direction of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center with Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. as prime contractor. Rift would be flight-tested in 1967-68 as top stage of Advanced Saturn (C-5) launch vehicle.
RL-10 rocket engine successfully static-fired in second test at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Cluster of the liquid-hydrogen engines would power second stage (S-IV) of the Saturn C-l.
dod and nasa signed an agreement that neither agency would begin the development of a launch vehicle or a space booster without the written acknowledgment of the other.
' Joint U.S.-Japanese sounding rocket launching at Wallops Station, Va., was postponed because of high winds.
Reported that nasa had selected Aerojet-General’s Algol solidpropellant motor to power Little Joe II booster, which would be used to flight-test the command and service modules of Apollo spacecraft.
Among the 22 scientists and engineers honored at Franklin Institute’s Medal Day ceremony, Philadelphia, were: Dr. Wernher von Braun, co-recipient of an Elliott Cresson Medal for his contributions to design and development of liquid-propellant rocket engines; Dr. James G. Baker, co-recipient of a Cresson Medal for his contributions to design of cameras for satellite tracking and aerial mapping; Dr. Wilbur H. Goss, recipient of Howard N. Potts Medal for engineering designs and technical supervision leading to development of first successful supersonic ramjet; and Dr. Charles H. Townes and Dr. Arthur L. Schawlow, recipients of a Stuart Ballantine Medal for their concept of an operable solid-stage, optical maser.
Titan II rocket launched by usaf from Cape Canaveral scored its fifth successful test flight in seven attempts.
Four German scientists, including Eugen Saenger, former director of Stuttgart Institute of Physics, West Germany, were reportedly employed by Egyptian government to direct Egypt’s new rocket design and development program.
Filth attempt to launch nasa’s Centaur space booster was canceled at the last second at amr. Engines on the Atlas first stage had been ignited when an automatic detection device spotted a malfunction and shut off the engines.
Astronaut Scott Carpenter flew simulated MA-7 mission in “Aurora 7” capsule mated to Atlas booster.
Governor Nelson Rockefeller, addressing New York State Associated Press Association, proposed establishment of New York state science and technology foundation “to stimulate industrial expansion through research attuned to the space age.” Mid-October: J. Thomas Markley, Apollo project officer at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, announced details of space facility to be established by nasa at White Sands Missile Range (see Sept. 17). To be used in testing Apollo spacecraft’s propulsion and abort systems, wsmr site facilities would include two static test-firing stands, a control center blockhouse, various storage and other utility buildings, and an administrative services area. October 16: Nike-Apache two-stage sounding rocket carried 65-lb. instrumented payload to 103-mi. altitude, in nasa launching from Wallops Island, Va. Primary objectives of the flight were to measure ionosphere electron density and temperature and to obtain data on the ion density and conductivity of the ionosphere.
nasa’s tiros iv launched by a 3-stage Thor-Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral into a near-circular orbit with an apogee of 525 miles and perigee of 471. tiros iv featured the same basic types of equipment as in previous Tiros satellites, including cameras for cloud-cover photography and infrared sensors to measure temperatures at various levels in the atmosphere. Principal innovation was a camera with new type of wide-angle lens covering an area 450 miles on a side, which was expected to provide minimum distortion, nasa press conference reported that quality of tiros iv pictures was good.
General Dynamics/Convair reported developing a new laser with increased pulse rate. When perfected, new laser would be able to machine and trim any material with greater speed and accuracy than available by any other means. Ocober 12: usaf Titan II rocket achieved all test objectives in flight from Cape Canaveral. This was fourth success in six test launchings of the rocket, a modified version of which will be used in nasa’s Project Gemini beginning in 1964.
Four-stage Journeyman rocket carried 145-lb. payload to 1,058-mi. altitude, from nasa Wallops Station. Primary experiment was measurement of the intensity of RF energy at medium frequencies; secondary experiment was measurement of electron densities in the upper ionosphere and investigation of possibility of using ionosphere as a focusing medium in future radio astronomy mapping experiments. Payload landed about 1,323 mi. from launch site in the Atlantic Ocean.
Reported that nasa had drafted for review by other Government agencies a policy statement on measures being studied for the prevention of rocket booster parts surviving re-entry, possibly injuring life and property on earth. Fragments of MA-6 booster had surprisingly survived re-entry. Measures, as reported, included programed booster destruction, perhaps at the cost of payload weight.
Rehbar II sounding rocket launched from site near Karachi, a continuation of U.S.-Pakistan joint program. First launching of Nike-Cajun sounding rockets carrying sodium vapor payloads was June 7.
usaf launched an unidentified satellite with a Thor-Agena B booster from Vandenberg afb.
Recent Soviet article discussed various methods the U.S.S.R. has been studying for sending a man to the moon in the current decade. The earth-orbital rendezvous method was reported as considered the most reliable, but consideration also has been given to the direct ascent method, using the “Mastodon” rocket. No decision has been made public.
usaf launched satellite from pmr with Thor-Agena booster.
nasa scientists Theodore P. Stecher and James E. Mulligan reported at cospar meeting that “a complex series of solar events” in November 1960 caused the inner Van Allen radiation belt to “dump” its captive high energy particles along the earth’s magnetic field. This event disrupted a rocket experiment, but it detected an ultraviolet aurora with almost no visible counterpart. Indications were that the inner belt was soon refilled and returned to “normal.”
Two gsfc scientific sounding rockets launched from Wallops Station. An Iris research rocket launched with test instrumentation did not achieve programed altitude and landed 175 statute miles downrange. A four-stage Argo D-4 launch vehicle carried 78-lb payload to an altitude of almost 530 statute miles to record the intensity and distribution of radio noise above the ionosphere at extremely low frequencies.
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, addressing National Rocket Club, asserted: “Developing the right kind of space program is a continuing job in the Department of Defense. . . . The difficulties encountered do not relate to problems of principle. The problems are questions of specifics. There are tough decisions of choice to be made. We have to weigh effects on other activities, make careful estimates as to time, determine rates and select the projects to be pursued. . . . The current rate of investment in space by the Department of Defense reflects our best judgment as to which projects are dictated by specific requirements and those which should be carried on for general development purposes. ... As projects become more precisely defined and funding and time estimates can be firmed, and as requirements become clearer and more specific, then efforts are focused on those most pressing and most promising. . . .”
usaf would undertake “development program to advance the technology of large solid propellant rocket motors” under recent nasa-dod agreement, dod announced. Program was designed to “keep open the possibility of expedited development” in case large solid-propellant motors should be required for future space boosters. Principal effort would be devoted to providing techniques for and proving feasibility of manufacturing, handling, transporting, and firing motors measuring 260-in. diameter and capable of about six million lbs. thrust.
nasa announced appointment of Bob P. Helgeson as Chief of the Nevada Extension of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo-n), effective August 1. As Chief of the Nevada Extension, Helgeson will direct construction and operation of Nuclear Rocket Development Station (nrds), national site for testing nuclear rockets.
A four-stage nasa Scout rocket carried P-21A probe payload 3,910 miles into space and 4,370 miles downrange from Wallops Station, Va. In 97-minute flight measurements were taken of the ionospheric electron density profiles, ion density, and types of ions, data needed to improve communication between earth and space.
A Blue Scout booster combination space probe was launched from Point Arguello, Calif., by the Air Force. No details were released.
Scientists at Hughes Aircraft Co. displayed Surveyor lunar probe at American Rocket Society, the probe containing redesigned payload weighing about 114 lbs. as compared to originally designed payload weighing 220 lbs. Payload of instruments would be placed on the moon in late 1964. Dr. Leo Stoolman, Surveyor project chief for Hughes, said reasons for redesigning Surveyor instrument package were difficulty in Centaur launch vehicle program and decision to include only instruments that would directly assist U.S. manned lunar landing program.
Titan II underwent a successful 20-second full-power captive firing at Cape Canaveral and was considered ready for its first flight test in about a week. usAF-developed Titan II produced 430.000	lbs. thrust in its 1st stage; the 2nd stage would add another 100.000	lbs. thrust; compared with 400,000 lbs. for the Atlas E and 380,000 for Titan I. Titan II, already selected as booster for nasa’s 2-man Gemini capsule, burns storable fuels that emit a stream of hot, clear gases rather than flame.
Aerobee sounding rocket launched to 140-mi. altitude at White Sands Missile Range (wsmr), N.M., by usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories, with objective of studying x-radiation from the moon. X-rays expected from the moon were blanketed by much stronger source in general vicinity of constellation Scorpius. Analysis of data from sensors indicated the radiation is in form of soft x-rays that do not penetrate earth’s atmosphere below 50-mi. altitude. Data also seem to indicate the sensors may have detected a second x-ray source on the galactic rim. afcrl planned a second rocket flight for October to verify results of this experiment.
30th sounding rocket launched by three-man team at McMurdo Station, Antarctica, the program calling for 60 Areas rocket launchings at rate of one a week. Purpose of launchings was to obtain information on sudden warming of upper atmosphere that occurs during Antarctic spring.
Prof. G. V. Petrovich, Soviet rocket specialist, wrote in Komsolakaya Pravda that within a few decades the solar system wlli seem no more forbidding than once-formidable Antarctica does today. When the solar system is conquered, man wlli be able to undertake interstellar flignts. Noting that the rockets boosting vostok iii and vostok iv into orbit were 20,000,000 horsepower, he predicted that during the Twentieth Century rocket liners would be built with engine capacity greater than 1,000,000,000 horsepower.
House of Representatives passed a bill (H.R. 9485) to amend the Space Act of 1958 to designate March 16 as National Goddard Day, commemorating the date in 1926 when Dr. Robert H. 114 Goddard launched the first successful liquid-fuel rocket. The bill was then referred to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences.
usaf launched an unidentified satellite employing a Thor-Agena B booster from Vandenberg afb.
Soviet Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky, executed in 1937 on Stalin’s orders and exonerated in 1956, was honored in the official military newspaper, Red Star. It was pointed out that in 1932 Tukhachevsky insisted on the development of rocket engines and that he persisted in this effort until purged.
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Can., under direction of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. Second stage failed to ignite, so rocket reached altitude of only about 9.5 mi.
usaf announced that it had begun negotiation with United Technology Corp. for development of solid-fuel motors for use in Titan III space booster.
Rodney D. Steward was named RL-10 rocket engine program manager at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. Steward replaced William D. Brown, who resumed full-time duties as deputy chief, Engine Management Office, msfc.
Dr. Ivan A. Getting, President of Aerospace Corp., told National Rocket Club in Washington that the U.S. space program had been plagued from the beginning by an artificial “dichotomy” that assumed peaceful activities in space were “pure” and military activities were “evil.” “We know, all the world knows, that we have no intention of exploiting space for reasons of aggression. But now the Russians are demonstrating to the world that their space exploits are straightforward demonstrations of raw military power. . . . “We in the United States need to reaffirm our traditional position—but with pride instead of seeming shame—that our presently great military strength is the most potent force in the world and that it is working 24 hours a day to help keep the peace. ...	_ “If our strength is to be maintained we must have the military tools that are best suited to help keep the peace . . . operational however and whenever and wherever necessary—in space, in the atmosphere, under the seas, or even underground. “We need to restate the historic peacetime military role of sharing in exploring the frontiers . . . now in space . . . and that this sharing be on a basis of both cooperation and also some healthy competition. ... “We must recognize that many practical space missions have both military and civilian uses; that the exploitation of space for these missions necessarily involves both the development and continuing operation of these systems, and that as a consequence, each should be evaluated on the basis of how it can be realized most effectively from the standpoint of overall national benefit. “It will take our best efforts in an overall unified plan. But to assure success there must be no dichotomy in space any more than has been in any other worthwhile national undertaking ))
Subcommittee of House Committee on Science ana Astronautics issued report on solid-propellant rocket motors for Nova-class vehicles: “If the cancellation of this development program [solids for Nova] is based on the cost factor alone, then the committee feels that nasa should review the events of the past. For it was this approach in the development of our icbm that gave the U.S.S.R. their superbooster and the resultant lead in space exploration which the U.S. is still struggling to overcome. The United States cannot afford a second setback of this magnitude. . . . “The committee is struck by the large amount of manpower and time that both the dod and nasa have devoted to coordination in trying to reach an agreement and the extended delay in starting even the most basic development program.” Committee recommended giving nasa the funding responsibility for continuation of solid-propelled motor effort, since there exists no direct mllitary requirement for the large boosters.
Draft convention presented to Australia covering joint use of the Woomera Rocket Range by space research program of the western European nations.
U.S. patent (No. 3,008,154) was granted to Dr. Vladimir K. Zworykin for a rocket to be used in detecting strength and polarity of electric fields in clouds. Such data could then be used in control of cloud movements and in effecting weather changes. Patent was first applied for in 1948 but until now was kept secret at request of dod. Dr. Zworykin is a consultant to the Princeton Laboratories of rca and honorary vice president of rca.
In address at Wheeling, West Virginia, Thomas F. Dixon, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, pointed out that nasa and dod “cooperate closely. For example, we have established a national launch vehicle program to provide the rocket power that both civilian and defense activities require. United States policy demands that every possible effort be made to perserve space as a peaceful resource for all mankind. We must not lose sight, however, of the fact that manned space flight involves facilities, vehicles, and techniques that may well be significant for national defense. . . . “Our landing on the moon will be a 240,000-mile step forward in the great adventure of space conquest. No one can say how far we will ultimately go, but I assure you of this—we are on our way to making the United States pre-eminent in space as well as on earth.”
nasa launched a Nike-Cajun rocket from Wallops Station, Va., which released an 80-mile-long sodium-vapor cloud to measure air density and wind direction in the upper atmosphere.
nasa announced that John Stack, Director of Aeronautical Research, would retire June 1 after 34 years of Federal service with naca and nasa. No successor was announced. Mr. John Stack achieved world-wide eminence for his wind-tunnel research and conception of the rocket airplane as a research tool, beginning with the X-l and the D-558, and culminating with the X-15. He was awarded the Collier Trophy in 1951 for solution of the transonic wind tunnel problem. In 1947, he shared the Collier Trophy with Maj. Charles Yeager and Lawrence D. Bell for the X-l which made the first flight through the speed of sound. Stack also received many other awards, including the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award of the ias and the annual medal of the Swedish Society of Engineers. He was a fellow of the ias and the Royal Aeronautical Society (England).
Nike-Zeus antimissile was shot outside earth’s atmosphere and successfully maneuvered with controlled blasts of rocket exhaust, in test over the pmr.
nasa announced that sea damage to Wallops Station, Va., occurring earlier in the month was not extensive, and that rocket firings would be resumed in a few days. Although launch pads and some tracking gear on the island itself had been damaged by water, the more important tracking and data acquisition facilities on the mainland were undamaged.
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station to measure high-altitude winds and temperatures, the payload consisting of 12 special explosive charges which were ejected and detonated at intervals from 24- to 57-mi. altitude.
Testimony before the Joint (Congressional) Committee on Atomic Energy revealed management difficulties on Project Pluto nuclear-powered vehicle, to fly at 2,000 mph within the atmosphere. Dr. Leland Haworth, member of aec, testified that aec was “awaiting a firm decision” from dod on whether the project would be continued. Reactor for nuclear ramjet rocket, under development since 1956, had been successfully ground-tested in Nevada. Dr. Harold Brown, director of dod research and engineering, said dod hoped that a decision could be reached “within a month.” An estimated $500 million would be required to continue the project through flight-test phase.
nasa indicated it would begin series of flights with an inflatable paraglider in mid-1963. Flights would provide information on frequency and size of micrometeoroid particles in space and allow post-flight laboratory study of impacts caused by such particles. Paraglider would be launched by Aerobee research rocket from White Sands Missile Range (wsmb) to height of 700,000 ft., and would descend to earth at speed of mach 5. Its re-entry path would be almost straight down—at an angle of 82°. Inflated paraglider would be 14-ft. long with span of 18 ft.; it would weigh 170 lbs. during launch and 85 lbs. during re-entry.
X-15 No. 1 piloted by Cdr. Forrest Petersen (usn) made its first forced landing in 47 flights when its rocket engine failed to ignite in mid-air after two attempts. X—15 was brought down without incident at Mud Lake, Nevada.
In interview with Science Service, Dr. John O’Keefe of nasa said that pattern of re-entry of pieces of MA-6 booster rocket reinforced the theoiy that tektites originate from the moon. Tektites are black, glossy rocks scattered on the earth’s surface, and the wide area covered by MA-6 rocket pieces was a similar pattern.
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena booster, the fourth unidentified satellite reported launched from Vandenberg afb in ten days.
nasa announced that Lockheed Missiles and Space Company had been selected for negotiation of a contract for the design, development, fabrication, and testing of the Rift (reactor-in-flight-test) stage. The Rift vehicle is intended to flight test the Nerva (nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application) being developed jointly by nasa and aec.
U.S. and Japan launched a joint sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va. nasa furnished the Nike-Cajun rocket, launch facilities, data acquisition, and a langmuir probe to measure electron temperature. Japan furnished instrumentation, a device designed to measure electron temperature and density simultaneously, functions which up to now have required two separate instruments. Height of the flight was 75.6 mi.
nasa launched Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Station, its 256-lb. payload lofted to 92-mi. altitude and 60-mi. distance. Efforts to recover the payload were not successflli, but scientists were able to analyze data telemetered during flight about performance of an attitude control system as well as four scientific experiments: to measure solar flux in two llitra-violet spectral regions; to measure radiation emerging from the top of the earth’s atmosphere; to obtain llitraviolet photographs of Venus from outside the earth’s atmosphere; and to study distribution of atmospheric atomic hydrogen and Lyman Alpha radiation. Also flight-tested was an experimental, transistorized telemetry system.	_	_
nasa announced the advanced version of liquid -hydrogen/liquid-oxygen rocket engine had completed its preliminary flight rating tests. In the test program, the 15,000-lb.-thrust engine underwent 20 static-firings for a total of 2,820 sec. of firing; it also passed humidity and vibration tests.
nasa announced that the first Centaur launch was due no earlier than April 20. Postponement on April 11 was caused by too low calibration of a transducer, which gave a false indication of the pressurization of the fuel systems in the Atlas booster.
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert announced signing of contract with United Technology Corp. for solid-propulsion rocket motors to be strapped to sides of Titan II rocket in Titan III configuration. He said contract with Martin-Marietta Corp. for airframe assembly and test of the rocket, as well as for structure of transitional upper stage, would be signed soon.
President Kennedy named Theodore von K&rm&n as the first recipient of the National Medal of Science for leadership in the science and engineering of aeronautics. A native of Hungary, von K&rm&n became a U.S. citizen in 1936 as director of the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratories of Cal Tech. In 1936 he also initiated the rocket research development which led to the creation of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. He is presently chairman of the Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research and Development for nato (known as agaed).
NASA-supplied Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by Swedish Committee of Space Research at Kronog&rd, Sweden, in experiment to study auroral event in progress, the rocket performing as predicted but payload failing to separate.
Second successful test of usaf Titan II rocket, 5,000-mi. flight from amr. Second generation ballistic missile with storable liquid fuels will be used as a booster in nasa’s Project Gemini.
Report at American Assembly-British Institute for Strategic Studies forum that Western Europe was planning 440 sounding rocket, 22 satellite, and 2 moon probe launchings by 1970.
Pakistan made its first space experiment, the launching of a Rehbar I sounding rocket from a site near Karachi. Part of a cooperative program between nasa and the Pakistan Upper Atmosphere and Space Research Committee, the Rehbar I was a Nike-Cajun rocket supplied by the U.S., carrying a sodium vapor payload to an altitude of about 80 miles to measure upper-altitude winds. Several more such launches are programed for the next few months. Prior to the launches, Pakistani scientists and technicians were given training in nasa research and launch centers.
usaf announced launching of an unidentified satellite with an AtlasAgena booster from Point Arguello, Calif.
Eugene W. Wasielewski, Associate Director of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, told National Rocket Club that ariel (U.K.-U.S.) satellite was “just beginning to show signs of trouble.” Launched April 26, 1962, the satellite was designed for one year of transmitting life. Wasielewski said some of the experiments aboard the satellite were “not doing as well as some others,” that the radio signals from some of the experiments were fading.
United Technology Corp. announced development of new technique for throttling rocket engines involving use of helium mixed with liquid fuel. Depending on ratio of gas to liquid, the engine will exert either more or less thrust; system would permit throttling of an engine of 10,000-lb. thrust down to as low as 100 lbs. utc director of research and advanced technology, William J. Corcoran, pointed out that a practical method of throttling liquid rocket engines had never before been attained.
Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru told Indian Parliament that India had agreed to have a rocket launching station on her territory under TT.N. auspices for international use.
Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower, writing on the U.S. space program in The Saturday Evening Post, stated that he did “not see the need for continuing this effort of such a fantastically expensive crash program. . . . “Why the great hurry to get to the moon and the planets? We have already demonstrated that in everything except the power of our booster rockets we are leading the world in scientific space exploration. “From here on, I think we should proceed in an orderly, scientific way, building one accomplishment on another, rather than engaging in a mad effort to win a stunt race.”
Unnamed nasa official said that a four-stage rocket probe would be launched in October or November to check the strength of the radiation belt created by U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion over the Pacific on July 9, 1962.
nasa fired a Scout rocket from Wallops Station, Va. The rocket flew 135 miles high and about 800 miles downrange in a re-entry test reaching speeds of 19,000 mph.
Rocketdyne Division of naa announced plans to expand its Canoga Park, Calif., facilities to manufacture F-l and J-2 rocket engines for nasa’s Advanced Saturn launch vehicle.
usn announced tests conducted at U.S. Naval Ordnance Test Station, China Lake, Calif., had included successful free-flight of a new type of rocket propulsion system called “Hybrid” because of its use of combination liquid and solid propellant in single motor.
nasa received patent (3,016,693) for electrothermal rocket invented by John R. Jack and Wolfgang E. Moeckel of Lewis Research Center.
Fuel tank of the Atlas booster of Ranger III was repaired from inside in 48 hours, first such repair while booster was upright on the pad. Effort of General Dynamics/Astronautics crew was necessitated by fuel leak.
usaf announced the launching of an unidentified satellite with a Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb, Calif.
Franco-American scientific sounding rocket launchings coordinated when two U.S. launchings were made from Wallops Island while France launched one from Algeria and failed to launch one from France. First U.S. rocket (Nike-Cajun) fired at 5:57 AM carried a Langmuir probe to determine electron density and the temperature of the “E” layer of the ionosphere (50-100 miles altitude); the second (Nike-Apache) launched at 6:15 AM, released a sodium vapor cloud to 106-mi. altitude which spread over 100 miles of the eastern seaboard. “Sporadic E” regions of the ionosphere have electron density that reflects much higher radio frequencies, and may result from wind shears. On November 7, gsfc scientists undertook the first sounding rocket _ firings to examine correlation between “E” region and wind shears.
X-15 No. 1 flown to 3,716 mph by nasa pilot Joseph Walker and put through a series of high-speed sharp-angle maneuvers involving banks and testing at three angles of attack. Skin temperatures may have reached 1,000°; the rocket engine developed some roughness in the course of the flight.
India offered to provide launching base for U.N. international rocket probes in session of U.N. Committee for Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. India’s proposal was related to a proposal that 1964 be designated International Year of the Quiet Sun (iqsy), and include equatorial sounding rockets to gather data above the earth’s Equator. Southern part of India lies within 10° of the Equator and would provide suitable launching site for the project.
nasa launched a Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., which detonated 12 grenades from 25 to 57 mi. altitude. Fifteen minutes later a Nike-Asp sounding rocket was launched. It released a cloud of sodium vapor from 26 to 144 mi. altitude in a study of wind velocities and upper-atmosphere densities.
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center announced Contract award to Pratt and Whitney, to investigate the feasibility of variable thrust in RL-10 rocket engine. The study was not directed toward any specific mission but would have wide application in future space flights.
Five Nike-Cajun rockets were fired from Wallops Station, Va., in a series of tests to measure atmospheric conditions at high altitudes. At 5:47 AM nasa scientists fired the first rocket to spread a trail of water vapor up to 89 miles altitude. At 5:54 AM the second rocket was fired. It loosed a cloud of sodium vapor starting at 26 miles and rising with the rocket to 84 miles. The cloud was spectacular in the sunrise and visible for hundreds of miles along the Atlantic coast. At 6:15 AM the third rocket jettisoned and detonated grenades one at a time at altitudes from 24 to 55 miles. Two additional Nike-Cajun rockets were fired in the evening with sodium and grenade experiments.
nasa press conference at nasa Hq. on the tandem Russian orbital flights of vostok iii and iv. Participants: nasa Administrator James E. Webb; Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden; Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Director, Office of Manned Space Flight, D. Brainerd Holmes. Mr. Webb paid tribute to the Russian accomplishment as “demonstrations of a very real technological capacity, an ability to plan and engineer and build and fly vehicles that can carry man for extended periods of time. . . . They do have significance.” Dr. Dryden felt that the flights essentially conformed to the stated Russian objective, “to subject two men to identical space exposures, and weightlessness . . . plus . . . longer duration, which is needed to do this.” Dr. Seamans noted that “as far as guidance accuracy is concerned, what they achieved is roughly comparable to what we achieve in our Mercury flights. To me the significant element here is that on the second flight they were able to take off within a limited period of time . . . countdowns can be protracted for one reason or another.” Mr. Holmes said he was not surprised at the Russian flights: “I think we would be selling the Russians pretty short if we didn’t feel that a year after they launched a Vostok on a booster that could lift that kind of a weight, something of the order of 10,000 pounds, that they couldn’t indeed perform in this fashion.” Asked whether the nasa manned space flight program could be accelerated, Mr. Webb answered that the booster program could be accelerated with a crash program spending another $1 to $2 billion a year. “You can get more done. It wlli be done inefficiently. We believe we have a program [now] that marries all of the considerations in an effective way . . .” To the question of who wollid first land on the moon, Mr. Webb replied, “I think we will make the manned lunar landing and return before they do.” As to future Russian capability, Dr. Dryden said: “there is a possibility that the Soviets can do circumlunar flight before we can. I once said there is a fifty-fifty chance, certailliy no better than that, that we collid do that as early as they can. It is for this reason, in fact, that our national goal was set at the lunar flight because this does require another booster on the part of the Russians as well as ourselves. “Ever since the Space Agency has been formed we have been waiting for this other shoe to be dropped. People have told us every month, the Russians are going to produce this big booster in the next few months. Now four years have gone by and they have not yet shown us this big booster. To the best of our knowledge they have developed lighter-weight nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles rather than bigger space boosters. This is not to say that they may not be doing this. All I am saying is that they will require a bigger booster to land men on the moon.”
Naval Ordnance Laboratory announced use of Loki launch tube attached to the barrel of a 5-inch/54 naval rifle to launch the Hasp (high altitude sounding rocket) for weather soundings from ships anywhere at sea.
Albert R. Hibbs, chief of jpl Arms Control and Disarmament, told American Rocket Society convening in Los Angeles: “Most people on both sides don’t feel that space weapons will be too important . . .,” but military neglect of space could be dangerous pending ratification of a treaty.
nasa approved the highest national priority for the Apollo program, covering Saturn C-l, Saturn C-5, Titan II, and Atlas-Agena launch vehicles, as well as all stages and engines connected with the vehicles.
“Big Shot” suborbital inflation test of 135-foot diameter sphere in Echo II program was conducted from amr. The 44-inch cannister containing the uninflated balloon that would be larger and more rigid than echo i was separated at altitude from a specially stabilized Thor booster which carried both TV and 16-mm movie cameras. These cameras monitored the separation of the cannister and inflation of the “balloon satellite,” showed the too-rapid inflation that ripped the balloon apart at 250-miles altitude; capsule with movie film re-entered and was later recovered by skin divers.
nasa launched rigidized Echo-type balloon on Thor booster to 922 mi. in inflation test. Nicknamed “Big Shot,” the 13-story balloon was inflated successfully and was visible for 10 minutes from Cape Canaveral. Movie film capsule parachuted into sea northeast of San Salvador was recovered by three pararescue men of the Air Rescue Service. This was the largest manmade object sent into space, the previous record being held by the 100-ft ECHO i.
Atom Affairs Ministry, West Germany, announced work on third stage of Western Europe’s first space rocket would soon begin in West Germany. First stage would be developed from U.K. Blue Streak missile, second stage from French Veronique. Satellite to be launched by the three-stage vehicle would be built by Italy. First model would be completed in 1966.
Dr. Marvin H. Gold, manager of Propellant Chemicals Div. of Aerojet-General’s Solid Rocket Plant, was awarded Navy Meritorious Public Service Citation by onr for his contributions to high energy rocket propulsion for advanced Polaris.
Aerobee sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station, the vehicle carrying 211-lb. instrumented payload to 128-mi. altitude in experiment to study behavior of liquid hydrogen exposed to radiant heating and zero gravity. Experiment was conducted for nasa Lewis Research Center, which would use data obtained in development of liquid-hydrogen rocket engines.
Navy Polaris missile destroyed over Cape Canaveral after launch. March 31: Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Projects Division at nasa’s Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded the $1,000 Galabert Prize in Paris for his studies on nonchemical booster rockets. During March: nasa completed work on its first major launching facility on the West Coast, a Thor-Agena pad at Vandenberg afb, Calif. A used gantry was shipped from msfc and installed at a $1 million saving over cost of new construction. Pad would be used for nasa polar-orbit launches, such as Echo II, Nimbus, and Pogo (Polar Orbiting Geophysical Observatory).
At American Rocket Society Honors Night Banquet in Los Angeles, Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, was presented the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Award, highest aes honor, for “general eminence in the field of rocket engineering and space flight.” Other 1962 ars awards: Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., nasa astronaut, received the aes Astronautics Award; Vice Adm. William F. Raborn, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations, Special Projects Office, received the James H. Wyld Memorial Award; Samuel K. Hoffman, president of naa Rocketdyne Div., received aes Propulsion Award; Dr. Howard S. Seifert, of Stanford Univ. and United Technology Corp., received the G. Edward Pendray Award; Theodore Forrester, director of Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., Ion Physics Dept., received the aes Research Award; and John R. Winckler, prof, of physics at Univ. of Minnesota, received the first ars Space Science Award.
usaf launched an unidentified satellite with a Blue Scout booster from Point Arguello, Calif.
Aerojet-General Corp. proposed a booster two to three times larger than Nova, to be launched from the sea. Two-stage Sea Dragon with takeoff weight of 20 to 100 million pounds would be assembled in existing drydocks, towed to point of launch, and launched from the water without gantry cranes or launch pads. Both stages would be recovered in the water by hydrodynamic deceleration.
ariel i (S-51), the first international satellite, launched into orbit from Cape Canaveral by Thor-Delta booster. The 132-lb. spacecraft was built by gsfc of nasa and carried six British experiments to make integrated measurements in the ionosphere. Three experiments measured electron density, temperatures, and composition of positive ions in the ionosphere, while two experiments were designed to monitor the intensity of radiation from the sun in the ultraviolet and x-ray bands of the solar corona. The sixth experiment was designed to measure cosmic rays, supported by simultaneous experiments from ground and by aircraft and balloon flights.
Joint U.S.-Norwegian-Danish Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Andoeya, Norway, with instrumented experiment to probe the ionosphere and the Northern Lights. Third in a series, the sounding rocket reached an altitude of near 68 mi.
usaf announced that an unnamed satellite had been launched by a Thor-Agena B booster from Vandenberg afb.
International Association of Machinists (iam) workers struck at Lockheed Aircraft Corp. in California, Florida, and Hawaii. President Kennedy, invoking Taft-Hartley Act, created three-man board of inquiry to investigate the dispute; board’s recommendations, due Dec. 3, would contribute to President’s decision whether to request Federal court order barring strike for 80-day period. Included in Lockheed production items are Agena second-stage rocket, used by usaf and in nasa Ranger and Mariner programs.
Mercury spacecraft (Capsule 13), friendship 7, was launched into orbit by Atlas booster (109D), Lt. Col. John H. Glenn, Jr., (usmc), as astronaut. After three orbits (apogee: 162.5 mi.; perigee: 98.9 mi.), friendship 7 re-entered and parachuted into Atlantic some 166 miles east of Grand Turk Island in the Bahamas. Picked up by the destroyer Noa, Glenn remained inside capsule until on deck. Beyond being the first U.S. manned orbital space flight, MA-6 flight of friendship 7 provided aerospace medical data during 285 minutes of weightlessness, including consumption of solid and liquid food and disorientation exercises. Astronaut Glenn was forced to “fly by wire” (i.e., pilot the spacecraft) during 2nd and 3rd orbits due to troubles with the automatic pilot. Glenn was pronounced “hale and hearty” after his 81,000-mile flight of 4 hrs. 56 min.
Aerobee sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 230-lb. payload to 116-mi. altitude before landing in Atlantic Ocean 59 mi. from launch site. Flight tested performance of three photometers developed for use in Oao (Orbiting Astronomical Observatory) satellite to be launched by nasa in 1964. Other instrumentation obtained data from the comparatively young stars Gamma Cassiopeia and Delta Persei, for use in star-evolution study being conducted by University of Wisconsin. Launch was under management of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center.
Reported in the press that a 3-ft. by 2-ft. metal fragment found on a farm in South Africa on February 21 was identified by numbers stamped on it as a part of the Atlas booster that placed Astronaut John Glenn into orbit on February 20. Local reports of an explosion about 1 AM on February 21 indicated that the fragment came to earth after about 8 hours in orbit. Fragment was reported as 4 ft. by 2-ft. “stainless steel” in Capetown telegram to nasa Feb. 26, 1962.
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said in Blacksburg, Va., that dual space flight of vostok iii and iv “was impressive from the standpoint of the whole operation, . . . [but] it does not look like the Russians used any new equipment. I don’t think there was a technical breakthrough. . . .” When asked to comment on U.S. prospects of being first to reach the moon, Dr. von Braun said that manned lunar flights would require rockets bigger than any used either by the U.S. or U.S.S.R. so far. “We have such rockets under development, and the Russians also have to develop a new rocket to do this job .... Therefore I don’t think we have any serious handicaps to overcome so far as the lunar program is involved.”
dod announced plans to develop Titan III launch vehicle powered by both solid and liquid rocket fuels and capable of thrust greater than 2.5 mlliion pounds. To become operational by 1965, Titan III would be used primarily to launch X-20 (Dyna Soar) manned spacecraft as well as heavy mllitary satellites. Martin-Marietta Corp. was selected as prime contractor for Titan III, to cost between $500 million and $1 billion.
Two-stage Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island with 95-lb. payload to 89-mile altitude with gsfc experiment to measure electron density and electron collision frequency in the ionosphere under undisturbed conditions.
White House announced President Kennedy would visit military and civilian missile and rocket installations at Cape Canaveral, Fla.; Huntsville, Ala.; Houston, Tex.; and St. Louis, Mo., on September 11-12. President Kennedy would be accompanied by Vice President Johnson, Secretary of Defense McNamara, nasa Administrator Webb, bob director David E. Bell, and several Congressmen. Purpose of trip was “to study the work being done in this most important area and in connection with the preparation of the fiscal year 1964 budget. . . .”
100-inch diameter, 53-foot long, solid-fuel rocket static-fired for 98 seconds and developed 600,000 pounds of thrust by Aerojet-General, the largest solid rocket fired to date.
Consolidation Steering Committee of the Board of the American Rocket Society (ars) and the Council of the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences (ias) completed preliminary “Principles of Consolidation” for a proposed new society to be known as the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa).
President Kennedy toured nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., and Launch Operations Center, Cape Canaveral, Fla. At msfc, he inspected a mock-up of the F-l engine and a Saturn C-l launch vehicle, and later witnessed 30-sec. static-firing of 1.3-million-lb.-thrust S-l stage for Saturn SA-4 launch vehicle. At loc, he inspected launch complexes for Mercury-Atlas vehicle, Titan rocket, and Saturn C-l. He then flew to Houston, Tex., to visit nasa Manned Spacecraft Center on September 12. Addressing workers at Cape Canaveral, the President said: “I don’t think we can exaggerate the great advantage which the Soviet Union secured in the ’50s by being first in space. They were able to give prestige to their system, they were able to give force to their argument that they were an advancing society and that we were on the decline. “But I believe that we are an advancing society, and I believe that we are on the rise, and I believe that their system is as old as time. . . .” He said that, as long as the American system was to be judged in at least one degree by its achievements in space, the United States “might as well be first, and therefore, this country, both political parties, have determined that the United States shall be first.”
nasa announced that Mercury Mark II spacecraft would be named “Gemini,” after the third constellation of the zodiac featuring the twin stars Castor and Pollux. Gemini would be a two-man spacecraft used in development of the rendezvous technique, would be 50% larger than the Mercury capsule, and launched into orbit by a Titan II booster.
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena B booster, from Vandenberg afb, Calif.
An astronautics ship together with a floating drydock has been proposed as a launching platform for icbm’s and large space boosters, including Saturn. LCdr. Burton Edelson (usn), writing for the Bureau of Ships Journal, contended that a 10,000-ton ship, such as the seaplane tender Curtiss, could be specially" outfitted as an integrated astronautics ship and could handle all solid-fuel launchings, including Minuteman. An accompanying floating drydock could handle large liquid-fuel rocket launchings up to and including Saturn.
nasa Wallops Station launched Aerobee sounding rocket with GSFC-University of Colorado 208-lb. payload to an altitude of 68 miles, experiment orienting an ultraviolet spectrophotometer in the direction of the sun to study wave-length profile as a function of attitude and to calibrate instrumentation for future satellite flights.
Premier Nikita Khrushchev said in speech to transport workers that despite the claims of American scientists no U.S. rocket has hit the moon: “The Americans have tried several times to hit the moon with their rockets. They have proclaimed for all the world to hear that they had launched rockets to the moon, but they missed every time. The Soviet pennant on the moon has been awaiting an American one for a long time but in vain and is becoming lonesome.”
Experimental new method of producing synthesis of chemicals with low-energy ions was reported by Rocket Power, Inc., a solid-propellant manufacturer. Milton Farber, vice president and director of laboratories, and Dr. Stanley Singer, chief chemist, indicated several new compounds had been produced. Mr. Farber said the ion-synthesis method could produce rocket propellants perhaps 10 per cent more efficient than any now available in U.S. “The key is the speed of the ions. If the beam of ions meets the target chemical at too high a rate, shattering occurs. By controlling the velocity of the ions, they can be made to merge with the chemical, creating a new compound.” Research project was sponsored by usaf oar.
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Project Div. of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded 1962 Hermann Oberth Award of the Alabama section, American Rocket Society.
Metal fragments resembling top of gasoline drum, thought to have fallen from the MA-7 Atlas booster, were discovered near Barkly East, South Africa.
usn transit v-a navigational satellite launched from Point Arguello, Calif., into near-perfect polar orbit (apogee, 395 nautical mi.; perigee, 375 nautical mi.; period, 99.06 min.; inclination, 90.7° to the equator), but satellite’s radio receiver failed to function in first five attempts to transmit data to the satellite, transit v-a was to have been the first operational satellite in system of four satellites, but now it would be useful as test vehicle rather than operational satellite. This was first time in Transit series that the radio command system had failed to work. The satellite was launched into orbit by four-stage Blue Scout rocket by usaf for usn.
In speech to the National Rocket Club, Senator Barry Goldwater said: “I am convinced that the American people fully endorse space preeminence for the United States. This is our long-range goal as a nation. . . . Space superiority in all its scientific, technological, and military aspects is fundamental to the future well-being, security, and prosperity of the United States . . . “As a new agency, nasa has picked up a momentum, a direction and a purposefulness directed toward long-range research and development which is one of impressive merit . . . “From all I can observe, the relationship between nasa and the Air Force in the space program has proceeded fairly well to date. But I would point out that the Department of Defense is responsible for military affairs, not nasa. nasa is not a military service, and its broad-based program will undoubtedly contribute greatly to our own national military requirements. . . . The point I am trying to make is that the requirements of the United States for military programs in space should not be neglected in any vital aspect . . .”
Soviet aircraft designer Artem Mikoyan was quoted as saying U.S.S.R. would have a “rocket plane” within this decade. Aircraft was described as wide-winged, stainless-steel covered, and powered by multistage rocket. After launching, craft would fly ballistic trajectory reaching height of 150-222 km. and later re-enter earth’s atmosphere, for intercontinental transport of mail, freight, and, later, passengers. Rocket planes also would be principal transportation between earth and earth satellites.
nasa launched Aerobee sounding rocket from Wallops Station, the 259-lb. instrumented payload reaching 106-mi. altitude in test to map sources of photons in specific wavelengths in the nighttime sky. Payload landed about 61 mi. downrange, with recovery not attempted.
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, in news conference, stated that U.S.S.R. was “substantially ahead” in some phases of military space development but the U.S. was acting to overtake the lead. Confirming reports that dod space budget wollid not be increased, McNamara added: “Lest you interpret that as an indication that the Russian flight was not a great one, or lest you interpret it as my belief that the Russians didn’t do anything we collidn’t do, let me hasten to add that we have not accomplished what they have accomplished to date. “We are behind in certain space developments, particularly those associated with large booster capabilities.” He cited development of Titan III booster as a major step toward overtaking the Soviet Union. Titan III would have between two and three times the thrust of the Soviet boosters used to launch manned Vostok satellites. Secretary of Defense McNamara stated that dod FY 1964 funding would include increases for development of 120-in., 156-in., and 260-in. solid-propellant rocket motors. 120-in. motors would be used in Titan III launch vehicles.
nasa was studying the problem of falling fragments from orbital objects and the possibility of injury or damage to persons or property on earth. Four fragments from the Atlas booster that put Astronaut John Glenn into orbit were recovered on earth, the first pieces known to have re-entered from an orbiting object without burning up. Statistically the chances of injury to anyone on earth would be extremely small, especially since the orbits are over water about 80% of the time, nasa pointed out that some 100 meteorites weighing two pounds or more struck the U.S. every year, yet there had never been a report of anyone being struck by one.
U.S.S.R. delegate to the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space expressed approval of a subcommittee’s recommendation to establish an international sounding rocket launching base on the geomagnetic equator. U.S. delegate Plimpton welcomed the Soviet position.
usaf launched a satellite with a Blue Scout booster, from Point Arguello; according to U.N. Public Registry, did not achieve orbit.
Back in Washington after two-day tour of U.S. space facilities, President Kennedy held news conference. Asked why decision was made to extend U.S. atmospheric nuclear tests, the President said: “There are two reasons. One is that, as you know, because of the blow-up in the pad at Johnston Island and because of the earlier failures of the communication system in the missile, we were not able to carry out these tests which were . . . among the most important, if not the most important of our series. “So we are going to finish those. In addition, as a result of the earlier tests of this Dominic series, there were certain things learned which we would like to prove out. “So we have agreed to a limited number of tests in concluding the Dominic series, and also we have taken some steps to prevent a repetition of the incident which caused an increase in the number of electrons in the atmosphere, by lowering the altitude and the yield so that lunar flights will not be further endangered.” Asked whether U.S. position of refraining from competition with U.S.S.R. military space vehicles would condemn U.S. to second place in the mllitary field, President Kennedy replied: “No, Mr. Alexander. As I said last week, in the first place we are spending $1.5 billion a year on our military space program. What is the key for the success both of peaceful exploration of space as well as the military mastery of space are large boosters, effective control of the capsule, and the ability to rendezvous, and all of the rest, so that there is an obvious usefulness if the situation should require, military usefulness for our efforts, peaceful efforts, in space. “In addition, as you know, very recently we determined to go ahead with the Titan III, which gives the United States Air Force a very strong weapon if that should become necessary. So that the work that nasa is doing on Saturn and the work the Air Force is doing on Titan and the work being done on the Apollo program and Gemini and the others, all have a national security factor as well as a peaceful factor. . . . “I think the United States is attempting, and this Administration, as you know, is making a very massive effort in space. As I said, we are spending three times what we spent last year in space, and more in this year’s budget than the eight previous years, so that this is a tremendous effort, $5.5 billion as well as the money that we are spending for the military use of space. “As I say, the size of the booster and the capsule and the control all would have, if the situation required it, a military use. We hope it does not; we hope that space will be used for peaceful purposes. That is the policy of the United States Government, but we shall be prepared if it does not; and in addition, as I said from the beginning, both the Soviet Union and the United States have a capacity to send a missile to each other’s country with a nuclear warhead on it, so that we must keep some perspective as to where the danger may lie. But the United States, in the effort it is making both in the peaceful program and the military program, all of this will increase our security if the Soviet Union should attempt to use space for military purposes.” Asked if he were hopeful that U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperative ventures in space exploration were likely in the near future, he replied: “No. As you know, Dr. Dryden had some conversations in Geneva with regard to the matter, and some progress was made, but it is limited in its scope and we would hope more could be done and more, perhaps, could be done if the atmosphere between the two countries should be improved.”
American Rocket Society gave Congressman George Miller of House Committee for Science and Astronautics a special award for his “outstanding leadership in space.”
Representative Chet Holifield, Chairman of Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy, declared in speech that “moon madness” is starving scientific programs other than space exploration. He predicted budgetary troubles for atomic energy programs because of “greater priority” of space programs. November 27-December 9: Four launchings of Centaur rockets took place from the Argentine Rocket Range, Chamical, as part of worldwide program of simultaneous measurements of winds and turbulence in the ionosphere by means of sodium-cloud experiments. The Argentine launchings were joint cooperative effort of French National Committee on Space Studies and the Argentine National Commission on Space Research.
Soviet cosmonauts held news conference in Moscow, revealing they had parachuted to earth from their space capsllies, landing about 124 mi. apart. Maj. Nikolayev reported that he and Col. Popovich had unstrapped themselves and floated weightless in their cabins for an hour, maintaining communications with each other at the same time. He also stated that the flight program had not called for rendezvous of vostok iii and iv, and that the closest the two capsules had come to each other was 5 kilometers (a little over 3 mi.). Col. Popovich reported they both had observed the glowing particles seen by Cosmonauts Gagarin and Titov and by U.S. Astronaut John Glenn. Popovich said they believed the particles had been “merely the exhaust of the rocket motors.” It was stated that the results of the cosmonauts’ flights would be published after the collected data had been processed.
aec—dod high-altitude nuclear test failed, the safety officer of Joint Task Force 8 destroying the Thor booster and nuclear payload within minutes after liftoff because of booster’s malfunctioning. This was third failure of four attempted high-altitude tests in the current Pacific series.
telstar, the first privately financed satellite, launched into orbit from amr by nasa Delta booster, telstar (apogee: 3,503 mi.; perigee: 593 mi.; inclination: 44.79 degrees; period: 157.8 min.) was funded by the American Telephone and Telegraph Co. (at&t) under a nasa-at&t agreement of July 27, 1961: Bell Telephone Laboratories design and build satellites at own expense; at&t reimburse nasa for Delta launch vehicles, launch, and tracking services (approximately $3 million per launch); Bell System conduct the communications experiments and nasa provide telemetry; and both nasa and at&t analyze data and results, to be made available by nasa to the world scientific community.
nasa witnesses testified before a subcommittee of the House Science and Astronautics Committee that Centaur rocket development administration had in recent months been streamlined. Problems in the program were attributed to too austere a budget at the start, “growing pains” of a new organization, and unexpected technics difficulties in utilizing high-energy liquid hydrogen as a rocket fuel.
naa announced that the 1961 Robert J. Collier Trophy, U.S. aviation’s highest honor, was awarded to four test pilots of the X-15 rocket research airplane: Scott Crossfield (naa), Joseph Walker (nasa), Major Robert White (usaf), and Cdr. Forrest Petersen (usn). Co-sponsors of the annual award, National Aeronautic Association and Look magazine, said the Collier Trophy was awarded to the pilots “for invaluable technological contributions to the advancement of flight and for great skill and courage as test pilots of the X-15.”
aec announced that U.S. would begin “rocket borne” nuclear tests at an altitude of “tens of kilometers” shortly after nightfall on June 1 at the Johnston Island test area.
Reginald Lascelles, personal assistant and spokesman for Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said Lovell was afraid the new radiation belt would “seriously affect space exploration by radio astronomy.” September mariner ii, 1.2 million mi. from earth on its voyage to vicinity of Venus, successfully swung a yard-wide antenna around and focused it on earth, sending radio beam back to scientists at Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The antenna maneuver was performed on command of on-board timer and was first of two in-flight maneuvers crucial to correcting the probe’s path to within 10,000 mi. of Venus; after scientists evaluated results of antenna orientation, nasa Goldstone Tracking Station would send radio command to fire rocket aboard the 447-lb. craft.
Washington Post reported that Thrust-Augmented Thor (tat) booster wollid be used with Agena D upper stage to orbit first of new Discoverer satellite series.
Navy launched solid-propellant Terrier-Asp IV sounding rocket from Point Arguello in successflli first flight test.
NASA’s F-l rocket engine first fired at full power (more than 1.5 million pounds of thrust) for full duration at Edwards, Calif.
Because of unnamed technical difficulties, flight test of X-15 rocket research aircraft was postponed minutes before X-15 was to be dropped from its mother ship.
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from White Sands Missile Range, N.M., in nasa experiment to gather data on solar radiation intensity in ultraviolet region. Rocket carried spectrophotometer package to 124-mi. altitude. Preliminary experimental results: “High voltage arcing in the instrumentation prohibited collection of scientific data ... .”
Sixth and final powered test of Kiwi BAA ground-test reactor for Project Rover was successful at Jackass Flats, Nev. Newsmen were permitted to watch this test from a mile away, the first test to which outside observers had been allowed. Kiwi B-4A, looking more like a flyable engine than some of its predecessors, was mounted on a remote-controlled railroad flatcar, consumed tons of liquid hydrogen in the half-power, five-min. test. Part of the joint aec-nasa program for development of a nuclear-powered rocket, the series of ground reactors tested different reactor designs, fuels, metals, and accessories.
U.S. transferred to Dominican Republic its rocket tracking station at Sabana, D.R. Formerly used to track missiles launched from Cape Canaveral toward Ascension Island, the facllity would be used as a training center.	_	_
nasa fired a Nike-Cajun rocket from Wallops Station, Va., which released a sodium vapor cloud between 25 and 74 miles altitude. Rays of the setting sun colored the sodium cloud red, instead of sodium vapor’s normal yellow.
Mercury capsule installed on top of Atlas booster preparatory for MA-6 manned flight; it was also reported from Cape Canaveral that first American orbital manned flight was now unofficially scheduled for January 23.
nasa announced U.S. and Swedish experimenters were studying samplings of noctilucent clouds obtained in four Nike-Cajun sounding rocket flights during August. Preliminary analysis indicated that samples taken when noctilucent clouds were observed contained significantly more particles than when no noctilucent clouds were visible. Analysis of origin and structure of the particles may take up to a year. Participants in the project include scientists from University of Stockholm Institute of Meterology, Kiruna (Sweden) Geophysical Observatory, nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, and usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories.
$16,280,069 contract for construction of F-l rocket engine test stands was awarded to Santa Fe Engineers, M. M. Sundt Construction Co., and Stolte, Inc., by Army Corps of Engineers as agent for nasa. Complex of three test stands and control center would be built at Edwards afb, Calif.
Nevada (Extension of the aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo) became operational, with Robert P. Helgeson as Chief. Located at Las Vegas, the Nevada Extension assumed financial and contract responsibilities for construction and operation of facllities at Nuclear Rocket Development Station (nrds), which will conduct static ground testing of nuclear rockets.
Aerobee 150A launched from nasa Wallops Station, the rocket reaching 117-mi. altitude in experiment to measure absolute intensity of the spectrum of stars with 50 angstrom resolution and to measure ultraviolet fluxes. No usable data were received because rocket failed to despin as planned.
Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa’s Director of Space Sciences, said that in addition to nasa’s international program for space science and the European organizations for cooperative space research, “some South American groups are considering the possibility of cooperative sounding rocket endeavors.”
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets, one from Wallops Island, Va., and one from Ft. Churchill, Canada, for purpose of comparing data on wind and temperatures in upper atmosphere. Nike-Cajun from Ft. Churchill reached 69-mi. altitude and ejected 12 high-explosive grenades which detonated on schedule; ground instrumentation measured sound energy from exploding grenades and recorded rocket position during flight. Nike-Cajun from Wallops Island performed unsatisfactorily, reaching altitude of only 31.8 mi. instead of 69 mi. predicted; only two grenade explosions were observed.
nasa fired two experimental rockets into upper atmosphere within a half-hour of each other, to obtain a comparison of electron density profile with wind profile measured at about the same time. First rocket, two-stage Nike-Cajun, attained 82-mi. altitude with a 55-lb. payload to obtain measurements of electron density and electron temperature in ionosphere at night. Second experiment, using two-stage Nike-Apache, involved use of sodium vapor clouds to measure atmospheric winds and diffusion; rocket reached 34-mi. altitude before ejecting its vapor cloud, which extended to peak altitude of 103 mi. Twin launchings, conducted at nasa Wallops Station, marked first time such experiments were conducted together. Experiments were conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center and Geophysics Corporation of America.
Signals from Venus-bound mariner ii interplanetary probe opened 17th annual meeting of American Rocket Society in Los Angeles.
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena B booster from Vandenberg afb.
aec and nasa announced that the Catalytic Construction Co. had been selected as construction contractor for nuclear rocket development facilities for Project Rover at the aec Nevada Test Site near Las Vegas, Nev.
President Kennedy, back in Washington after inspection of defense and nuclear-rocket facilities, said: “We are going to let these test go on of the [Project Rover] reactor. These tests should be completed by July. If they are successful, then we will put more money into the program, which would involve the Nerva and Rift, both the engine and the regular machine. We will wait until July, however, to see if these tests are successful. “It should be understood that the nuclear rocket will not come into play until 1970 or ’71. It would be useful for further trips to the moon or trips to Mars. But we have a good many areas competing for our available space dollars, and we have to try to channel it into those programs which will bring us a result, first, on our moon landing, and then to consider Mars.”
Dr. Andrie B. Severny, Director of U.S.S.R.’s Crimean Astrophysical Observatory, explained techniques used to photograph mars i on Nov. 3, when the interplanetary probe was 120,000	mi. from earth. Using 102-in. telescope, largest outside the U.S., astronomers fixed its aim at spot mars i was calculated to be; automatic controls shifted telescope’s aim slightly to sweep along the probe’s assumed trajectory. At same time, photographs were made, with each plate exposed twice at 30-sec. intervals. Resulting photographs showed mars i as well as its booster rocket traveling through space. This was believed to be greatest distance from which man-made objects had been photographed.
X-15 No. 3 flown by Major Robert White (usaf) in stability test at speed exceeding mach 5, with lower tail-fin absent and with nose raised to 25° angle above the horizon. Successful flight was the 75th by the rocket research airplane.
Soviet news agency Tass reported mars i probe was 606,000	mi. from earth (at 4:00 PM est) and was increasing that distance by 215,000 mi. a day. Soviet observatories photographed the Mars probe and its carrier rocket on Nov. 3; director of Crimean Astrophysical Observatory said this was the first time moving artificial interplanetary bodies had been photographed from earth.
U.S.S.R. representative to U.N.’s Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space pledged that U.S.S.R. would cooperate “by deeds” in international programs on space. Promised reports to U.N. on Soviet satellite and rocket launchings, cooperation on communications satellites but on the basis of “international regional agreements.”
Two leading U.S. space scientists born in Germany were voted honorary members of the German Rocket Society: Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of nasa Launch Operations Center, and Prof. K. 0. Lange, Director of University of Kentucky’s Aeronautical Research Laboratory.
Indonesian scientist Dr. Hadinoto said Indonesia hoped to launch her first space rocket in 1964 for scientific purposes, with aid provided by U.S.S.R.
Thor-Agena D booster launched usaf satellite from Vandenberg afb, Calif.
usaf launched unnamed satellite from Vandenberg afb with Thor-Agena B booster.
U.S.S.R. was building “largest radio telescope in existence” near Serpukhov, it was reported. 20-acre, cross-shaped radiotelescope featured two movable antenna arms of 1-km. length with supporting towers of 65-ft. height, the instrument modeled after cross designed by Dr. Bernard Y. Mills of Australia. Chief character-tic of cross was its ability to collect considerable amount of radio energy emanating from an extremely small area of the heavens. Another instrument at the radioastronomy station was radiotelescope with parabolic antenna 72-ft. in diameter. Station was under direction of Dr. Viktor V. Vitkevich and operated by Lebede Institute of Physics of Soviet Academy of Sciences. November 26: nasa Flight Research Center announced investigation of X-15 No. 2 accident on Nov. 9 had revealed probable cause was succession of equipment failures coupled with landing gear collapse. Inability of rocket engine to attain full power was attributed to faulty governor actuator which prevented engine’s receiving sufficient amount of propellant. Failure in engine’s receiving mechanism did not allow landing flaps to come down and resulted in high load on aircraft’s landing gear. Unusually high landing-load caused collapse of main landing gear soon after the X-15 touched down at Mud Lake, Nev. Pilot John McKay sustained severe bruises, a back injury, and shock; but he had been released from hospital and had returned to work at nasa Flight Research Center. Accident was under continuing investigation by nasa and usaf engineers, with plans calling for mechanical improvement in flap-lowering mechanism before another X-15 flight.
France announced plans to establish rocket launching facility along the Atlantic coast near Mont-de-Marsan in southwestern France. Station will be ready by 1967, when France has agreed to evacuate the rocket research center at Colomb-Bechar in Algeria.
oso i (Orbiting Solar Observatory) was successfully launched into orbit from Cape Canaveral, marking the seventh straight success for the Thor-Delta booster. The 458-lb. satellite, with an apogee of 370 mi. and a perigee of 340 mi., immediately began sending back signals on the sun’s radiation in the ultraviolet, x-ray, and gamma ray regions from its position above the filtering action of the earth’s atmosphere. By an intricate positioning apparatus, oso’s 13 instruments were focused constantly on the sun with a pointing accuracy of 1 minute of arc. This was the first of a series of Osos to be launched by nasa in the next 11-year sun cycle.
President Kennedy gave the order to resume nuclear testing in the atmosphere, to be conducted by Joint Task Force 8 under the command of Maj. Gen. A. D. Starbird. April #5:’'Saturn (SA-2) booster rocket was successfully launched from ame in its second flight test. Like the first Saturn vehicle launched on October 27, 1961, the Saturn fired only the first-stage engines, generating 1.3 million lbs. of thrust. Dummy second ana third stages filled with water were detonated at 65 miles altitude (Project High Water) and the water ballast formed an artificial cloud. Maximum velocity was slightly more than 3,700 mph. Modifications to decrease the slight fuel sloshing encountered near the end of the previous flight test were apparently
Supreme Court of the State of New Jersey ruled unanimously that Thiokol Chemical Corporation, producer of the rocket engines for the X-15, was liable for property damage caused in testing the engine. The Court ordered $25,605 damages to be paid to 15 home owners near the Picatinny Arsenal, Rockaway Township, for cracked foundations, floors, walls, chimneys, and fireplaces. Thiokol stated that it would have to pass these costs on to the Federal Government, since it had a cost-plus contract.
nasa Administrator James E. Webb announced that the project management of the liquid hydrogen-fueled Centaur launch vehicle and the hydrogen-fueled M-l rocket engine would be transferred from Marshall Space Flight Center to the Lewis Research Center. Studies were being initiated to adapt Centaur as a stage to other boosters. Mr. Webb said: “The transfer wlli allow the Marshall Center to concentrate its efforts on the Saturn vehicles for the manned lunar landing program. ... It wlli permit the Lewis Research Center to use its experience in liquid hydrogen to further the work already done on one of the most promising high-energy rocket fuels and its application to Centaur and the M-l.”
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena booster from Vandenberg afb.
High-altitude nuclear test over Johnston Island in the Pacific failed when Thor rocket and the thermonuclear device were destroyed by the safety officer “because the tracking system was malfunctioning.” Debris fell into the ocean well within the 520-mile-radius safety area around Johnston Island.
usaf launched unidentified satellite (Alpha Theta) from Vandenberg afb with Thor-Agena booster.
James H. “Dutch” Kindelberger, President of North American Aviation (1928-48) and chairman of the Board (1948-date), died in California. After Armistice in 1919, he joined Glenn L. Martin plant in Cleveland with Donald W. Douglas, later following Douglas and supervising the engineering of the DC-1 and DC-2, the first Douglas Aircraft passenger planes. During World War II, naa built 14% of the U.S. military aircraft including the B-25 and P-51, later the famed F-86 Sabre, and more recently the X-15. Under Kindelberger, naa’s Rocketdyne Division pioneered the rocket propulsion development for Navaho, Atlas, Jupiter, Thor, and Redstone engines, naa is presently prime contractor on nasa’s Apollo program and the S-II.
