Second Shotput suborbital sounding rocket flight in U.S.-Italian San Marco project was launched from nasa Wallops Station, the 177.5-lb. payload reaching 183-mi. altitude in flight to test instrumentation for San Marco satellite. Another purpose of launching was to determine whether Shotput despin difficulties of first San Marco launching had been corrected, and flight officials indicated the vehicle performed satisfactorily. Shortly after the Shotput launch, a related experiment was launched from Wallops Island using Nike-Cajun sounding rocket. Three mylar balloons were ejected from Nike-Cajun and tracked by radar, to provide air density data to aid in evaluating San Marco experiment. A third Shotput launching later this year would continue testing instrumentation performance and launch techniques for San Auaiuo piojcci^ vviiu/ii v>wuiu tuiiiunaic 111 iauiiLimig ui caicuuc into equatorial orbit from platform off east coast of Africa. San Marco is cooperative project of Italian National Research Council and nasa. (nasa Release 63-172; Wallops Release 63-75; nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
nasa launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Wallops Station. Payload was a 77-lb. package sent to 84-mi. altitude to measure mechanical and thermal stresses on a scientific payload during launch. (Wallops Release 63-99)
Sodium-vapor experiment to measure high-altitude winds and diffusion rates was launched on Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va. Sodium vapor trail, ejected from 27 to 127mi. altitudes, was visible for several hundred miles from launch site. (Wallops Release 63—51; AP, wash. Post, 5/24/63)
nasa and aec announced revision in Project Rover, canceling development of Rift (Reactor-In-Flight-Test) stage and deferring flight objectives of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application). Rover’s Kiwi ground reactor program was unchanged. Work towards development of flight systems was deferred until technology learned from Kiwi and Nerva is “satisfactorily established.” Revision was expected to save as much as $180 million of planned and programed funds in FY 1964 and FY 1965. nasa and aec now will concentrate on ground reactor and experimental engine research, development, and testing “with particular emphasis on analyzing and understanding power levels, temperatures, operating life, and problems of frequent and reliable restarts.” (nasa Release 63-285)
At American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in Cleveland, Prof. Kenechi Maeda of Kyoto Univ. described proposal for Japanese space booster submitted by Japanese engineers. Headed by Prof. H. Itokawa of Tokyo’s Institute of Industrial Science, the engineers are designing a multistage, solid-fueled booster capable of putting about 100 lbs. into low earth orbit. Development of the rocket, known by Greek letter “Mu,” is not yet approved by Japanese Government. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/27/63)
First technical description of U.A.R.’s Pioneer rocket appeared in Cairo newspaper Akher Saa. Article said Pioneer multistage rocket has range of 625 mi., is powered with liquid oxygen and another unnamed liquid, and is intended as space research vehicle. (AP, Houston Post, 8/2/63)
usn launched Hydac sounding rocket, built by Douglas Aircraft and Lockheed, from Pt. Arguello, Calif. {M&R, 12/23/63, 10)
207-lb. instrumented payload carried 125 mi. high by Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched at Wallops Island, Va., by nasa and Australian scientists. Designed and built by Australian Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, experiment was designed to measure vlf radio noise above E region of ionosphere and was similar to experiment conducted under nighttime conditions April 12. (Wallops Release 63-48; nasa Release 63-99)
Italy launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket to 126-mi. altitude for atmospheric studies. Launching was first from island of Sardinia, (upi, NY T, 5/22/63,34)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station with 95-lb. instrumented payload to measure “ion and electron density and conductivity in the ionosphere under undisturbed conditions,” and to measure solar ultraviolet and x-ray fluxes. Rocket reached 96.7 mi. altitude and for the first time “both ionization in ‘D’ region and solar rays causing it” were observed. This was the very process that formed the ionosphere, (nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching; Astro, and Aero. Eng., July 1963,9)
Second Town Meeting of the World telecast by cbs-TV via telstar u satellite. The subject was “The Christian Revolution” and linked in a discussion church leaders in New York, London, and Rome. Program was only a partial technical success, since the audio signal for the speakers in Rome was missing for most of the program. (cbs-TV) October 16; Twin Vela Hotel satellites were launched by dod from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas-Agena vehicle, according to newspaper reports. The two satellites, designed to detect nuclear explosions m space to a distance of 100,000,000 mi., were launched mto an elliptical orbit of 57,000-mi. apogee, 230-mi. perigee. Some 18 hours after launch, one of the two satellites received a signal from Vandenberg afb which activated a rocket motor at apogee to kick the satellite into circular orbit at 57,000 mi. On Oct. 19, the same was done for the second satellite, so that both would orbit at 57,000 mi. but always be on opposite sides of the earth. Reports also indicated that a third satellite, known as “Pygmy” and weighing 2^2 llis., was included in the launch, would remain in elliptical orbit returning radiation readings across the depth of the Van Allen Belt. This function was said to be completely independent of the purpose of the twin Vela Hotel satellites. (Witkin, NYT, 10/18/63, 13; Wash. Post, 10/18/63; N.Y. Herald Tribune, 10/18/63; dod Release 1396-63)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 70-lb. instrumented payload to 106-mi. altitude, payload impacting in Atlantic Ocean 87 mi. downrange after 6 min., 40 sec. flight. Payload contained instrumentation to determine altitude and intensity of electric current systems in the ionosphere. New method of altitude determination during rocket flight was also tested. Flight was in preparation for electrojet program to be conducted from India later this year. (Wallops Release 63-81; nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
U.S-S.R. and U.S. were reported by the Washington Post to have reached agreement on frequency allocation for communications satellites at the International Telecommunications Union-sponsored conference in Geneva. In previous years the Soviet Union had opposed any space activity by nongovernmental organizations, but in recent months had dropped its opposition to private firms, such as the U.S. ComSatCorp, operating in space. Original positions at the conference had seen the U.S. ask for reservation of 2,725 megacycles in a highly sought-after portion of the microwave spectrum, while the U.S.S.R. had favored only 1,600 me. Details of the compromise position would emerge when both nations went before the full convention. (Wash. Post, 11/5/63) pch-1, patrol craft hydrofoil built by Boeing, flight-tested by U.S. Navy at speeds of more than 45 knots. (AAA, January 1964, p. 5) Partial results announced by Univ. of Stockholm scientists from the U.S.-Swedish series of sounding rocket experiments made in July and Aug. 1963 showed extremely low temperatures to be associated with the presence of noctilucent clouds. Sounding rocket data from the Kronogard firings indicated that up to 35 mi. temperatures closely followed the profile found over the U.S. and other countries. The temperature increased from about — 50°C ( —58°F) at 10 mi. to slightly above 0°C (32°F) at 32 mi., where absorption of the sun’s ultraviolet radiation by ozone molecules causes a warming. Above this level, temperatures decreased again to a normal minimum at 50 mi. of 120°C ( —184°F). When noctilucent clouds were present at this altitude, however, the temperature dropped to what appears to be the lowest temperature ever recorded in nature— —143 °C (— 225° F). This would confirm earlier findings in 1962 that noctilucent clouds om COIRnOSed of cIAn^ tyqrfioloo orvoforl irifli ioa /\mba PaImca 63-248)r	* — v —	“	~ Laser beam bounced off the moon by Soviets was detected by Crimean Astrophysical Observatory. (AAA, January 1964, 5) Editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology by Editor Robert Hotz criticized the national space policy as “badly shredded” by President Kennedy’s recent statements, called for a new statement of policy “based on solid elements of national interest” before the FY 1965 budget debate begins in Congress. (Av. Wk., 11/4/63) Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of afsc, spoke to the aiaa/ asd Vehicle Design and Propulsion Meeting in Dayton, Ohio, on the future of areonautical systems. He predicted a continued need for aircraft in the weapons inventory, cited particular improvement potential in cargo aircraft and V/Stol. Another potential was that “future space operations may require the use of recoverable boosters, for reasons of both efficiency and economy. The first stage of such a booster system would probably be a recoverable air-breathing vehicle.” Two technical areas of particular promise were identified as materials and propulsion. “We have identified new materials that are stronger, lighter, stiffer, and able to withstand higher temperatures. For example, new types of metallic fibers may be feasible in forming extremely strong, lightweight composite structures. If such projected applications prove to be practical, then we may be in for a revolution in aircraft design and fabrication. “There also appear to be high payoffs in the propulsion area. New technology should enable us to achieve better thrust-to-weight ratios and to move away from single point design. “. . . Engineers are almost always overly optimistic about the next two or three years and unduly conservative in their estimates of a 15-year period or more. There were study groups in the 1950’s that denied the practicality and feasibility of icbm’s, the turbofan, and hypersonic flight. Ten years ago, so-called ‘sound engineering judgment’ would not have forecast the present generation of systems. The point is that ‘engineering judgment’ does not always give the best evaluation of long-range predictions. The crucial question to ask is, ‘Does a new concept defy known scientific principles?’ If it does not, then the technical problems will eventually be overcome.” (afsc Release 310-R-9<)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb and Council of New York City President Paul R. Screvane conferred in Washington on plans for nasa exhibit at 1964 World’s Fair, ^possibly to he a proposed 361-ft. inflatable Saturn V rocket replica to house 10,000 sq. ft. of exhibits. ( nasa Release 63-58)
usaf announced launch of unidentified satellite into polar orbit from Vandenberg afb using improved Thor-Agena booster (tat). This was second attempt and first successful launching of the improved Thor, thrust of which was uprated from 170,000 lbs. to about 330,000 lbs. by addition of three solid-propellant rocket motors to the liquid-fueled power plant, (dod Release 374-63)
nasa announced it would negotiate contract with Pratt and Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. for continuation of RL-10 rocket engine development. Contract would complete the RL-10 qualification program; it would specify improvements to be incorporated in the liquid-hydrogen engine as well as certain support services to be provided to Centaur and Saturn vehicle systems. RL-10 engines were being used to propel the Centaur upper-stage launch vehicle and the S-IV stage of Saturn I launch vehicle. (nasa Release 63-189)
usn announced Allegheny Ballistics Laboratory facilities destroyed by fire in April would be rebuilt “to provide support for current rocket motor development programs and those already planned for the next year.” (AY,Wash. Post, 5/7/63)
General Accounting Office (gao) released report on nasa’s Centaur booster which was sharply critical of both Government and contractor performance. Done at the request of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics and submitted to them on March 29, 1963, but not released until Oct. 3, the report charged that poor management and program slippage had added $100 million to the cost of the program. The most significant charge in the report was that nasa and the contractor—General Dynamics/Astronautics—had in their possession in 1960 data from which could have been predicted the failure of the first test flight in 1962. The only immediate reply came from Julian Scheer, nasa’s Deputy Assistant Administrator for Technology Utilization and Policy Planning: “On Sept. 30, 1962, we moved the Centaur project from Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville to the Lewis Research Center because we knew we had problems. Still, we hope to fly Centaur by the end of this year.” {Wash. Post, 10/4/63; Space Bus. Daily, 10/4/63, 25)
J-2 rocket engine first successfully test-fired, at simulated space altitude of 80,000 ft. The one-sec. test was conducted in specially designed vacuum chamber at naa’s Rocketdyne Propulsion Field Laboratory, (msfc Historian, 5/22/63)
In editorial on “Apollo and Its Critics,” Aviation Week and Space Technology Editor Robert Hotz said: “Like all great pioneering ventures, the Apollo manned lunar landing program is the target of a continual barrage of carping. This anti-Apollo chorus usually reaches a crescendo in the spring, when the National Aeronautics and Space Administration budget is facing significant congressionl decisions, and dwindles to a barely audible pianissimo after every successful U.S. and Russian manned space flight. “This year the critics’ chorus is louder than ever and studded vvith many familiar faces ranging from ex-president Eisenhower, who still wishes the space age would dry up and blow away, to an esoteric wing of the scientific community which appears to be disturbed by the fact that non-scientist types, such as engineers and pilots, nave crept into the space program and are running their portion of it with vigor and enthusiasm directed toward specific goals that some scientists regard as unseemly. . . . “The scientific community has traditionally provided the most solid opposition to the manned space flight program, but there has been a steady rate of conversion from critics to supporters during the Mercury years. This has been helped by the fact that it has become obvious that nasa does not intend to neglect scientific exploration because of the Apollo priority. As the nasa program has unfolded with the years, it has become apparent that considerable scientific exploration by instrumented satellites and probes is a necessary preliminary to extending the parameters of manned space flight. It is also evident that manned space flight itself will offer a greater opportunity for scientific exploration of the universe than could ever be possible using only remotely controlled instruments and data transmission .... There are a great many valid, vital reasons why this nation must continue to press its exploration of space at the maximum feasible pace. “We intend to discuss them as the Apollo debate continues. But for the moment, there is no better summation of the purpose in this national effort than that stated by Brainerd Holmes, nasa’s director of manned space flight and the chief engineer of the Apollo program, when he said in a recent speech:
nasa Plum Brook Research Reactor, Sandusky, Ohio, reached full power for the first time. 60,000 kilowatts of thermal energy were produced at end of two-month-long approach to power. The reactor is scheduled for basic research experiments associated with nasa’s plans to develop a nuclear rocket for interplanetary exploration. (Lewis Chronology, 2; lrc Release 63-20)
afsc/ssd awarded $4,396,000 increment to existing contract to Aerojet General Corp. for work on Titan III liquid rocket engines for space programs, (dod Release 1599-63)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket with experiments to measure winds and temperatures and to derive densities and pressures up to 90 km. was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada. Twelve grenades ejected and exploded successfully at altitudes from 39 to 91.3 km. A simultaneous launching with Wallops Island was achieved. ( nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 3/11/63)
usaf Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards afb, Calif., was using F-104 and F-106 fighter aircraft to simulate portions of space vehicle re-entry and landing profiles, Capt. Edward J. Dwight (usaf) said' at Howard Univ. in Washington. The F-104 is usually accelerated to mach 2 at 35,000 ft. and continued in powered climb to 75,000, coasts to a top altitude of 90.000 to 95,000 ft., and starts down. “We usually relight the engine at about 60,000 feet and recover from a spin.” When the NF-104, modified to add a rocket engine, was available, this maneuver would be extended to 120,000 to 140,000 ft. The F-106 is used to simulate the landing pattern of a Dyna Soar-type space vehicle, dropping from 20,000 ft. to a high-speed landing. {NYT, 11/10/63, 88) _	_
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, Calif., on board a Thor-Agena booster. {M&R, 11/18/63,12)
50-lb. payload of ionospheric measuring instruments launched with Argo D-4 sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., into orbital path of alouette satellite. Preliminary data indicated measurements were made in upper ionosphere within two minutes of soundings taken from alouette. Payload reached peak altitude of 590 mi. Purpose of experiment was to obtain measurements of ion and electron temperatures and densities; data from payload instruments would be compared with similar data transmitted simultaneously by alouette. Analysis of data later confirmed that alouette i data were valid. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64, 128; Wallops Release 63-63)
nasa announced it was dropping four manned Apollo orbital flights employing the Saturn I booster and accelerating the all-systems manned Apollo flights employing the Saturn I-B •booster. Saturn I would have been able to orbit only the command and service modules of Apollo. Saturn I-B can launch the entire system, including the Lunar Excursion Module (lem). Studies have concluded that running all-systems checks from the beginning is a quicker and more certain method of checkout than to add additional systems flight by flight. Also the deletion of the four flights would save $50 million in FY 1964. The changes would delay the first manned Apollo flights by some nine months. (nasa Release 63-246; NTT, 10/31/63,18; Wash. Post, 10/31/63, 5) October SO: Thrust-Augmented Thor space booster developed by the usaf would be added to the National Launch Vehicle program as booster for Agena and Delta vehicles, dod and nasa announced. tat would have three XM-33 solid-propellant rockets, each 31-in. in diameter and producing 54,000 lbs. thrust, strapped to the sides of the basic Thor vehicle. This is the same rocket developed by Thipkol Chemical Corp. as the second stage of nasa’s Scout booster. The three solid rockets would be fired at the same time as the Thor engine, would bum for about 40 sec., and then drop off as the Thor engine continued powered flight. Raising Thors total thrust to 330,000 lbs., tat would represent a 20 to 30% increase in capability over the Delta, putting 1,000 lbs. into earth orbit compared with 800 lbs. for Delta, (dod Release 1434-63)
usaf announced launch of space probe using Blue Scout, Jr., booster from Pt. Arguello, Calif. {M&R, 3/18/63,11)
nasa launched Little Joe II booster rocket with dummy payload simulating size and weight of Apollo command module and escape tower in flight test at White Sands Missile Range, N.M. The lj-ii attained 24,000-ft. altitude and mach 1.1 speed, impacted about 47,000 ft. downrange instead of planned 35,000 ft. because destruct system did not respond to ground command signal. This was first launching of lj-ii and was a flight qualification test to verify performance of lj-h before using it to test Apollo command module. 100 sec. of telemetry was recorded and five of the six test objectives were achieved, (nasa Release 63-193; Av. Wk., 9/2/63, 20)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched at twilight from Wallops Station, Va., with 100-lb. payload to test theories of free radical formation in comets. At 95-mi. altitude a flame was produced that left a faintly luminous cloud of combustion products visible from earth for 10 to 20 seconds. The cloud reflected sunlight in the way a comet does. Conducted by Lewis Research Center, the studies would test theories that natural comets are composed of the materials existing at the time of formation of the solar system. A second test was scheduled for the following night. (Wallops Release 63-90; Space Bus. Daily, 10/11/63, 68)
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf) wired conSatulations to w iiiiam Bergen, President of Martin Co., and to aj. Generals Waymond A. Davis and Benjamin Funk of afsc for solving “pogo-stick action” in the Titan II booster for Project Gemini. The sharp surging accelerations during early stages of flight were noted early this year. To solve the problem, Martin Co. engineers redesigned the fuel distribution system to include “surge chambers.” In the two test-flights of Titan II’s incorporating the modification, the booster met nasa-usaf requirements for manned space flight. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/20/63) • The Black Report was submitted to President Johnson by Presidential advisers Eugene R. Black, former World Bank president, and industrialist Stanley de J. Osborne. The report said: “We conclude that one of the basic philosophies of the current grogram, namely that of tying the United States effort to the oncorde and therefore compressing the time of development and construction, is dangerous, technically and economically. “We feel that a superior aircraft which is available in two to three years of the first ‘Concorde’ deliveries will still be able to catch the bulk of the world market.” (Wash. Daily News, 2/13/64; CN, 2/14/64)
Japan’s Science and Technology Agency announced a five-year space program that included development of Japanese boosters and launching of three satellites. It would be funded at $59,138,888 and employ some 300 Japanese engineers. Programs included a 60-km. weather observation rocket; a 150-km. two-stage weather observation rocket; 400-km. three-stage rockets; 1,200-km. two-stage rockets; navigation satellites, to be ready for launching by NASA in 1967. (M&R, 11/18/63,13)
usaf announced $500,000 study contracts awarded to General Dynamics/Astronautics, North American Aviation, and Douglas Aircraft Co. for investigation of Aerospace Plane (Asp) concepts. Powered by air-breathing ramjet-like engine, Asp would take off from conventional runway, then travel through space propelled by liquid-oxygen/liquid-hydrogen rocket engine, orbit, and return to land at conventional airfield, (non Release 891 63; M&R, 7/1/63,9)	...
Atlas booster, first stage of Centaur space launch vehicle, arrived at Plum Brook Station to begin series of structural tests in E-Stand, (lrc Release 63-64, Lewis Chronology, 7)
Missiles and Rockets quoted Harrison Storms, president of North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div., prime contractor for Apollo program, on proposals that a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar program would enable U.S. to proceed at more leisurely pace and less expensively: “When is soon enough? I don’t see anything blocking us now. ... If you put it off, it will cost more money. You must have the level of effort capable of developing the systems to do the job. If you go below that level, it costs money. . . . When you begin to lower your effort it’s not the least capable man who leaves first, it’s the most capable. You lose critical talent and you may actually need the same or more manpower to reach the same goal at a later date.” (M&R, 10/7/63, 86)
nasa announced signing $980,488 contract with Pratt and Whitney Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft Corp. to conduct research in use of fluorine/hydrogen and fluorine-oxygen/hydrogen as rocket propellants. Objective of 13-month research project was to demonstrate feasibility of a complete engine system using the two mixtures, (nasa Release 63-158)
Dr. E. C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke before the Georgetown University Forum: “In brief I would list some solid reasons for the moon trip: “1. [There is] No other place so near in space where we can test the equipment and the men for future space travel. “2. A clear objective gives impetus, order, and efficiency to a program. “3. The lunar project requires the development of powerful rocket engines, sophisticated spacecraft, trained astronauts, tracking systems, and capability to protect man against the multiple hazards of space. “4. Success in this venture gives prestige essential at negotiating tables. “5. It will give an impetus to our standard of living, to education and employment, and to new methods and materials for the productive process. “6. There will be substantial defense spin-offs, in addition to the political and economic benefits which also tend to deter aggression. For example, rendezvous technique, life-protective measures, control and guidance systems, improvement in rockets, etc. “7. The moon is an excellent platform for mounting astronomical instruments, without atmospheric handicaps. “8. The moon can be a relay point for communications and a refueling point for space travels.” (Text)
nasa announced Flight Research Center had purchased three F-104 jet aircraft from Lockheed California Co. The F-104’s would oe modified for nasa use in many research programs, including simulated landing of X-15 rocket research aircraft, (frc Release 10-63; nasa Release 63-98)
X-15 No. 3 was flown to 89,800 ft. and 3,310 mph (mach 4.94), by nasa pilot Milton O. Thompson. This was Thompson’s second flight m the X-15 and was intended to familiarize him with the extreme altitude control of the rocket research aircraft. (M&R, 12/9/63,10; X-15 Project Office)
238-lb. instrumented payload to measure intensity of light from stars was launched with Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from nasa Wallops Station to altitude of 110 mi. Telemetry data obtained during flight would be compared with data from similar experiment conducted July 19. (Wallops Release 63—71)
France successfully launched a cat into space onboard a Veronique rocket and brought it to a safe landing. (Reuters, Wash. Post. 10/19/63, 4)
nasa spokesman was quoted bjr Missiles and Rockets as saying that nasa would switch many of its satellite programs from the Delta launch vehicle to the Thrust Augmented Delta (tad), tad would use the Delta second stage with the usAF-developed Thrust Augmented Thor (tat) ,which uses three strap-on solid rockets to raise thrust from 170,000 lbs, to 330,000 lbs. and provide 200 lbs. increase in payload in a 300-mi. orbit. Many nasa programs had been pushing the payload limit of the Delta, Those benefiting from the new booster were reported to be Syncom, the Bios satellites, Oso, Tiros, and the Interplanetary Monitoring Probe (Imp). (M<&R, 10/21/63,15)
French government report recognized the direct and indirect economic benefits to the French economy from space and nuclear work. Of 13,000 persons employed in rocket development, 5,000 were in electronics, 5,000 in chemical-metallurgy. Of 14,000 working at the Pierrelatte nuclear center, 92% are employees of private industry. {MdcR, 11/18/63,9)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, nasa Manned Spacecraft Center Director, said in speech before National Rocket Club in Washington that suggestions of U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint lunar landing program were impractical. Such exchange of manpower, knowledge, and funds could be of some benefit, he said, “but I tremble at the thought of the integration problems we could expect .... I really have mixed emotions, but I’m speaking only as an engineer, not as an international politician . . . .” (NYT, 9/18/63, 11; nbc Release)
164-lb. payload sent to 127-mi. altitude with Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from nasa Wallops Station in experiment to obtain nighttime electromagnetic noise and propagation data. Included in payload were three sweeping receivers and a broadband receiver of the type to be included in Eogo satellite (Eccentric Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) next year. Preliminary telemetry evaluation indicated all experiment objectives were met. (Wallops Release 63-65)
Aerobee sounding rocket launched 248-lb. instrumented payload to 123-mi. altitude in experiment to map night sky sources which emit photons (radiant energy) in specific wavelength interval. Impact occurred 62-mi. downrange from launch site at Wallops Station. Flight was joint project of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center and Lockheed Missile and Space Co. (Wallops Release 63-28)
Japan sent a note of protest to the U.S.S.R. in reaction to the Soviet announcement of Nov. 29 designating two areas in the Pacific as test areas for a new series of Russian rocket launchings from Dec. 2,1963, through Jan. 25,1964. Japan reserved the right to claim damages if any were incurred by Japanese as a result of the tests. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/30/63)
nasa announced signing of formal contract with Boeing Co. for development and production of Saturn V first stage, largest rocket unit under development in U.S. Contract worth $418,820,967, largest ever signed by nasa, called for design, devel-' opment, and manufacture of 10 flight boosters and one ground test booster, as well as assistance to nasa Marshall Space Flight Center in portions of ground test program. Preliminary development of the vehicle stage, powered by five F-l rocket engines, had been in progress under interim contract since December 1961. (nasa Release 63-37)
In first altitude test of aec’s Project Sand (Sampling Aerospace Nuclear Debris), Honest John-Nike rocket carried nuclear sampler payload to 36-mi. altitude where it was jettisoned and parachuted back to earth. Launch was conducted from Tonopah Test Range, Nev., by Sandia Corp. for aec. Project Sand was designed to determine amount of nuclear debris in atmosphere 23 to 43 mi. above earth and to develop techniques for predicting its dispersal in this region. (Space Bus. Daily, 8/27/63, 300)
explorer xix was launched by nasa from pmr on a Scout booster. The 17.8-lb. polka-dot balloon satellite was placed in orbit by a new fourth stage (X-258) of the Scout booster. Apogee was lower than planned and resulted in an orbital period almost six min. less than planned. This, plus a very weak signal from the tracking beacon on the satellite, caused several days’ delay in confirming satellite inflation and in defining the orbital data. Optical ana radar tracking confirmed orbital data as: apogee, 1,488 mi.; perigee, 366 mi.; period, 115.8 min.; inclination, 78.62°. explores xix, like explorer ix, is an atmospheric density satellite. Because of its large surface area and very low mass such a satellite is very sensitive to fluctuations in density in the upper atmosphere. These changes, largely caused by variations in solar radiation, can be measured by fluctuations in the satellite’s orbit, explorer xix was launched into polar orbit and, when tracked by nasa and the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory for a good portion of an H-yr. solar cycle, should provide atmospheric density data on the earth’s high latitudes comparable to those provided by explorer ix for the lower latitudes, (ex. xix Project Office, Lauc, W. J. O’Sullivan; nasa Releases 63-271 and 281)
usn launched a Polaris A-3 missile off U.S.S. Observation Island missile support ship, had to destroy the missile 52 sec. after launch when it went off course. (M&R, 12/9/63, 10) . November : nasa launched the first successful Atlas-Centaur space booster from amr. The booster performed perfectly and the Centaur second stage ignited its liquid-hydrogen engines in space and went into orbit as the heaviest object (10,500 lbs.) yet orbited by the U.S. Orbital data were later announced to be : apogee, 1,050 mi.; perigee, 340 mi.; period, 108 min.; and inclination, 30°. Although another six flights remained before the Centaur could be considered operational, this first successful flight of the high-energy liquid hydrogen-liquid oxygen booster was a major landmark in a development program dogged with delays and disappointments. The previous launch attempt, on May 8, 1962, ended 55 sec. after launch in fiery explosion when the weather shield ripped off the Centaur second stage. In a press conference after the launch, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications Edgar M. Cortright spoke of the launching as “the world’s first successful flight of a hydrogen-oxygen rocket.” Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of nasa Lewis Research Center and the man who personally oversaw the reworking of Centaur during the past year, added that the flight was “the first test of our ability to successfully ignite hydrogen on time in space.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/28/63; Benedict, Wash. Post, 11/28/63; Witkin, NYT, 11/28/63; nasa Releases 63-254-261)
nasa launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., sending a 156-lb. payload to an altitude of 137 mi. Payload was a photospeciroineler to measure ultraviolet light emissions from atomic oxygen at various altitudes in the upper atmosphere to learn more about the amounts and properties of the oxygen atoms. (Wallops Release 63-101; NYT, 11/13/63, 29)	■
nasa launched two-stage Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., with 185-lb. payload of U.S.-Japanese instrumentation to measure electron density and temperature in the ionosphere. Payload was lofted to 139-mi. altitude and no recovery operation was involved. Purpose of experiment was to compare simultaneous measurements made by two different methods: instruments supplied by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center and radio-frequency resonance probe developed by Japan’s Radio Research Laboratory. (Wallops Release 63-85; nasa Release 63-211)
Explosions at Allegheny Ballistics Laboratory, Rocket Center, W. Va., with three men presumed dead and 10 others injured. Explosion occurred in building used for processing chemicals, destroying building and several large trailers, abl is Navy-owned facility, primarily a research center for solid-rocket propellants, operated by Hercules Powder Co. Cause of explosion was not immediately known. (Wash. Sum. Star, 4/28/63)
X-15 No. 3 flown by nasa pilot Joseph A. Walker to record 354,200-ft. altitude (67.08 mi.), the aircraft attaining maximum speed of 3,794 mph (mach 5.58) at 167,000-ft. altitude. Purpose of flight was to obtain data on stability and control in extreme ranges of flight, especially during re-entry from high altitude with X-15’s ventral fin removed. X-15 carried, for first time, an altitude predictor using an internal computer to provide instantaneous measurements of aircraft’s climb angle and rocket engine’s energy; these measurements were then relayed to pilot through use of an altimeter displaying the predicted altitude. Immediately after launch from B-52, X-15 went into steep climb about 44° above horizontal, its engine burning full thrust for 85.5 sec. On upward trajectory pilot Walker applied speed brakes to prevent excessive velocity. For about three min. he experienced near weightlessness. This was 91st flight of X-15 rocket research aircraft, 25th in X-15 by Walker, (nasa Release 63-191; frc Release)
LRC-engineers described base-heating studies being performed on Saturn V Apollo rockets. Base-heating can be a severe problem with rocket vehicles pouring out exhaust gases at temperatures as high as 6000°F. Similar studies were performed on Saturn I. (lrc Release 63-95, LewisChronology, 12)
Monorail rocket sled attained mach 5 speed along missile test track at Holloman afb in recent test, afsc announced, highest known speed ever reached by a monorail sled. Fired in two stages with Cajun and Cherokee rockets, the test vehicle reached 3,753 mph before being stopped near end of seven-mile track. Attachment of “flow separation spike,” similar to needle on nose of jet fighter aircraft, reduced air resistance and thus increased speed. To brake the sled, spike was flipped away from front of sled when peak speed was attained, thus increasing air drag by a factor of four. Sled was then caught by several lengths of tied-down nylon restraining straps. Major test objectives were accomplished, (afsc Release 37-74—72)
Aerobee sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 195-lb. instrumented payload to 125-mi. altitude in 7V2-min. flight. Conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, experiment was designed to measure electron densities in ionosphere by several methods and to yield information necessary to further development of direct measurement techniques. (Wallops Release 63-42)
James E. Webb, nasa Administrator, said in address to Charlotte (N.C.) Chamber of Commerce: “The most important of the major reasons for undertaking a broad national program of space research and development—the one which promises the greatest rewards for mankind—is the least understood and the most difficult to explain. It is the certainty that the basic scientific knowledge gained, and the technological applications which will flow from it, will offer the greatest return on our space investment over many years ahead .... “The road to pre-eminence in space may be a long one. It certainly will not end on the moon, regardless of which nation lands the first explorers there .... “Much of what we need for pre-eminence in space will be acquired on the way to the moon. That is why we have chosen the lunar exploration as an immediate national goal of prime importance. “When will we clearly achieve the pre-eminence we seek ? This is not an easy question. The answer depends not only on_the sustained effort and investment we make, but on what the .Russians do. Their system lends itself to concentration of resources on specific tasks, but their system like any other is faced with conflicting demands for priority. At the present time we simply cannot know what level of investment they expect to make on a long-range space program. We do know we must not be trapped into a narrow one-purpose program such as one limited to a lunar landing. . . . “Unless the Russians unveil a new rocket on the order of Advanced Saturn in the next few years, our chances for being first to explore the moon remain good . . . .” (Text)
usaf launched unidentified satellite for geophysics research purposes from nasa Wallops Station, Va., using Scout booster. (AP, Wash,. Post, 7/7/63; gsfc Sat. Sit. Rept.)
European space organization, Eurospace, issued report recommending program of communications satellites, time-keeping and navinational satellite, and rocket development. Report said Europe’s first operational communications satellite could be launched by 1968 and suggested a network of 12 communications satellites or, as alternative, two stationary satellites, in equatorial orbit] a light satellite orbiting at about 625-mi. altitude as time-keepmg and navigational aid; development of launch vehicles based on existing models of European nations and eldo (European Launcher Development Organization); and studies on equatorial launching site. Eurospace is private association of 125 members representing industries, professional bodies, and industrial associations from nine countries—Belgium, France, Great Britain, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and West Germany. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 4/9/63; NYT, 4/9/63)
A. O. Tischler, nasa Launch Vehicles and Propulsion Assistant Director (for Propulsion), quoted as saying combustion instability 262 problem of F-l rocket engine was now “under control,” in Missiles and Rockets. Installation of mechanical isolator separated oscillations in engine pump from oscillations in fuel system. “Since that time the engine has been tested under the most severe conditions and there has been no evidence of combustion instability.” (M&R, 7/1/63) ...	.	.
John C. Sanders, chief of Dynamics and Controls Branch, nasa Lewis Research Center, obtained patent for and made preliminary design of interplanetary rocket using solar rays as energy source. Rocket uses 200-ft.-wide aluminized mylar mirror to gather solar rays. (Marshall Star, 1/9/63,3)
West German Government announced that it disapproved of its citizens assisting the United Arab Republic on military rocket projects, and said that there was no proof that any West Germans were so engaged. The Israeli Parliament had appealed to Chancellor Adenauer on March 20 to take action against German scientists assisting the U.A.R. in developing military potential. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/22/63, A2)
Skylark rocket launched at Woomera, Australia, reached 123-mi. altitude with experiment to measure electron densities in upper atmosphere. Secondary experiments were measurement of distribution of positive ions, x-ray spectrum of the sun and distribution of atomic hydrogen in upper atmosphere. (MdcR, 3/11/63,
More than 400 German scientists and technicians were reported to be working for Egyptian government on first Egyptian-made rocket and nuclear warhead. First group of German atomic scientists arrived in Egypt in 1954, Israeli sources said. (London Sunday 741-623 0—64--8 Times, in Wash. Post, 3/24/63, A17; London Observer News Service, in Wash. Post, 3/24/63, A17) Mardh 25: Three major U.S. television networks each broadcast seven-minute programs from Paris to New York via relay i communications satellite. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/25/63)
usaf announced launching of unidentified satellite June 28 from nasa Wallops Station, using Scout booster. Goddard Space Flight Center Satellite Situation Report listed the satellite as “research satellite for geophysics.” (AP, Wash. Post, 7/7/63; gsfc Sat. Sit. Rpt., 6/30/63)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster rocket with unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (upi, Wash. Post, 12/22/63; Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
nasa launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from nasa Wallops Station, Va., sending a 200-lb. payload 115 mi. into the upper atmosphere to measure ultraviolet radiation. Experiment was part of a continuing program to develop techniques for measuring ultraviolet dayglow and from the measurements determining the physical processes taking place in the upper atmosphere. Such techniques would also be useful as instrumentation on satellites studying the atmospheres of other planets. (Wallops Release 63-103)
Details of Soviet antimissile missile were disclosed for the first time, by Hungarian Communist Party newspaper Nepsza-badsag. The two-stage rocket has range of between 2,500 and 3,750 miles, can operate effectively against target missiles at altitudes from 20 to 200 miles. Weapon is part of long-range radar system that automatically feeds data of approaching missiles into computers; data are passed automatically to antimissile missile stations, which take over tracking; then, when approaching missile is within 600 miles, antimissile missile is fired automatically. (upi, Wash. Post, 12/8/63)
Editorial in Washington Evening Star quoted Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson:“. . . To reach the moon is a risk. But it is a risk we must take . . . [for] failure to go into space is even riskier .... Where the moon is a major goal today, it will be tomorrow a mere whistle stop for the space traveler.” Editorial cited “soundness of what he has had to say about our projected lunar voyages . . .” and added: “The warning is well-timed, especially so because of what some otherwise sensible and perceptive people have been saying about the alleged nonsensicality of flying to the moon when the money could be better spent on such urgent projects as building schools, sewage plants and more and more highways right down here on earth. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/25/63) April 26: usaf launched Blue Scout rocket from Pt. Arguello, Calif., with unidentified payload. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/26/63)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, said he doubted that Russia has developed any new booster capability despite rumors that the Soviets are about ready to launch another “space spectacular.” (Dallas Morning News, 4/24/63)
nasa launched an Aerobee rocket to an altitude of 123.5 mi. over White Sands Missile Range, N.M., with a 245-lb. payload to study solar radiation. Three telescopes with automatic camera attached to each took x-ray photos of sun at exposures ranging from 3/io sec. to 100 sec. Equipment was designed to obtain an optical image of the sun from its own low-energy x-rays and would be used in future scientific satellites, gsfc cooperated with American Science and Engineering Corp. of Cambridge, Mass., in the experiment. The payload was recovered 55 mi. downrange. (Wash. Post. 10/16/63; AP, NYT, 10/16/63, 2; nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 11/14/63)
usaf placed into orbit two 1.5-lb. Tetrahedral Research Satellites (trs), and a 50-lb. Project West Ford satellite, launched pickaback aboard an unidentified satellite using an Atlas-Agena B booster, trs’s were to measure solar cell radiation damage. West Ford satellite was ejected on the same day of its launch. The satellite was to place a ring of metal fibers in a belt around the earth for passive communications experiments; experiments were successful and effect of 400 million copper filament belt on radioastronomy was found to be negligible. Natural decay of belt expected as planned, (upi, Wash. Post, 5/11/63; Press Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)	_
X—15 No. 1 flown by Maj. Robert Rushworth (usaf) to 101,000-ft. altitude and 4,018 mph speed (mach 6.06), just 86 mph slower than record speed of 4,104 reached in June 1962 flight by Joseph Walker (nasa). Today’s flight was scheduled to reach 3,900 mph, but an extra burst of power from the rocket engine propelled the aircraft close to the record speed. Purpose of flight was to test new navigation instrument, cross-ranger indicator, and to measure effects of high speed flight on photographic techniques. Photographs taken by the X-15's camera were compared with those taken by camera in U-2 aircraft, piloted by Lt. Col. Harry Andonian at the same time as the X-15 flight and along the same route—Edwards afb to Delamar Lake, Nev. (AP, Balt. Sun, 12/6/63; upi, Chic. Trib., 12/6/63)
West German Cabinet approved West German participation in two European rocket and space projects—development of three-stage rocket by 7-nation eldo and development of space probe by 11-nation esro. (NTT [West. Ed.], 7/11/63)
French plans to orbit four-pound “Satmos” satellite in 1964 revealed by unnamed French Government officials. To be launched by Army’s National Office of Space Research using four-stage Berenice rocket, satellite would provide data on re-entry from outer space, (upi, NTT, 9/8/63,42; M&R, 9/16/63,12)
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center awarded preliminary, 90-day contract for development of variable-thrust RL-10 rocket engine to Pratt and Whitney Aircraft. The hydrogen-powered engine would be capable of operating at as little as 12.5 per cent of its rated thrust and be capable of restarting in space. Throttleable RL-10 engines had been test-fired in feasibility studies at Pratt and Whitney plant and nasa Lewis Research Center. (Huntsville Times, 1/8/63) communications agency Telespazio in
President Kennedy visited Cape Canaveral, his third tour of the test site within two years. Flying in from Palm Beach, where he was spending the weekend, the President spent three hours watching the launching of a Polaris missile from the submerged nuclear submarine U.S.S. Andrew Jackson, riding in a helicopter over the Merritt Island Launch Area (mila) where nasa is constructing facilities for Saturn V launches, visiting the Saturn I rocket on its launch site. Speaking of the Saturn I flight scheduled for earlv December, the President said that if successful it would give tlie U.S. “the largest booster in the world and show significant progress in space. “I think that would be an important milestone for us.” The President was briefed on Projects Gemini and Apollo and the related booster programs by a group of nasa officials including nasa Administrator James E. Webb, nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and msfc Director Dr. Wem-her von Braun. At one point in the illustrated lecture, the President lagged behind his party to examine models of the various boosters in the space program. He picked up a model of the 72-ft. Atlas D which had boosted the Project Mercury astronauts into orbit and compared it with a model of the 281-ft. Saturn V intended to propel Project Apollo astronauts to a manned lunar landing. “This is fantastic,” the President said. (NYT, 11/17/63,1; Wash. Post, 11/17/63,2)
usaf solicited proposals from industry for development of solidpropellant space booster capable of up to six-million-lb. thrust. usaf action stemmed from dod-nasa agreement of December 1962 to advance the technology of large solia-propellant rocket motors. (dod Release 53-63; AP, Wash. Post, 1/16/63)
msfc awarded Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation an $8,441,956 contract to extend the duration run of the J-2 liquid-hydrogen rocket engine from 250 sec. to 500 sec. (Space Bus. Daily, 11/7/63, 218)
nasa launched 85-lb. scientific payload to 208-mi. altitude at exact moment explorer xvii atmospheric structure satellite passed over the Wallops Island, Va., launch site, an unusual “first” in nasa sounding rocket program. Launched by Aerobee 300A sounding rocket, experiment obtained temperature data on electron and neutral particles and measured ion and neutral particle densities. Data from this experiment would be compared with similar data obtained from explorer xvn as it passed over Wallops Island at 198-mi. altitude during its 236th orbit of earth. Miss distance was 35,000 yards. Preliminary evaluation by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center scientists indicated data were of excellent quality. (Wallops Release 63-40; Av. Wk., 5/6/63, 21)
14-16 months’ additional slippage of Rover nuclear rocket program due to engineering and materials problems in Kiwi nuclear reactor reported by Missiles and Rockets. Dr. Harold B. Finger, Manager of aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo), was quoted as saying procurement difficulties were encountered because Rover lacked DX priority. No decision would be made to request a DX priority, he said, until results were obtained from the component test and evaluation program. (M&R, 3/11/63, 14-15; R-2, Stein and Morgan)
First birthday of alouette i (“topside sounder”) satellite, built by Canada and launched by nasa into orbit Sept. 28, 1962. alouette was still functioning well and transmitting ionospheric data to 13 telemetry stations around the world. nasa launched four-stage Javelin (Argo D-4) rocket with instrumented payload to 645-mi. altitude from Wallops Station, in experiment to compare rocket-borne measurements of ion and electron temperatures and densities with similar data obtained by alouette. Measurements were taken by the rocket payload in the ionosphere 10 min. before alouette passed through the region and made its measurements. Data were telemetered to ground receiving stations and no recovery operation was involved. Flight was follow-on to similar experiment conducted July 2, results of which indicated close agreement in measurements. During the first year of operation, alouette i orbited the earth 4,981 times, executed 12,900 commands, and provided 2,060 hours of telemetry transmissions, (gsfc Historian; nasa Release 63211; Wallops Release 63-87; Goddard News, 9/23/63,1)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station in continuing series of upper atmosphere studies, the vehicle carrying payload that ejected and detonated 12 explosive charges at intervals from 22- to 51-mi. altitude. A similar experiment was launched from Ft. Chilrchill, Canada, at about the same time to obtain high altitude wind and temperature data. Both shots were considered successful. Experiments were being conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-22; nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 3/5/63 and 3/11/63)
Company began final razing of World War II tnt manufacturing facilities at Plum Brook Station. At the' height of production during W W II, 12 tnt production lines were in operation and 6,000 employees were at work. The 6,000-acre site now is the home of a nuclear research reactor and numerous rocket engine test stands, (lrc Release 63-65, Lewis Chronology, 7)
nasa launched Scout rocket from Wallops Island, Va., with rfd-i (re-entry flight demonstration-1) payload for aec. 480-lb. mockup nuclear reactor traveled 800-mi. suborbital trajectory and reentered southwest of Bermuda, but initial recovery attempts were not successful. Purpose of flight was to obtain data for designing space nuclear reactors that, disintegrate upon atmospheric re-entry. This was first of series of aec flight tests to evaluate safety of aerospace nuclear power systems in operation. (Wallops Release 63-49; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/23/63)
nasa had decided not to begin development of the Multi-Mission Module (mmm) at this time. The module would use two RL-10 engines with tanks configured for different missions. Serving as the third stage of the Saturn I-B or the fourth stage of the Saturn V, it would give the big boosters the flexibility needed for planetary and other missions. Present decision was based on the fact that the stage is not necessary for the Apollo program. (Av. Wk., 10/14/63, 23) During October: Project Stabilization Agreement was ratified for nasa Mississippi Test Operations facilities by representatives of business, labor, and Government. Worked out by the President’s Missile Sites Labor Commission, the unusual agreement established a standard for working conditions, hours, hiring practices, grievance procedures, etc., in return for the promise of no strikes or work stoppages. Agreement would run to July 1, 1966. (Space Bus. Daily, 10/11/63,65)
Flight of X-15, with Maj. Robert Rushworth (usaf) as pilot, canceled minutes before scheduled drop from mother ship because of mechanical troubles in the rocket aircraft, (upi, Wash. Post, 12/19/63)
Three-stage Nike rocket launched from Eglin afb, Fla., fourth in series of ten high-altitude probes to test methods of slowing reentry vehicles. Parachute was deployed when 500-lb. Cree payload reached peak altitude, and cameras in payload photographed action of parachute as it deployed and descended with payload. (AP, Balt. Sun, 3/9/63)
Donald L. Mallick and Harold E. Ream, nasa Langley research {illots, reported to ias meeting on research results of simulated unar spacecraft landing, lunar orbit rendezvous, and atmospheric re-entry made in simulated three-man spacecraft. Realistic tests demonstrated ability of research pilots to complete precise maneuvers of flight, despite necessarily cramped quarters and seven-day duration. Lane aerospace scientists Jack E. Pennington and Roy F. Bris-senden reported on experiments to investigate astronauts’ ability to rendezvous in space by visual means. Pennington and Bris-senden concluded that pilot could sight target vehicle from perhaps as much as 200 mi. away if it is lighted by sun or bright beacon; he could then successfully brake his own spacecraft along an intersecting path. Dr. Leonard Roberts, LaRc physicist, reported to ias on implications of lunar landing if moon has, as many scientists believe, dust layer on surface. Dr. Roberts concluded that spacecraft descending to moon would erode a crater by action of its rocket exhaust. If dust exists on lunar surface, it would be blown outward and away from descending vehicle; air would not be present to recirculate dust in envelnnimr cloud so astronaut’s visibilitv '	...... ... ... .. IT-----Q -----7	—	----------- should not be reduced by lunar dust. Other Lane scientists presented research reports covering instruments for satellites, supersonic aircraft flutter problems, and wind tunnel experiments on helicopter rotors. (Langley Release)
usaf launched an Abres (advanced ballistic re-entry system) vehicle on an Atlas booster from Vandenberg afb, Calif. Like the two previous launches in the series from amr, Abres carried scientific experiments designed to advance the state of the art in re-entry systems. No attempt was made to recover the payload. (Space Bus. Doily, 11/5/63,202)
usn made second attempt to place operational Transit navigational satellite into orbit from Pt. Arguello, Calif., Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering reported. A&AE said spacecraft failed to attain orbit because of malfunction in fourth stage of usaf Blue Scout booster. (A&AE, 5/63,141)
Reported that Russian trawlers and other Soviet vessels regularly appeared off of nasa’s Wallops Station to observe rocket launchings. (Perkinson, Balt. Sun, 5/26/63)
Unidentified space probe employing Blue Scout, Jr., booster was launched by usaf from Pt. Arguello, Calif. {M&R, 2/11/63,13)
Reported that Marshal Nikolai I. Krylov, commander of Moscow military district, had been appointed Chief of Soviet Rocket Forces, replacing Marshal Sergei S. Biryuzov, recently named Chief of Staff of the Soviet Armed Forces. (AP, NYT, 4/16/63)
Three-stage solid-fueled West German rocket launched from Cuxhaven, Germany, reached 65-mi. altitude and returned to earth by newly developed parachute technique. Rocket was designed by and launched under direction of Berthold Seliger, who called test “a partial success—I meant the thing to hit 93 miles high.” Seliger, who helped develop Germany’s V-l and V-2 rockets, said new rocket was developed from V-2. First major German rocket launched since World War II. it would be used in space research and possibly in development of antimissile missile, (trpi, Wash. Post, 5/3/63)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight: “The F-l engine development program has an impressive list of accomplishments. A year after the contract was signed full-scale components were undergoing tests, and in 27 months complete engine systems testing had begun. Full thrust and full duration tests have become routine. The engine has been gimbaled during hot firing. We expect successful completion of the Preliminary Flight Rating Tests this year .... “When design of the F-l was begun in 1959, combustion instability was known to be a potential problem. Accordingly, early in the program tests of various injectors for the thrust chamber were conducted, and a design was selected which had not experienced unstable combustion. For about a year, from mid-1961 to mid-1962, engine tests were conducted without this phenomenon occurring. Then, on June 28 last year we were testing development engine #008 on the test stands in California. A test run which was scheduled for the full 2y2 minutes running time was interrupted after 106 seconds of satisfactory performance by a rupture of a valve casting. The rupture was traced to combustion instability. Since this occurrence, several cases of combustion instability have taken place. “This phenomenon is not unique to the F-l, but has occurred in the development of most liquid rocket engines .... “We are presently concentrating on combustion instability and are making progress. With the contractor at Rocketdyne, we have made an exhaustive survey of all test data having a bearing on the problem .... “To summarize, the F-l engine development over the last four years has made satisfactory progress . . . .” (Testimony) March 18: Frederick R. Kappel, at&t board chairman, said in speech before New York Chamber of Commerce that telstar ii communications satellite would be equipped with instruments “far more resistant to radiation” than telstar i. Like its predecessor, telstar n would be launched by nasa at at&t expense. (NYT [West. Ed.], 3/19/63)
Japan launched Lambda-2 sounding rocket with instrumented payload to 376-mi. altitude in experiment designed to gather data on the upper atmosphere for iqsy. Rocket was built by Tokyo Univ. Industrial Engineering Research Center and fired from Kagoshima Space Center in southern Japan. {M&R, 12/23/63, 10; Space Bus. Daily, 12/19/63,428)
U.S. launched an unidentified probe using Blue Scout booster. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963,1/27/64)
nasa Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station failed to boost scientific experiment to desired altitude because of launch vehicle malfunction. Experiment was to have studied spectral emission lines in upper atmosphere to help in determining “distribution of certain molecular and atomic species in the upper atmosphere.” (Wallops Release 63-8)
mit announced that a laser had been used to observe meteoritic dust at heights of 35 to 85 mi., with the dust seeming to concentrate at 50 to 75 mi. It was suggested that the lower layer might be related to the noctilucent clouds, since last year’s rocket launchings from Sweden suggested that noctilucent clouds found at that altitude could be ice-covered particles of meteoritic dust. The higher layer might be at the level where meteors break into dust on entry into the earth’s atmosphere. (NYT, 10/16/63, 2)
Two-stage sounding rocket instrumented to observe ionosphere was successfully launched to 215-mi. altitude by Japanese scientists near Kagoshima, Japan. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 5/21/63)
U.K. completed first static-firings of Blue Streak rocket planned as first stage of three-stage booster for eldo. Tests were conducted at Woomera, Australia. {M&R, 12/23/63, 9) During December: nasa’s trend toward more incentive-type contracts was outlined in Commerce Clearing House report, pointing out that in early 1962 nasa had no incentive-type contracts, by end of June 1963 nasa had awarded 10 large incentive contracts with others in negotiation, and by June 1964 the number of incentive contracts was expected to be increased by a large margin. Incentive-type contracts were expected to lower costs and improve work performance, in place of cost-plus-fixed-fee type. (Goodman, Wash,. Post, 12/18/63)
Second birthday of Michoud Operations, nasa facility in Louisiana used for fabrication of Saturn I, Saturn IBj and Saturn V rocket stages. To date, nasa had awarded $739 million in contracts which will be carried out primarily at Michoud, and some $41 million had been spent on rehabilitation and modification of plant and construction of new facilities. More than 7,800 persons are now working at Michoud, most of them employees of nasa contractors. (Marshall Star, 9/11/63,1,2)
U.S.-France Aerobee 150A sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Station, Va., in cooperative program between nasa and the French National Center for Space Studies (cnes) to study very low frequency (vlt) radio wave propagation in the ionosphere. The French were developing a technique to measure simultaneously electronic and magnetic vlf field strength and electron densities. If successful the technique would be used in a scientific satellite. The 197-lb. payload rose 116 mi. and transmitted seven min. of data before impacting 59 mi. down-range. This was repeat of unsuccessful attempt two days earlier when Aerobee 150A failed on launch. (Wallops Release 63-95)
Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Program Manager, Apollo Spacecraft, msc, spoke before the National Rocket Club in Washington. He explained the philosophy behind the recent changes in the Apollo flight-test program, when Saturn I launch vehicles were replaced by Saturn IB’s and the first manned flight thereby delayed for some nine months. Dr. Shea pointed out that the space age had advanced to the point that the space environment is understood well enough so that components can be designed, built, and ground-tested with confidence that they can perform well in space. The flight test program has become “the relatively small portion of the development iceberg which is clearly visible to the public.” This had led to a desire to flight-test the entire spacecraft configuration from the outset, rather than the previous method of adding additional systems flight by flight, when “every spacecraft is a somewhat different design containing the potential of new problems. “The discipline of a single configuration—configuration control, if you will—not only increases the carry over from test to test so necessary for establishing design confidence, but also provides repeated opportunities for early spacecraft tests of substantial scope.” (Text)
Study on possibility of polluting outer space with rocket exhaust gases, made by Geophysics Corp. of America for arpa, was reported by John W. Finney of New York Times. Principal conclusion of study was that there is “strong probability that the accelerated rocket program with enormously large missiles in prospect in the near future may cause modifications over large local areas or on a worldwide basis in the upper atmosphere.” Modifications could include marked changes in composition, structure, and temperature of upper atmosphere and changes in electron density of the ionosphere. For example, large amounts of hydrogen could absorb ultraviolet radiation from sun and thus decrease electron density in D region of the ionosphere. (nytCo., Atlanta Constitution, 1/21/63) ■January 21: Reported that Russia's Aeroflot had increased its student fare discount from 25% to 50%, discount applicable to all college students, including those taking evening and correspondence courses, high school students, ana persons enrolled at military or naval institutes. (Av. Wk., 1/21/63,52)
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson reviewed his first 26 months in office on abc television interview. Referring to his participation in major national decisions, he referred to pushing ahead with the large rocket booster program and the accelerated space program decisions in which he participated as Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council. (Wash. Post, 3/27/63; Wash. Eve. Star, -3/27/63)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb, Calif., on a Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena D booster, (mi, Wash. Post, 10/30/63; Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64)
Saturn I ground test booster arrived at Cape Canaveral after 10-day trip from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. It would be used with S-IV stage in series of tests to check out the launch complex. (Huntsville Times, 4/16/63)
Reported that dot cost study of Titan III launch vehicle concluded total development cost of Titan III “exclusive of mission payload adaptations” would be $808.3 million. Study concluded the military space booster would repay its development costs over three or four years of operation—conclusion based on predictable and expectable payload launchings within booster’s capability. (Space Bug. Dally, 7/1/63)
Dr. Nicholas E. Golovin of the President’s Office of Science and Technology told National Space Club in Washington that low reliability of Scout booster (50%) was because of difficulties in four-stage booster teclmology. A basic difficulty to be overcome in future space systems, he said, was development of long-lifetime components and subsystems. Today’s missile system technology requires operational lifetime of less than a half hour; but Apollo would require 400 times that long and Mars fly-by mission, up to 20,000 times that long. The other basic problem for future space systems, he said, was achieving greater reliability with less flight testing. (Space Bus. Daily, 12/18/63, 417)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara visited Boeing Co. in Seattle, Wash., and nasa Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston, Tex., for briefings on X-20 (Dyna Soar) and Gemini projects. In Houston, McNamara said to press: “In the last six months the Department of Defense has completed with nasa an agreement on joint planning for the nasa Gemini program. We want to see how Gemini and the X-20 can be fitted together to make the best program for both military and civilian purposes. “The Gemini program provides for two men to be placed in orbit in 1964. The X-20 program proposes to place one man in orbit at a later date. While the X-20 would be in orbit less time than proposed in the Gemini program it would provide more recoverable payload because it would use a larger booster. The two programs are therefore not entirely comparable. “But because they do have similarities and are both very costly, I believe this trip to Seattle and to Houston, Texas, to visit the Manned Spacecraft Center where the Gemini program of nasa is underway is extremely important. “We will have spent about $350 million on the X-20 by the end of this fiscal year. We are requesting Congress to authorize an additional $125 million in the next fiscal year (1964) . . . .” (dod Release 334—63; msc Space News Roundup, 3/20/63, 1, 7; AP, Balt. Sun, 3/15/63)
usaf and Martin Co. engineers reportedly adopted a tight engineering review system in the number and types of changes in the Titan II missile to the man-rated Titan II booster for Gemini flights. System is intended to improve reliability by holding changes down to fewest possible and seeing that each of these contributes to overall reliability. Modifications that have been made include the necessary structural changes to accept the Gemini capsule, redundancy in certain key systems, and a malfunction detection system that would alert the flight crew to possible trouble. {Space Bus. Daily, 10/3/63, 20)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of National Aeronautics and Space Council, told National Rocket Club in Washington: “From time to time, major public attention shifts from one space project to another. ... It would be incorrect to conclude, however, that any one of these projects or any other specific project encompasses the whole job of implementing our space policy. Rather, all of them, plus many projects not yet conceived, combined to make the national program viable, energetic and selectively expanding. . . . “. . . Our military space activities are just as peaceful as our non-military ones. Indeed, our space legislation labels both as ‘peaceful.’ Both, incidentally, are also scientific, so one cannot make the further distinction that nasa’s and aec’s projects are scientific and the Defense Department’s are something otner than that, or vice versa. ... “Whether or not enough is being done in either the military or non-military space field—and I am never satisfied—I would suggest that before one comes to a firm conclusion on such a question, he should examine in considerable detail just how much has been accomplished during the past 12 months. It is an impressive record and one need not skip over the failures or the delays in specific projects in order to develop a balance sheet which shows a remarkable degree of progress in a field in which we started late and moved slowly too long. . . . “In concluding . . , I would emphasize several points: (1) It is in this nation’s interest—economically, technologically, scientifically, militarily, and internationally—to carry out an accelerating space program; (2) to maintain our position of leadership in the free world we cannot afford anything less than first place in space accomplishment and there is no sound basis for complacency regarding our present position; (3) we must take risks and overcome failures in this complex endeavor and we dare not let the risks or the failures slow our momentum; and (4) in spite of all the excitement and glamor of the space program, it must be managed and operated in a tough-minded fashion so that we will get every one of its many benefits as soon and as efficiently as possible.” (Text)
Aerobee 150A launched from nasa Wallops Station carried instrumented payload to approximately 102-mi. altitude in experiment to study behavior of liquid hydrogen in conditions of radiant heating and zero gravity. Radiant heat measurements were as predicted, and there were 4 min. of zero-g time. Experiment was conducted for nasa Lewis Research Center, responsible for nasa development of liquid-hydrogen-propelled rocket enE'nes. (Wallops Release 63-83; nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. lunching)
Missiles and Rockets article on nasa’s advanced research program said: “The greatest single obstacle to development of new and improved rocket engines—large or small—lies in certain peculiar sounds emitted by powerplants in operation. “Commonly called screech, screaming, squealing or buzzing, the sounds are all manifestations of combustion instability—one of least understood characteristics of a rocket engine. “The key to the lack of knowledge and understanding of the phenomenon is in the very complexity of the combustion process within the engine.” (M&R, 11/25/63, 63)
robes to the moon and Mars by 1970, by converting the Blue treak booster to use of liquid hydrogen, (cpi, Wash. Post, 11/15/63)	^
Soviet news agency Tass announced improved types of rocket carriers for spacecraft were launched successfully from Soviet Union to central Pacific during June and July, and area was no longer off-limits for navigation of ships and aircraft. (Tass, Komso-molskaya Pravda, 7/11/63,3, afss-t Trans.)
Two sounding rockets launched at 'White Sands Missile Range in U.S.-Sweden coordinated study of ion and electron concentrations in D-region of the ionosphere. Areas sounding rocket carrying Sweden’s scientific experiment was fired to 60-mi. altitude, its 12-lbs. of instruments to obtain measurements of ion densities from peak altitude down to 25 mi. At apogee, parachute was deployed and instrumentation exposed. Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched 62 min. later, carried U.S. experiments in 100-lb. payload of instrumentation designed to measure ion and electron densities, ultraviolet radiation in the upper atmosphere, and a camera supplied by Univ. of Leicester, England, to photograph x-ray emission; payload did not achieve desired altitude (about 110 mi.) because of malfunction in the launch vehicle. Cause of malfunction was not yet known. U.S.-Sweden experiments were part of program sponsored by Swedish Committee for Space Research and nasa, whose Goddard Space Flight Center has responsibility for U.S. coordination. Both firings were conducted by Physical Science Laboratory of New Mexico State Univ. under U.S. Army contract, (nasa Release 63-277)
usaf announced launching of unidentified satellite using AtlasAgena booster launched from Pt. Arguello, Calif, (upi, Wash. Post, 5/11/63)
H.J. Res. 787 to provide for erection of a memorial statue to the late Dr. Robert H. Goddard was ordered favorably reported to the House by the House Committee on Science and Astronautics. The legislation would require that nasa erect a bronze statue of Dr. Goddard in central Massachusetts, the memorial giving appropriate recognition to Dr. Goddard’s 1914 patents, first liquid-fuel rocket flight, and other pioneering achievements, (nasa Leg. Act. Rpts. 11/196 and 11/198)
Air Force said that “an improved Thor booster combination of liquid and solid propellants,” launched with unnamed satellite from Vandenberg afb, was deliberately destroyed when it veered off course. Improved Thor had increased thrust from 170,000-lbs. to about 330,000-lbs.—almost double its earlier power and almost equal to the early Atlas, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/63, 1; Wash. Eve. Star, 3/1/63)
F. J. Krieger, rand Corp. specialist on Soviet astronautics, said in report for usaf Project Rand that Soviet Cosmos satellites probably are “para-military” spacecraft of two types: (1) recoverable vehicle as large as Vostok spacecraft and (2) 4,400-lb., non-recoverable vehicle launched from another site and with different booster. Krieger also stated his belief that U.S.S.R. had six attempted probe launchings end in failure between August 25 and January 4 caused by inability to get fourth stage out of parking orbit. First three were attempted Venus probes; next two, Mars probes; last one, moon probe, (rand Memorandum RMOKAK TkT» *	A	TTT 7 j /Cia //**>	f\r\\ OUtfU—r JAj 111 II. V. YY tC^^/ZV/ oo, zz)
nasa launched Saturn SA-4 in successful flight test from Cape Canaveral, the 1.3-million-lb.-thrust rocket reaching 77-mi. altitude in last of four successful tests of first stage alone. After 100 sec. of flight, one of the booster’s clustered eight engines was cut off by pre-set timer, and that engine’s propellants were rerouted to the other seven, which continued to burn. Experiment confirmed engine-out capability designed into the Saturn I vehicle system by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center engineers, (nasa Release 63-61)
On 10th anniversary of first successful Redstone missile launching, Army fired Redstone rocket at White Sands Missile Range in successful test by Redstone Field Artillery unit. {M&R, 8/26/63, 14)	.	.	,
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster rocket with two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb, Calif. (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/30/63; M&R, 9/9/63, 13; Pres. R-pt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64)
dod announced “clearest data yet obtained of the ionosphere and the dynamics of its formation and dissipation” had been obtained by afcrl scientists, who matched experimental data from positive ion detector aboard a Thor rocket with theoretical data based on laboratory studies, within error of only two per cent, (dod Release 388-63)
Reorganization of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s Michoud Operations was announced by Michoud General Manager Dr. George N. Constan. (Marshall Star, 6/26/63,7) Jwm 27: X-15 No. 3 piloted by Maj. Robert A. Rush worth (usaf) to 285,000-ft. altitude and 3,425-mph speed (mach 4.89) in 13-min. flight. X-15 was launched from B-52 mother ship over Delamar Lake, Nev., its engine burning 80 sec. Maj. Rushworth qualified for military astronaut wings by piloting the rocket research aircraft to altitude higher than 50 mi. Purpose of flight was to familiarize 38-year-old Major Rushworth with comparatively high-altitude flight, (frc Release 14—63; nasa Release 63142)
Scientists at the nasa Lewis Research Center succeeded in driving an experimental solid-propellant rocket motor into unstable combustion. This new experimental technique makes possible a {ilanned research investigation of combustion instability prob-ems. (Lewis Chronology, 5)
Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, nasa Director of Biotechnology, said in speech before National Rocket Club that Lt. Tereshkova’s orbital space flight established feasibility of sending scientists not trained as pilots to moon and nearby planets: “I think it is significant that she is not a pilot. This points to the importance the Soviets attach to gathering biomedical information on the effects of space flight and may be a preparation for flying scientists who are not trained pilots . . . .” (upi, NYT, 6/19/63, 3; Av. Wk., 6/24/63,33)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched at twilight from nasa Wallops Station in the second of a series of comet experiments. At 95-mi. altitude the 100-lb. payload produced flames visible from earth and combustion products that lingered after burnout as a faint luminous cloud somewhat similar to a comet. The cloud effect was visible for a surprising five minutes, compared with less than one half minute the night before. The simulated comet was photographed from three ground positions. (Wallops Release 63-92)
Franco-Italian project to develop “Iris'’ rocket capable of delivering mail to any European city was reported by Associated Press. Powered with mixed solid-liquid fuel, the rocket is being designed to deliver 65 lbs. of mail more than 400 mi. away. Rocket would be launched vertically to predetermined altitude—around 72,000 ft.—then guided by radio to delivery point. 30 mi. from target, engine would be shut off, allowing rocket to glide; retrorockets M ould be fired to point its nose up, then Iris would descend backwards to earth. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star. 12/4/63)
Perfection in manufacture of engines for Project Gemini would be sought through a Verification Instruction Program (vip) to train and qualify manufacturing and test personnel at Aerojet’s Liquid Rocket Plant. The program would include 30 days of classroom instruction followed by on-the-job training for top management and senior hourly personnel. Program would be operated by nasa Astronaut Frank Borman and Aerojet plant manager Ray C. Stiff, Jr. (Space Bus. Daily, 11/8/63, 228)
U.S. worldwide tracking network was not able to locate stncom i communications satellite; radio contact with the satellite had been lost Feb. 14, seconds after onboard rocket had fired to transfer stncom i from its highly elliptical orbit into near-synchronous orbit. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/15/63)
Identification of innovations “. . . I want to make it very explicit that nasa’s Technology Utilization Program is separate and distinct from our manned space flight and space science efforts. The space exploration program stands on its own merits; our nation must occupy a position of pre-eminence. The benefits from industrial applications are not now—and never will be—the justification for the high costs of this major effort . . . .” (Text) Harold B. Finger, Manager of aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of nasa Nuclear Systems, described on May 9 nasa research in and plans for nuclear propulsion: “. . . the door that was opened here in Chicago in December 1942 has in less than 20 years led us to concepts and hardware for the utilization of that new energy source in space missions that could not be generally anticipated at that time. As a result of that dramatic scientific effort, we have established major goals aimed at the early and practical utilization of nuclear energy in space. We are convinced that a substantial effort is justified by the potential performance advantages and the many applications of these systems for difficult space missions. This work will lead us not only to the development of particular hardware items, but will open new fields of rocket propulsion and power to permit us to travel freely in space.” (Text)
Atlas booster for Project Mercury manned flight MA-9, scheduled for mid-May, arrived at Cape Canaveral from General Dynamics/ Astronautics, San Diego. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/20/63)
At 17-nation disarmament conference stymied in Geneva, Soviet Ambassador Semyon K. Tsarapkin said: “The U.S. knows very well that the Soviet Union can carry out nuclear explosions on the other side of the moon. The U.S. therefore proposed a ban on tests in outer space, but without any controls or inspections of rocket launchings or any other inspections whatsoever.” This showed, Tsarapkin explained, that the U.S. demands for on-site inspections of earth tremors were made for purely political reasons. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/11/63, A4)
Joint U.S.-U.K.-Australian Project Dazzle to study behavior of objects re-entering atmosphere would be conducted at Woomera Rocket Range in Australia, dod announced. ILK. would provide Black Knight rockets and re-entry payloads; U.S. would provide instrumentation for test, (dod Release 1088-63)
Promotion of Marshal Sergei S. Biryuzov, commander of Soviet rocket forces, to Chief of the General Staff was reported in Soviet militaiy newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/29/63)
usaf announced awarding $3,000,000 original definitive contract to Lockheed Propulsion Co. for research and development of solid propellant motors for the large solid booster program, (dod Release 1304—63) September 27-October 10: nasa displayed models of manned and unmanned spacecraft in lobby of nasa Hq. building, part of fifth anniversary observance, (nasa Release 63-214)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center announced series of sounding rocket tests had confirmed association of Sporadic-E disturbances with presence of wind shears in altitude regions measured Nov. 7, Nov. 30, and Dec. 5,1962. Linder nasa contract, Geophysics Corp. of America scientists measured velocity of wind movements (using Nik6-A_p&clie rockets witli sodium vapor trails) and iguo-spheric phenomena (using Nike-Cajun with Langmuir probe electrical equipment) at nearly the same time. Experiments confirmed theory of Australian scientist J. D. Whitehead that action of upper atmosphere wind pulls electrons from above and below into thin cloud-like layers, causing Sporadic-E layers that often interfere with radio signals’ being reflected off higher F layer of ionosphere, (gsfc Release)
usn launched Polaris A-3 test missile from surface test ship U.S.S. Observation Island using completely new eject launch system. (dod Release 1301-63) September 26-0ct6ber 1: xivth International Astronautical Congress held in Paris, with more than 1,000 delegates from 34 countries attending. 80 papers covering wide range of scientific and technical subjects were presented. (Program) Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of nasa Biotechnology and Human Research, and Chairman of iaf Bioastronautics Committee, presented his “Bioastronautics Review.” Dr. Konecci discussed U.S. bioastronautics programs, results, and plans, and compared U.S. program with that of U.S.S.R. Summing up Project Mercury MA-9 flight, he said: “Hie performance of Gordon Cooper proved in detail man’s integration with the operation of the spacecraft systems. This accomplishment of the Mercury program is of major significance as it does indicate that much more dependence can be placed on man as a reliable operating portion of the man-spacecraft combination .... Once agam, the recent flight of MA-9 has proved that man can adapt very rapidly to a 35-hour period in a new environment. His senses and capabilities are little changed in space. At least for the duration of Cooper’s mission (a total of 34+ hours) weightlessness affecting the normality of his judgment, orientation and other human functions in space was no problem . . . .” (Text) Dr. Konecci also reviewed Russian progress in biotechnology. He said the Soviets had demonstrated the reliability of their spacecraft and their “high regard for life of the cosmonauts, since, to our knowledge, ‘not a single life has been lost in the U.S.S.R. space effort.’ The Soviets concede that, in the long run, human intellect and sensations are the only forces capable of learning the secrets of the universe.” (Text) Four papers by Soviet scientists presented at iaf Congress indicated biological effects of cosmic radiation were one of the most complex and most urgent problems of bioastronautics. Papers reported on radiation effects on seeds, fruit flies, animal tissue, and bacteria as well as on cosmonauts Gagarin, Titov, Nikolayev, and Popovich, who experienced no harmful effects. (Abstracts) At iaf Congress in Paris, Dr. Charles Draper of hit told Missiles and Rochets that joint lunar landing was possible within five years if progress continued at present rate and if U.S. guidance were used with a Soviet rocket. {M&R, 9/30/63,26) Lt. Col. Yuri Gagarin said in address Sept. 28 that Soviet scientists were working on problems of rendezvous and coupling of at least two spacecraft in orbit. Cosmonaut Gagarin acknowledged that rendezvous technique was “extremely complex” and that a number of problems remain in areas of “communications, optics and maneuvers.” He said Soviets would dock several individual vehicles in earth orbit to construct space platform from which man would be sent on flight trajectory toward the moon. Le Journal du Dimanche reported Cosmonaut Gagarin’s prediction that U.S.S.R. would land a man on the moon before the U.S. {Av. Wk., 10/7/63, 30; Le Journal dv Dima/nrhs,. 9/29/63. 22) . Soviet General Nicolai Petrovich Kamanin, Deputy Chief of Staff of Soviet Air Force and head of cosmonaut group, said at iaf luncheon that joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. manned lunar program would achieve a manned lunar landing more quickly and cheaply than separate efforts by the two countries. After the luncheon he told newsmen that a “more favorable political evolution” was necessary before a joint lunar expedition could be planned. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/30/63) Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Director of nasa Office of Space Sciences, said in iaf address: “One of the most exciting technological aspects of space exploration has been the development of automated spacecraft. Most of the scientific exploration of space and the useful applications of space flight thus far have been made possible by automated spacecraft. Development of these spacecraft and their many complex subsystems is setting the pace today for many branches of science and technology. Guidance, computer, attitude control, power, telecommunication, instrumentation, and structural subsystems are being subjected to new standards of light weight, high efficiency, extreme accuracy, and unsurpassed reliability and quality . . . .” He then reviewed automated spacecraft already flown or currently under development by nasa. (Text)
Rocket-boost testing of the Apollo spacecraft would begin during the summer of 1963 from White Sands Missile Range, N.M., nasa announced. The first flight tests would see dummy Apollo capsules launched to relatively low altitudes by the Little Joe II solid rocket to subject sections and the assembled vehicle to maximum combinations of g forces and aerodynamic resistance that would be encountered in the launch phase of normal flights. (NTT, 6/29/63,35)
nasa launched Scout rocket with flight experiment to test re-entry heat shield material for spacecraft, but Scout veered off course and had to be destroyed before it left vicinity of Wallops Station launch area. Cause of malfunction was being investigated. (Wallops Release 63-69)
Conference on artificial satellites held at Virginia Polytechnic Institute, Blacksburg, Va., sponsored by vpi in cooperation with National Science Foundation and nasa Langley Research Center. 13 nasa scientists and engineers were among the featured speakers. ( XT A C * T?ol QOCp AO 1 7	\ ^ j.. ilu.l AtV/iGiVOU WW X I Cl J Dr. Homer E. Newell, nasa Director of Space Sciences, said in introductory lecture: “Those who argue that we should dispense with the frills of science and space exploration, and concentrate on the necessities of military development, forget that we can’t really say what the military necessities in space will be. Our crystal ball is not that good, and it would be foolhardy to pretend that it is. We do not wish to develop a Maginot line in space, only to have it flanked by forces of greater flexibility. We need to develop in a broad way our space capability so that we shall have the ability to move in any direction required by future events to meet any threats along whatever lines may develop. “. . . Out of this broad activity in space will come the ability of the United States to use space and to operate in space either as it may chose to do voluntarily or may find itself compelled to do in its own defense. The development of our ability to operate in space, including manned space flight, gives to our country another dimension in which to meet the challenges—both opportunities and threats—of the future. We can do engineering in space, advance our science in a way that cannot be accomplished at the surface of the earth, and extend the range of practical applications for the benefit of man. And, if necessary, we can thwart the attempts of any enemy to use space against us. “In this day and age we cannot afford to ignore this last point. In our own self interest, and for the safety of our country, we cannot permit others to develop space capabilities that we cannot match, and that may, therefore, be used disastrously against us. “This is a capability we must have to ensure our survival in the space age as the independent, self-determining nation that our forefathers set us up to be, and that we have always insisted on is is the capability that we shall have from the development of the ability to investigate scientifically with satellites and space probes, and from space applications, from the ability to perform manned space flight and manned space operations, from the vast complex of manufacturing and assembly plants, launchings complexes, tracking and telemetering facilities, and from the invaluable experience that this initial stage in the space program will give us. “This is the most significant point about the present era in space. This is the most important aspect of the present activity in space. “We are now laying the groundwork for whatever role we may have to play in space in the future. We are ensuring that no one will ever be in a position to use space against us while we, helpless and frustrated through lack of the necessary space capability, have to take what comes . . . .” (Text) Dr. Wilmot N. Hess of Goddard Space Flight Center told Conference August 14 that U.S. high-altitude nuclear explosion in 1962 provided new information for determining path and rate of decay of high-energy electrons, thus providing better understanding of the Van Allen radiation belts. “While the nuclear explosion shortened the lives of some satellites and increased the intensity of radiation around the globe, it had a valuable side effect. “To students of the Van Allen belt, it was almost like having a controlled experiment in space . . . .” (AP, NYT, 8/15/63, anna i geodetic satellite’s flashing beacons had resumed after more than two months of blackout, Richard B. Kershner of Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory disclosed in Aug. 15 press conference. In Blacksburg for Artificial Satellites Conference, Kershner said: “We have no explanation for the lights coming back on two weeks ago. We don’t like to believe in space gremlins, but we’ve reached the point where that’s as good an explanation as any.” (AP, Chic. Trib., 8/16/63) Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of nasa Langley Research Center, addressed banquet. Dr. Thompson called on educators attending the conference to join with nasa and other research organizations to develop new and more effective means for accelerating effective distribution and assimilation of newly acquired research information. He cited prospective establishment of Virfinia Associated Research Center (varc) adjacent to the lshc pace Radiation Effects Laboratory at Newport News, Va., as a new and imaginative device to promote flow of knowledge between a major laboratory and three outstanding Virginia institutions of higher learning. (LaRc Release) Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Chief of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center’s Flight Operations Div., said Aug. 16: “The first U.S. manned spaceflight program [Project Mercury] was designed to (1) put a man into earth orbit, (2) observe his reactions to the space environment, and (3) bring him back to Earth safely at a point where he could be readily recovered. All of these objectives have been accomplished, and some have produced more information than we expected to receive . . . .” Discussing the stringent reliability requirements of manned space flight: “The smallest mistake in a man-rated system can bring totally unexpected results. The unexpected is the rule in the unknown, and if man is going to live in the region beyond our atmosphere, he is going to live under new rules or not at all. We have been aware of these rules . . . but they have not been brought to our attention so vividly as they have in the manned flight program .... “The manned space flight program has added greatly to our knowledge of the universe around us and demonstrated that man has a proper role in exploring it. There are many unknowns that lie ahead in space, but we are reassured because we are confident in overcoming them by using man’s capabilities to the fullest ... . We now depend on man in the loop to back up automatic systems rather than using automatic systems alone to insure that the mission is accomplished .... We have arrived at what we think is the proper mixture of that formula. Man is the deciding element; but we cannot ignore the usefulness of the automatic systems.” Kraft told news conference that two engine problems were encountered in the Titan II booster for Project Gemini. Titan II’s first stage generated chugging oscillation which could cause “the pilots to have their eyeballs shook out.” Second stage engine was producing only about 90% of desired thrust. Both problems apparently were associated with turbine drive mechanisms (msc Release 63-126; AP, Chic. Trib., 8/17/63) Gerald M. Truszynski, nasa Deputy Director of Tracking and Data Acquisition, discussed satellite data recovery and tracking system for manned satellite program. He described the manned space flight network used in Project Mercury and the augmentations planned for support of Project Gemini, concluding: “. . . while certain equipment augmentations will be effected, many of the techniques learned during the Mercury program, particularly in terms of procedures required to assure positive Network support, will be utilized in Gemini and in this way, an ever-increasing background of know-how will be available for the extremely complex missions which will be encountered in the manned lunar landing program shortly to be upon us.” August 13: Spokesman for Westinghouse Defense Center, which was preparing program definition study of nonmilitary navigational satellite under nasa contract, predicted navigation by satellite could become reality “in three or four years .... Using electronic sensors, the system would determine automatically the position of each ship or aircraft with respect to known references and relay this information to a ground station. This station would then compute the navigation ‘fix’ and relay this information to the user via the satellite . . . .”	(Space Bus. Daily, 8/13/63, 230)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was fired by nasa from White Sands Missile Range, N. M„ the 235-lb. payload to take observations of ultraviolet light and the sun’s corona, (gsfc Hist.; AP, Wash. Post, 10/2/63)
Soviet Premier Khrushchev, opening session of World Woman’s Congress in Moscow, warned that third world war would “be a rocket nuclear war of extermination, . . . [destroying] much of what we generally call civilization.” Cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova was stellar attraction at Communist-dominated congress. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/24/63 A-20)
Pratt & Whitney Aircraft Co. announced successful demonstration of new method of cooling high-pressure hydrogen rocket-engine chamber, p&w spokesman said that “successful demonstration of cooling during this company-sponsored firing was a research breakthrough on high-pressure hydrogen rocket engines .... The high pressure concept is the next step in increasing the performance of hydrogren fueled rocket engines.” p&w is producer of RL-10 liquid hydrogen rocket engines for Saturn S-IV stage and Centaur upper stage booster. (Space Bus. Daily, 9/9/63, 356; Hartford Courant, 9/9/63)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket carried instrumented payload to 101-mi. altitude in experiment from nasa Wallops Station to measure density and conductivity of electrically charged particles in the ionosphere under undisturbed conditions. Except for failure of solar aspect sensor, experiment was considered a success. The 80-lb. payload impacted in Atlantic Ocean 77 mi. from launch site. (Wallops Release 63-38; nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
usaf launched a Thor-Agena D booster carrying an unidentified satellite, from Vandenberg afb, Calif. Also launched that day was a Minuteman icbm in what was termed a routine training launch. (AP, W ash. E ve. S tar, 11/28/63)
nasa successfully launched explorer xvm, the Interplanetary Monitoring Probe (Imp), from amr on a Thor-Delta booster. Intended to have an apogee of 173,000 mi. and a perigee of 125 mi., explorer xvm was tracked as having an apogee of 122,800 mi. and a perigee of 120 mi., with an orbital period of about four days, and an inclination of 33.3°. Essentially a continuation of the series of energetic particle spacecraft and similar in design and in some experiments to the earlier explorers xn, xiv, and xv, its 35 lbs. of instruments would measure the major magnetic field phenomena in space, including the interplanetary magnetic field, interactions of the streaming solar plasma and the geomagnetic field, galactic and solar radiation, (nasa Releases 63-249,261; Wash. Post, 11/27/63)
A second Aerobee-Hi research rocket in the NASA-French joint program investigating propagation of very low frequency waves in the ionosphere was launched from Wallops Station. The 193-lb. payload went to an altitude of 115 mi. and yielded seven minutes of telemetry data before impact. The first experiment in this series was conducted on Oct. 17, 1963. (Wallops Release 63-98) 741-623 0—64--27
nasa Administrator James E. Webb said in address before Milwaukee Press Club Gridiron Dinner: “From the results of the past five years of effort, it is apparent that, if we are to achieve mastery of space, we must add substantially to our scientific knowledge and to our utilization of technology. The nasa program is moving forward on both of these fronts. Essentially, our efforts in the Gemini and Apollo programs, leading to exploration of the moon, will provide us with an understanding of the limiting factors in space utilization, and the skills which will be needed to meet such future requirements in the space environment as our nation decides to undertake .... “All of these skills are needed not only in the pursuit of peaceful rewards for mankind from space exploration, but for the development of any space missions wbich may become necessary to our national defense, to insure that space will not be used as an unchallenged avenue of aggression against us. As these skills increase, a growing close relationship between the nation’s best experts in the underlying technologies is utilized to make the best decisions on new operat ional systems, whether civilian or military. “It is also recognized that our space program must be broad enoughj including considerable basic research, to give us a flexible base suitable for a continuity of effort in a direction or directions perhaps still unknown. Our broad and varied space effort permits us to lead from our great national strengths—the remarkable flexibility of our economic, social and political systems, the great variety of our talents, and the vast resources of our university-industry-government complex. “Accordingly, we have not allowed ourselves to be trapped in a narrow competition, but have developed a national space program which embraces a wide range of activities . . . .” (Text) April 17: Soviet declaration of 11 basicprinciples of space activity presented to Legal Subcommittee of U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. U.S. sources said proposals were virtually unchanged from those offered last year. {NTT, 4/18/63, 22) Discovery of planet (“Barnard’s Star B”) in constellation Ophiu-chus was reported to astronomers at Tucson, Ariz., by Dr. Peter van de Kamp, Director of Swarthmore College’s Sproul Observatory, Swarthmore, Pa. Six light years from earth, planet is one-and-a-half times mass of planet Jupiter or nearly 500 times mass of earth. Dr. van de Kamp’s measurements of amount of wobble it produced in motion of its sun, Barnard, determined object to be a planet. Barnard’s Star B was third planet discovered outside our solar system but the most nearly planet-sized one of all. (Wash. Daily News, 4/18/63; NTT, 4/19/63, 4) usaf announced selection of three contractors to begin development work on large solid-fuel rocket motors: Aerojet General Corp., Thiokol Chemical Corp., and Lockheed Propulsion Co. Thiokol and Aerojet would conduct parallel programs leading to demonstration static firing of half-length 260-m. motor of about 3 million-lb. thrust; depending upon results of this work, usaf would select one of the companies to proceed with development aimed at demonstration of 6-million-lb. thrust motor. In addition, Thiokol would work toward demonstration static firing of 156-in.-diam-eter motor of 3-million-lb. thrust, using two segments in solid-fuel motor; Thiokol would work toward demonstration static fipirwv 1	r\ Tia-TOilUstTt.lk flimcf in oinrrlo llilllg VA Il/U'AAA.“VAAlilllOtCl lAAV/VVl VA VliV AiAAAllVAA IV, Ulll	AAA UAAAj^AV/ segment, steerable through use of movable nozzles; Lockheed would work toward demonstration static firing of 156-in.-diame-ter motor of one-million-lb. thrust, in single segment, steerable through use of deflectors, usaf was managing the solid-propellant rocket motor development under nasa-dod agreement, (dod Release 493-63) Draft report on two bills (S. 132 and S. 152) “to create the National Weather Council and to provide coordination and central direction for an accelerated program of weather research, basic and applied,” sent to Bureau <3 the Budget for consideration and advice prior to submission to the Congress. Proposed council “would coordinate and centrally direct meteorological and weather research and experimental programs” of represented agencies and would consist of: Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau (Council Chairman), Director of nsf, Administrator of nasa, Secretaries of Agriculture, Interior, Army, Navy, and Air Force or their respective designees. S. 132 would also include Administrator of faa. ( nasa Leg. Act. Rpt. 11/55 and 56; Itr, nasa administrator to Hon. Warren G. Magnuson, 4/17/63)
Deputy Commander of Soviet Strategic Rocket Troops, Col. Gen. Vladimir Fedorovich Tolobko, said in Krasnaya Zvezda that U.S.S.R. had perfected 100-megaton nuclear warheads for its missiles and had succeeded in creating antimissile defenses. (upi, Wash. Post, 2/21/63, A21)
X-15 No. 1 flew to an altitude of 77,800 ft. and a speed of 2,834 mph (mach 4.21), as Capt. Joe H. Engle (usaf) made his first flight in the research rocket aircraft, (nasa Release 63-224; Chic. Trib., 10/8/63)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island, Va., carried 63-lb. instrumented payload to 104-mi. altitude in test to measure ion concentration and composition in upper atmosphere. Flight was joint project of Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. and nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63—47)
Eclipse of the sun visible across Canada and Northeastern U.S. nasa joined other scientists and astronomers in scientific studies during the eclipse, with emphasis on ionosphere and on sun’s corona. At Churchill Research Range, usaf oar facility located at Ft. Churchill, Can., six Nike-Apache sounding rockets equipped with instruments to measure electron density, electron temperature, and solar radiation in ultraviolet and x-ray regions were launched for nasa Goddard Space Flight Center; Aerobee 150 sounding rocket equipped with spectrophotometric instruments to measure absolute intensity of spectral features in ultraviolet region was launched for Johns Hopkins Univ.; and Canadian Black Brant sounding rocket with instruments to measure variations in D and E layers of ionosphere was launched for usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories, gsfc and afcrl scientists said preliminary results indicated collected data confirmed previous predictions of composition of the ionosphere. At White Sands Missile Range, gsfc project for eclipse was Aerobee 150 sounding rocket equipped with coronagraph to photograph sun’s corona, ultraviolet spectrometer aimed at sun’s center, and camera to photograph Lyman-Alpha rays. At Wallops Station, gsfc project was measurement of electron and neutral particle temperatures in the ionosphere using instrumented payload launched by Aerobee 300A sounding rocket to 207-mi. altitude. At Pleasant Pond, Me., gsfc team photographed eclipse with specially made instrument for photographing stars and comets near the sun. DC-8 flying observatory flew north from Edmonton, Can., to meet eclipse at Great Slave Lake, following path of moon and flying above much of atmospheric-haze layer. Sponsored by Douglas Aircraft Co. and National Geographic Society with 11 other participating organizations, expedition included nasa Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter and nasa astronomer Dr. Jocelyn R. Gill studying various scientific details of the phenomenon. Also onboard were Sheldon Smith and Ray Torrey of nasa Ames Research Center, photographing rays of sun’s corona, (nasa Release 63-148; msc Release 63-113; Goddard News, 7/15/63, 1, 8; oar Research Review, Vol. II, No. 11; dod Release 978-63; Wallops Release 63-70; M&R, 7/29/63,24)
Titan II was launched 5,700 mi. down amr in test of vibration levels Sri or to its employment as a booster for Gemini manned space ights. Also along on the flight was a pickaback capsule of instruments to study the exhaust plume of the missile, (upi, NYT, 11/2/63, 9)
Preliminary test of instrumentation to be used in joint Italian-U.S. San Marco Project was made with launching of two-stage Shotput sounding rocket from nasa Wallops Station, the rocket carrying 180-lb. instrumented payload to 265-mi. altitude. Flight was first in three-phase project being conducted by Italian Commission for Space Research and nasa, to be followed by further tests of San Marco instrumentation with launching of Shotput vehicle from towable platform in Indian Ocean and to be culminated in launching of scientific satellite into equatorial orbit from the platform. Basic objective of San Marco Project was to obtain high-altitude measurements of atmospheric and ionospheric characteristics in equatorial region, (nasa Release 6376; Wash- Sun. Star, 4/21/63)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) officially came into existence, a merger, after more than a year of study and debate, of the American Rocket Society (ars) and of the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences (ias). aiaa is thus the leading technical society keyed to the dynamic developments of the space age. Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of jpl, became the aiaa’s first President. {Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering, February 1963,19)
A nasa Hq press conference confirmed that the combustion instability that had plagued the 1.5 million-lb.-thrust F-l rocket engine had been corrected, nasa had assembled a team of the best propulsion experts in the country to work on the problem. The nature of the corrective action was redesign of a part of the engine behind the injector, so that fuel and oxydizer were no longer subject to surging as they entered the thrust chamber. Further redesign was underway to simplify the rather complicated series of baffles in the new part. (Wash. Eve. Star, 11/19/63)
Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that, within past 18 months, four F-l rocket engines had been damaged or destroyed in static firings and that another 12 firings had ended with premature shutdowns. F-l was under development by Rocketdyne for use in Saturn V launch vehicle. (Av. Wk., 2/4/63, 26)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D.-Minn.), in Missiles and Rockets interview, advocated selling space boosters to foreign countries. Noting Scout and Thor boosters already were available to European countries, he said Atlas also should be made available, under these conditions: “One, that they pay for the vehicle—I don’t think we should give it away. “Two, we would need to launch it for them. . . . Third, whatever secrecies surround the launch vehicle and/or other devices, all of this would be handled by U.S. personnel .... “In my opinion, other nations are not as interested in advancing scientific exploration as they are in embarking on programs to advance their own economic position. And in this instance I say it’s fine for us to cooperate by selling to them a booster or whatever other paraphernalia they need. “As these countries become more involved in space programs, it may be they will be desirous of buying Saturns or Centaurs. We don’t necessarily need to stop at Atlas. I think the whole high-thrust field of boosters is a tremendous market with great potential. “. . . we should do this through an agency of the U.S. government, probably through the Defense Department or nasa. Whatever profit might be involved does not go to nasa, does not go to dod—it goes to private industry, to those who make the Atlas or the Saturn or Centaur. This money gets back into the economy. It provides jobs. It stimulates the U.S.’s gross national product, causing our overall economy to grow and expand . . . .”	(M&R.
Dr. Donald E. Gault of nasa Ames Research Center told American Geophysical Union that moon dust, from one to 10 tons a day, was falling on earth. Dr. Gault estimated that 54 per cent of dust sprayed off moon (by impact of meteoroids) enters solar orbit; 40 per cent enters earth orbit; 3 per cent impacts earth directly soon after leaving moon; and 3 per cent hits earth after a month or more. He suggested methods of finding moon dust for analysis: launching rocket to collect sample particles from upper atmosphere; and obtaining samples of sea sediment in polar regions where, he said, layers of moon dust must have been deposited and trapped. (NYT, 4/18/63; Wash. Post, 4/18/63)
usaf launched unidentified payload with Blue Scout booster from Pt. Arguello, Calif. {Wash. Post, 2/20/63, Al; M&R, 2/25/63,11)
X-15 No. 1 flew at speed of 2,864 mph (mach 4.25) and altitude of 74,000 ft. in its first test as an aerial mapping plane, a camera having been installed into the underside of the craft’s nose. Piloted by Maj. Robert Rushworth (usaf) , X-15’s rocket engine burned a record 2min. Primary purpose of flight was to measure photograph distortion caused by shock waves, air flow, and other aerodynamic turbulence. Flight marked first test in advanced research program in which X-15 would photograph stars, measure meteoroids, and investigate infrared rays in space, (upi, Wash. Post, 4/12/63; AP, NYT, 4/12/63)
National Aeronautic Association president Martin M. Decker announced National Frank G. Brewer Trophy for 1962 would be awarded to Dr. Merlyn McLaughlin, president of College of Osteopathic Medicine and Surgery of Des Moines, Iowa, (naa Release) Eugene M. Zuckert, Secretary of the Air Force, speaking at Symposium on the Exploration of Mars of the American Astronautical Society, discussed the two-fold task of the Air Force: “. . . . first, to protect the Nation’s exploration and research in space as effectively as the Air Force contributes to protection of our national activities on the Earth’s surface, and second, to act as the Department of Defense agency which helps insure the National Space Program’s success through provision of Air Force facilities and services to the overall effort. “The question of whether there is a need of an operational capability for United States military forces beyond the atmosphere may already have been answered for us in a number of public statements by Soviet military and political leaders .... Their major new book on Military Strategy . . . says, “Soviet military strategy acknowledges the need to study the use of space and space vehicles to reinforce the defense of the socialist countries. ... It would be a mistake to allow the imperialist camp to gain any superiority in this area.’ ” (Text) Speaking at a symposium on the Exploration of Mars in Denver, Colo., Wolfgang E. Moeckel, chief of lrc’s Electromagnetic Propulsion Division, said: “The potential of electric propulsion for Mars exploration is as great or greater than that of other systems now under development and it becomes even more attractive for the exploration of the farther reaches of the solar system.” (lrc Release 63-35, Lewis Chronology, 4-5) Highlights of parellel studies on three classes of Nova launch vehicles, conducted by General Dynamics/Astronautics and Martin-Marietta Corp. for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, were presented by Andrew Kalitinsky, gd/a Program Director. {Av. Wk., 6/10/63,34) Dr. H. O. Ruppe of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s Future Projects Office estimated manned Mars mission would require about $9 billion for interplanetary spacecraft, $5 billion for operating costs (including procurement of Nova launch vehicles), and $2 billion for remaining production and procurement costs. Dr. Ruppe presented paper on “Vehicle Design for Earth Orbit to Mars Orbit and Return,” discussing results of Project Empire (Early Manned Planetary-Interplanetary Roundtrip Expedition) contract studies by Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Ford Co. Aero-nutronics Div., and General Dynamics/Astronautics Corp. Results of studies indicated: only marginal capabilities exist for allchemically propelled space vehicles; even with nuclear-powered upper stages, manned roundtrip flight would be difficult task; because of eccentricity of earth’s orbit, flights during 1975-80 period may be technically or economically unfeasible; manned Mars program would require unusually high degree of coordination within entire National space program. {NTT, 6/7/63, 11; Marshall Star, 6/12/63,1? 4) Harold B. Finger, Manager of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of nasa Nuclear Systems, said: “[Manned Mars mission] will be a very major undertaking exceeding the Apollo program In total cost and difficulty. For that reason, we must realistically recognize that one of the factors determining the timing of such a mission will be the availability of funds and manpower. We must recognize that we cannot undertake such a mission until the Apollo mission begins to phase out. “If, as will probably be the case, rendezvous in earth orbit and some orbital assembly or propellant transfer will be required to perform the Mars landing missions, an earth orbiting space laboratory will probably precede the accomplishment of the actual planetary missions. The cost of such a system would also be high but it would probably be a necessary stepping stone to the planetary missions .... “The unknowns in such a mission will require the accumulation of a great deal of basic information and . . . substantial development efforts for all of the systems and facilities that would be required in such a mission. I think it is to be expected that the time required for development of these systems puts the accomplishment of a manned Mars landing mission off until late in the seventies and more probably into the early eighties .... “I expect that large chemical rocket booster stages, in combination with nuclear rocket upper stages, will be used to accomplish the Mars landing mission. I expect also that such vehicles and propulsion systems will be used to perform the preliminary missions of manned fly-by trips around Mars and trips into orbit around Mars. It is conceivable that such missions could start in the latter part of the 70’s . . . .” (Text) A. James Shiner of nasa Man-System Integration delivered paper prepared by him and Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, Director of nasa Biotechnology and Human Research: “A manned orbital research laboratory . . . becomes a distinct requirement to obtain human design requirements for a Mars vehicle system, whether that system be nuclear or chemical. The manned orbital research laboratory will help answer many of our questions about the space environment^ and man’s ability to not only survive, but to perform useful functions in prolonged space missions. The manned orbital research laboratory under study by the Langley Research Center will have to operate for prolonged periods of time to obtain the required human research and biotechnology data needed for design of advanced space systems. A manned orbital research laboratory will eventually be used to simulate Martian voyages as well .	. .” (Text) Secretary of the Air Force Eugene Zuckert predicted need for military patrol in space “to determine at all times what is hap741-623 0—64--16 pening in near-space and to deal with any threat there . . . . [Space patrol] would provide on-call protection for U.S. space activities, both scientific and military, in the event of hostile enemy actions.” (Rocky Mountain News [Denver], 6/7/63) Dr. W. M. Sinton, Lowell Observatory astronomer, said in June 7 address that possible vegetation on Mars would probaby resemble cactus, especially barrel or saguaro cactus. (AP, Balt. Sim, 6/8/63) Dr. Gerard de Vaucouleurs of Univ. of Texas described recent Mars observations from Pic du Midi in French Pyrenees. Studying spotted patterns of dark areas, Pic du Midi found seasonal darkening or Martian surface was actually a filling in of spaces between dark spots on the planet. Dr. de Vaucouleurs found it difficult to reconcile large-scale changes of dark areas with recent findings that Mars was extremely dry. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/8/63) Jwne 7: France’s President Charles de Gaulle opened 25th International Air Show at LeBourget Airport, visiting U.S. space exhibit as well as other exhibits. (NYT, 6/8/63,35)
28-nation U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space approved Indian progress report on plans to sponsor an international rocket base at Quilon for launchings in space above the equatorial regions. Italian delegate reported that the San Marco floating launching facility would be completed in time for use in the iqsy. {L.A. Times, 2/26/63)
Two usaf U-2 aircraft have been used at amh for more than three years in a program gathering data on infrared characteristics of the exhaust plumes of ballistic missiles, according to Aviation Week. The program had been sponsored by Aeronautical Systems Div. of afsc. Known as Smokey Joe, it was coordinated with arpa’s Project Tabstone, which includes aircraft-user programs Lookout (using rcaf CF-lOO’s) and ramp (Radiation Air Borne Measurement Program). One of the U-2’s was equipped with 400-lb. radiometer, the other with spectrometer. One or both covered 80% of am:r launchings, flying at 60,000 ft. to observe the plume of the rocket as it passed on its upward flight. Data was forwarded to agencies concerned with ballistic missile defense. (Av• Wk., 11/18/63,53)
Attempt to launch two-stage Astrobee 1500 sounding rocket from nasa Wallops Station failed with first stage of the vehicle failing to perform properly. This was nasa’s first attempt to launch the Astrobee, and purpose of test was to evaluate the rocket’s performance as a nasa test vehicle. (Wallops Release 63-36)
Dr. G. A. Tokaty, former chief of the aerodynamics laboratory of the Zhukovsky Academy and later chief rocket scientist of the Soviet Government in Germany (1946-47), published an article on “Soviet Space Technology” in Spaceflight, magazine of the British Interplanetary Society. Article submitted that the “Soviet Government have manifested their keen interest in the [spacej field throughout the entire history of their existence [since 1917J” and reviewed this history in interesting detail to 1961. (Spaceflight, 3/63,59-64)	.
U.S.-Australian experiment to obtain data on the ionosphere conducted at nasa Wallops Station, with Aerobee 150A sounding rocket carrying 144-lb. payload of radio instruments 1,253 mi. high during eight-minute flight. Experiment was designed to measure intensity and spectrum of vlf radio waves above “E” region of the ionosphere. This was third U.S.-Australian attempt of the space experiment and first success, the previous two having failed to reach desired altitude because of vehicle structural failure. Scientific payload was provided by Australia’s Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization. Technical facilities, telemetry recording, and the two-stage rocket were provided by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-39)
A one-segment solid-propellant rocket engine of the type intended as the first-stage booster power for the Titan III-C space launch vehicle was static-fired by United Technology Center. Under Air Force contract, the company is developing a single engine consisting of five such segments. Two of these five-segment enfines would give Titan III-C a liftoff thrust of more than 9 x 10s g (2 x 106 lb). They would be the largest and most powerful solid-propellant engines ever developed. (SID, 4/15/63) February 24: Citing recent survey of 100 U.S. scientists who concluded top-priority scientific goal of U.S. space program should be “searching for and finding life on other planets,” Washington Post's Parade magazine said: “It would be interesting to note their answers were they asked what should be the nation’s overall scientific goal—not merely the goal of our space program.” (Parade, 2/24/63)
usaf launched Thor rocket with delta-wing re-entry payload from amr, first flight test in Project Asset (Aerothermodynamic-Elastic Structural Systems Environmental Tests). Payload reached 35-mi. altitude before re-entering atmosphere at 10,900 mph speed and landing about 1,000 mi. southeast of Cape Canaveral. Recovery efforts were not successful. Good data on temperatures and pressures of the payload were obtained during the 20-min. flight; the various materials of the payload were subjected to re-entry heat up to 4,000°F. (AP, NYT, 9/19/63, 8)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D with unidentified satellite from pmr. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963) During July: nasa Marshall Space Flight Center selected General Dynamics/Ft. Worth and Douglas Aircraft Co. to conduct parallel studies of manned Mars exploration flight “in the unfavorable time period” (1975-85). Under seven-month contracts, the companies would outline the mission and development program for the Mars flight, identifying spacecraft and booster systems and selecting mdst promising mission profile. (Space Bus. Daily, 7/5/63; LA. Times, 7/9/63; Marshall Star, 7/10/63,8)
Dr. Theodore von Karman, distinguished U.S. physicist, died in Aachen, Germany, four days before his 82nd birthday. As early as 1906, Dr. von Karman established basic principles that led to design of light and efficient aircraft structures. Among his important scientific contributions were studies of air turbulence, which influenced early aircraft design, and theory of boundary layers, which led to pioneer construction of wind tunnels. He was responsible for many scientific theories leading to development of supersonic jet aircraft and rocket engines. Dr. von Karman in 1930 became Director of Cal Tech’s Guggenheim Laboratory, which in 1944 became Jet Propulsion Laboratory. As jpl Director he pioneered in U.S. rocket propulsion, led development of Jato. Chairman of nato’s Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research and Development (agard) since 1951, he was recipient of more than 20 honorary doctorate degrees and was in 1963 first recipient of National Medal of Science, which cited him “for leadership in the science and engineering basic to aeronautics, for distinguished counsel to the armed services and for promoting international cooperation in science and engineering.” Dr. von Karman was bom in Budapest, became U.S. citizen in 1936. (NTT, 5/8/63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/8/63, B5)
Areas rocket instrumented to measure electrical characteristics of lower ionosphere launched from Birdling’s Flat on the Canterbury Plains, New Zealand. First sounding rocket launched in cooperative U.S.-New Zealand program, Areas with its launcher was supplied by nasa ; payload was designed and built by Univ. of Canterbury staff; rocket was assembled and launched by Royal New Zealand Air Force. Two more Areas rockets would be launched in the joint Univ. of Canterbury-NASA project, sponsored by National Space Research Committee of the Royal Society of New Zealand, (nasa Release 63-110)
usaf announced launching of unidentified satellite with Blue Scout rocket from Vandenberg afb. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/6/64)
Activities of Amateur Rocketeers of America (aha) at National Amateur Missile Analysis Center (namac) near Indianapolis were described in National Observer, namac was built by ara, national organization of high school-age rocket enthusiasts, and put into use in autumn 1962. Completion was planned for summer 1963. {National Observer, 4/22/63)
Nike-Apacbe sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, carrying experiments (1) to determine upper atmospheric winds and diffusion coefficients by means of triangulation photography of sodium vapor trail, and (2) to determine atmospheric temperature from photoelectric measurement of emission line width. The flight was part of an international effort to measure winds at widely separated geographical locations, (nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 6/14/63)
Solid-propellant rocket motor for Titan III test-fired for first time at United Technology Center, burning for about two min. and producing more than a million lbs. of thrust. Two such motors would be used in first stage of Titan III. (M&R, 7/29/63, 15)
nasa Deputy Director Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, at U.S. National Committee of International Scientific Radio Union meeting in Washington, referred to recent criticism of Project Apollo by scientists who had charged that scientific returns from manned lunar landing program aid not justify $20 billion cost: “They’ve been setting up a straw man and knocking it down. . . . No one in nasa had ever said the program was decided upon solely on the basis of scientific return. . . .” He described the manned lunar program as “a technological program, though it does have some science content,” and said it, like overall U.S. space program, was designed to give this country “mastery and pre-eminence” in space. Knowledge gained through Project Apollo, in rocket techniques as well as biosciences, would help prepare U.S. “for whatever we are called upon to do for both civil and military uses” of space. (AP, Balt. Sun, 4/30/63)
At Third International Conference on Atmospheric and Space Electricity, held at Montreux, Switzerland, Elden C. Whipple, Jr., of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Planetary Ionosphere Branch proposed that rocket be fired through thunderstorm to determine effect, if any, of such storms on earth’s ionosphere. (Goddard Release)
Announced that the Air Force launched six research rockets designed to study the structure of the earth’s atmosphere by photographing chemical trails released by the rockets. The flights, launched from Eglin afb, Florida, on May 15, 17 and 21, reached the ionosphere, 60-90 mi. above the earth. Each rocket was fired between sunset and sunrise. Luminescent chemicals were released and photographed by ground-based cameras. The high altitude studies are being made of turbulence and wind shears, (oar Release #6-63-5)
usaf announced award of formal contract to Martin-Marietta Corp. for design, development, fabrication, and delivery of Titan III Standardized Space Booster. Martin-Marietta was serving as systems integration contractor, with Aerojet General producing liquid propulsion systems and United Technology Corp. the segmented, solid-propellant engines, (dod Release 256-63)
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center announced study contract award to Sjlace Technology Laboratories, with objective of identifying and defining essential design requirements for an operational nuclear space propulsion system in the 1970’s. Study would be based on Saturn V or Nova-class first-stage booster, msfc also let conceptual design studies to Douglas Aircraft Co. and General Dynamics/Astronautics for parallel studies of launch vehicles having chemical-propulsion first stages and nuclear-propulsion upper stages, to be used in mid-1970’s. Chemical-nuclear rocket configuration would have one-million-lb. orbital capability. (Huntsville Times, 7/4/63; S-pace Bus. Dally, 7/8/63, 33)
British Minister of Aviation Julian Amery announced U.K. had ordered a design study to determine suitable communications satellite system, the satellites to be placed in orbit by eldo vehicle (European Launcher Development Organization). To be undertaken by Royal Aircraft Establishment at Famborough and Signals Research Development Establishment at Christchurch, studies would consider: network of medium-altitude-orbit satellites, probably at least 12; system of stationary-orbit satellites, calling for much smaller number of satellites; use of Woomera rocket range, Australia, for launchings. U.K. was hopeful that such a system could be established in cooperation with European countries but independent of U.S. “No one country should have a monopoly of space,” Amery said. He also announced that contracts to industry for a third Ariel satellite, to be launched by U.S. rockets but to be built entirely by U.K., would be awarded soon. (Wash. Post, 3/30/63; Av. Wk., 4/8/63, 38)
Soviet Marshal Nikolai I. Krylov, writing in Izvestia, claimed that Soviet icbm’s “in many respects exceed both quantitatively and qualitatively” the strategic rocket potential of any other nation. The new-model tests in the Pacific in the spring of 1963 had produced “fabulous super-sniper accuracy” over a range of 8,000 mi., he said. Among characteristics of Soviet icbm’s, the Marshal listed “unlimited range,” relative ease of operation, combat readiness “within minutes,” and capability of launching from mobile field installations having no preliminary engineering work. (NYT, 11/17/63, 39)
usn disclosed new Subroc antisubmarine missile, a submarinelaunched, rocket-propelled, inertially-guided nuclear depth bomb, would be operational in 1965. Launched from standard torpedo tube, Subroc is powered by solid-fuel rocket motor which ignites underwater and propels missile up and out of the water. Rocket booster is automatically separated from depth bomb payload, which continues on ballistic trajectory until impacting water, where it sinks and detonates, (dod Releases 1536-63 and 1537-63)
Addressing National Rocket Club in Washington, Rep. George P. Miller, Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said: “To me, the most important indirect benefit we are gaining [from the space program] is probably the least tangible, the least measurable, and yet the most far reaching in effect insofar as our future national growth is concerned. I am referring to the impact our space program is having upon our educational programs and institutions. The fact that NASA places demands upon and draws from almost every academic discipline has produced a stimulus in universities and colleges that is unprecedented in peacetime .... “What is important to understand is that scientific research and development is for the first time in our peacetime history being organized within one agency to accomplish a national goal. The achievements of our immediate space objectives are, of course, of paramount importance. But, I have little patience with the critics who cry out that our tax money is being thrown away in the exploration of space, or that going to the moon will result in the neglect of our problems here on earth. “It should be obvious to those critics, if they take the time for a short historical review, that many years of experience have shown that the indirect payoff in human terms for technical innovation is many times more valuable than the original investment . . . .” (Text)
Preparations continued for nasa-cnes launching of U.S. instrumented payload with French Centaure rocket from Colomb-Bechar, Algeria, next February. {M&R, 12/2/63, 8-9)
In Aviation Week and Space Technology editorial, Robert Hotz said: “The current debate has done much to explain to the public and Congress the real aims of the space program, which are the development of a broad capability in space technology that eventually can be applied to whatever national purpose or need that may arise in the future. Gradually, the point that the manned lunar landing Apollo program is simply the best possible focal point for this effort in its present phase is emerging from the verbal pyrotechnics of the current debate. It is becoming more readily apparent that Apollo is not just an ‘over-Niagara-Falls-in-a-barrel’ type of dare-devil stunt, but a well-conceived program of broad exploration across the whole spectrum of space technology as we know it today. “The solid technical success of the Mercury program, particularly in the six- and 22-orbit flights of Cdr. Schirra and Maj. Cooper, has done much to make this point clear. It should be obvious now that Mercury, Gemini and Apollo spacecraft are really the Nina, Pinta and Santa Marias of space exploration, and are simply paving the way for whatever useful purposes this nation eventually decides to utilize space. . . .” {Av. Wk., 6/3/63, , ^ • •
nasa Ames Research Center announced award of contracts to naa Space and Information Div. and Space Technology Laboratories (stl) for studies of manned Mars landing-and-retum missions. Each contract called for nine-month studies to determine requirements for possible Mars missions and to decide what research would be required during next several years to implement such a flight program. Other studies of manned Mars missions were being managed by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center and Manned Spacecraft Center, emphasizing use of Apollo-class booster and spacecraft; Ames-managed studies emphasized Mars-landing mission with no restrictions as to type of vehicle and spacecraft. (Ames Release 63-21)
Rocketdyne had completed test firings of the X-8 experimental engine, one of a series of experimental rocket engines being designed and tested by Rocketdyne for usaf’s Ballistic Systems Div. in a search for advanced propulsion techniques. The X-8 engine had tested the feasibility of using liquid hydrogen as coolant for the thrust chamber. The tests showed liquid hydrogen to be a remarkably good coolant. An X-12 engine would now be built to test the possibility of achieving an increase of four to five times the pressure in the thrust chamber using coolant. This would not alter thrust at sea level but would give considerably increased thrust at altitude. {Av. Wk.. 11/11/63,99)
Soviet news agency Tass announced test program of “improved types of rocket carriers for spacecraft” would be conducted May 15-July 15 in specified regions of the Pacific. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 5/12/63,1, afss-t Trans.)
Editorializing about possible cuts in Rover project, New Tork Times said: “. . . The effort to build a nuclear-powered rocket for eventual manned exploration beyond the moon is a longer-term project [than Project Apollo], one which might eventually be accomplished by joint work of Soviet and American scientists, or perhaps even by a broader international team. Any proposal to kill this program in its entirety appears to us unsound; while to continue it at a substantially reduced rate would retain the gains of past research and continue slowly to increase our capabilities in this field. Such a course of action would mean minimum loss for the nation’s near- and medium-term space goals, give us bargaining power in negotiations for a joint effort with the Soviet Union and still provide useful savings.” (NYT, 12/18/63, 40)
Upper stage (S-IV) for Saturn SA-5 rocket arrived at Cape Canaveral aboard modified Stratocruiser aircraft. To be test-flown late this year, SA-5 would be first Saturn testing live upper stage.	(Marshall Star, 9/25/63,1)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched from White Sands Missile Range, N.M., but sustainer engine failed to ignite, destroying vehicle and payload containing a gfsc nebular spectra experiment, (gsfc Historian)
Aerobee 150A rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried instrumented payload to 147-mi. altitude in experiment to flight-test components of equipment for Eogo satellite and to measure propagation of vlf signals through ionosphere. Flight was joint project of Stanford Research Institute and nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-32; nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales announced France would send a cat into space from rocket launching site in Sahara. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 9/24/63)
usaf announced launching of unidentified satellite using Blue Scout booster from Pt. Arguello, Calif, (upi, Wash. Post, 6/16/63; M&R, 6/24/63,10)
nasa Argo D-8 (Journeyman) rocket launched from Pt. Arguello, Calif., the four-stage sounding rocket carrying 104-lb. instrumented payload to probe hazards of the radiation belts. Designed by Univ. of Minnesota scientists, payload reached 990-mi. altitude and relayed valuable information during its 27-min. flight, then impacted in Pacific Ocean 1,250-mi. south of Pt. Arguello. Launch was conducted by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center with support by nasa Wallops Station personnel. (Wallops Release 63-12; AP, Newport News Times-Herald, 2/12/63)
U.S. Dept, of Commerce translation of article, “How to Fly to Mars, by Soviet scientist Prof. G. Chebotarev, was reported. “The ‘Mars-1’ interplanetary station was launched from a heavy satellite in a circular earth satellite orbit; the velocity of the satellite was 4.9 miles a second. The rocket was launched from this satellite at a velocity of 3.1 miles a second, but the rocket left the orbit at 8 miles a second. 741-683 0—64“It headed toward Mars in a hyperbolic trajectory and left the earth’s sphere of attraction at 4 miles a second. For it to assume an orbital path around Mars the station would have to be braked to a velocity of 3.2 miles a second . . . .” (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/12/63, A5)	_
First complete night system test of the Sert (space electric rocket test) payload under simulated space conditions at Lewis Research Center. Two engines in the Sert package would be the first electric engines to operate in space. (Lewis Chronology, 11)
West German rocket firm, Weapons and Aviation Armament Corp. of Hamburg, test-fired four solid-fuel rockets to 90,000-ft. altitude and announced signing contract to deliver missiles to an unnamed foreign country. {Wasli. Post, 12/6/63)
Two contracts were awarded by nasa Lewis Research Center to study possibility of “floxing” the Atlas booster. If feasible, the mixture of liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen might increase the Atlas payload capability for earth orbit by as much as 88%. (Lewis Chronology, 4)
General Dynamics was proposing combination of fluorineandiiquid-oxygen Atlas and Centaur upper stage as a cheaper substitute for Titan III booster for usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol), Missiles and Rochets reported. (M&R, 12/23/63, 9)
usaf launched three Atlases from Vandenberg afb: Atlas D fired down the Pacific Missile Range in Abres (advanced ballistic reentry system) test; Atlas-Agena D booster rocket combination launched an unidentified satellite; and Atlas F fired down the pmr with mock nuclear warhead. (NYT, 12/19/63, 18)
Mining of water on the moon could provide rocket fuel for interplanetary spacecraft, thus eliminating need for more advanced rockets, John W. Salisbury of usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories said. Converting water to its components oxygen and hydrogen would provide the two fuel elements of Saturn V’s upper stage. Salisbury said lunar water would be present either as subsurface ice or as* one-eighth of silicate rock formations known as olivine, usaf was conducting studies to determine most efficient way of mining water thus trapped in the moon, (nytns, Wash. Post, 4/7/63, A7)
Ten senior executives, representing nasa’s major Apollo program contractors, visited the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston for a briefing on the current status of Apollo. (Space News Rowndup, 1/8/64, 2)
AF Cambridge Research Laboratories terminated flight of 54-ft. mylar balloon after 28-day journey across Pacific Ocean. Launched May 19 from Chico, Calif., superpressure balloon had reached point 500 mi. south of Kamchatka (Siberia) peninsula when afcrl destroyed it by radio command from Chico. This was third successful balloon flight in afcrl series to evaluate superpressure design. (OAR Research Review, 9/9/63, 2) Jwne 17: Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched to peak altitude of 113 mi. from White Sands Missile Range, N.M. Purpose was to obtain positive information on gyro drift and general control characteristics. The aspect instrumentation on the rocket included two cameras, two Adcole digital sun sensors, a fine tracking Ball Brothers System and a Whittaker three-axis gyro package. All of the instruments worked exceptionally well. Good control, stabilization, and maneuver accuracy was demonstrated, but the target accuracy was less than expected, (nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 7/2/63 & 7/19/63)
Estimated 200 German scientists and technicians were working in Military Factory 333, Egyptian rocket center outside Cairo, according to Washington Post's magazine Parade. {Parade, 5/5/63)
Entire issue of Astronautics and Aerospace Engineering devoted to launch operations, including detailed summary articles by Dr. Kurt Debus, Director of loc, on “Launching the Moon Rocket,” Georg F. von Tiesenhausen on “Toward the Orbital Launch Facility,” and Arnold W. Frutkin on “International Co operation in Space Research.”
Experiment to study behavior of liquid hydrogen when exposed to radiant heating and zero gravity conditions was launched to approximately 120-mi. altitude by Aerobee sounding rocket from nasa Wallops Station. Preliminary analysis of telemetry data indicated only partial success of the experiment, provided by nasa Lewis Research Center. (Wallops Release 63-60)
Chief of the U.S. 14th Coast Guard District in Honolulu, Capt. George D. Synon, was quoted as confirming that a U.S. cutter had entered the Soviet rocket-test zone “by accident” earlier in the month. This was in reply to accusation by the Soviets that the U.S. had observed rocket tests on May 18 and 25. Capt. Synon stated that the cutter “did not do any observing.” (AP, Wash. Post, 5/31/63')
In news interview, John W. Locke, aerospace engineer for Booz, Allen Applied Research, Inc., reported on conclusion of six-month study of feasibility of launching rockets from aircraft, study conducted for usaf Special Weapons Center with cooperation of usaf Office of Aerospace Research. Suggesting that cost of U.S. space launchings could be reduced 40 per cent by employing aircraft instead of launching pads, Locke said: “Results from the study indicate the B-58 can be used as the prime launch vehicle. A four-stage rocket like the small version of the Scout missile, weighing 14,000 pounds, will provide the desired performance with minimum development effort. “The air launching of even larger space vehicles is both feasible and acceptable and may be done economically.” (Copley News Service, N.O. Times-Picaywne, 9/8/63)
Faith 7” Mercury spacecraft was installed on Atlas booster at Cape Canaveral, in preparation for Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper’s MA-9 flight, (upi, NYT, 4/23/63)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Can., with nuclear emulsion payload to study very-low-energy cosmic ray heavy nuclei. Payload reached 150-mi. altitude, was recovered from an inland lake approximately 90 mi. from launch site. Instrumentation and nuclear emulsions were in excellent condition, but analysis of nuclear emulsions would require considerable time. Experiment was project of nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Rpt. of Sounding Rkt. Launching)
msc announced a contract amendment to General Dynamics/Convair in the amount of $2,247,174 for two additional Little Joe II solid boosters for use in the Apollo test program. The two new boosters would be used in high-altitude abort test—around 60,000 ft.— testing the capability of the launch escape system to separate the command module from the booster. This amendment would bring total Little Joe II procurement costs to $8,928,637, including the four vehicles originally ordered and nearly $500,000 for design, development, and installation of two launchers at the White Sands Missile Range, N.M. (msc Release 63-223)
tiros vm (A-53) meteorological satellite was placed in orbit by nasa, using a Thor-Delta booster at amr. Initial orbital data: apogee, 474 mi.; perigee, 431 mi.; period, 99.3 min.; inclination, 58.49°. tiros vm, in addition to the usual wide-angle TV camera transmitting cloud-cover pictures once an orbit to a rather sophisticated ground station, featured the first orbiting of the automatic picture transmission system (aft), designed to provide real-time local weather information to any area in the world by means of a simple, inexpensive ($32,000) ground station. apt equipment in the satellite was a 24-lb. package including a new wide-angle (108°) Tegea-lens TV camera, with its storage and slow-scan transmission system. Preliminary results from the new systen, wereexcellent. („«* Ke.ease •»», -<> Ticking
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched to 126 mi. altitude from White Sands Missile Range, N.M. Payload contained experiments to study the solar corona and extreme ultraviolet radiation—studies which would later apply to the Oso-B (S-17) ex
Plum Brook Station, nasa Lewis Research Center, awarded a $450,000 contract for completion of nuclear rocket and dynamic control test stand. The 200-ft.-high stand was to be used for testing second-generation nuclear rocket components. (Lewis Chronology, 3)
Soviet Chief Marshal of Aviation Konstantin Vershinin was quoted as saying that air-launched missiles had become basic form of weapon for Soviet aircraft, replacing bombs. (Av. Wk., 1/7/63, 25) Cape Canaveral, and usaf was conducting study to determine cause of the advanced Minuteman’s malfunction. This was second flight of new, more powerful Minuteman model, (dod Release 25-63; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/8/63) Early January: United Technology Center made first U.S. test-firing of cluster of large segmented solid rocket motors. Four rocket motors consisting of six segments each were fired for 14 sec., producing 140,000 lbs. of thrust. Test was to demonstrate techniques for ignition of clusters “which appear applicable to the simultaneous ignition of clusters of solid booster rockets producing millions of pounds of thrust.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 1/14/63; Av. Wk., 1/14/63,33)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D space vehicle with unidentified payload from pmr; launch occurred several hours after another booster exploded. (Pres. Rpt. on Space, 1963, 1/27/64; NTT, 6/12/63)
Atlantic Research Corn, announced development of solid rocket propellants containing beryllium to provide increased thrust Studies leading to this development were sponsored by dod. (NYT, 5/20/63, 46)
nasa Hq. had tentatively approved Project Luster, designed to capture lunar dust that was in orbit around the earth, Missiles and Rockets reported. Proposed by Ames Research Center, the project is based on the assumption that meteorite impacts on the moon above a certain velocity should throw out more than the meteorite’s own weight in dust. Some of this lunar dust should find its way into earth orbit. Ames would launch an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket to attempt to trap some of the dust. (M&R, 10/14/63,9)	...
Marshal Sergei S. Biryusov, Soviet Commander of the Strategic Rocket Force, said in article published for Soviet Armed Forces Day: “The problem of destruction of hostile rockets in flight was successfully solved in the Soviet Union .... It has now [also] become possible at a command from earth to launch rockets from satellites at any desirable time and at any point of the satellite’s trajectory.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/63, A3; Wash. Post, 2/22/63, A16) February 22:	In ceremony on the 45th anniversary of the Soviet Armed Forces, Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky said: “I maintain emphatically that in retaliation to the 344 missiles with which Mr. McNamara is threatening us, we shall deal a simultaneous blow of several times more missiles and such a tremendous nuclear yield that it will wipe off the earth all targets, industrial and administrative-political centers of the United States, will destroy completely the countries which have made available their territories for American war bases . . . .” Marshal Malinovsky said that Soviet rocket crews are required to show 95 per cent proficiency and that there are no Soviet planes equipped to drop bombs, only those equipped to fire rockets. Premier Khrushchev attended the Kremlin ceremony wearing the uniform of a lieutenant general. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/22/63, 1)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa WTallops Station carried 65-lb. instrumented payload to altitude of 100 mi., in experiment to measure electron density profile, electron temperatures, and solar radiation in the ionosphere. Secondary objective of the flight was to check out hardware to be flown from Ft. Churchill, Can., during solar eclipse in July. (Wallops Release
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket with flight test instrumentation duplicating that intended for installation in the solar-pointed section of the S-17 satellite spacecraft (Oso-B) launched to 119.2 mi. from White Sands Missile Range, N.M. Results undetermined until recovery of payload effected, (nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 6/24/63)
nasa launched an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket to an estimated peak altitude of 185 mi. from White Sands, New Mexico. Objective of the experiment was to measure the absolute alpha radiation resonantly scattered by atmospheric atomic hydrogen at night. Instrumentation included eight ion-chamber nodules and two aspect photometers, (nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching, 4/4/63)
Missile tests for Project Dazzle, a defense research program to develop antimissile missiles, involving cooperation between the United States, Britain, and Australia, would be conducted at Australia’s big Woomera rocket range, using the British-developed Black Knight rocket. Project Dazzle would involve identifying and tracking missiles re-entering the earth’s atmosphere from space. The program would include basic research into the physical phenomena associated with the re-entry of objects from space. Australian and British natural scientists would be responsible for analyzing the results recorded by an instrumentation system provided by arpa. (U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, November, 1963; The Christian Science Monitor, 8/14/63)
aec announced second U.S. satellite wholly powered by nuclear energy was launched into orbit recently by a Thor-Able-Star booster from Vandenberg afb, and signals from the satellite were being transmitted sucessfully with electricity from the Snap-9A isotopic power generator. Designed to provide 25 watts of direct electrical current, the Snap-9n. was the same type of generator as that providing power for a satellite launched from Vandenberg earlier this year. The two Snap-9A’s are designed for operating lifetime of five years. However, they are in orbits of at least 900 years so that by the time they re-enter earth’s atmosphere they will be almost completely decayed. At that time they are designed to bum into minute particles which will be widely dispersed in the atmosphere, thus increasing radioactivity in the atmosphere negligibly, (aec Release F-250)
Ivan A. Getting of Aerospace Corp., in address to space flight testing conference at Cocoa Beach, Fla., estimated that 90 percent of all current in-flight rocket failures could be detected and corrected by better preflight checking, including “preliminary designs, design reviews, re-design, testing, additional redesign and additional testing. The probability of a successful perform-anee of sucli R product is directly related to th.s thorough~r*ess of this evolutionary process .. . “There is an unfortunate tendency in our rush to meet end objectives and time schedules, and in our desire to save money within the program, to cut out important steps in developmental tests and ground systems tests. Not only are such economies false, but they impinge on our reputation as a nation for excellence in scientific achievement and engineering design.” (AP, Wash. Post, 3/20/63. A2)
nasa simplified its launch vehicle terminology for the Saturn space booster series: Saturn C-l became “Saturn I”; Saturn C-lB became “Saturn I-B”; and Saturn C-5 became “Saturn V.” (MA, Holmes)
oso i solar observatory satellite completed its first year in orbit, exceeding its estimated operating life by six months. Eleven of its 13 scientific experiments were still operating, having provided more data on behavior and composition of the sun than any single ground-based observatory and all previous rocket, balloon, and satellite flights combined. Preliminary results from oso i would be presented at a symposium March 14. (Goddard Release)
Utmost care would be taken in the assembly and checkout of the Mariner B spacecraft intended for a landing on Mars in 1966 so that the Mars lander would be completely free of earth microbes that might contaminate the Martian environment. Workers with even minor colds would be barred from the assembly area. The final assembly would be subjected to a dry heat at 275°F for 24 hours, then sealed into its special can and placed aboard the booster for launching. The special can would not open until the spacecraft was some 350 mi. from earth, considered to be the limit of earth microbes. {Wash. Post, 11/7/63)
Soviet Army newspaper Red Star reported an account of a rocket failure, the first public mention of a rocket launching failure in the U.S.S.R. No date or program was named, only a report of heroism of a Lt. Col. Serebreynnikov. He reportedly pulled out a starting plug by hand after mechanism had failed, and only six seconds before the rocket exploded. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/1/63, A35) During November: Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, writing in the 10011 ft A /?/> mo /to innn	tlio '■	*	'	OKf \y lllUgU/JUiA Ol VUV \JIV11VA il Plnofrin	OQirl • “Space is not a gambit. It is not a gimmick. “Our national activities in space research and exploration are no longer in the category of a gamble. We are able to talk seriously about explorations and journeys, 26 million miles away to the planet Venus—or 47 million miles away to the planet Mars. “We have come a long way. In the new Age of Space which brings us together, we are destined to go a Tong way further. Where the moon is a major goal today, it will be tomorrow a mere whistle stop for the space traveler. I confidently believe that the developments of the Space Age will bring the beginning of the longest and greatest boom of abundance and prosperity in the history of man.” (Challenge, Fall 1963,24—5) The Marquardt Corp. of Van Nuys, Calif., has delivered 30 production units of its Roksonde 200-1 to West Germany. The sounding rockets would be used for meteorological testing at the Salto di Quirra Test Range in Sardinia. The meteorological data gathering is part of the overall European effort in support of the iqsy worldwide programs. As part of the program, the Mar?[uardt Corp. will assist the West German government in two aunching series. The first series was currently in progress, scheduled for completion by mid-December; the second would be completed in early 1964. (Marquardt Release, 11/21/63, sin, Jan., 1964) During November: jpl scientists Dr. Richard M. Goldstein and Roland L. Carpenter reported in Science magazine on recent radar experiments using an 85-ft. parabolic antenna at a tracking station in the Mohave Desert. The planet Mercury was found to be quite rugged, more so than Mars and twice as rugged as Venus. The experiments also corroborated Mercury’s rotation period as 88 days. (Science Service, NYT, 11/6/63, 33)
Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, said he believed Soviet Union is building super-rocket that would dwarf any flown before. “We would be foolish to think they are standing still,” he remarked. Dr. von Braun was at Michoud Operations, near New Orleans, formally accepting the first Saturn S-I booster built by private industry (Chrysler Corp.). (upi, Chic. Trib., 12/15/63; Marshall Star, 12/18/63,1)
A number of unofficial reports from Moscow have identified two key figures in the Soviet space program, according to Theodore Shabad, the New York Times Moscow correspondent. One of the men was Valentin P. Glushko, known as a rocket propulsion expert who worked with Friedrich Zander in the first Soviet research in liquid fuel rockets in the early 1930’s. The other was Sergei P. Korolov, a mechanical engineer long associated with mechanics and structural problems of flight. Both are full academicians in the Soviet Academy of Sciences. (Shabad, NYT, 11/12/63, 2)
A gimbaled integral nozzle (gin) was sucessfully tested on the Lockheed “Char” motor by experts at the AF Rocket Propulsion Lab, designers of the exhaust system. Partially submerged in the aft section of the rocket case, the flanges and actuating components were shielded from the exhaust gases by the case itself. The concept would lead to a gimbaling system requiring less operating power than present operational swivel-type nozzles. A heavy, high-temperature-resistant silicone grease was used to lubricate the ball-and-socket gimbaling system. {M&R, 2/17/64, 21)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, in address at Topeka, Kansas, traced the historic role of the Federal Government in animating science and pointed to the quickening pace of science and technology today. Major considerations? which “make it clear that an understanding of the space environment, and the development of the technology which will enable us to operate in space, are imperative,” Webb said. “First, the modem rocket engine, which can operate in the vacuum of space . . . has given us and other nations for the first time the means to explore and utilize the space medium. Given this ability, and the spectacular achievements already made, Americans and citizens of other nations assuredly will not remain confined to this small planet. We and they will explore space, nrt+fln	r> Alkinnr 5 v*o van	mi ■■■»■ ■■» iuio w mg uno less than a position at the forefront of that pioneering effort. “Second, it is generally recognized, I believe, that our national security itself is heavily involved in the space competition. Not only our prestige but our capacity for constructive international leadership depend upon a superiority in science and technology— for economic development of national defense—that is understood and accepted. The nations of the world, seeking a basis for their own future progress and security, continuously pass judgment upon our ability as a nation to make decisions, to concentrate effort, to manage vast and complex technological programs in our own interest. It is not too much to say that in many ways the viability of representative government and of the free enterprise system, in a period of revolutionary changes based on science and technology, is being tested in space. “Third, our national defense—perhaps even our national survival—demand that we act to insure that no hostile force will be permitted to use space as an unchallenged avenue of aggression against us. “The fourth and most important of the major reasons for undertaking a broad national program of space research and development—the one which promises the greatest rewards for mankind—the technological applications which will flow from it, will offer vast returns op our space investment here on earth over many years ahead.” (Text)
F-l rocket engine static-nred in 10-sec. test, first in series conducted by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. (Marshall Star, 12/11/63, 2)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, Assistant to dod Director of Defense and Engineering, said in address to National Rocket Club in Washington that dod viewed X-20 (Dyna Soar) and Gemini projects as “insurance” against uncertainties of future military manned clarify man’s possible role in military space missions. {M&R, 8/26/63, 12, 14)
Dummy S-IV stage for Saturn I rocket arrived at Cape Canaveral from Douglas Aircraft Co. via converted Boeing 377 Stratocruiser, marking first use of aircraft for transporting major nasa rocket components from West Coast, (upi. NYT. 7/14/63, 64)
Speaking on Cuban television from Havana, Soviet Cosmonaut Valentina Tereshkova said that she was a member of the team of Russian cosmonauts chosen to make the trip to the moon and that Yuri Gagarin headed the team. She said she would propose that a Cuban woman be included on the team. The Russian plan for a moon flight was described by Miss Tereshkova: the manned capsule would be launched into earth orbit, where it would rendezvous with an unmanned tanker spaceship; then another rocket would be launched from earth and tow the manned-vehicle-tanker combination to the moon. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/5/63)
Maj. Robert M. White (usaf) was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal for his achievements as pilot of X-15 rocket research aircraft. Presentation was made by Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert in ceremony at Edwards afb, Calif. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/20/63)
Argo D—4 sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island, Va., in experiment to measure vertical distribution of ionospheric parameters simultaneously with overhead passage of alouette i topside sounder satellite. The rocket reached 644.6mi. altitude and all experiments functioned normally, but telemetry system failed at approximately 12 min. »o about 7 min. of re-entry data were not obtained, (nasa Rpt. of S. Rkt. Launching) .	.	.
usaf announced that Cape Kennedy would be open to the general public for three hours every Sunday beginning on December 15th, to allow for “public drive-through.” Only on Armed Forces Day in 1961 had the general public previously been allowed within the rocket and space launching complex, (upi, NYT, 12/8/63,A4)
Senator Margaret Chase Smith (R.-Me.) and nasa Administrator James E. Webb were co-hosts at luncheon at Senate for three women accorded national recognition for space age accomplishments—Marcia S. Miner, student at American Univ. and winner of National Rocket Club’s 1963 Goddard Memorial Scholarship Award; Dr. Nancy C. Roman, Chief of Astronomy and Solar Physics in nasa Geophysics and Astronomy Program and 1962 winner of Federal Women’s Award; and Eleanor C. Pressly, Head of Vehicles Section, Sounding Rocket Branch, in nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Spacecraft Integration and Sounding Rocket Div., and 1963 winner of Federal Women’s Award. ( nasa Release 63-94)
Thomas F. Dixon, Deputy Associate Administrator of nasa, told American Rocket Society Solid Propellant Rocket Conference in Philadelphia: “From the programs of the past two years has come conclusive evidence that large segmented [solid propellant] motors are not only feasible but highly reliable .... “Also clear is the quality that is perhaps the greatest virtue of solid rockets: the relative speed with which major advances in performance can be achieved. In a brief period, the technologies of weight, thrust, bum time, and thrust vector control have moved forward rapidly .... “The new dod-nasa program carried out by the U.S. Air Force will give us a great deal of information on the technology and logistics associated with these very large high-thrust engines .... “As we move deeper and deeper into space, it seems likely that we will come to rely upon solids for an increasing variety of missions for the same reasons that we have called upon them in the past—reliability, storability, ruggedness, low cost of development, and instant readiness, to mention a few . . . .” (Text)
Informed nasa sources were quoted as saying Astronaut Leroy Gordon Cooper’s Mercury flight MA-9 would be delayed about a week from the May 7 planning date because of technical problems in the Atlas booster. Also revealed was name Astronaut Cooper selected for his Mercury spacecraft—“Faith 7,” (rrpi, Wash. Post, 4/19/63)
With launching of Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Kronogard Range, Sweden and U.S. completed series of sounding rocket experiments to study noctilucent clouds near Arctic Circle. Sponsored by nasa and Swedish Committee for Space Research, program included launchings of Areas rockets with payloads to measure winds and Nike-Cajun rockets with payloads to make direct cloud samplings during 1961 and 1962. Four Nike-Cajun rockets with rocket grenade payloads were successfully launched during summer 1963, these experiments measuring upper atmosphere temperatures, winds, pressure, and density and measuring changes in size of artificial cloud particles created by smoke puffs from the payloads. Experimenters were scientists from Institute of Meteorology, Univ. of Stockholm; nasa Goddard Space Flight Center had responsibility for U.S. coordination in the project. (nasa Release 63-179)
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket carried 153-lb. instrumented payload to 139-mi. altitude in experiment from Wallops Island to study spectra] emission lines in upper atmosphere and measure their intensity as function of altitude, thus determining distribution of certain molecular and atomic species in upper atmosphere. Experiment was designed by The Johns Hopkins Univ. under nasa research grant administered by Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 63-46)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, interviewed by the New York Herald Tribune, acknowledged that parts of Project Apollo were behind the schedule as written two years ago. He singled out on-board power—“we have counted on fuel cells .... To say that the fuel cell is behind is not an adequate statement, but to say that problems have been encountered in solving the problems of enough on-board electrical energy to do the job would be an accurate statement”—and the Titan II booster for the Gemini program—“We must know what happens to men and equipment under a weightless condition for a week or two. We had hoped to get this information at an earlier, date in making our plans for Apollo and future flight missions. We still will get it early enough to do the job within this decade.” (Ubell and Loory, N.Y. Herald Tribune, 10/13/63)
usaf fired Titan II icbm in 5,800-mi. flight down the Atlantic Missile Range, the missile carrying malfunction-detection system similar to the one to be incorporated in Titan II Gemini booster. The Titan II also carred scientific pod containing instruments to study radiation in the missile’s exhaust plume. (NYT, 8/22/63, 22; M&R, 8/26/63, 14)	_
Fifth anniversary of nasa. Ceremonies throughout the week included open house at Wallops Station, Va., Sept. 29 and 30; Fifth Anniversary Honor Awards Ceremony in Washington; Project Mercury Summary Report Conference at Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston, Tex., Oct. 3 and 4; and nasa Fifth Anniversary Banquet in Washington Oct. 5. In its fifth year of space operations (October 1, 1962-October 1, 1963), nasa launched 12 orbital, deep space, and manned space flights, of which 10 were successful, 1 partially successful, and one unsuccessful. The X-15 rocket research aircraft set a new altitude record of 350,000 ft. and began its follow-on flights involving space research. The Mercury program added a 6-orbit flight and was concluded with a 22-orbit flight. Among other successful flights were four scientific satellites, two communications satellites, the first and second synchronous-orbit communications satellites, and another weather satellite. The fifth scientific lunar probe (ranger v) was unsuccessful and led to a reworking of the remaining Ranger probes. Project Apollo flight testing was begun. In its five years of space operations, nasa had launched a total of 68 orbital, deep space, and manned space flights, of which 39 were successful, 9 partially successful, ajid 20 unsuccessful, for an overall average of 2y2 successes for every failure. The rate of improvement ranged from 1 success per failure in 1958-59 and 1959-60, to 2 to 1 in 1960-61, to 5 to 1 in 1961-62, . to 12 to 1 in 1962-63.	(hhr-14)
West German scientists outlined plans for German space program at Third European Space Flight Symposium, Stuttgart. Program includes: communications satellite to be placed in polar orbit; high-energy rocket propulsion stage; space transport system ; space probe rocket with paraglider landing system to allow recovery and reuse. (Wilcke, NYT, 5/26/63,13)
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station with 230-lb. instrumented payload to measure intensity of light from stars. Equipped with four scanning photoelectric spectrophotometers, payload reached 115-mi. altitude, impacted in Atlantic Ocean 68 mi. downrange. (Wallops Release 63-68)
Chemist S. Stephen Papell, of nasa’s Lewis Research Center, had applied for a patent on magnetic rocket fuel. Mr. Papell had found a means of magnetizing JP-4 and other liquid hydrocarbons by mixing small quantities of magnetic iron oxide with the liquids. Under weightlessness, an electromagnet located near the propellant pumps could pull the fuel into the pumps. Papell said much work remained to be done on the process before it could be considered operationally feasible. (Av. Wk., 11/11/63, 30; Lewis Chronology, 11)
X-15 No. 2, damaged in a landing accident in Nov. 1962, would be returned to flight status early in 1964 with a number of improvements, nasa announced. Under a usaf contract with North American Aviation, Inc., the damaged X-15 was being modified to take another 13,500 lbs. of propellants. This would increase the rocket engine burning time from 86 sec. to 145 sec., which theoretically would add some 1,300 mph to maximum speed capability. There were no plans for extending altitude capability because it would increase re-entry stresses. Other modifications included strengthened nose wheel and landing skids, dropable wing tanks, provision for installation of two 50-gal. liquid-hydrogen tanks in the fuselage midsection, to be used for advanced propulsion experiments, and windshield changes and ablative material additions to cope with the higher heat accompanying higher speed, (frc Release 27-63)
Titan II icbm flown 6,500 mi. down amr with heaviest payload ever to travel that far on a U.S. rocket vehicle. This was first Titan II launch conducted by an all-usAF crew, (dod Release 166-63; upi, Wash. Post, 2/7/63, A2; M&R, 2/11/63,13)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, nasa-Director of Electronics and Control, said in address before Fourth International Electronic Circuit Packaging Symposium: “Electronics and its associated disciplines constitute the brain, nerves and senses of flight vehicles. It is estimated that about 40 per cent of our booster costs, 70 per cent of our major spacecraft dollars, and 90 per cent of our tracking and data acquisition funds go into electronics. Unfortunately, in the same context approximately 90 per cent of our flight failures, not to mention flight delays, arise from electronic failures. Success in this area is obviously a major factor in over-all mission accomplishment since a dead or unintelligent vehicle is useless if it cannot measure data and send it back to earth .... “nasa electronic research must satisfy the following requirements : “Undertake, under contract and in-house, advances in the electronic art to meet the requirements of future space flight. “Guide industry and university sponsored research, in space electronics, into channels useful to both nasa and the sponsoring industry. “Provide facilities to verify the performance of advanced electronic equipment developed for space use, irrespective of source of funding. “Conceive, develop, ground test, flight test and interpret data for nasa flight experiments designed to prove advanced electronic equipment fin-use.’ ” Dr. Kelley then described the functions of the proposed Electronics Research Center, which would be “the focal point of our electronics research efforts.” (Text)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D.-Ind.) spoke on the space race: “Mr. Speaker, the announcement that the Soviet Union is withdrawing from the race to the moon has produced some disturbing reactions here in the United States. Here we have a breakdown in the Communist system. Here we have an opportunity to exert real leadership and show what a free econ _ . d vA/in 4" t r> /v 4" L n I UU 1 OVtitlllg UlOrO we abandon our efforts to explore the universe. I am perturbed. Why must we do something just because the Soviet Union does it? Why should we refuse to do something just because the Soviet Union refuses to do it?” (OR, 10/29/63, 19384) Addressing the Joint Meeting of Service Clubs, Bozeman, Montana, nasa Administrator James E. "Webb said: “To take a clear lead in rocket power, or even to match the larger rockets the Russians may be building now, we must cariy on with the development of the Saturn V. This giant rocket is needed to do extensive maneuvering in space near the earth and has the power to send the Apollo spacecraft on its journey to the moon and on prolonged flights in earth orbit. “The United States will inevitably need space power of this order even if we had no plans for going to the moon. We do not know now what future military requirements for rocket power may arise.” (Text) Project Gemini was running into serious problems in its onboard power systems, according to John Finney of the New Tork Times. The new fuel cell source for electric power was to have provided power for up to two weeks at only 1/6 to 1/10 the weight of batteries required to produce equal wattage. But fuel cell development has run into problems of leakage, inadequate lifetime, and poor thermal control. While such problems could probably be engineered out by the time fuel cells were needed for Apollo, the Gemini timetable might require batteries to be substituted for the fuel cells. This in turn might cut Gemini missions down to two days, nasa’s new Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller was said to favor beginning development of backup systems in some of the areas of new technology such as fuel cells but to be hampered in this approach by lack of money. (Finney, NYT, 10/30/63, 26)
The Air Force accepted the first Gemini Launch Vehicle from the Martin Company. The booster, a specially modified Titan II, would be used in the nasa Gemini program. (A-N-AF Journal and Register, Jan. 1964; afsc Release 312-114, Atch. 2, 1/1/64, 2)
usaf was reported by Aviation Week and Space Technology to be planning an expansion of its ballistic missile early warning system (bmews) to cover the southern approaches to the U.S. and possibly also to detect launches from submarines. Named Project Red Mill, the proposed system being developed by Raytheon Co. under usaf contract would use high-frequency ionospheric radar bounce techniques to detect changes in the ionospheric critical frequency made by rocket exhaust. (Av. Wk., 10/14/63, 23)
Morris Tepper, nasa Director of Meteorological Systems, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Applications and Tracking and Data Acquisition. He discussed the Tiros meteorological satellite system and described the Nimbus advanced meteorological satellite, first of which would be launched in 1963, and said: “Each one of these five elements—orientation, coverage, direct local readout, lifetime and growth potential, represents a major advance over Tiros. Nimbus, including all these, represents an extremely large step forward beyond the Tiros capability. The Nimbus technical difficulties of the past were associated with the development of these five elements. Wre now believe that our major difficulties are behind us. . . .” He described the meteorological sounding rocket program, and said: “In the large meteorological sounding rocket program, it is planned to fire approximately 45 per year. These will be distributed at various latitudes to measure the atmospheric structure in the various climatic regions from the Arctic to the Tropics. “The small meteorological sounding rocket program is aimed at providing a standardized flight article which will meet the requirements at an overall minimum cost. Approximately 100 rockets will be launched per year in this program. (Testimony)
usAF-sponsored solar hydrogen rocket engine (sour) was successful in series of ground tests, producing up to one pound thrust in runs of several hours. Scale-up to 10-lbs. thrust now appeared feasible. Built by Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., sohr uses large, lightweight solar concentrators to focus solar energy into a cavity absorber containing a heat exchanger using hydrogen. The heated hydrogen provides thrust as it is accelerated through a nozzle. One sohr generating one to two lbs. thrust could move a 6,000-lb. payload from a 300-mi. orbit to a 22,400-mi. synchronous orbit in 20 days, compared with half a day for a chemical powerplant and 45 days for an electrical one. Specific impulse of sohr is 800 sec., compared with 400 sec. for chemicals, 1,200 for arc jets, and 5,000 sec. up for ion rockets. {M&R, 11/18/63,35)
Dr. Franklin A. Gifford, Jr., was awarded Dept, of Commerce’s Gold Medal for Exceptional Service for his “major contributions to science and administration, for extremely significant research and outstanding leadership in the study of turbulent diffusion in the atmosphere, and for highly distinguished authorship in the field of meteorology.” Dr. Gifford is Meteorologist in Charge of che Weather Bureau Station at Oak Ridge, Tenn. (Dept, of Commerce Release WB 63-1) Mid-February: AF Cambridge Research Laboratories conducted atmospheric-density experiment by dropping instrumented mylar sphere to earth from 160-mi. altitude. Aerobee rocket carried inflatable sphere to desired altitude from Eglin afb, Fla., the sphere’s telemetering equipment transmitting linear accelerometer data measuring atmospheric drag on the sphere, (dod Release 35-63)
