usaf launched Atlas-Agena D satellite booster from Vandenberg afb with an undisclosed payload. (M&R, 9/28/64, 9)
A Naval Research Laboratory team under Dr. Herbert Friedman announced that it had disproved the theory that the Crab Nebula in the constellation Orion had a superdense neutron star at its center. The experiment was carried out July 7 by means of x-ray detectors flown to an altitude of 144 mi. over New Mexico by an Aerobee sounding rocket. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/18/64)
Results and new research of X—15 project were detailed in Astronautics & Aeronautics article by Thomas A. Toll, Chief of Research Div., NASA Flight Research Center, and Jack Fischel, head of FRC Manned Flight Control Branch. “. . . In the area of aerodynamics, problems resulting from the heat generated by high-speed flight were of most concern to designers at the time of the X-15 feasibility studies. . . . “At the time thermodynamic design of the X-15 was first contemplated, it was thought likely that fairly extensive regions of laminar flow might be achieved in flight, thereby alleviating the problem of heat protection as it would exist for an all-turbulent condition. This reasoning was based largely on rocket-model and wind-tunnel results available at the time. These results indicated a stabilizing effect on the boundary layer at hypersonic speeds for low ratios of the surface temperature to the stagnation temperature. As the design of the airplane progressed, it became evident that the probability of obtaining laminar flow would be greatly reduced by the presence of unavoidable surface irregularities. As a basis for the aerodynamic heating design, a relatively low value of the transition Reynolds number (Rr=100,000) was therefore stipulated. Flight results have generally confirmed this design approach, inasmuch as it has been found that at the lower altitudes, where the heating rates are highest, the boundary layer is largely turbulent, due primarily to the surface irregularities. Regions of laminar flow generally are limited to the immediate vicinity of the leading edges and are quite small. The conditions found to exist on the X—15 are consistent with results of refined wind-tunnel techniques now being used. . . . “Maximum structural temperatures have been experienced during X-15 operation at high speeds and comparatively low altitudes, with accompanying normal-acceleration values much lower than those experienced during recovery from high altitudes. . . . “By way of assessing die [structural] failures experienced, there appear to have been no cases in which the structure deteriorated to such a degree as to seriously endanger the integrity of the airplane. It is entirely probable, however, that had a less-conservative design been followed the problems noted might have resulted in greater deterioration with more serious consequences. . .	(A&A, 3/64, 20-28) During March: Martin-Denver revealed design concept of its Astrorocket, a proposed reusable aerospacecraft. Launched vertically, the vehicle would have two stages—both manned—equipped with auxiliary fan jets as well as rocket engines. After stage separation, first stage would re-enter atmosphere and land on airstrip like conventional airplane. Second stage, carrying payload, would also land at air base after completing mission. Astrorocket concept employed parallel staging rather than conventional bottom-to-top staging. Martin said advantages of the Astrorocket were its reusability and its capability to operate with existing air bases for space operations. (A-N-AF J&R, 3/7/64, 38)
Liquid-hydrogen-powered rocket engines for Saturn I’s S—IV stage exploded during preparations for static-firing at Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Sacramento, Calif., facility. Explosion, which demolished the test stand, was evaluated by NASA to determine if forthcoming Saturn SA—5 706-598 0—65-----3 flight test at AMR should be delayed; NASA officials decided the explosion was not sufficient reason to interrupt the SA-5 launch preparations. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/25/64; AP, Wash. Post, 1/26/64)
NASA explorer xxi scientific earth satellite (imp b) was launched into orbit from Cape Kennedy with a Thor-Delta rocket booster. Onboard instrumentation was working excellently, but the satellite’s orbit (59,400-mi. apogee; 120-mi. perigee; 34-hr., 57-min. period; 33°53' inclination to the equator) fell far short of the intended deep-space path which would have enabled the Interplanetary Monitoring Platform to measure magnetic fields, cosmic rays, and solar winds in interplanetary space. Planned apogee was 161,000 mi. Robert H. Gray, Director of Goddard Launch Operations, said minimum apogee required for mission success was about 97,750 mi. As in launch of explorer xviii (imf a), the Delta rocket used higher-thrust third-stage motor, the X—258, to give the satellite its final boost into orbital injection. Preliminary tracking data indicated this stage had not provided the required thrust. Designed and built by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, explorer xxi contained nine experiments. Five of these were provided by GSFC researchers and four by experimenters at Univ. of Chicago, Univ. of California, NASA Ames Research Center, and mit respectively. (nasa Release 64-242; AP, Balt. Sun, 10/5/64; upi, Chic. Trib., 10/5/64; M&R, 10/12/64, 24)
Scout rocket launched by usaf from Pt. Arguello, Calif., exploded in flight. {M&R, 7/6/64, 8)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., with instrumental payload to obtain evidence of hypervelocity micrometeoroid impacts, samples of low-velocity cosmic dust, and measurements of electron densities. Flight failed when'rocket’s propulsion system malfunctioned and the rocket attained only 6.25-mi. altitude. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Article in Fortune magazine said: “The U.S. is spending a lot of money—but it is also getting a lot of results in technological breakthroughs, any one of which would have been regarded as wondrous only a few years ago. The milestones passed since last summer indicate how fast the space program is now moving. ... “The Soviet Union isn’t going to collapse if it loses the race. If the U.S. loses, it isn’t going to collapse either. For both countries, there are other goals in space that may yield rich rewards in both prestige and scientific advance. Meanwhile, NASA has much to be proud of. . . . “The superiority of liquid hydrogen as a rocket fuel has been proved and the U.S. has definitely overcome the Soviet lead in big boosters.” (Fortune, 3/64)
NASA launched its first Project Luster payload from White Sands, N. Mex., on an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket. Primary objectives of flight were to evaluate engineering performance of Luster micrometeoroid-sampling instrument and to collect meteoritic debris during the peak of the Leonids meteor shower. The Aerobee 150 reached 97mi. altitude, and performance of both the rocket and the instrumentation was considered “very good.” Nose cone did not fully retract, so the data collected during the flight were lost in re-entry heating and atmospheric contamination. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
Postmaster General John A. Gronouski revealed plans for issuance of Robert Hj Goddard air mail commemorative stamp this year. The stamp would honor 50th anniversary of Dr. Goddard’s first patent registrations in 1914 for solid/liquid fuel methods and multi-stage rocket designs. (nsc Ltr. 4/1/64; Goddard News, 4/20/64,3)
U.S. airmail stamp honoring Dr, Robert H. Goddard was released at Roswell, N. Mex. Stamp was first U.S. stamp with rocket motif since Fort Bliss stamp of 1946. U.S. stamps also had been issued for Project Echo (1961) and Project Mercury (1962). (NASA Historian)
Eleanor Pressly, head of Vehicle Section, Spacecraft Integration, Sounding Rocket Div. at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and winner of a 1963 Federal Women’s Award, was guest speaker at Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson’s White House luncheon for “women-doers.” (Wash. Post, 3/17/64)
A report from GAO to Congress charged that usn had spent $13.3 million to put rocket launchers on fighter planes and then had taken them off again because they created too many problems. The rockets had caused the fighters to pitch upward, and in many cases a plane would overtake and collide with a rocket it had launched. The GAO report said that the Navy could have saved about $4 million if it had gotten information available before the launchers were ordered, (upi, Houston Chron., 7/18/64).
22,000-lb.-thrust rocket engine for Project Apollo service module, to return Apollo astronauts from the moon, was test-fired twice at Las Cruces, N. Mex. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/16/64)
Maj. Gen. O. J. Ritland (usaf), Deputy Commander for Space, afsc, discussed in aas luncheon address the role of usaf in U.S. space program, tracing history of icbm development: “The task for the Air Force in those early days was a tremendous one. It had full responsibility for the development, acquisition, and deployment of an icbm force capable of deterring any missile threat the Soviets might develop. This meant that we had to develop reliable high thrust boosters, materials that could withstand extreme heat caused by re-entry friction, guidance components, and a host of subsystems for use in our icbm’s. We had to develop command, control and tracking systems, and a wide range of support and test facilities for launch and retrieval. We had to recruit and train a tremendous force of highly skilled specialists and technicians. In addition we had to set up whole new management structures and apply expedited management methods under which these tasks could be accomplished with the greatest possible speed. “Time was the critical factor. The Soviets had a very substantial advance in technological lead times over us. For this reason it was essential that we have the fullest cooperation and support from all segments of our society. The response to these needs was characteristic of the American people. . . . “We had tremendous support from many government agencies. The National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, which became the National Aeronautics and Space Agency in 1958, gave unfailing support. For example, naca’s Moffett Laboratories did a major portion of the high speed wind tunnel testing for our nose cone development program. naca’s Cleveland Propulsion Laboratories provided vital support to the Air Force in the rocket engine field. These are just two examples of the highly successful partnership which has evolved between the Air Force as the primary military agency in space and the NASA as the primary civilian agency in space. The partnership continues to be one of the most vital and dynamic aspects of the national space effort. . . .” (Text, afsc Release 45-R-51)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched in U.S.-Pakistan project from Sonmiani reached 124-mi. altitude. Sodium vapor trail ejected during ascent was photographed by ground cameras to measure atmospheric wind directions and speeds. Launch was part of cooperative program between NASA and Pakistan’s Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Committee, (nasa Rpt. srl)
More than 20 Martlet rockets were launched from Barbados site during first year of the high-altitude research project conducted by Canada’s McGill Univ., New York Times reported. Fired from 16-in. naval cannon, Martlet has motor that ignites once the rocket is in flight, sending rocket to altitudes between 60 and 100 mi. It lands about 100 mi. southeast of Barbados in the Atlantic. 200 shots, financed by U.S., were planned for 1964. (AP, NYT, 1/11/64)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with French sodium-vapor payload was launched from India’s Thumbs Range to about 192-km. altitude (about 119 mi.). Two ground camera stations photographed sodium vapor released from the rocket to obtain measurements of atmospheric winds, turbulence, and diffusivity. (nasa Rpt. srl)
The Soviet Union marked Rocket Day, a new observance, by warning the West of the “stupendous power,” great range, and pinpoint accuracy of its missiles. Marshal Nikolai I. Krylov, chief of the rocket forces repeated the Kremlin’s claim that it had antimissile missiles. (upi, NYT, 11/20/64, 27)
NASA launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., to an altitude of 117 mi. The payload contained three experiments, the most important of which involved the measurement of the composition of the neutral atmosphere in the altitude region of 62-155 mi. All three experiments operated satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
msfc Director Dr. Wemher von Braun discussed Saturn IB/Centaur launch vehicle at Michoud tour and said that “there will be money to develop the booster in the FY ’66 space agency budget.” Dr. von Braun said he believed Saturn IB/Centaur would compete on cost-effectiveness basis with Titan III; with the contemplated missions, cost of $20 million per launch was possible. Dr. von Braun also disclosed NASA studies indicating manned circumlunar flight with Gemini spacecraft was feasible. Such a mission was not being seriously considered at this time, however. (M&R, 5/18/64,17)
Two U.S. commercial airline pilots reported seeing unidentified object explode in a “spectacular flash” as it entered earth’s atmosphere over the Atlantic Ocean, about 200 mi. west of Land’s End, England. Press sources reported speculation that explosion was part of jettisoned rocket used the previous day in Soviet launch of Cosmos satellite, (upi, NYT, 3/20/64, 2)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with Univ. of Alaska instrumented payload attained 96-mi. altitude. Experiment objective was to obtain data on visible aurora in three wavelengths and data on vacuum ultraviolet emissions. This information was to be supplemented by data from two electron particle detectors. Payload also included three photometers and two vacuum ultraviolet detectors. Good telemetry signal was received for 383 sec., but door covering instrumentation apparently came off at about 20,000-ft. altitude and most of the sensors were damaged by the severe environment. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with Rice Univ. payload was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 94-mi. altitude. Two photometers, two scintillators, three Geiger counters, and two magnetometers made coordinated measurements of light intensity and particle fluxes. (NASA Rpt. srjl)
Potential of the gas-core nuclear rocket was outlined at recent press conference by National Aeronautics and Space Council staff-member Maxwell W. Hunter, Jr., and Welsey Kuhrt and George Mc-Lafferty of United Aircraft Corp., which is performing research on gas-core nuclear rocket under NASA contract. Maximum specific impulse for gas-core nuclear rocket would be between 2,000 and 3,000 (contrasted with 400 for the best chemical propellants and 1,000 for solid-core nuclear rocket). United Aircraft calculated useful payload sent to moon and back by gas-core nuclear rocket would be 10-30% of takeoff weight, compared to a fraction of 1 % for chemical rockets. Power of gas-core rocket would be so great there would be no need for rocket staging; single-stage rocket could take off from earth, land on moon, take off, return to earth, and land safely. Such a rocket vehicle would be reusable. (Witkin, NYT, 1/26/64, 32)
Cape Kennedy celebrated its 14th anniversary as a missile and space vehicle launching base. The first missile from the Cape was a hybrid Bumper (V-2) booster with an Army Wac Corporal second stage, launched on a 200-mi. trajectory on July 24, 1950. Since then more than 1,400 launches had been made. Since its establishment in 1958, NASA had been responsible for 84 flights. (Marshall Star, 7/29/64, 9)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite on a Thor-Agena D booster toward a polar orbit from Vandenberg AFB. Purpose of the shot was not indicated. (upi, Wash. Post, 12/22/64)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster rocket from Vandenberg AFB with unidentified satellite payload, (upi, NYT, 10/7/64, 19; HHN—48 )
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by USN from the White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carried a spectrograph payload prepared by Princeton Univ. to 78.8-mi. altitude before the payload returned to earth by parachute. Primary objective of studying ultraviolet radiation of three stars in the constellation Orion was achieved. Payload was recovered in good condition and the film extracted and developed. Princeton said it 'believed this was the first time any university had attempted to study the atmosphere and composition of stars by means of equipment contained in a rocket, (nasa Rpt. SRL; NYT, 11/17/64, 72)
Astrobee 1500, most powerful of U.S. sounding rockets, was flight-tested from NASA’s Wallops Island, Va., launch site, its second stage carrying 156-lb. instrument package to 1,212-mi. altitude before impact in the Atlantic Ocean 1,326 mi. from launch site. This was second flight test of the solid-propellant rocket; adequate performance data were not achieved in first NASA flight test (April 1963) because nosefairing failure ended the flight only 16 sec. after launch. In today’s flight, 27 min. of telemetered data were received on acceleration, vibration, temperatures, and pressures, and from preliminary examination the test appeared successful. (Wallops Release 64-76)
In Fortune article on “Khrushchev’s Paper Bear,” Charles J. B. Murphy reviewed the background of U.S. intelligence concerning Soviet missile development as related to the first icbm’s, the first Sputniks, the high-altitude U—2 operations, and the so-called “missile gap.” He related these to American decisions and politics. Author submitted that Soviets failed to exploit early lead in missiles and that U.S. miscalculated relative missile strength in 1960. (Fortune, 12/64, 114f.) During December: Karl G. Harr, Jr., Pres, of Aerospace Industries Assn., editorialized: “To those familiar with the technical achievements of the past few years there is no doubt that aviation is on the threshold of its brightest era. . . . Enough is known of the potential of the new aeronautical technology to predict that all types of aviation—military, airline, and general aviation—will be completely transformed in the next two decades. The day of the manned military airplane is far from over. Today’s civil jet transports, which enjoy a high reputation, are far from the ultimate in economical flying machines. The usefulness of all types of aircraft will be vastly improved, and they will be much cheaper to operate in the future. “Perhaps even more important will be the widespread benefits of the new aeronautical technology outside of aviation. In the past, aeronautical technology, which has provided major advances in high performance engines, efficient air flow design, lightweight structures and material, and high reliability, was put to wide use after it was given in aviation. . . . This pattern of transfer of aeronautical technology will not change. In fact, the opportunity should be greater in the future because the jump in efficiency now considered possible for aircraft structure and powerplant technology is greater than anything yet experienced. . . .”	(Aerospace, Winter 64-8-9) During 1964: The deepening and broadening of the U.S. space program continued at an accelerated pace in 1964. The U.S. orbited a total of 76 payloads, of which four were deep-space probes, while the U.S.S.R. orbited 35, of which two were deep-space probes. Of the U.S. total NASA orbited 23 payloads. Other major NASA launches (not included in orbital total) were one unsuccessful attempt at orbit (Beacon satellite) and 5 suborbital tests of a burgeoning roster of new launch vehicles, spacecraft, and space equipment. dod’s launch program continued to be numerically larger than NASA’s, with 53 satellites successfully orbited during the year. NASA’s most publicized flight of the year was the RANGER vii flight to the moon with its close-in photography of the moon. Other solid achievements were apt weather photos from tiros VIII and the much improved clarity and coverage of weather photos from the first advanced research weather satellite, NIMBUS I. The first generation of active communications satellites concluded with syncom ill, which was maneuvered into the first truly synchronous orbit of the space age and performed beyond design requirements as a communications relay between Asia and the U.S. A significant scientific contribution was made by explorer xvn, which in 1964 mapped the earth’s magnetosphere and found it, instead of the sphere it was previously thought, to be a tremendously elongated comet-like shape. In flight tests Gemini and Apollo spacecraft moved nearer to qualifying as man-rated. The Saturn I completed its seventh (out of 7) successful test flight and orbited a new world weight record of 39,000 lbs. The Centaur continued a successful flight-test program to work the bugs out of the first liquid-hydrogen engines in an operational space vehicle. In ground tests the Saturn IB and V launch vehicles took significant strides in testing of new large engines find of complete stages. In advanced research two achievements of high promise were the full-power runs of solid-core nuclear rocket engines that confirmed the engineering feasibility of nuclear rocket engines with their tremendous increases in specific impulse over chemical-fueled engines, and the successful use of laser in satellite tracking, promising a new order of tracking accuracy for geodetic and other uses. In DOD’s launch program, the most publicized flight was that of Titan III-A on Dec. 10, when the big booster for the proposed MOL successfully flight-tested its crucial transtage. Also dod continued its policy of launch economy with 8 multiple-satellite launchings, including one (Jan. 11) in which a single Thor-Agena D booster launched 5 satellites. The most publicized event of the Soviet space program in 1964 was its orbiting of VOSKHOD I, a new 3-man spacecraft, with 2 of the crew not trained pilots. For both the U.S. and Russia, one major effort in each program remained a question mark at the end of the year. Each country had a deep-space probe (mariner iv and zond ii) enroute to Mars, due for flyby in July 1965. Perhaps never in its seven years had the space age offered such a direct confrontation as this promised to be. (hhr-s; hhn-48 ; NASA Release 64-321; A&A, 64, passim.) During 1964: Soviet scientists P. M. Bayevsky and K. I. Zhukov reported in the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences’ Journal, Cosmic Research, that two of their cosmonauts had suffered a rhythm instability in their heartbeats while in space. The condition, cardiac arrhythmia, was observed in both Valery Bykovsky, who spent five days aloft, and Valentina Tereshkova, who orbited the globe for 71 hrs. Both flights were made in June 1963. Changes were attributed to “normal” reactions to weightlessness, but the doctors warned that the condition should be watched closely on future iong-duration flights since it could be a clue to more serious “pathologic changes,” including a possibly fatal heart attack. Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace, NASA Director of Space Medicine, saw the electrocardiograms while in Russia and said they showed only “variations we’d expect.” NASA doctors agreed that cardiac arrhythmia should be watched as a potential danger signal but said they had seen “nothing dangerous” so far in U.S. astronauts’ heart rhythm changes, (tns, Bylinsky, Huntsville Times, 12/27/64)
explorer xxvi, Energetic Particles Explorer D (epe-d), was launched into an egg-shaped orbit atop a three-stage Delta rocket from Cape Kennedy. The 101-lb. windmill-shaped satellite carried five experiments designed to learn how high energy radiation particles are injected, trapped, and eventually lost in the Van Allen radiation belts. Information obtained from the mission was expected to make important contributions to the Apollo manned lunar landing program, specifically in the design of protective spacecraft shielding and in planning flight trajectories for moon landing. Information on the depth of penetration of the geomagnetic field by high energy solar protons—particles of potential danger to moon-bound astronauts—might also be obtained. Preliminary orbital data: apogee, 16,280 mi.; perigee, 190 mi.; period, 7 hrs. 36 min.; inclination, 20.15°. The satellite was designed for an operational life of one year. (NASA Release 64-302; AP, Benedict, Wash. Post, 12/22/64)
nasa’s echo ii passive communications satellite was placed in near-polar orbit by Thor-Agena B launch vehicle launched from Van-denberg afb, Calif. The second-stage Agena fired shortly after booster separation, coasted, then reignited over South Africa, injecting into orbit the canister containing the laminated mylar plastic and aluminum balloon. Canister opened and released the 535-lb. balloon-satellite which inflated to 135-ft. diameter. Initial orbital data: apogee, 816 mi.; perigee, 642 mi.; period, 109 min.; inclination to equator, 81.5°. (nasa Release 64-11; AP, Wash. Post, 1/26/64; Becker, NYT, 1/26/ 64,1)
Soviet annual report to cospar listed 21 satellite and 114 rocket launchings for 1963. Omitting any mention of when U.S.S.R. might launch major spacecraft, report said past manned space flight had “set some new problems before scientists requiring immediate solution for successful preparation and realization of more prolonged space missions. ...” A major question to be answered was whether it was “possible for an astronaut, after two or three weeks stay under conditions of weightlessness, to endure satisfactorily stresses acting on an organism during re-entry.” Also studies must be made of methods to safeguard astronauts’ cardiovascular systems. Longest section of report was on medical and biological problems of manned space flight; it offered evidence that U.S.S.R. was paying increasing attention to weightlessness and other problems of manned space flight. Soviet report was first such version ever submitted in English and was thought to be strikingly free of propaganda. Possibly significantly, report referred to U.S. space research in correlation with Soviet research ; for example, findings of mars I were said to correlate with findings of U.S. explorer x and mariner ii. (AP, 5/9/64; Simons, Wash. Post, 5/13/64)
NASA announced it had selected General Atomics Div. of General Dynamics Corp. to perform preliminary work, estimated to be worth about $1.7 million, on development of advanced type of nuclear reactor for use in powering spacecraft. Company would conduct studies on use of tungsten to contain uranium fuel in compact high-powered reactor that might power a rocket. Work would be performed for Space Nuclear Propulsion Office operated jointly by NASA and aec. (nasa Release 64-173; WSJ, 7/15/64)
First flight tests of new 16-in. rocket motor in Project Harp (High-Altitude Research Project) were expected in May at Barbados Is., B.W.I., Missiles and Rockets reported. Static tests on the motor were now underway. The rocket motor would be used to boost gun-launched payloads in the McGill University-U.S. Army project. The May series would include some 30 firings of the rocket vehicle and new versions of the Martlet-series missile. Project sources indicated use of multiple staging with new rocket motor could make possible the orbiting of 50-70 lb. payloads into 60-100 mi. earth orbit. (M&R, 1/27/64, 22)
NASA and Netherlands Organization for the Advancement of Pure Research announced agreement for joint scientific sounding rocket project. Under the agreement, four Nike-Apache sounding rockets carrying sodium vapor payloads would be launched from Coronie, Surinam, near the equator next autumn. Netherlands would provide scientific payloads and launch site, as well as other support facilities in Surinam. NASA would provide the rockets and launching device and train Dutch launching personnel, (nasa Release 64-197)
NASA announced that usns Croatan had completed its successful shakedown cruise off the Virginia-North Carolina coast during which a number of sounding rockets were launched for NASA. Electronic equipment and operational procedures were checked out in preparation for using the usns Croatan as a mobile launch platform early in 1965. During this three-month NASA expedition, forty or more scientific experiments would be launched from the usns Croatan as part of NASA’s sounding rocket program in connection with the International Quiet Sun Year (IQSY), 19641965. (Wallops Release 64-86; NASA Release 64-294)
U.S.S.R.’s unsuccessful attempts to send payloads to Venus Feb. 26 and Mar. 4 were reported in the U.S. press. Failures were attributed by U.S. military officials to difficulties with upper-stage rocket supposed to send the spacecraft out of parking orbit and onto its interplanetary course., (Av. Wk., 3/30/64,15; Finney, NYT, 4/1/64,1, 10)
NASA announced initiating Atlas flox program, involving addition of about 30% fluorine to the rocket’s oxidizer to obtain “flox,” which would significantly increase booster performance. In first phase of program possible hazards and operation problems of flox would be studied, including component compatibility tests and rocket engine static-firing, at estimated cost of $8 million. Second phase, not yet funded, would conclude with r&d launch of flox Atlas with dummy upper stage in 1966. NASA Lewis Research Center would negotiate contracts with gd/a for work on the Atlas and with Rocketdyne Div. of naa for work on the engines. (NASA Release 64-150)
U.S.S.R. launched into orbit three earth satellites—cosmos xxxvm, cosmos xxxix, and cosmos xl—with a single booster rocket “of a new type.” Tass said the three satellites were orbiting in close orbits with initial parameters as follows: 876-km. (544-mi.) apogee, 210-km. (130-mi.) perigee, 95.2-min. period, and 56.16° angle of inclination to the equator. (Tass, Krasnaya Zvezda, 8/19/64, atss-t Trans.)
A pea-sized rocket motor, called a cap motor, weighing less than threehundredths of an ounce, might be given its first trial in space next year as a stabilizing motor for a Tiros weather satellite. Conceived by the Wright Aeronautical Div. of the Curtiss-Wright Corp. in Wood Ridge, N.J., it was made entirely of plastic, contained igniter material which would be touched off by an electrical impulse, a solid propellant, a combustion chamber, and a flared exhaust nozzle. A string of the expendable motors would be mounted on a tape that would feed through a half-pound triggering device and fire them one at a time or in sequence. One cap motor would yield a pound of thrust for about two-hundredths of a second. Two cap motor units, each containing 300 cap motors, would be placed on Tiros for the test in an attempt to lengthen its useful life beyond an expected three months. The satellite must spin at a certain number of revolutions a minute to stabilize its cameras; the slight friction in its trajectory would tend to slow it down. Computers on the ground would calculate the amount of spin to be imparted; aboard Tiros, 100 cap motors would be fired in each burst. (Hudson, NYT, 12/30/64,1,17)
Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, NASA Deputy Administrator since 1958, received the aiaa premiere award, the Louis W. Hill Award for 1964, for the Outstanding Contribution to Space Transportation. Dr. Dryden was honored for his fluid mechanics research leading to space era, technical leadership of naca and nasa teams which made civilian space program a reality, and personal contribution to research in the X—15 program. He was called “a symbol of our aerospace success.” In his address at the aiaa Honors Night Banquet, Dr. Dryden said that those involved with our space program must consider broad national goals in addition to scientific details. Other goals mentioned by Dryden were “to obtain maximum benefit to the welfare of the Nation and to all mankind” and “to provide not only material benefits to free man in a peaceful world, but also incentives for mental and spiritual growth and accomplishment.” While recalling the day about 40 years ago, “when an airplane was essentially the product, from concept to final machine, of one man, the designer with the aid of two or three assistants,” Dr. Dryden said today’s space technologist “. . . must search for knowledge of the facts, conduct our work with devotion to intellectual honesty and objectivity, and realize in our activities the highest moral aspirations and ideals of which we are capable.” Dr. Dryden expressed confidence that the Nation would continue to support comprehensive space exploration program because of sum total of goals space planning strove for. These included national prestige, national defense, human knowledge of space, development of efficient space vehicles, and utilization and international exchange of technological information. He added: “I believe that the rate and scale of the program are not excessive in view of the great resources of this country.” (aiaa, The Louis W. Hilt Award pamphlet, 7/1/64; aiaa Booster, 7/2/64,1; Speech Text; NASA Release 64-161)
Fourth anniversary of tiros I, first meteorological satellite, orbited with a Thor-Able booster from AMR. The spectacular accomplishments by the experimental tiros weather satellites were to develop into a global cloud-cover reporting system.
Harold Gold, head of Spacecraft Branch of nasa Lewis Research Center, discussed Sert I project at the Air Transport and Space meeting in New York. Scheduled for launch on a ballistic flight this summer, Sert (Space Electric Rocket Test) would be NASA’s first electric engines in space. The two electric engines aboard Sert I would differ: (1) built by Lewis was electron-bombardment ion engine using mercury propellant; (2) built by Hughes Aircraft’s Hughes Research Laboratory was contact-ionization thrustor using cesium propellant. Hughes engine would operate for first half of flight, then Lewis engine would take over. “If Sert I data indicate that beam neutralization is completely effective the development of ion thrustors for space missions can continue in vacuum chambers. However, if beam neutralization is of limited effectiveness a new program of vacuum chamber and flight tests may be undertaken,” Gold said. (NASA Release 64-101; lrc Release 64-39)
Flight-rating test for F-l rocket engine was delayed from mid-year to end of the year, and tests leading up to the qualification would begin in September. {M&R, 5/25/64,9)
NASA launched Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill with grenade payload to obtain atmospheric temperature, wind, density, and pressure data. The rocket attained 86.5-mi. altitude and all but the first of the 12 grenades detonated. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center scientists Saul H. Genatt and Edwin Reid said they had seen “red and blue bands” on the moon last Aug. 25 through a 16-in. telescope at GSFC, Greenbelt, Md. Reid first sighted the hands, which appeared at the crater Aristarchus, then he and Genatt continued to observe them for an hour. Two bands were red and one was blue, Genatt said; the two red bands lay across the southern half of the crater and the blue band lay across the northern half parallel to the other two. The colors were “very strong” at 10:00 p.m., when the men began observations, then gradually faded in intensity until the blue band disappeared at 10:30 and the red bands, shortly after 11:00. Similar sightings had been reported by Lowell Observatory scientists in October and November 1963, and prior to that time, by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Kozyrev. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/15/64; Perkinson, Balt. Sun, 9/14/64; A&A 63) *	usaf launched Thor-Agena D satellite booster with unidentified payload from Vandenberg afb, Calif. (M&R, 9/21/64, 11)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with French sodium-vapor payload was launched from India’s Thumba Range to about 192-km. altitude (about 119 mi.). Two ground camera stations photographed sodium vapor released from the rocket to obtain measurements of atmospheric winds, turbulence, and diffusivity. (NASA Rpt. srl)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics began hearings on NASA authorization for FY 1965. NASA Administrator James E. Webb testified: “In the tight budget situation faced by the President for Fiscal Year 1965 it was necessary to stress with him and the Bureau of the Budget that unless the full $5.3 billion authorization requested for FY 1965, and •the supplemental appropriation of $141 million requested for FY" 1964 are approved, the manned space flight program will encounter further delays- It will then not be possible to achieve the national goal of exploring the moon with men within this decade. “There may be some inclination to assume that the adjustment of our program to the reductions imposed for FY 1964 indicates that this will likewise be possible in the event of reductions in the request which is before you at this time. I cannot emphasize too strongly that this is not the case. “In adjusting our program to compensate for the reductions made in the appropriation for FY 1964, we have already sacrificed the margins and early target dates which were needed, and which in reality are still needed, in our effort to achieve the goals which have been set for us. In fact, Mr. Chairman, we are not able to maintain a reasonably balanced program, and accommodate the entire reduction, with any strong assurance that we can meet the 1970 lunar target date. The best we can say is that we have a ‘fighting chance.’ “To sum up our situation in a sentence, if we do not receive the funds which the President has requested, there is nothing left to sacrifice except the National goal itself. “. . . whether it is agreed or not that international considerations and national security factors require that we hold to the present pace of the space program, the fact is that prudence and economy will be served. Even if economy alone were to be the guiding consideration in the evaluation of the NASA request for FY 1965, the cost of establishing and maintaining superiority in space will be less if we maintain the pace, the momentum, which the supplemental, appropriation and this authorization request will provide. “. . . Despite the difficulties which have been experienced, we can still put two American explorers on the moon in this decade, and we can do it for less than $20 billion. . . . [But] if the program is further curtailed, if the momentum is lost, if the Apollo program is stretched into the next decade, the cost will not be under $20 billion, it will be several billions more. The ultimate cost will increase for each year in which achievement of our goal is delayed. “. . . [According to a NASA study], the cost of the lunar exploration would increase by approximately $1 billion for each year that the landing is delayed. A three year delay would cost $3 billion, a six year delay $6 billion, with no corresponding improvement in the benefits obtained. . . (Testimony: CR. 2/5/64, A545-48)
NASA Group Achievement Award presented to Centaur “E” Stand Project personnel at NASA Lewis Research Center’s Plum Brook Station for their “significant contributions resulting in the successful completion of research testing of the Atlas 116 D booster under simulated loading and environmental conditions and [for] providing data vital to the first flight of the Centaur vehicle.” (lrc Release 64-56)
First launch of NASA Aerobee 350 sounding rocket was conducted at Wallops Island, Va., the rocket reaching 6,000-ft. altitude in successful test. For this first test upper stage was inert, the main objectives being to demonstrate compatibility of Aerobee 350 with Aerobee launch-tower rail system and evaluate performance of Aerobee 350 during first-stage (Nike) boost. Preliminary evaluation of test indicated NASA Goddard Space Flight Center could proceed with plans to launch complete live Aerobee 350 without redesign of the rocket or the launcher rail system. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
usaf announced it had launched Thor-Agena D satellite booster from Vandenberg afb. (AP, 8/21/64)
Two NASA Nike-Apache sounding rockets were launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, and returned good data. The first attained 95-mi. altitude, its instrumented payload measuring light intensity and particle fluxes. Rice Univ. payload included two photometers, one scintillator, three Geiger counters, One Geiger tube, and two magnetometers. The second rocket reached 117-mi. altitude with instrumented payload to obtain data on charged particles responsible for the visual aurora and on those responsible for auroral absorption. (NASA Rpts. srl)
West German government issued denial that any West German firm was producing missiles suitable for military application. Denial was in response to Soviet diplomatic complaint that missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads were being produced in West Germany, recalling rocket test-firings last December by Weapons and Air Equipment Co. of Hamburg. German government said investigation of the Hamburg company established that it possessed no manufacturing facilities. Two days later, according to Missiles and Rockets, the company halted production of rockets that it “apparently planned to export to Middle Eastern Arab nations.” Company officials told M&R the decision was made voluntarily to prevent further embarrassment to West German government. (NYT, 2/6/64, 5; M&R, 2/17/64, 9)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $2,017,400 contract to Granite Construction Co., Houston, Tex., for construction of a vehicle component supply building and a hazardous materials storage building at its Saturn rocket production plant (NASA Michoud Operations) in New Orleans. (Marshall Star, 11/18/64, 4)
Aviation Week recounted an exchange between Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and Sen. J. William Fulbright (D.-Ark.) in which McNamara stated that the Apollo program had psychological value but no direct military worth. In response to a question about the effect of the Apollo program on the mission of dod, McNamara said: “... if a psychological victory that might result from the Soviets arriving at the moon first leads to a shift in attitudes in the world, tending to reduce the belief in the strength of the West, and in increasing the Soviet’s view of the weakness of the West, this is bound to have a military effect. This is exactly what occurred in connection with our space programs, and it led to a very costly response by this country.” (Av. Wk., 7/20/64)
Officials of NASA’s Saturn program expressed interest in a miniature version of the Rover nuclear rocket engine. Called the “Poodle,” the liquid-propellant engine was developed under an AEC contract with Space Technology Laboratories of Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge.	(M&R, 6/8/64, 22)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite aboard an Atlas-Agena D booster from Point Arguello, Calif. (AP, 5/19/64)
In interview with Aviation Week and Space Technology, Air Force Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert replied to question about mol: “I am sure that the mol must go forward. I am in sympathy with Mr. McNamara’s pressing us to try to define what we hope to do with it. This can have a lot to do with the subsystems that you plan to put in it. Also, the definition effort has to do with the cost, and with the time it is going to take us to do the job. We haven’t suffered at any time in the last three years that I have heen here by taking a few months to try and work out with reasonable precision what we are planning to do. I am convinced, for one, that the studies and program definition that we went through in the Titan 3 materially improved our chances of getting a fine booster at lower cost. I know, as Secretary McNamara knows, that there is a limit to the precision with which you can define what you are going to do with something you haven’t got. But the effort should be made to set out the parameters. It has -the merit, at least, of excluding some of the things you know you are not going to try. I’m convinced Mr. McNamara means exactly what he says—that we have to get this mol capability, and I’m not disturbed by the efforts that are being made to attempt to define what we mean by a capability. . . (Av. Wk., 3/2/64, 73)
NASA launched second re-entry experiment for aec, designated Reentry Flight Demonstration-2 (RFD-2), on a Scout booster from Wallops Island, Va. Nonradioactive mockup of nuclear isotopic generator was sent to 800-mi. altitude by three-stage Scout, before the payload reentered atmosphere on its ballistic trajectory and impacted about 250 mi. southeast of Bermuda. Primary objective of rfd-2 was to acquire data on generator disassembly and fuel capsule burnup rate for use in advanced generator designs. In previous flight test (rfd-1 in May 1963), nonradioactive model of Snap-lOA nuclear reactor was tested in atmospheric re-entry; rfd-i demonstrated that space reactors can be designed to melt down and disassemble upon re-entry. The nonradioactive mockup in rfd-2 was a model of an isotopic-thermoelectric generator. Earlier testing had shown that heat created during re-entry could be used to burn up isotopic generator, leaving very minute particles which then would be dispersed at high altitudes to eliminate any radiation danger. (Wallops Release 64-72)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket at White Sands, N. Mex., the rocket serving as a test round for a series of rockets to be flown in Sweden in July, and containing micrometeoroid-particle collector as follow-up to Aerobee 150 experiment three years before. Despite extremely low peak altitude (about 30 mi.—the second stage broke up after about 4.5 sec. of burning), instrumentation functioned until impact except for aspect sensor and Dovap. No useful scientific data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., reached 107-mi. altitude with four spectrographs to obtain spectra of planets, but no data were obtained because attitude control system’s despin valve failed and the rocket spun out of control. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Soviet newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda published erroneous map of the target area in the Pacific for its rocket tests which it had previously announced would begin August 4. The map placed the impact areas within 10Q mi. of populated islands, but the targets as previously defined were several hundred miles from nearest inhabited areas and in another part of the Pacific. (Shabad, NYT, 8/3/64)
According to breakdown of FY 1965 budget of NASA’s Office of Advanced Research and Technology, NASA would initiate preliminary design study of advanced fluorine-hydrogen (flox) rocket engine in FY 1965. The new engine would be based on results of experimental fluorine program with RL-10 engine. (M&R, 2/17/64,18)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket with ionosphere experiment payload from Wallops Island, Va., to peak altitude of 105 mi. The payload carried instrumentation to measure electron and ion density and solar radiation in the D and E regions of the ionosphere; it impacted 114 mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean. Provided by Univ. of Illinois and the Geophysics Corp. of America, the experiment was an investigation of the International Year of the Quiet Sun (1964-65) (iqsy). (Wallops Release 64-37)
Two satellites were orbited with single Atlas-Agena D booster, launched by USAF from WTR. ( HHN-4 8 )
Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in speech before Professional Group on Antennas and Propagation of the ieee, Kennedy Airport International Hotel: “In the development of national [space] capability, nasa is carrying forward the work begun a half-century ago by its predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. Like the naca, the space agency is concentrating its efforts on research and development. The only important difference is that NASA also carries out operations in space and, in so doing, develops methods of operation as well as the needed technology. . . . “The facilities, manpower, flight hardware, and experience being created in the Apollo program will serve the country long after the program itself has been completed. In fact, fully 90 percent of the work now in progress in Apollo would be done to create space power even if there were no moon and our efforts in manned space flight had an entirely different goal. “It may be compared with the Paris objective of Lindbergh’s flight. His primary purpose was not to reach Paris but to develop and demonstrate the capability of transatlantic flight. . . .” (Text)
NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center announced that two barnacle-encrusted capsules, each containing 100 ft. of color motion-picture film in good condition, were found, one on a beach at Eleuthera Island in the Bahamas, the other near a beach in San Salvador in Central America. The capsules had been ejected from Saturn I SA—7 booster rocket launched Sept.'18, 1964, from Cape Kennedy, (upi, NYT, 11/14/64, 24)
NASA announced the next U.S. manned space flight, Project Gemini GT-3, had been delayed into 1965 because of time lost as result of lightning damage to GT-2 launch vehicle and removal of the rocket from launch pad during hurricanes Cleo and Dora. Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said GT—2 unmanned suborbital mission would be made in last quarter of 1964. GT-3, with Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John Young as crew members, was scheduled for first quarter of 1965. (nasa Release 64-233)
Four-day Conference on Space Nutrition and Related Waste Problems, sponsored by NASA and organized with assistance of National Academy of Sciences’ Space Science Board, opened in Tampa, Fla., with some 200 engineers and scientists attending. In introductory remarks at Conference, NASA Associate Administrator 'or Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff said that in both the life sciences and the physical sciences, “when we strip away the unessentials, we are really dealing with the conversion and control of energy. There is the muscle with its tiny fibrils on the one hand and the chemical fuel energy converters on the other. There are the electrical activities of the brain and nerve impulses on the one hand.and the computer and feedback loop on the other. “The state of man’s technology in every age has depended on his ability to convert and control energy. The Industrial Revolution brought on an economic structure that could not be operated without knowledge of the equivalence of different forms of energy. . . . “The opportunities that are now presented for advancements in energy conversion and control are breathtaking. New methods of energy conversion from solar, chemical, and nuclear energy sources which will be useful to all of mankind are being pioneered in the space program. . . . Perhaps the most dramatic energy conversion devices in the NASA program are the propulsion devices that convert chemical or nuclear energy to kinetic energy. The Nerva rocket engine converts nuclear energy to kinetic vehicle energy by passing liquid hydrogen through a graphite reactor at 6000° R and ejects it through a nozzle. In these devices we will convert as much energy as is converted by the Grand Coulee Dam in a device about the size of an American motor car. . . .” (Text) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon of nasc staff said in address at the Conference: “. . . As of April 24, the United States had orbited 203 payloads, and the Soviet Union 65 since 1957. But weight comparisons are quite different. They have put up about three times as much net payload as we have. What is more discouraging, every year for the last five years, the lead of the Soviet Union in that year has grown larger than it was for the year before. ... “My 'best assessment is that the Soviet [space] program has close to the same variety of goals as our own, including undertaking very complex missions. Let us look at j ust the main outlines. “Scientific Exploration in Earth Orbit: . . . The Soviet Union is clearly interested in more than spectaculars. In the Earth-orbital regime, it has put up 28 Kosmos class scientific and engineering-test satellites with a minimum of fanfare, and these have included a range of experiments. . . . Additionally the pair of Elektron satellites are providing synoptic measurements of the radiation belts out to 40,000 miles. “Space Applications: When it comes to practical applications of unmanned satellites, the United States has the lead in demonstrated accomplishments. . . . But similar flight operations are not beyond Soviet capabilities. . . . “Lunar and Planetary Probes:. . . In absolute number of launchings the Soviet Union has made a larger commitment to such flights than we have. As a percentage of total flight effort, their commitment for that purpose is running about five-fold our own. And they use larger vehicles by far. Take a part of the comparative planetary effort for example. Of our two launch attempts to date, the 447-pound Mariner II carried about 40 pounds of instruments near Venus and returned some data. We are rightfully proud of this accomplishment. “The Soviet pattern has been to orbit 14,300-pound platforms from which a probe weighing up to 2,000 exclusive of the rocket casing can be launched on the interplanetary trajectory. Between 1960 and 1962, ten such launchings were made. Typically, the comparison is a difficult one to make. We met with a great success in Mariner II. Not one of the Soviet craft attained its full objective. . . . “While neither country should he overly proud of its lunar probe record, the pictures taken by Lunik III back in 1959 are still a high-water mark. “Manned Space Flight: . . . Through the 1963 season each country had made six manned launchings, and neither side had killed an astronaut or cosmonaut. Stories to the contrary are fabrications. . . . “Human Safety: . . . The Russians sent up without recovery Laika, four years before Gagarin. The Vostok ship itself completed 100 orbits of fully controlled flight, including successful recovery of four dogs, before the first man was sent. . . . “Future Manned Missions: ... To the best of our knowledge, the Russians have not yet demonstrated a launch system capable of convenient manned flight to the Moon for a landing and return. But then, if we chose to practice Soviet-style security around our launch sites and factories, there would be no hard evidence available to foreigners that the United States is building a lunar capability either. . . . “Because we are not permitted to inspect their facilities, we have to do our best by inference to judge the truth of their repeated statements that they intend to be first in ambitious manned flights. . . . With all this circumstantial evidence I feel it is entirely possible and even probable that they are planning officially to make long-duration and distant manned flights. . . . “I feel we have the knowledge, the manpower, the resources, and the facilities, to mount the finest space program in the world. I feel it is worth undertaking on its own merits. I am also aware that we are in a race with a competent and tough-minded competitor. We must recognize the nature of this race and organize to meet it, not by year-by-year reactions, but with sound, consistent planning. . . .” (Text)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara held a press conference at which he responded to questions regarding the mol project: question: “Mr. Secretary, Senator Anderson has suggested that a billion dollars could be saved by merging the Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory with nasa’s Apollo. [See Dec. 7, 1964.] Can you tell us how you feel about that?” secretary MCNAMARA: “I feel very strongly that we must avoid duplicate space programs. There must be only one National Space Program. The great bulk of the expenditures for that National Space Program should be in NASA, because the bulk of the National Space Program will be oriented toward civilian scientific and other objectives. There is a place, there is a requirement for a military component. We must maintain security, a high level of security, on certain elements of the space program and that portion of the program must be handled by the Defense Department. I think Senator Anderson was simply emphasizing the absolute essentiality of fully coordinating the NASA and the Defense Department programs. With that, I agree 100 percent. . . . My principle is a very simple one ... I believe we are a military organization, we are not interested in space except insofar as it bears directly on our military mission. If there is anything that NASA can do, that we can in effect hire them to do as our agent, I am 100 percent in favor of doing so.” question: “A related question. Could you say, specifically, whether you are backing the mol or not?” SECRETARY mcnamara : “Yes, indeed.” question: “That could go ahead under the Air Force.” secretary MCNAMARA: “Yes, but I want to be sure that the mol program, the details of it, are fully analyzed by NASA and fully taken into account when NASA establishes any portion of its Apollo Program not directly related to the Lunar Program. ... I want to be certain that the Air Force, when it established the MOL, takes account of what NASA is required to do as part of the Apollo Program that in turn is directly related to the Lunar Program.” (Text; M&R, 12/21/64, 20; SBD, 12/15/64)
Trustees and President of Clark Univ. announced Clark’s proposed new library would be named the “Robert Hutchings Goddard Library” in honor of the distinguished rocket pioneer, who was an alumnus and professor of physics at Clark. (Clark Announcement)
The second set in a series of three dual ship-to-shore sounding rocket launchings was conducted at 5:24 p.m. EST from the usns Croatan and at 5:27 p.m. from Wallops Island, Va., about 200 mi. apart. Sodium vapor was ejected by the Nike-Apaches from about 25 mi. up to an altitude of approximately 125 mi. The reddish-pink clouds were visible for several hundred miles along the East Coast. (Wallops Release 6484; NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told Senate Appropriations Committee’s Independent Offices Subcommittee that 15 Saturn V flights were planned for Project Apollo program, the lunar landing to be accomplished in the last three months of 1969 with the fifteenth flight. Webb also said that if the proposed $5.3 billion nasa budget for fiscal year 1965 were cut so that the Apollo program had to be slowed down, the cost of the program would increase by a billion dollars with each added year of delay. (Text)
Rep. John W. Davis, (D.-Ga.) said dod had turned over the large solidpropellant rocket motor project to NASA, the decision made because no definite military mission was assigned for the technology. In FY 1965 NASA will cover cost of the large-motor rad; in FY 1964 usaf carried the cost. NASA officials said they planned to request $13 million for the project, with about half that going to contractors Thiokol Chemical Corp. and Aerojet-General. (Atlanta Const., 1/24/64)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in speech at Engineers’ Week dinner, Los Angeles: “At present, we estimate that more than 35,000 engineers and scientists are at work in the Gemini and Apollo programs and the studies of possible advanced manned missions. This number will reach a level of 45,000, about 2.8 percent of the national employment of scientists and engineers, when our currently approved programs reach their peak of effort next year. . . . “In recent months, we have reviewed thoroughly the status of program technology . . the pace of the program for its impact on total cost . . and the possible effects on the program of the hazards of interplanetary space. . . . “First, with respect to technology ... we have found all of the knotty questions involved in advancing the state of the art are yielding to hard work. We know of no technological problems that would prevent our accomplishing the Apollo program in this decade. . . . “[Second], . . . starting with the level of funding planned for the current fiscal year there is sound economic justification for maintaining the program on its present schedule. To stretch out the program at this time would add to the cost and unnecessarily delay this first major step in space exploration. “The final area of examination of the program has been with respect to the hazards of interplanetary space. . . . Estimates based on present information indicate that meteoroids will not constitute a major problem in the planning of the first manned lunar exploration. . . . “Altogether, the present evidence indicates that radiation does not present a hazard that would prevent ^accomplishment of manned lunar exploration in this decade. Indeed, there is no serious evidence that the radiation factor would inhibit us in selecting the time of a lunar mission. . . .” (Text)
Space Technology Laboratories, Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge, selected by JPL to provide throttleable vernier engines for Surveyor lunar spacecraft being developed by Hughes Aircraft Co. under JPL supervision. (Av. Wk., 4/27/64,30) During April: European Space Research Organization (esro) was planning to orbit its first two satellites by late 1967 or early 1968, from U.S. Pacific Missile Range. Using purchased Scout booster, esro would launch the 200-lb. satellites into polar orbits. (Av. Wk., 4>/27/64>, 31)
Lockheed-Califomia Co. engineers disclosed concept for a reusable rocket plane to transport 10 passengers between earth and orbiting space station. Prepared in a study for nasa Marshall Space Flight Center, the design concept was a winged, two-stage carrier with two-man crew in each stage and capable of hauling three tons of cargo in addition to the passengers. Lockheed engineers said if the vehicle system development program were begun in 1967, the transport could be operational in 1975.	(Huntsville Times, 8/19/64)
Joseph A. Darr, Jr., and John Reeves of NASA Flight Research Center received plaques from President Johnson for their dollar-saving contribution to the X—15 research rocket airplane. Darr and Reeves were cited for the design and construction of a portable engine inspection cart that was used to check the systems operation of the LR—99 rocket engine which powered the X—15. Use of the cart saved 500 man hours and about $150,000, NASA estimated, (nasa Release 64-303)
In the Letters to the Editor column of the New York Times, Dr. Martin Summerfield, AIAA Vice President for Publications, took issue with sources quoted by NYT to the effect that Communist China would not be able to produce military nuclear-tipped rockets for another decade or even a generation. “As for rocket secrets,” he said, “there are none, either in theory or design. All one needs is a reading knowledge of English, French, or German, and a good collection of recent technical journals.” He said it was a serious underestimate to believe that the Chinese could not plan and execute an efficient research, development, and production program for practical missiles of medium range and a further underestimate to believe they were not close to their objective. (NYT, 11/8/64; A&A, 12/64,10)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in interview with John Finney on the subject of U.S. and U.S.S.R.’s space programs: “The significance [of VOSKHOD I flight], it seems to me, is the clear indication that manned flight in large spacecraft is important to the Russians, and offers opportunities for them for the future that justifies the investment clearly required.” Asked if VOSKHOD i flight meant U.S.S.R. had “extended its lead over the United States in manned space flight,” Mr. Webb replied: “This is hard to answer categorically but if I had to give a quick answer, I would say ‘Yes.’ ” Asked when U.S. would overtake U.S.S.R. in manned space flight, Mr. Webb said: “Well, first I think we must always keep in mind that our program including the developmental flights on the Saturn IB and the flights out to a quarter of a million miles with Saturn V are designed to meet United States needs for an operational capability out that far in space. “If the flight capability of the Russian craft is extended to include these additional capabilities, then we will have a serious problem in catching up in the next few years. If their capability does not extend to the booster power necessary for the full range of operations out to the moon, then we will pass them in this decade, provided our present program is adequately funded and no unknown or unanticipated difficulties show up.” (Interview, NYT, 10/18/64, E5)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb remarked at Univ. of Notre Dame that the establishment of its new Aero-Space Science and Engineering Department placed Notre Dame “in a vigorous and growing group of the nation’s leading educational institutions. . . . “What is happening this fall at this university is in some ways symbolic of what is happening all over the nation. For the space program has been a catalyst to science, to engineering, to research, and to education at all levels. The power of the modern rocket has given man a new, and in many ways, an unlimited tool for probing the mysteries of the universe. ... .” (Text)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with instrumentation to obtain data on charged particles responsible for visual aurora and on charged particles responsible for auroral absorptions was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 127-mi. altitude. Instrumented payload included five charged-particle detectors, aspect magnetometer, and accelerometer. All flight objectives were met. (nasa Rpt. SRl)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb with unidentified satellite. It was later disclosed that two satellites were placed in orbit. (M&R, 1/27/64,10; hhn-48)
United Press International (upi) reported that the Air Force would attempt pickaback launch of a secret satellite (OV—1) next month from Vanden-berg aeb with hopes of proving a method which would save the taxpayers $370,000 per launch. The 300-lb. satellite, carrying its own rocket motor, would ride into space on the side of an Atlas missile making a re-entry test. Near the peak of the Atlas’ flight, OV-1 would spring away, coast for a few seconds, and be launched into orbit by its own rocket. The Atlas would continue on its mission, (upi, NYT, 11/10/64,34)
Article written by Sen. Barry Goldwater, Republican nominee for President, in which he laid down his views on the form the U.S. space program should take, appeared in Science and Mechanics: “The concept that speeding men to the moon is the same as jockeying trotters over a muddy track must be abandoned, regardless of Kremlin propaganda. The idea that we can cooperate with the Russians to do the job quicker and cheaper is too ludicrous for comment. We are spending entirely too much money on the manned moon program, when a carefully plotted program using unmanned lunar landing equipment could steadily build up a solid body of scientific knowledge about the lunar environment that would increase the safety factor for astronauts much later. Automatic landing equipment could be designed at minimum cost. The program should expand in easy steps, each one leading to the next. The billions of dollars thus saved could be profitably invested in other aspects of space research.”	, Speaking of the military role in space, he said: “All manned space research should be directed by the military, with national security and control of the access to space as primary goals. The threat from space now and in the foreseeable future is from spatial regions within a thousand miles of Earth and not from lunar distances. Routine daily surveillance of these regions must be established, and the additional capabilities of positive identification, interception, and destruction of hostile enemy space vehicles will be necessary. This would be the greatest deterrent to an enemy’s military space aspirations. It would also give us the means of developing experienced space pilots, scientific and technological methods, and new scientific knowledge which could be used later in sending men to the moon and the planets. The hardware, on a routinely reliable basis, would be available ofi-the-shelf. “It might be added that almost every successful NASA launch to date, manned and unmanned, has been made with military support—with missile rocket-boosters, launch facilities, technical know-how, communications (including air transport of boosters) or safety procedures—or with all five. . . . “Finally, I believe that an immediate initial step of any effective military space program must be a manned station in near orbit about the Earth, with necessary support equipment. . . .” Senator Goldwater also stated that in his opinion there was the need for two crash programs in space research. The first would develop the Nike-Zeus antimissile missile, and the second would develop the potentiality of lasers for use as military weapons. (Science and Mechanics, 6/64; Wash. Post, 7/21/64) During June: France’s Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aero-spatiales (ONERA) revealed it had successfully flight-tested hybrid rocket engine in a rocket launched April 25 from Ceres sounding rocket facility on the lie du Levant in the Mediterranean Sea. Engine employed combination of liquid nitric acid oxidizer and unidentified solid fuel. (Av. WL, 6/29/64, 24)
NASA launched three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Ft. Churchill, Canada, and Wallops Island, Va., two with grenade payloads to investigate winds, temperature, density, and pressure in the upper atmosphere. The first, a Nike-Cajun was launched from Wallops; it sent payload to about 57-mi. altitude, where aluminum-coated mylar plastic sphere was ejected and inflated to 26-in. diameter. The sphere continued up to about 78.4-mi. altitude before floating down to earth. Radar tracking of ascent, descent, and drift provided data for calculating densities at various altitudes. Less than two hours later the Ft. Churchill rocket was launched, sending 82-lb. payload which ejected grenades detonating at intervals in region of 28 to 58 mi. 20 min. later the final rocket—the second carrying grenades—was launched from Wallops Island, with grenades exploding in about the same altitude range. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center conducted the flights to observe characteristics of the upper atmosphere and to measure variations occurring through the period of increased heating. The grenade experiments were an extension of series conducted from Jan. 23 to Mar. 6 involving 13 Nike-Cajun flights which “yielded excellent data on the characteristics in the upper atmosphere during winter conditions,” according to project scientist Wendell S. Smith. Follow-up experiments were planned for late summer when solar heating would be near maximum, for comparative data. (Wallops Release 64-38)
X—15 No. 3 flown 'by NASA pilot Milton O. Thompson to 63,000-ft. altitude and 2,045-mph speed (mach 3.10). The X-15 rocket engine burned 41 sec. before Thompson cut back power to planned 40 per cent. Then engine unexpectedly cut off. Thompson could not restart it, and he had to make emergency landing on Cuddeback Dry Lake. Cause of premature shutdown was malfunction in engine control system. This was fourth forced landing in 107 X-15 flights. (NASA X-15 Proj. Off.; AP, Balt. Sun, 5/22/64)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with Univ. of Alaska payload to obtain data on the visible aurora and on the vacuum ultraviolet emissions. This information was to' be supplemented by data from two electron particle detectors. Payload also included three photometers and two vacuum ultraviolet detectors. The rocket attained peak altitude of 103 mi., and the flight appeared satisfactory. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Gemini-Titan II (GT-2) rocket which was to launch unmanned Gemini spacecraft arrived at Cape Kennedy. It arrived by C-133B cargo plane from Martin Co. plant in Baltimore where it had undergone testing. (AP,Orlando (Fla.) Sentinel,7/12/64)
AEC announced a satellite carrying small Snap-9A atomic generator had been launched on Thor-Able-Star booster from Vandenberg afb last April 21, but it did not go into orbit. Preliminary data indicated the satellite burned up upon re-entry into earth’s atmosphere. (AP, NYT, 5/12/64; Av. WL, 5/18/64,38)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket successfully launched from the Argentine launch range at Chamical to study the ionosphere. Payload contained continuous wave propagation, electron temperature, and ion density experiments. This was first rocket launched by a South American country under a cooperative arrangement with NASA. Project was administered jointly by the Argentine National Commission of Space Research (ci^ie) and NASA. Argentina built the payloads and part of the ground station, while NASA trained Argentine technicians and engineers and provided some ground support equipment. Argentina purchased two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets in the U.S. No exchange of funds took place between the two agencies, (nasa Release 64-304; NASA Rpt. srl)
U.K. successfully launched its second Blue Streak rocket booster from Woomera, Australia, in development test. Blue Streak was slated to serve as first stage of eldo’s multistage launch vehicle. (M&R, 10/26/64,11)
Kenneth W. Gatland, Vice-President of British Interplanetary Society, described space progress in Great Britain in Astronautics & Aeronautics. He pointed out that Britain not only played a leading role in establishing eldo but also was contributing to eldo “the 300,000-lb.-thrust Blue Streak ... as the booster for a three-stage satellite launcher [Europa 1].” Other activities—not counting the eldo contribution—had made Britain, in cooperation with Australia, “easily the biggest participant in space research outside the United States and the Soviet Union. “Upper-air research with Skylark rockets began at Woomera in February 1957 and has continued to the present time. Black Knight rockets have reached heights of 500 mi., and with it a number of interesting investigations have been made on both re-entry and stabilization and control of rocket vehicles at high altitudes. The growth of the Weapons Research Establishment at Woomera as a launching, tracking, and communications center under joint investment by the British and Australian Governments, and latterly by ELDO and NASA, has made this facility the finest and best-equipped overland rocket range in the Western World. . . . “With the advent of Sputnik 1 in October 1957, Jodrell Bank [radioastronomy facilities] quickly established itself on both sides of the Iron Curtain as an important center for space tracking and communications. . . . “In addition, the General Post Office in 1961-62 built an experimental ground station at Goonhilly Downs, Cornwall, for relaying telecommunications signals between the United States and the United Kingdom via Telstar and Relay. There are plans to develop this station into a ground terminal for a global telecommunications network. . . . “In July 1963, it was announced in Washington that Black Knight would be used by the United States, Great Britain, and Australia in a joint program of re-entry research [Project Dazzle] to he conducted over the Woomera rocket range.. . . “[British] universities and industry . . . [supplied] scientific instruments for the satellites S—51 and S-52 built and launched by the United States. A third scientific satellite, S-53, wholly engineered in the United Kingdom, will be launched by Scout in 1966.. . . “In the small rocket field, excellent results are currently being obtained with the Skua meteorological rocket .... a cheap and simple tool for the meteorologist to conduct routine research measurements in the upper atmosphere. . . . “Finally,. . . [studies] are currently being made in the United Kingdom into the concept of the Aerospace Plane, or space Transporter. . . .”	(A&A, 7/64, 18-26)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island, Va., in test of hinged-fin assembly with modified wedge designed to produce about 5 rps at Apache burnout and to obtain temperatures in flight at various points on the fin panel. Rocket reached 90-mi. altitude; performance of rocket and instrumentation was considered good, with exception of temperature probes, which were lost shortly after lift-off. (NASARpt. srl)
usaf OAR announced determination by Cambridge Research Laboratories scientists R. A. Skrivanek, R. K. Soberman, and Tom Ryan that nocti-lucent clouds were composed of meteoric particles or of residue of burned out meteors. The determination was made after extensive examinations of noctilucent cloud particles gathered by specially designed rocket nose cones sent aloft on Nike-Cajun rockets in joint afcrl-nasa—Univ. of Stockholm program. The researchers expected that another series of noctilucent cloud experiments to be conducted in Sweden this summer would confirm these results. ( oar Release 4-64-3)	"
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was fired from Wallops Island with 82-lb. payload containing grenades, detectors, and associated equipment. the grenades electing and exploding at altitudes ranging from 24-to 59-mi. altitudes. This flight was followed 20 min. later by Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Fort Churchill, Canada, with identical payload, a less successful flight because second-stage motor failed to ignite. Grenades were ejected and detonated but at altitudes too low to obtain useful data. The close-order firings were first two in current NASA, series to gather comparative data on winds and atmospheric temperatures up to 55-mi. altitude at widely separated locations on nearsimultaneous basis. (Wallops Release 64-7)
Successful static firing of 156-in. solid propellant rocket motor was conducted at Lockheed Propulsion Co., Potrero, Calif. The 110-sec. firing was considered successful in all respects. Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier, Deputy Commander for Manned Systems, afsSD, said the test signified “ a completely new era with regard to the size of solid motors for ballistic missiles, and in particular, for space boosters.” (M&R, 6/8/64, 25)
Mating assembly of Saturn V rocket sections would be accomplished with aid of air cushions, Marshall Star reported. General Motors’ Defense Research Laboratories was developing for MSFC a special tool—basically 20 “air pads”—for lifting rocket section and its wheeled carrier. Air pads would lift the huge sections about 1% in. from the floor. Tool designers were also working on mechanical mover for the air-cushion device so that one man would be able to move the stages forward and laterally. (Marshall Star, 1/8/64, 1-2)
X-15 No. 1 piloted by John B. McKay (nasa) reached only 98,000ft. altitude and 3,375-mph speed (mach 5.10) in flight near Edwards AFB, Calif. Within seconds after launch from mother ship, all guidance equipment on the rocket aircraft failed, forcing Pilot McKay to cut back speed and altitude. Flight had been planned to reach 180,000-ft. altitude and 3,550-mph speed in test for future X-15 flights to photograph the stars from above atmospheric interference. The rocket engine burned 83 sec. (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.; Wash. Post, 7/1/64)
Pratt & Whitney received $685,000 contract from NASA msfc for study and integration of an advanced liquid-oxygen-hydrogen rocket engine. Objective would be to integrate existing feasible concepts into one engine best able to meet future requirements. Work would be coordinated with other advanced mission studies such as Saturn V improvement, post Saturn, and the reusable orbital sbuttle transport. Configuration would be an engine with a single chamber turbopump unit with variable mixture ratio control. It would be throttleable and capable of multiple restarts and with a thrust range of 300,000 to 350,000 lbs. One-year study would use data produced under several separate NASA engine technology contracts at Pratt & Whitney with inputs from Aerojet-General Corp., Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, and General Electric Co. (M&R, 7/20/64, 8; SBD, 7/14/64, 63)
Continuing the current series of sounding rocket experiments to obtain comparative characteristics of the upper atmosphere at widely separated locations, NASA launched three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets at Wallops Island, Fort Churchill, and Ascension Island. The rocket payloads ejected 12 grenades which detonated at intervals up to 55-mi. altitude. (Wallops Release 64-16)
usaf successfully flew Athena re-entry test rocket from Green River, Utah, to target area at White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. USAF said that “some test objectives were achieved.” Launch was said to be second time in five launches that the four-stage missile completed the 357-mi. course. (AP, Phil. Inq., 10/4/64)
Archeological relics dating as far back as 3,500 B.C. were being uncovered at future site of man’s rocket launchings to the moon—Merritt Island, Fla. (nasa Space Sheet, 10/16/64)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., with two cameras and two spectrographs to obtain spectra of nehulosites of certain star fields. Rocket attained 118-mi. altitude and instrumentation performed properly, but failure of the attitude control system prevented the rocket from pointing at the targets and there were no experimental results, (nasa Rpt. srl)
The Athena rocket was successfully fired by usaf from Green River, Utah, to a target area in the White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. (M&R, 12/14/64, 10)
Interviewed in Data, Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (USAF), director of Apollo program in NASA Hq., replied to question about “all-up” concept of testing in the Apollo program. “The general test policy requires that all-up testing will be the basic approach to the flight test program. This requires that where practicable, all flights will be scheduled as complete space vehicles using all live stages and as much of the lunar mission flight hardware as can be made available. This policy results from the recognition that true operational suitability of the flight hardware can only be obtained by operating the systems in the space environment and that the total number of development flights and total elapsed time can be reduced by making all flights as fully representative of the operational configuration as possible.” {Data, 10/64,7-13)
Richard H. Nelson, Boeing’s project manager for production of Saturn V rockets, said production was about 10 weeks behind schedule because of a parts shortage. However, first rocket scheduled for flight was to be delivered on schedule in late summer or fall of 1966. Present delay affected Saturns designed to test design and engines in ground firings at msfc. Last 10 of Saturn V’s were expected to be delivered to Cape Kennedy by late 1968. Nelson was addressing Aviation Writers Association in Houston. (Houston Chron., 7/2/64)
Launching of Saturn I SA-5 rocket from AMR was postponed at T—100 min. because blind flange in liquid oxygen line to S-I stage had not been removed after recent pressurization check. Launch was rescheduled for Jan. 29. (Wash. Post, 1/28/64; Marshall Star, 1/29/64, 1)
John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, announced major reorganization. KSC Director Dr. Kurt H. Debus said objectives of reorganization were to: (1) realign Apollo program management functions in accordance with concept of NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller that these functions be standardized at NASA Hq. and the three manned space flight centers; (2) separate and strengthen administrative and technical support functions; and (3) reduce number of offices reporting to Dr. Debus and delegate more authority and responsibility to Assistant Directors. Under realignment there were five Assistant Directors, with authority to act for Center Director within their areas of responsibility: Program Management, Administrative Management, Launch Vehicle Operations, Technical Support Operations, and Instrumentation. Program Management was divided into two areas, Plans and Program Support Office and the Apollo Program Management Office, which was aligned as counterpart organization with Apollo program offices in NASA Hq. and the other manned') space flight centers (Manned Spacecraft Center and Marshall Space Flight Center). Unaffected by the change were Launch Support Equipment Engineering Div., Facilities Engineering and Construction, and five staff offices. New NASA Hq. office, NASA Regional Inspections, was attached to KSC. msc’s Preflight Operations Div. was renamed msc Florida Operations but its basic relationship to KSC was unchanged. Other NASA Center elements attached to KSC, such as GSFC Field Projects Branch, remained unchanged, (ksc Release.10-64)
Largest monolithic solid grain ever poured was well into its 20-day curing cycle at Aerojet-Dade Div. of Aerojet-General Corp. The 120-in., 37-ft.-long “Subscale 1” would be test-fired in the same cast-cure pit in midAugust. Both batch and continuous mix processes were used with the continuous mix working for 55 straight hours in the 2^-day pouring job. The 100-ton grain was to produce about 600,000 lbs. thrust in checking out the nozzle, materials, and processes developed for the upcoming 260-in. large solid rocket test at Aerojet. (M&R, 7/13/64, 11)
usaf launched Atlas-Agena D booster from Cape Kennedy with triple-satellite payload. Press sources reported the booster orbited two dod Nuclear Radiation Detection Satellites and a 4.5-lb. tetrahedral satellite. The three satellites were reported to be injected initially into elliptical orbits ranging from 120 to 65,000 mi. altitudes; ground command signal maneuvered one NRDS into 65,000-mi. circular orbit, and similar maneuver was planned for the other nrds two days later. The “Pygmy,” designed to measure electrons in the Van Allen belts, would continue in the elliptical orbit. Unofficially nicknamed “Sentries,” the twin radiation detectors were said to be similar, with minor exceptions, to the first pair, reported to have been successfully launched last October. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 7/19/64; Av. Wk., 7/20/64,24; M&R, 7/27/64, 22)
President Johnson sent $97.9 billion FT 1965 budget to Congress. Of space research and technology, he said: “Our plan to place a man on the moon in this decade remains unchanged. It is an ambitious and important goal. In addition to providing great scientific benefits, it will demonstrate that our capability in space is second to no other nation’s. However, it is clear that no matter how brilliant our scientists and engineers, how farsighted our planners and managers or how frugal our administrators and contracting personnel, we cannot reach this goal without sufficient funds. There is no second-class ticket to space. “Appropriations enacted for 1964 for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration were $6008 million below the amount requested. As a result, major development programs leading to the manned lunar landing have fallen behind schedule. Careful replanning of the entire program, including a reduction in the number of test flights, will offset some of this delay. Even so, more funds are needed in 1964, and I am therefore recommending a supplemental appropriation of $141 million for this year. “For 1965,1 am requesting appropriations of $5.3 billion, $63 million above the 1964 amount, including the proposed supplemental appropriation. The 1964 and 1965 recommendations represent the minimum amount needed to achieve our goals in space. The estimated increase of $590 million in expenditures in 1965 is due principally to payments required by commitments made in 1964 and earlier years. With the leveling off of appropriations, annual outlays should remain relatively stable in subsequent years. “In addition to the manned space flight program, though related to it, funds are included to support unmanned space flights for lunar exploration and supporting research and development. Funds are also included for scientific satellites, planetary probes, and experiments with meteorological and communications satellites. “The programs of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration are designed to maintain American supremacy in space and to demonstrate this supremacy by achieving a manned landing on the moon in this decade. . . . “The level of activity in support of the 3-man Apollo lunar spacecraft development program will reach its peak during 1965 with 13 flight spacecraft in production by the end of the year. The Saturn V rocket program will be proceeding rapidly along its development cycle in preparation for launching the Apollo spacecraft, and will account for about $850 million of the estimated 1965 expenditures. . . (Text, NYT, 1/22/64119-21)
NASA announced award of contract to North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div. to provide four RN-6 liquid-hydrogen-cooled nozzles to be used in tests. Three nozzles were to be used for Nerva program, the fourth for Lewis Research Center’s Advanced Nuclear Rocket Systems Analysis Program, (nasa Release 64^162)
NASA announced signing Memorandum of Understanding with Norwegian Space Research Committee and the Ionospheric Research Laboratory of the Royal Technical Institute of Denmark to extend joint sounding rocket program of investigations of the ionosphere. Tentative schedule of new series called for two Nike-Apache launches this year and two more early next year from Norway’s Andoeya Range and two Nike-Apache launches from U.S. facilities. Scandinavian groups would purchase the four sounding rockets to be launched in Norway, fund their own experiments, and operate Andoeya Range. NASA would supply two sounding rockets to be launched in U.S., fund its experiments, and provide use of its Wallops Island, Ya., range. There had been 11 successful launchings in this program since 1962. (NASA Release 64274)
nasa launched 295-lh. explorer xxni (S-55c) meteoroid detection satellite from Wallops Station, Va,, aboard a Scout vehicle. The satellite was a cylinder 24-in. in dia. and 92 in. long. Its orbital elements: apogee, 614 mi.; perigee 286 mi.; inclination to equator, 52°; period, 99 min. explorer xxiii was expected to have a useful lifetime of one year. Its primary purpose was to provide accurate knowledge of penetration capabilities of meteoroids and the resistance of various materials to penetration, thus facilitating design of spacecraft. The payload contained primary sensors (pressurized cells) designed to record the rate of meteoroid penetration in two different thicknesses of stainless steel; a capacitor-type penetration detector to determine effects of high-energy radiation; cadmium sulphide cells to record the size of impacting meteoroids; impact detectors capable of detecting three levels of meteoroid momentum; two separate telemeter canisters for storing experimental data and relaying it to ground stations. Also onboard the Scout rocket was an experiment to measure air loads on the structure during its ascent through the atmosphere between 25,000 and 40,000 ft. The spacecraft was the successor to explorer XVI (S-55b), launched Dec. 16, 1962, which made the first statistically significant sampling of meteoroids in near-earth space, (nasa Release 64-272; Wallops Release 64r-81; Marshall Star, 11/11/64, 1; NYT, 11/7/64, 9; M&R, 11/16/64,33)	_
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island, Va., with Rice Univ. experiment “Sammy I” to measure and study causes of auroras and airglow. Vehicle carried 68-lb. payload, designed and built by professors and students in Rice Space Science Dept., to peak altitude of 56 mi. before impacting 74 mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean. No recovery operation was conducted; telemetry data during flight would be analyzed by the Space Science Dept. This was first of four similar experiments to be conducted under NASA grant; remaining three flights would take place at Ft. Churchill, Canada. (Wallops Release 64-3)
Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation received four NASA contract modifications worth $22,378,626 on existing research and development production contracts for the F—1 engines, which provide thrust in first stage of Saturn V launch vehicle. NASA also awarded contract modifications to Douglas Aircraft Co. totaling $31,471,836 for additional work on the S—IV and S—IVB rocket stages. (Marshall Star, 7/15/64, 1,9; Nashville Tennessean, 7/9/64)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., sent instrumented payload to 117-mi. altitude in successful test of the sounding rocket’s attitude control system with the improved inertial reference system. Payload was recovered immediately after impact and found to he in excellent condition. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
In a report to the Atomic Industrial Forum, Frank Deluzio, staff director of the Senate Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee, called for increased funds for Kiwi and Nerva and also urged that the suspended Rift nuclear rocket program be reactivated. He suggested that studies be begun to substitute a nuclear reactor for the chemical engines in the giant Saturn V rocket. “While it is admitted that nuclear propulsion comes into its own in the large scale manned missions to the planets,” Deluzio said, “. . . nuclear stages should be committed to earlier programs, such, as lunar landings late in the Apollo program. The integration of a nuclear stage with the Saturn launch vehicle should be done at the earliest possible moment so that proper experience and confidence can be obtained . . . This will increase the utility of the Saturn for a great number of years; it means a high return to the nation for its investment in the Saturn, its ground support, related systems, and industrial capabilities.” Deluzio also urged that nuclear rocket development remain the province of aec. (McHugh, Copley News Service, San Diego Union, 12/21/64)
Rep. Olin E. Teague (D.-Tex.) was quoted in World Book Encylopedia Science Service article as saying NASA’s Apollo three-man spacecraft could be modified for military missions to: orbit earth for two-to-three months with more than 2% tons of weapons or reconnaissance equipment by 1967; move from equatorial orbit to polar orbit, surveying earth every 24 hrs.; survey a single strategic portion of the globe from a stationary 24-hr. orbit; carry six 500-lb. rocket packages, adaptable to containing nuclear weapons. “If we do not succeed in developing . , . [such] military potential for Apollo, it will be because of lack of funding and direction, and not because of technical problems,” he said. “. . . our ability to defend ourselves in the future and thus our whole future is tied up in space.” (WBESciServ, Houston Chron., 9/13/64)
French Dragon rocket was successfully fired to an altitude of 275 mi. from a base in Iceland, National Center of Space Research announced in Paris. Fired in cooperation with Icelandic scientists, the sounding rocket carried instruments to measure energy and direction of particles from Van Allen radiation belts. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 8/2/64; M&R, 8/10/64,11)
Dr. Eugene G. Fubini, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, called on defense industry at aiaa meetings to stop what he called unjustified and potentially dangerous “gloom and doom talk” about future defense spending. He said Pentagon r&d spending, currently at a $5.5 billion annual level, should remain relatively stable in coming years. Such pessimistic fears on part of industry, based on recent very small decrease in defense budget, Fubini said, could prompt top engineers and scientists to move into other industries and thereby weaken U.S. military posture by reducing industry’s capability of generating new ideas for dod and developing new weapons, (aiaa Booster, 7/2/64; NYT, 7/2/64,32M; Av. Wk„ 7/13/64,19)
Awards at 1964 Air Force Association national convention included H. H. Arnold Trophy to General Curtis E. LeMay (USAF CofS), who was named “Aerospace Man of the Year” for his “enlightened and aggressive leadership in behalf of the status and welfare of fhe military man”; David C. Schilling Trophy to Maj or Sidney J. Kubesch, SAC B-58 pilot, for his record Tokyo-to-London flight in October 1963; and Theodore von Karman Trophy to Clarence L. Johnson, Vice President (Advanced Development Projects) of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., for designing theYF-12A (A—11) aircraft. Among the citations of honor: Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman, nasc, was cited for his “broad understanding and vigorous pursuit of aerospace goals.” Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), deputy director of Apollo program in NASA Hq., was cited for his contributions to Minuteman icbm program in previous assignment with afsc/bsd. Chief M/Sgt. Frank M. Davis (usaf) and Capt. Joseph H. Engle (usaf) were named outstanding airman and outstanding officer of 1964 by afa. Davis was cited for leadership in desert survival training including program for Gemini astronauts, among other citations. Engle was cited for “his active and aggressive” role as an X-15 test pilot. (AF Mag., 10/64, 33; Wash. Post, 9/12/64)
Two nasa satellites—explorer xxiv and explorer xxv—were successfully launched into orbit from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., aboard a single four-stage Scout rocket. This marked the first time NASA had orbited dual spacecraft with a single booster. The double payload was designed to provide more detailed information on complex radiation-air density measurements. explorer xxiv (Air Density satellite) was a 12-ft.-dia., 19-lb. polka-dotted sphere identical to explorers ix and XIX. It was covered with aluminum foil to reflect both sunlight and radio waves; approximately 4,000	white spots on the surface provided temperature control. EXPLORER xxiv would provide three types of global comparative measurements: (1) high-altitude air density; (2) sources of atmospheric heat through comparison of data with Injun and other satellites; and (3) density and temperature variations of the atmosphere as a function of latitude. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 1,550 mi.; perigee, 327 mi; period, 116 min.; and inclination. 81°. EXPLORER XXV (Injun-B), a 2-ft.-dia., 90-lb. metal satellite bearing 16 radiation sensors to measure protons and electrons in various ranges of energy, was roughly spherical in shape with 40 flat surfaces, 30 of them studded with solar cells. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 1,548 mi.; perigee, 326 mi.; period, 116 min.; and inclination, 81°. Tracking data after one complete orbit indicated that the satellites were close to planned orbit with all instruments operating. (NASA Release 64-284; Goddard News, 11/30/64)
NASA awarded $5,944,000 supplemental contract to the Boeing Co. for additional r&d and planning in the manufacture of Saturn V first-stage rocket at Michoud Operations, La. (New Orleans Times-Picayune, 4/4/64; Marshall Star, 4/8/64,10)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb told University Club in New York that NASA’s last 25 attempts to place satellites in orbit were all successful. Of the 25, only one payload failed to function. Mr. Webb pointed out that in 1959, NASA’s first full year of operation, the record showed 6 successes and 13 failures. By 1961, rocket reliability “had improved to the point that we had 54 successful space flights with five successes for each failure.” (NYT, 1/10/64, 85)
USAF launched Thor-Able-Star rocket toward polar orbit from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., but did not disclose payload or mission. It later was revealed that the Thor-Able-Star placed three satellites in orbit. (upi, NYT, 10/7/64,19; SBD, 10/8/64, 202; hhn-4s)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 111-mi. altitude, but telemetry transmitter failed. Five charged-particle detectors, an aspect magnetometer, and an accelerometer were included in the instrumentation, which was to have obtained data on charged particles responsible for visual aurora and those responsible for auroral absorption. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
NASA launched Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Ascension Island to peak altitude of 75.8-mi., in flight to measure wind and temperature and derive density and pressure from 12 grenade explosions during rocket ascent. All grenades ejected and detonated as programed, and ground microphones recorded the sounds, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
Nomadic Lapps in northern Sweden had registered complaints about ESRO’s rocket launching plans from new base being built about 100 mi. northeast of Kiruna. Beginning in 1966, esro would fire 50 rockets per year 120 mi. into the ionosphere every year for eight years. But the Lapps, living in the target area for the rockets, were fearful for the safety of themselves and their reindeer. (Reuters, NYT, 10/21/64, 26)
Soviet radio astronomy expert Iosif Shlovsky said at a symposium on 1964 science conducted by Tass news agency that the biggest success of 1964 in world astronomy was an experiment by Dr. Herbert Friedman of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory. The experiment showed that a large region of the Crab Nebula produced x-ray radiation. Data obtained by Friedman with an Aqrobee rocket launched July 5 from White Sands Missile Range “established how the flux of x-ray radiation coming from the Crab Nebula changed when the moon passed between it and the rocket,” Shklovsky said. Some scientists had attributed the radiation to a tiny, superdense “neutron star.” But observations from the rocket as the moon shut off direct view of the Nebula showed that a larger area was involved. (AP, Balt. Sun, 12/29/64; Sullivan, NYT, 12/19/64,3)
Harold B. Finger, Manager of AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of NASA Nuclear Systems and Space Power, discussed nuclear rockets before Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking, House Committee on Science and Astronautics:	. . our major effort is in the reactor area. It includes analysis and experimental work on all of the components and subsystems of our reactors with sufficient evaluation and testing to give the greatest possible confidence in the successful operation of the graphite reactors that will form the basis for the first nuclear rocket engines to be developed in the world. We are, however, not overlooking the potential advantages provided by the metallic tungsten reactors. We are, therefore, conducting a program to evaluate the feasibility and advantages of these systems. “Our nerva engine and non-nuclear component technology work has made substantial progress in those difficult areas of engine technology that require extension of presently available information so that system development can eventually be undertaken rapidly and with a high degree of confidence. “Sufficient facilities are available or are being constructed for the conduct of our presently planned program. Tests to be conducted in our reactor facilities during this year should clearly demonstrate the success of the solutions we have designed to avoid the mechanical problems that have been encountered in the past and should demonstrate the operating capabilities of graphite reactors. Our advanced concept work is fundamental in nature; it is long term; but it is being pursued because of the high, theoretical performance potential of these advanced ideas for nuclear rocketry. “Out of this over-all nuclear rocket program, I am convinced, will come a new family of rockets that will open the way to more extensive space travel than is possible with the chemical combustion rocket systems upon which we are now completely dependent. Although new in capability, the nuclear rockets we are now developing are logical follow-ons to the chemical rocket systems and, therefore, do not involve basically new test, development, and system technology or scientific breakthroughs. These nuclear rocket developments must be actively pursued to ensure that this country is not prevented from undertaking missions involving higher velocities, energies, and payloads than are required for the early Apollo manned lunar landing mission.” (Testimony)
A team of Canadian scientists from McGill Univ., conducting Project Harp (High Altitude Research Program), was using a 250-ton, 16-in. naval gun to launch scientific rockets to heights of nearly 100 mi. The method was both reliable and economical (more than 80 shots had been fired, most of which were successful), and the launch procedure relatively simple. Objective of experiments was to find the secret of the lower ionosphere’s influence on radio communications. Dr. Gerald Bull, who conceived the idea of Project Harp, said that a new technique was being developed whereby a combination of gun and rocket could place a 100-lb. payload in earth orbit. (Jeffrey, London Daily Telegraph, 12/8/64,14)
At aiaa banquet, G. Edward Pendray Award was presented to Andrew G.	Haley for his “pioneering contribution to the analysis of governmental and international legal questions arising from the rapid development of space travel and space exploration, as exemplified by his book, Space Law and Government, published in 1963.” aiaa Lawrence B. Sperry Award was presented to Daniel M. Tellep, Manager of Launch and Entry Thermodynamics Research and Engineering at the Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., for Tellep’s “contributions to re-entry technology through participation in the United States’ first re-entry flight test program and for advancements in the field of heat transfer as related to aerospace programs.” Also presented were the 1964 Graduate and Undergraduate Student Awards to Richard C. Lessman and Lawrence S. Iwan. (aiaa Annual Mtg. Program; aiaa Booster, 7/2/64)
NASA Flight Research Center Director Paul Bikle said in Missiles and Rockets that rocket engines to power M—2 and HL-10 lifting bodies would accelerate the manned mockups to mach 2 for investigation of their handling characteristics. “The maximum altitude they reach will not be very high, maybe 70,000 or 80,000 ft.” frc planned to select the engine by mid-July. (M&R, 6/22/64, 20-21)
Hurricane Dora with her 125-mph winds approached the U.S. Atlantic coast from Cape Kennedy to Myrtle Beach, S.C., and workers at the rocket launching center dismantled five of the six rockets being prepared for launch this fall. Only the Saturn ISA-7 rocket was secured in its gantry; removed were Titan II (for GT-2 Gemini launch), Atlas-Agena (for Mars probe launch), Thor-Delta (for Imp launch), Atlas-Centaur (launch vehicle development launch), and Atlas for USAF reentry test, (upi, NYT, 9/9/64, 1; Witkin, NYT, 9/9/64, 23)
NASA announced it would join with Norwegian Space Research Committee and the Ionospheric Research Laboratory of the Royal Technical Univ. of Denmark in three sounding rocket launches from Andoeya, Norway, during February and March. The Nike-Apache sounding rockets would carry experiments to test theories of how D-region of the ionosphere is formed. Norwegian Committee was providing launch site and associated facilities; Norwegian Committee and Danish Ionospheric Laboratory together were purchasing sounding rockets and contributing scientific payloads. NASA was furnishing certain experiments for the payload, already had assisted Danish and Norwegian scientists by providing training in rocket handling and data acquisition. (nasa Release 64-27)
usaf announced launching four-stage Blue Scout, Jr., rocket combination from Vandenberg afb, Calif., with undisclosed payload, (upi, NYT, 8/30/64)
NRX-A2 Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) experimental reactor, run at full power Sept. 24, was restarted in test of reactor system in the low-power, low-flow region of operation. Analysis of data from this run confirmed design predictions and indicated no unusual start-up or control problems. Test was conducted by Aerojet-General and Westinghouse Electric Corporations for nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, (snpo; NASA Press Conf. Transcript, 11/12/64)
Interview with General John P. McConnell (usaf), Vice Chief of Staff, usaf, in The Airman. General McConnell gave his opinion of USaf’s future role in space: “First, to augment the existing defense capabilities of the U.S. land, sea, and air forces by using space systems for such things as better communications, weather reporting, and navigation. Second, to develop a military capability for protection of U.S. interests in space. “I think the Air Force, by virtue of its overall mission and experience, as well as its DOD-assigned responsibilities for space developments and boosters, must seek to obtain space capabilities for our defense as quickly as they become economical and practical. “Our role to support the national goals of both the scientific exploration and the high-priority defense projects should continue. “I also visualize that in the long run, future manned vehicles will play an increasingly vital role. It is essential that the Air Force vigorously pursue space research and development as well as operations.” (Airman, 9/64,12-15) During September: Writing in U.S. Naval Institute Proceedings, Capt. R. C. Truax (usn, Ret.) described early naval rocket development work at Engineering Experiment Station, Annapolis. Captain Truax was in charge of all rocket propulsion work for usn Bureau of Aeronautics from 1946 to 1949.	(U.S. Naval Inst. Proc., 9/64, 82-108)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched from Wallops Island, Va., reached 95.3-mi. altitude in satisfactory flight to measure ambient electron density, measure ion densities, and monitor solar ultraviolet radiations. Instrumented payload, provided by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, contained CW propagation experiment, probe with Gerdien condenser, planar ion trap, and planar secondary emission detector. Another objective of the flight was to test efficiency of the 12.267 mc/s shroud antenna at D-region altitudes; one of the antennas performed unsatisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. srl)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster combination with unidentified satellite payload into a polar orbit. (AP, Chic. Trib., 6/14/64; upi, Wash. Post, 6/14/64)
New York Times reported that aec and USAF were jointly supporting work on a relatively simple nuclear rocket engine (Project Poodle) that was likely to be flyable in the next five years. The rocket would be clustered to propel an upper rocket stage, and it was reported that the newly designed device might save more than $300 million on space missions which had already been planned and for which conventional upper stages had been contemplated. The novelty of the new engine stemmed from the fact that its power would be derived not from a controlled nuclear reaction but from the decay of radioactive polonium 210. Propulsion would be provided in gentle acceleration of about % lb. thrust sustained for periods of weeks. (Witkin, NYT, 6/1/64)
usaf successfully launched the fifth Asset re-entry test vehicle in its series of six from Cape Kennedy. The glider rode pickaback aboard a singlestage Thor booster. (Wash. Post, 12/9/64; M&R, 12/14/64, 10)
Rep. J. Edward Roush (D.-Ind.) said in the House: “On Wednesday we saw the successful launching of the Saturn rocket carrying into orbit around the earth 18 tons. This included the largest payload ever placed in orbit by man and exceeds the largest Russian payload by 11 tons. For several years now this Nation has been plagued with the uncomfortable knowledge that the Russians were ahead of us in the space effort. This has been based primarily on the fact that they had a greater lift capability. The United States is now ahead in lift capability and in every other phase of the space program. . . .” (CR, 1/31/64,1443)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara was criticized by Military Operations Subcommittee of the House Government Operations Committee in report on military communications satellite. Subcommittee said his concern with economizing had resulted in “overmanagement and underperformance” in the comsat area. “We do not believe, however, that economizing efforts should throttle programs essential to the national security. Satellite communications is one of the most vital and relatively less costly of our major defense programs.” Subcommittee said Secretary McNamara’s proposal last October for joint military-civilian comsat system was “ill-advised, poorly timed and badly coordinated. . . . Valuable time has been lost. Had the department moved ahead according to plans and policies laid down two years ago by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, a system could have been operating now. . . .” Subcommittee also recommended dod begin comsat program using Atlas-Agena satellite booster instead of Titan III-C experimental launch vehicle. (Finney, NYT, 10/9/64, 1, 16; M&R, 10/12/ 64,10)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched from NASA Wallops Station to 71-mi. altitude with payload of 12 explosive charges to provide data on atmospheric winds and temperatures and effects of the “warming trend” in the upper atmosphere. Previous measurements had been made during February “warming trend,” which moved in westerly direction across the northern hemisphere. This second and unexpected warming trend appeared to be moving in easterly direction. (Wallops Release 64-25; nasa Rpt. srl)
ComSatCorp applied to fcc for authority to construct and orbit over the mid-Atlantic a synchronous-orbit communications satellite to provide commercial service on an “experimental-operational” basis between North America and Europe. ITie satellite was described by ComSatCorp as an “initial step in the development of a global communications system.” It would provide 24-hour communications service capable of relaying TV broadcasts or up to 240 telephone calls. Plans called for the satellite to be orbited in spring of 1965 with a TAT-Delta booster supplied by NASA on a reimbursable basis. (ComSatCorp Release)
usaf Atlas-Agena D space booster was launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., with undisclosed payload. (AP, Wash. Post, 10/9/64; hhn-4 8)
United Technology Center (utc) had developed hybrid rocket combining best features of solid and liquid propellants and 20% more powerful than any solid-propulsion rocket operational today. Rocket used solid fuel—butadiene rubber—and liquid oxidizer—liquid oxygen. utc Assistant Manager of Advanced Technology Douglas D. Ordahl said the rocket also was safer than solid-fueled rocket motors and was simpler and more reliable than liquid-fueled rockets. (WSJ, 5/26/04)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at Apollo electronics panel, IEEE Western Electric Show and Convention, Los Angeles:	“The United States is now completing the first decade of the exploration of space. During the last five years major strides have been made in exploring, understanding, and exploiting space. Today we have allocated almost half the resources needed to carry out the greatest adventure in the history of mankind—the manned lunar landing which is the goal of the Apollo Program. This goal could not have been conceived, much less achieved, without the amazing growth of knowledge, techniques, and technology in the field of electronics which has been ever accelerating since the last war. Communications, guidance, power, control, display, all these have passed and surpassed the maximum expectations of a decade ago. “In the Apollo Program we are developing a set of capabilities which will provide for manned exploration, understanding man’s proficiency in space and the vicinity of the earth. This is a capability which can be extended to meet the needs of this Nation for science or technology, for transportation or observation, for defense or commerce. “Although the end is manned exploration of space, the means, including the production of space vehicles, is being created here on earth. It is based in large measure on the expansion and growth of the electronics industry. It depends on that electronics industry to meet and exceed new goals for reliability and quality as well as performance in their products. . . .” (Text) August 28-September 7: In conjunction with Cleveland’s Parade of Progress exhibit commemorating opening of new Cleveland Convention Center, NASA exhibited Centaur space vehicle, full-scale spacecraft such as Ranger and Mariner, Sert spacecraft, ranger vii moon pictures, Gemini two-man spacecraft, and other exhibits. Space lectures and motion pictures were presented. NASA Lewis Research Center coordinated the display, (lrc Releases 64-72, -73, -75, -79, and -80)
usaf announced an ion rocket would be tested in 90-day orbital flight next spring, using Agena vehicle. Electrical power to operate the engine would be provided by Snap 10A reactor, the first test combining an electrical propulsion engine and a nuclear reactor in space. Spokesmen said similar rocket had been successfully tested in August in suborbital flight from Pt. Arguello, Calif. The new engine, developed by Electro-Optical Systems, was said to have “developed the unheard-of specific impulse level of 7,800 seconds—roughly 20 times greater than the best chemical rockets of today.” {Wash. Post, 10/6/64; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/6/64)
It was reported that U.A.R. planned to soon launch its own earth satellite— a 40-70 lb. satellite boosted by a three-stage rocket. A source close to German rocket scientists in U.A.R. said the launching would probably be purely a prestige gesture, having little or no scientific value, (upi, Wash. Post, 6/4/64)
Intelligence information reaching Washington revealed that Red China had begun to manufacture its own MiG jet fighters. Significance of the new development was that Red China might have the principal ingredients of a nuclear force—A-bombs and jet fighter bombers. (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/31/64) During December: Boeing Co. was named systems integration contractor for NASA’s three-stage Saturn V booster. Work would be performed at the firm’s launch systems branch at New Orleans under an 085 million supplement to its contract as prime contractor for the booster’s first stage. Systems and engineering integration would be conducted in three major areas: the vehicle, systems documentation, and systems development breadboard facility. On the vehicle itself, Boeing would be responsible for mechanical interface engineering, instrumentation and telemetry systems, aerodynamics and flight mechanics, flight evaluation and operation, atmospheric environmental design criteria, malfunction detection system, structural heating and environmental control system, structural dynamics, and vehicle assembly documentation. (M&R, 1/4/65,10)
Saturn I SA-7 two-stage rocket was launched from Cape Kennedy, placing in orbit a nearly-37,000-lb. payload consisting of boilerplate Apollo spacecraft command and service modules, instrument unit, and spent S-IV stage. The orbit (145-mi. apogee, 112-mi. perigee, 88.6-min. period) was similar to the interim orbit for future three-man Apollo lunar missions. All major test objectives were met: final development testing of Saturn I propulsion, structural, guidance and flight control systems; development testing of Apollo spacecraft structure and design during flight through the atmosphere; and demonstration of physical compatibility of launch vehicle and spacecraft and test-jettisoning of spacecraft launch escape system. Except for minor changes in Saturn I vehicle, test was similar to Saturn I SA-6 (May 28, 1964). For third time, elaborate system of eight motion picture cameras and one TV camera was mounted in S-I stage to record such flight events as S-IV stage separation and ignition of S-IV engines. The eight motion picture cameras were ejected following S-I powered flight, but Hurricane Gladys was located about 300-mi. from camera impact point, so the recovery ship had to leave the area the previous day and recovery was not attempted, (nasa Release 64-228; upi, NYT, 9/19/64, 11; Marshall Star, 9/23/64,1; msc Roundup, 9/30/64,1)
USAF was considering developing new 40,000-lb. thrust third stage for Titan III launch vehicle, Aviation Week reported. Burning high-energy fuels, the new stage would replace the 16,000-17,000-lb.-thrust transtage. Meanwhile usaf asked six firms for proposals for a back-up and/or replacement rocket engine system for the transtage, said to be experiencing development difficulties. But usaf was not asking for upgrading of the 16,000-lb.-thrust system at this time. (Av. Wk., 4/6/64, 13; SBD, 4/10/64,59)
NASA announced the first electric-rocket engine space flight (July20)	had been so successful that a second test would not be necessary. In Sert I (Space Electric Rocket Test), electron-bombardment engine using mercury propellant produced an ion beam developing .0055 Lb. of thrust, (nasa Release 64-264; lrc Release 64-93)
Kiwi B—4E reactor, operated at nearly full power for eight minutes Aug. 28, was restarted and run for a second time at power level nearly identical to that achieved during the first experiment. Test lasted about 2.5 min. and reactor performance was excellent. This demonstration of capability to rerun reactors came much earlier in the NASA—AEC nuclear rocket program than had heen anticipated; officials considered it a significant step toward economical development of nuclear propulsion technology. Harold B. Finger, Manager of NASA—aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, said: “We have proved that nuclear rockets can give the kind of performance that is needed for advanced space missions. We could use essentially this type of reactor for experimental flights in the early 1970s and have an operational system by 1975.” Test marked final one planned for Kiwi, (snpo; Wash. Eve. Star, 9/15/64)
The third and final set in a series of dual ship-to-shore sounding rocket launchings was conducted at 5:53 a.m. EST from the USNS Croatan and at 5:56 a.m. from Wallops Island, about 300 mi. apart. Sodium vapor was ejected by the Nike-Apache launched from the ship up to an altitude of approximately 141 mi.; sodium vapor failed to eject from the payload launched from Wallops Island. (Wallops Release 64-85; nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA Lewis Research Center granted $900,000 authorization to AEC Hanford Atomic Products Operation for r&d in connection with advanced nuclear rocket engines—fabrication, test, and evaluation of tungsten uranium oxide fuel elements for advanced nuclear rocket engine now under study at Lewis. The agreement brought value of work being performed at Hanford for NASA to more than $1.5 million, (lrc Release 64-21)
Unnamed NASA officials were quoted as saying U.S. had detected Soviet failure within the last week in an attempt to launch a probe to the moon, by John Finney in New York Times. Failure was said to have occurred within minutes after rocket booster rose from launch pad near the Aral Sea. (Finney, NYT, 4/30/64,9)
Aerojet-General Corp. and Westinghouse Electric Corp. successfully conducted first power test of a Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application ) experimental reactor designated the nrx—A2. The reactor was operated for six minutes, at powers ranging from 56% of full power to near full power. All test objectives were met. Nerva was a project of NASA—AEC Space Nuclear Reactor Office, (snpo; Lewis News, 10/30/64, 1; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/25/64)
120-in. solid-propellant rocket motor being developed by United Technology Center for usaf was static-fired for nearly two minutes, a “completely successful” test. (SBD, 1/30/64,163)
X-15 No. 1 flown by usaf pilot Maj. Robert Rushworth to maximum speed of 3,920 mph (mach 5.76) and altitude of 101,000 ft., in flight near Edwards AFB, Calif. For the flight a special camera was installed in the plane’s fuselage to test optical degradation caused by temperatures of up to 1,200° F. This was the 103rd flight of the rocket research aircraft, (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.; upi, Chic. Trib., 3/28/64)
British Minister of Aviation Julian Amery announced at banquet of Society of British Aerospace Companies the government’s decision to develop Black Knight rocket as an experimental satellite launcher. The new rocket, designated Black Prince, would be a three-stage configuration using hydrogen peroxide and kerosene in the first two stages and a solid-propellant spin-stahilized third stage. The first stage would be powered by a cluster of eight engines. Also announced were plans to accelerate research on an ocean-going hovercraft to fill a naval role. (AP, 9/9/64; A&A, 11/64, 116)
United Technology Center’s 120-in.-dia., solid-propellant motor for Air Force’s Titan III—C booster was static-fired successfully for more than 110 sec. with a new ablative nozzle-throat which probably would be substituted for the carbon throat previously used in test firings. (Av. Wk., 11/23/64, 34; utc)
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Research Projects Laboratory, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, was awarded the Hermann Oberth Medal by the West German Association for Rocket Research Technique and Space Flight at annual meeting of West Berlin’s Scientific Association for Air and Space Flight. (Reuters, Houston Post, 9/17/64)
nasa launched 250-lb. instrumented Ram (Radio Attenuation Measurement) spacecraft on a ballistic trajectory from Wallops Island, Va., on a three-stage rocket system. Experiment was one of series to investigate the problem of communications through the ionized plasmas created when a spacecraft re-enters earth’s atmosphere at high velocities. Spacecraft was to attain top speed of 18,400 fps. Preliminary data indicated the vehicle and payload performed satisfactorily; the flight lasted ahoul 10 min. and impact occurred approximately 650 mi. east of Bermuda. Plight measurements, telemetered to ground receiving stations would be reduced and analyzed at Langley Research Center, which designed and built the spacecraft. Ram series was under LaRC direction for NASA’s Office of Advanced Research and Technology, (nasa Release 64-65; Wallops Releases 64-29 and 64-34)
NASA successfully launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket to 89-mi. altitude from White Sands, N. Mex. Purpose was to map photon-emitting night-sky sources. Gas-filled proportional counters were used to detect and measure energy of the x-rays. The rocket performed well and experimental results were good, but 10-20% of desired data were lost because yo-yo despin mechanism failed to deploy. (NASA Rpt. srl)
USAF launched Atlas-Agena D booster combination from Point Arguello, Calif., with unidentified satellite payload. (AP, Houston Post, 4/24/64; M&R, 5/4/64, 8)	_
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center accepted the first of three new F-l rocket engine test stands at NASA’s engine test site at Edwards AFB, Calif. (M&R, 3/30/64,17)
NASA Summer Faculty Fellowships, a unique 10-wk. summer program, began at Lewis Research Center. The 12 Fellows, all young professors and instructors in engineering and the physical sciences, would work on space research projects at lrc and would attend a special graduate level course in chemical rocket technology at Case Institute of Technology. (lrc Release 64-53)
Four consecutive full-duration F-l engine test firings at new Rocket Engine Test Site at Edwards, Calif., demonstrated the operational readiness of the site, which was officially accepted by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center Director Dr. Wernher von Braun from the Army Corps of Engineers. In the ceremonies, Dr. von Braun assigned site operation responsibilities to Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., which would use the site for qualification firings of F—1 rocket engines. {Marshall Star, 10/14/64,10; nasa Release 64-259)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb addressed the American Assembly Student Conference at the Air Force Academy, Colorado Springs: “. . . in assessing the future one can always learn from the past, and if the thoughtful student of history learns anything from a review of the march of human progress, it is that the ultimate potential of contemporary undertaking is almost never perceived. “So, I believe, it is with research and exploration in space. . . . “Today, 500 years after Prince Henry and his use of the caravel to initiate die Oceanic Age, 400 years after Copernicus presented his theories about the solar system, 300 years after Newton worked out the formula for space flight, but less than 40 years after Goddard devised the vehicle to make it possible, man has left the earth, and widened his horizons to include the entire solar system. “Science today has at its disposal a modem caravel, the chemical rocket, which has already traveled to the moon and Venus. And, as with Henry and his explorations, we have improved navigation systems to guide them out and bring them back to make steadily more accurate measurements of the environment of space—that environment through which Gargarin and Glenn and others traveled, and through which our own planet, Mother Earth, is also traveling around the sun at the relative speed of 67,000 miles per hour. “And to complete the parallel, just as Prince Henry inaugurated an Age of Discovery which led man to all the seas and continents of the earth, and into the atmosphere up to twice the height of his tallest mountains, so have we today embarked on a new Age of Discovery in which there is no foreseeable horizon. . . .” (Text; CR, 4/6/64, 6686)
NASA announced Purdue Univ. had been awarded grant of $840,000 to finance expansion of Purdue’s Jet Propulsion Center. The construction would enable Purdue to conduct studies of ultra high pressure combustion in rocket thrust chambers, (nasa Release 64-145)
dod announced award of $15,599,775 contract to Boeing Co. for Project Hibex (Hi-G Booster Experiment), an arpa research experiment investigating high performance missile boosters, (dod Release 38-64) January 11: Philco Corp. had begun cable and pneumatic tube installation in the Mission Control Center under construction at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, msc announced. Philco was prime contractor for flight control equipment for the Project Gemini/Apollo facility, which was scheduled for occupancy in mid-1964. (msc Release 64-8)
usaf Titan II rocket was launched successfully from an underground silo on flight down Western Test Range. Same day, faulty relay box in Thor-Agena launch vehicle postponed launch of NASA’s Nimbus meteorological satellite into polar orbit. (Wash. Post, 8/12/64; M&R, 8/17/64, 9)
Two-stage French Rubis rocket reached altitude of 1,800 km. (1,118.49 mi.) in launch from Hammaguir base. First stage of Rubis was Agate rocket and second stage was third stage of France’s satellite launcher Diamant. {M&R, 6/29/64,12)
NASA launched ranger VI lunar probe with Atlas-Agena B launch vehicle from AMR in lunar landing mission to photograph the moon’s surface. The Atlas booster fired properly and, after stage separation, the Agena B stage ignited and attained orbital speed. After coasting in parking orbit of about 110-mi. altitude, the Agena B reignited, sending RANGER VI through the “launch window” on a course which would pass within 600 mi. of the moon. A midcourse correction maneuver was planned so that the spacecraft would impact the lunar surface. The only scientific instruments onboard the 804-lb. spacecraft were six TV cameras, designed to provide more than 3,000 photographs of the lunar surface during the last 10 min. of the 66-hr. flight. This was the first Ranger launch since October 1962, when extensive review of the Ranger project was undertaken because of previous Ranger failures. For ranger vi, changes were made in subsystems to improve reliability and provide redundancy in some areas; also, sterilization requirements for Ranger spacecraft were relaxed, since excessive heat was suspected of causing some previous malfunctions, (nasa Release 64-16; Witkin, NYT, 1/31/ 64,1; lrc Release 64-10; Miles, Wash. Post, 1/31/64, 1)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster from PMR with unidentified satellite payload. It was later disclosed that five satellites were orbited with the single booster. (HHN—48)
dod announced additional $30,414,000 had been obligated to Martin Marietta Corp., Denver, on cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for design, development, and fabrication of Titan III space booster, (dod Release 3-64)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with Univ. of New Hampshire instrumented payload was launched from Thumba Range, Trivandrum, India, to 102-mi. altitude. Payload instrumentation included densitometer and baroswitch, to determine altitude and intensity of electric current systems in the ionosphere near the magnetic equator. Performance of both rocket and instrumentation was considered good; telemetry signal was received for 395 sec., and good data were expected, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
U.S. Army’s Redstone rocket, developed by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center team when it was formerly part of Army Missile Command, was officially retired from active military operation in ceremony at Army Missile Command, Redstone Arsenal, Ala. Dr. Wemher von Braun, msfc Director, spoke on Redstone’s contributions to U.S. space exploration, including serving as launch vehicle for first and second U.S. manned space flights. Redstone was replaced as military missile by Army’s Pershing. (Marshall Star, 10/4/64,10)
Second rocket in India’s space program, a Nike-Apache, was launched from Thumba Range on southern tip of Indian peninsula, releasing sodium vapor clouds used to study high-altitude conditions. The Nike-Apache’s peak altitude was estimated at 106 mi. The Physical Research Laboratory of Ahmedabad provided the instrumented payload for the NASA rocket, (nasa Rpt. SRL; Reuters, NYT, 1/9/64, 15)
usaf Secretary Eugene M. Zukert said that the Titan III rocket would make its maiden flight during the coming summer. Eventually, Titan III would launch the usaf’s Manned Orbital Laboratory, probably sometime in 1967 or 1968. In addition, Zuckert announced that three firms, Douglas Aircraft Co,, General Electric Co., and Martin Co., had been authorized to go ahead with work on orbital space-station studies. (UPl, Louisville Courier-Journal, 6/6/64)
Atlas-Centaur 4 (AC-4) hurled its Centaur second stage into orbit around the earth with a mass model of the Surveyor lunar spacecraft in its nose. The first-burn performance of the Centaur rocket sent the stage into a nearly circular parking orbit of 100 mi. perigee and 106 mi. apogee. The second bum should have put the rocket into an oval path taking it out as much as 5,000 mi. from earth; however, the attempt to restart the RL-10 engines failed and the stage began to tumble and roll. After about 15 hr. in orbit, the Centaur stage and its Surveyor dummy payload re-entered the atmosphere over the South Pacific east of Australia and disintegrated. NASA said all prime mission objectives had been met, including the demonstration of the structural integrity of the Atlas-Centaur during powered flight, testing of the guidance system which was flying closed loop for the first time, verification of the structural and thermal integrity of the Centaur nose fairing and insulation panels, and verification of the performance of the jettison systems for the nose fairing and insulation panels. Project officials were investigating what caused the stage to tumble, preventing propellants from reaching the pumps. (NASA Release 64289; Lewis News, 12/24/64, 1; Av. Wk., 12/21/64, 24; Wash. Eve. Star, 12/11/64)
Static-test firing of Titan II rocket for first Project Gemini flight was postponed at Cape Kennedy until Jan. 14 because of possible malfunction of first-stage propellant valve during countdown, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/11/64; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/11/64)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Ft. Churchill, Canada, reached 144.5-mi. altitude in experiment to study very low energy cosmic ray heavy nuclei. Rocket performance was good and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. Two of three trays containing experimental emulsions did not completely retract and were damaged by heat and upon impact by water. Preliminary estimate was that 100% good data were obtained by the emulsion that functioned properly and 60% by the two which did not retract. (NASA Rpt. SRl)
nasa successfully launched a Javelin sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to an altitude of 522 mi., with instrumented payload to measure the earth’s geomagnetic field from the ground to Javelin peak altitude. Data from this experiment would be combined with that obtained from a Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched 90 sec. earlier. This was the first Javelin launched from the Churchill Research Range, (nasa Rpt. srl) ,
“Boosted Areas” sounding rocket was launched from NASA Wallops Station to 59.5-mi. altitude with sodium-lithium payload designed and built by Sweden’s Uppsala Ionospheric Observatory on contract to Swedish Space Committee. The wide and reddish sodium-lithium cloud ejected in the atmosphere was visible for many miles and was photographed from several locations. The test was in preparation for series of such launchings in the auroral zone in northern Scandinavia later this year, to study causes of aurora and airglow. This first launch of Boosted Areas from Wallops was quite successful. Small booster included in the Areas increased its altitude from normal 225,000 ft. to 314,000	ft. (Wallops Release 64-24)
A. 0. Tischler, NASA Director of Chemical Propulsion, Office of Advanced Research and Technology, discussed 1.5-million-lb.-thrust hydrogen-oxygen M—1 engine and the large solid-propulsion rocket motor before Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Tracking, House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “Last year this engine project [M-l], which was originally planned for completion in the late 60’s, was slowed down to a minimum level of effort consistent with such a development program. It is our intent to maintain the low level of funding during the present critical years of the manned lunar landing program and then to accelerate this development for completion in the early 70’s. . . . “The M—1 can be a team-mate of the large solid propellant motors. Potentially these two, if used in vehicle systems together, can provide the United States with increased payload capability at reduced cost during the 1970’s. . . . “. . . the large solid motor demonstrations have heretofore been funded by the Department of Defense and have been carried out by the Air Force in compliance with NASA-defined requirements. . . . This year NASA is requesting funds for the continuation of the contracted work on the 260" diameter solid propellant motors. . . . “Each contractor [Thiokol Chemical Corp. and Aerojet-General Corp.] will fire a half-length solid motor during the fiscal year. . . . each half-length motor will produce three million pounds of thrust, about double the thrust of the Saturn I booster. The full-length motor, for which we would intend to contract if the half-length motor firings are successful, will produce about six million pounds of thrust.” (Testimony)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with instrumented payload to study very low energy cosmic ray heavy nuclei. The rocket reached 133.7-mi. altitude, ejected recovery package. After land recovery of the payload, examination revealed the emulsion trays all had fully extended and fully retracted properly, so that very good data would be obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRl)
nasa Aerobee 300 sounding rocket with Univ. of Michigan payload to measure electron and neutral particle temperatures in the atmosphere was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 200-mi. altitude. Instrumentation included electrostatic probe, omegatron gage, Bayard-Alpert ion gage, as well as a solar aspect sensor to provide proper attitude. Instrumentation performance was satisfactory, although the omegatron made no measurements, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., to 86.6-mi. altitude, but nose cone failed to release. Using CW propagation transmitter, Gerdien condenser probe, and ion trap, experiments were to have measured ambient electron and ion density, monitored integrated ultraviolet flux from the sun, and tested two 12.267-mc shroud antennas. The propagation experiment obtained good data from 83 sec. to peak, but no other experimental results were obtained. (nasa Rpt. srl)
Engineers proposed development of intercontinental ballistic troop transport capable of carrying 1,200 troops to any trouble spot on earth in 45 minutes. Such an Ithacus rocket transport would be ideal for helping stamp out “brush fire” conflicts, according to engineers Philip Bono and George C. Goldbaum of Douglas Aircraft who spoke at aiaa annual meeting. If funds were committed to project, they considered the ICBM transport system might be operational by 1975.	(Houston Chron.,
NASA successfully launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket to an altitude of 110.8 mi. from Wallops Island, Va. Experimental objectives were: (1) to measure daytime ion and electron densities and solar ultraviolet flux in the region from 31—124 mi.; (2) to test efficiency of loop antenna section for extending CW propagation measurements to “D” region altitudes. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA awarded two contracts to Aerojet-General Corp. for development of M-l 1.5-million-lb.-thrust rocket engine. One contract was for $190,075,635 and provided for R&D work; the other contract was for $48,550,074 and provided for necessary test facilities. Development of the liquid hydrogen/Iiquid oxygen engine was under technical direction of NASA Lewis Research Center, (nasa Release 64-66; lrc Release 64-31)
NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, interviewed in Washington World, replied to interviewer’s question: “Yes, Gemini is really necessary to the Apollo program. As a matter of fact, Gemini would be necessary as the next major step in manned space flight even if there were no Apollo mission. Gemini provides the United States large increments of manned space flight capability. Gemini is vital to the Apollo program since our astronauts must learn— and perfect—the techniques of rendezvous and docking in space before attempting the trip to the moon and hack. . . .” (nasa)
100th flight of the X-15 rocket aircraft was conducted near Edwards afb, Calif., with Maj. Robert Rushworth (USAF) as pilot. X-15 No. 1 reached 3,682 mph (mach 5.4) and 107,000-ft. altitude in its “fully successful mission.” The X-15 was launched over Delamar Lake, Nev., its engine burning 76 sec. and the flight lasting 11 min. X-15 program was initiated in December 1954 with signing of formal memorandum of understanding by naca, usaf, and usn. Contracts were awarded to North American Aviation for construction of three X-15 aircraft and to Thiokol Chemical Corp.’s Reaction Motors Div. for manufacture of rocket engines. X-15 was designed to fly at mach 6 and 250,000-ft. altitude, objectives often exceeded in flight. First powered flight of X—15 was made Sept. 17, 1959, by NAA test pilot A. Scott Crossfield. X—15 research program has provided information on aerodynamics, structures, flight control, and physiological aspects of highspeed, high-altitude flight. Follow-on program, begun in 1962, utilizes X—15 as test-bed for scientific experiments beyond earth’s atmosphere. (twx, frc to NASA Hq.; FRC Release 2-64)
A ten-second firing of the “battleship” stage of the Saturn S—II, second stage of the Saturn V moon rocket, was conducted by North American Aviation, Inc., at their Santa Susana Field Laboratory. The test demonstrated the ability of the battleship stage and accompanying facilities to operate the J-2 engine at full thrust. The S—II would be powered by a cluster of five J-2 liquid hydrogen engines, developing a total thrust of a million pounds, (naa' s&id Skywriter, 12/31/64, 2; Marshall Star, 12/16/64,1,12)
Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, reviewed 1963 highlights in testimony before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “Although direct measurements of the physical properties of the Moon await successful lunar flights, our Earth-based work has continued with some exciting results. Lowell Observatory scientists detected evidence of gas escaping from three different spots in the area of the lunar crater Aristarchus. This observation suggests that the Moon may be far from inert, and it has an important bearing on how we may conduct our lunar investigation. For example, if the Moon is seismically active, the seismograph may play an important role in the investigation of the lunar surface. . . . “Also, much effort was applied to clarifying the data from Earth-based or balloon observations of Mars. One important subject of controversy developed. Whereas it had been believed previously that the pressure at the surface of Mars is around 85 millibars, where 1000 millibars is roughly one atmosphere of pressure, it is now believed by many that the surface pressure on Mars may be as low as 10 or 11 millibars. This has serious implications with regard to landing a capsule on Mars. If the lower pressure is correct then retrorockets have to be used, whereas with the higher pressure atmospheric drag could be used to slow down the incoming capsule. “Significant new knowledge on the fundamental physical nature of the universe may have to await the launching of the first oao. In the meantime, sounding rocket experiments continue to provide data in ultraviolet and radio astronomy. . . . “Although the formal development of Scout had been completed, additional work was required to improve its reliability. The primary objective of the December 1963 Scout firing was to determine the efficacy of the measures taken to correct observed deficiencies. The virtually perfect vehicle performance during this firing encourages one to look for a high success rate in future Scout firings. . . . “Performance of all Atlas-boosted launch vehicles would be considerably improved by introducing a mixture of fluorine and oxygen (flox) as the oxidizer. Careful study shows this can be done with admixtures of up to 30% fluorine without major redesign of the propulsion system. We are, therefore, planning to flox the Atlas. A primary objective of this program is to provide for additional payload in the Surveyor investigations. . . .” (Testimony)
Two NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rockets were launched from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. The first rocket reached 126.5-mi. altitude carrying instrumented payload which was recovered after impact. Electron measurement experiment did not work, but the other experiments apparently were successful: hypervelocity micrometeoroid collectors, cosmic dust collectors, and momentum and energy measurements as correlative data for the collectors. The second rocket reached 145.5-mi. altitude in successful nighttime test to study distribution of Lyman-alpha radiation. Scanning ultraviolet spectrometer and a photometer were used. (NASA Rpts. SRL)
Titan II launched unmanned Gemini spacecraft into orbit in first Project Gemini flight (GT—1), a test of Titan II launch vehicle system, Gemini spacecraft structural integrity, and spacecraft-launch vehicle compatibility. After an uninterrupted countdown at Cape Kennedy, the Titan II lifted off and placed the spacecraft in orbit of 204-mi. apogee, 99.6-mi. perigee, and 89.27-min. period. Walter C. Williams said all systems functioned “well within manned tolerances.” Only imperfection in the flight was Titan II’s 14-mph excess speed (17,534 instead of 17,520 mph), sending spacecraft 21 mi. higher than planned. However, this was within tolerance and, on manned flight, crewmen could easily correct the extra height. The 7,000-lb. spacecraft was not separated from the spent rocket casing, and NASA officials estimated the orbiting assembly would re-enter the atmosphere and disintegrate in about 3^2 days, (nasa Release 64-70; msc Roundup, 4/15/64,1,3)
Final Gemini unmanned flight test (GT-2) from etr was postponed after a last-second engine misfire on the Titan II rocket. The trouble occurred 1.7 seconds after the Titan II booster engines ignited: loss of hydraulic pressure caused one of the two engine nozzles to swivel out of place; and automatic system sensed this and immediately extinguished both engines in the rocket’s first stage one second before lift-off. A NASA spokesman said that one of the nozzle tubes received a slight crack as a result of the malfunction and that extensive checking of all systems must be completed before a decision would be made as to whether the entire first stage would be replaced. The Titan II was to have lifted the 6,900-lb. Gemini capsule to 106 mi. in the suborbital flight and then accelerated it to faster and hotter reentry than normal. A parachute landing in the Atlantic was projected for the capsule and recovery planned. Chief goals of the flight, second in the Gemini series, would have been to test the heat shield as well as control, life support, and other systems. NASA said the delay meant the first manned Gemini flight would not take place until the second quarter of 1965. GT—2 would be attempted again in January. (Hoffman, N.Y. Her. Trib. 12/10/64; Balt. Sun. ■	12/10/64; Witkin, NYT, 12/10/64)
Black Knight rocket was fired at Woomera Rocket Range in U.K.-U.S.-Australia Project Dazzle. Minister of Supply Allen Fairhall said the rocket reached 370-mi. altitude, where second stage rocket ignited to drive instrumented re-entry package back through the atmosphere. (Reuters, Houston Post, 8/7/64)
Geraldo de Carvalho Silos told the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that Brazil would establish a rocket center near Natal and would seek U.N. sponsorship for the facility. The U.N. had been asked to sponsor a similar international facility at Thumba, India. (NYT, 11/4/64,39)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster from Wtr with undisclosed satellite payload, (hhn-48)
USAF announced launch of Thor-Agena D booster combination with unidentified satellite payload, from Vandenberg afb. (upi, NYT, 11/3/64, 53; hhn-48)
NASA launched a 110-lb. instrumented payload to measure upper atmospheric day-glow emissions from Wallops Station, Va., aboard a four-stage solid-propellant Javelin (Argo D—4) sounding rocket. Day-glow studies were extended to higher altitudes than previous observations and tests of instrumentation being considered for future orbital missions were conducted. The payload, containing a spectrophotometer, ultraviolet photometers, and a rotating filter wheel photometer, was carried to an altitude of 548 mi. as scientific data were telemetered to ground receivers for 17 minutes. Impact occurred in the Atlantic 930 mi. from the launch site. (Wallops Release 64-79; nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., with experiment to obtain optical spectra of night ultraviolet airglow. Rocket attained 1'13.5-mi. altitude, and the attitude control system kept the two fast spectrographs pointed accurately at the horizon, permitting four-minute exposure of the faint molecular oxygen Herz-berg bands. Also included in payload was a Nikon camera to obtain star-field backgrounds for aspect determination, (nasa Rpt. srl)
DOD announced award of $1,692,001 contract for construction of dual vertical checkout and pneumatic test station Saturn S-II facility at Seal Beach, Calif, (dod Release 788-64) Franklin P. Dixon, NASA Director of Manned Planetary Mission Studies, said in a speech: “Our studies indicate that the next major phase in manned earth orbital operations should be a space station with a 6-9 man capacity. This would be specifically designed for long-duration earth orbital flights and would directly further the routine exploitation of near earth space for peaceful purposes. The studies on this concept have shown that the basic station module should have a usable total volume in the order of 8,000 cubic feet with continuous ‘floor’ areas of not less than 300 square feet.” (Text) Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary and Acting Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, spoke at the awards banquet: “There is a wonderful thing about the space business. It has a vitality and a deep sense of challenge, which most other activities do not have. If it is not a way of life, it is at least a way of looking at life. The space program is the program for the optimist, the person who is willing to look ahead with confidence, the individual who sees no limits to what can be done and no horizons to the scope of doing. One of the greatest benefits already obtained from the space program is its revitalizing effect upon our whole economy—our whole educational system— our whole attitude toward the future. Let us use all our power of persuasion against any individual or any group who would slow down the pace of this program.” Referring to statements that the military possibilities of space have been “downgraded,” Dr. Welsh said: “During the four-year period of 1957 through 1960, space expenditures for the dod totaled $1 billion. On the other hand, during the last four years, that is 1961 through 1964, the dod spent about $4.6 billion on its space responsibility. The fact is that the Department of Defense is annually spending about a billion and a half dollars in space research and development. This includes projects in navigation, communications, observation, detection, booster development, scientific instrumentation, command and control techniques, interception, and manned and unmanned space flight.” He would make no prediction regarding next year’s space budget, but suggested that “space expenditures over the coming years, even with occasional plateaus, would be characterized by an upward trend.” Dr. Welsh confirmed the Russians were relying heavily upon unmanned Vostok spacecraft in their Cosmos program. He said the Vostoks had accumulated “more than 2500 orbits”; since the seven Soviet manned flights to date accounted for only 10% of this, the balance must have been achieved in the more than 20 Vostok flights from Tyuratam range at the 65° inclination. Unlike the Cosmos satellites, these unmanned Vostoks had been recovered after as much as two weeks in orbit. Dr. Welsh also disclosed that Soviet launching reliability was “comparable” to the 85% attained by U.S. in past three years. (Text; A&A, 11/64,116; Dr.EdwardC. Welsh) Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, staff member of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, in a comparison of U.S. and Soviet space flights, said that 262 military and civilian launch vehicles had been launched by this country between 1957 and October of this year as opposed to at least 81 launched by the Russians. Of the total U.S. launch attempts, 192 were successful, and 231 payloads were put into earth orbit, eight were injected into escape trajectories, and 84 were listed as failures. (Text) Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier, AFSC Space Systems Div. deputy for manned systems, said that studies by Jet Propulsion Laboratory and by General Electric, under JPL contract, showed that payload capacities of both Surveyor and Mariner could be doubled if the Titan III, rather than the Atlas-Agena, were used to launch them. The GE study, he said, determined that the Voyager Mars soft-landing mission objectives could be accomplished more effectively if the lander and or-biter were launched as two separate Titan III payloads, rather than as a combined package atop a Saturn IB. (Av. Wk., 11/9/64, 27) aiaa made the following awards: 1964 Astronautics Award to Walter C. Williams, vice president and general manager of the Manned Systems Div. of the Aerospace Corp. and until April 1964 NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Operations, for “outstanding and continuing achievements in successful aerospace systems operations”; Octave Chanute Award to Fred J. Drinkwater and Robert C. Innis, usaf pilots at NASA’s Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif., for their work on the V/Stol and Stol aircraft; John Jeffries Award to Dr. Eugene Konecci of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, until Oct. 1964 NASA Director of Biotechnology and Human Research, for his contributions to life sciences; Robert M. Losey Award to Col. Robert C. Miller (usaf) , Kansas City Weather Bureau, for his work on turbulence. (Av. Wk., 11/16/64,19; msc Roundup, 11/11/64,1) Joseph A. Walker, project pilot for NASA’s Flight Research Center, described the first flight of the Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (LLRV). Walker said this was the first of several pilot familiarization and checkout flights. Simulated lunar missions were scheduled for early 1965. The first flight consisted of three separate take-offs and landings. Total free flight time was just under one min., with a maximum altitude of approximately 10 ft. He used only the jet engine for lift power and did not activate the lift rockets. All eight of the standard control rockets were operated briefly. The llrv was equipped with a jet engine that could be automatically regulated to counterbalance five-sixths- of the vehicle’s weight to compensate for the gravitational difference between the moon and earth. This engine was also used to provide take-off power. During forthcoming checkout flights, two hydrogen-peroxide rocket motors, capable of delivering from 100 to 500 lbs. thrust each, would be used to regulate lift. The program, in support of Project Apollo, was designed to study the piloting and operational procedures involved during the final phases of a manned lunar landing and during the initial portion of the lunar take-off. (frc Release 28-434) Paper on launch vehicle engines by A. O. Tischler, Director of NASA oart Chemical Propulsion Div., and Leland F. Belew, Manager of msfc Engine Program Office, covered current status of solid- and liquid-propellant rocket engines for Saturn and Titan launch vehicles. The authors reported that the F-l engine represented “the largest thrust engine fired to date. Started in early 1959 the F-l engine has been under development for six years. Five F-l’s will be used in the first stage of the Saturn V vehicle to produce a take-off thrust of 7,500,000 pounds. . . . “Nominal firing duration is 150 seconds and we expect better than 15 times that life to be in the engine at qualification. . . . “[Design refinements to correct combustion-driven oscillations] have produced an engine which in the last five months has accumulated almost as much test time as in the previous five years. . . .” (Text) November 4: Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa’s Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, cited during a luncheon of the AIAA Third Manned Space Flight Meeting in Houston four important decisions made in the past ten years: “The first was in 1954 when as the result of the Von Neumann Committee’s recommendations we began the ballistic missile program on a top-priority basis. . . . The second decision a year later was to undertake the Vanguard program as the second priority effort, completely separate from the ballistic missile program. . . . The third decision . . . was the passage of the National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958. . . . The fourth major decision was President Kennedy’s 1961 proposal to expand and accelerate United States space activity.” Dr. Mueller said that there is no such thing as unmanned exploration of space. “As sensor, manipulator, evaluator, and investigator in space, as the scope and range of our activities continue to increase, the role of man assumes increasing importance. Our challenge is to capitalize on his presence in space.” (Text) 766-598 0—65----25
USAF began awarding small study contracts to industry to explore various aspects of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory. Directed toward the orbiting of a 4-ton laboratory in 1968 to help DOD determine the military role of manned space flights, mol would be launched by a Titan III—C rocket and would orbit for approximately one month. Contracts were let last month to the Martin Co. to study the role of Titan III—C in relation to launching the laboratory. Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. and the AiResearch Div. of the Garrett Corp. got contracts for study of environmental control systems. (Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 6/5/64)
Appearing before Special Subcommittee on Air and Water Pollution of the Senate Committee on Public Works, NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology John L. Sloop said: “The NASA activities having a bearing on air and water pollution are almost entirely in the area of nuclear and chemical propulsion. Even in this area, however, only a fraction of the work offers a pollution threat. “With regard to water pollution, it is standard practice at NASA Centers and in the rocket industry to capture water used in test operations and, if necessary, treat it before re-use or discharge. “In considering air pollution, the NASA uses two approaches:
A scheduled flight of the X—15 rocket ship to test star-tracking cameras was canceled when rain soaked lakebeds used as landing fields for the plane. No new date was scheduled. (Wash. Post, 11/10/64)
Rep. Carl Albert (D.-Okla.) submitted in Congressional Record “An Accounting of Stewardship 1961—1964,” which included summary of U.S. accomplishments in space: “Since 1961 the United States has pressed vigorously forward with a 10-year, $35-billion national space program for clear leadership in space exploration, space use, and all important aspects of space science and technology. “Already this program has enabled the United States to challenge the early Soviet challenge in space booster power and to effectively counter the Soviet bid for recognition as the world’s leading nation in science and technology. . . .” Among the achievements listed: Saturn I rocket’s successful flight; Saturn IB and V development; mastery of liquid hydrogen as rocket fuel; six manned Mercury space flights; Gemini spacecraft and Titaq II launch vehicle test-flight; Apollo spacecraft development; first close-up observations of another planet (Venus) with mariner ii and pictures of the moon with RANGER vu; orbiting observatory program initiation; Tiros weather satellite operation; and ComSatCorp establishment. “In short, the United States has matched rapid progress in manned space flight with a balanced program for scientific investigations in space, practical uses of space, and advanced research and technological pioneering to assure that the new challenges of space in the next decade can also be met, and U.S. leadership maintained.” (CR, 9/15/64, 21498)
According to Hebrew Univ. sources, Dr. Menahem Steinberg of Hebrew Univ. in Jerusalem had developed new oxidizer for use in solid-fuel rocket engines, said to be superior to those in general use because the gases produced by combustion would be of a low molecular weight and so would increase propulsion power. The sources said two years would be required to develop and confirm the new discovery. (Reuters, Balt. Sun, 4/2/64)
Launch of NASA’s S-48 ionosphere explorer satellite (“Topsi”) was postponed when malfunction was discovered in Scout vehicle’s wiring system during prelaunch checkout at Pt. Arguello. The Scout was returned to manufacturer Ling-Temco-Vought in Dallas for repair. “Topsi” was to have continued NASA’s program to gather information on structure of the upper ionosphere pioneered by three satellites— explorer vni, ARIEL i, and alouette I—and a number of sounding rocket flights, (nasa Release 64-49; Av. Wk., 3/23/64, 23)
Analyzing impact of voskhod i flight, John Finney said feeling of U.S. Government officials was that voskhod i “probably was the prelude to a longer flight sometime soon and to the unveiling of a more powerful rocket for launchings.” In itself, voskhod i flight was considered of more psychological than technical significance. (Finney, NYT, 10/ 14/64, 18)	.....
usaf launched Atlas-Agena D space booster from Vandenberg afb, Calif., with unidentified payload. (M&R, 7/13/64, 14; SBD, 7/8/64, 33)
NASA announced it would purchase 102 additional J—2 rocket engines for Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles at cost of about $165 million. Contract would be negotiated by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center with Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc. (nasa Release 64-211)
Five-segment 120-in. rocket motor for Titan III exploded after 55 sec. during static firing at Edwards afb, Calif. Explosion caused extensive damage to new $ 10-million solid-motor test facility, dedicated just three hours earlied by SSD commanding officer Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk, who had called the new stand “the most sophisticated and highly instrumented facility in the world.” Stand was operated for usaf by United Technology Center (utc), and further tests were shifted to utc’s test facility at Coyote, Calif. Cause of explosion was thought to be failure of casing weld when a “boot” in the bottom of the motor was removed. {M&R, 5/11/64,16)
NASA’s ogo I (Orbiting Geophysical Observatory) was launched from Cape Kennedy by Atlas-Agena B rocket booster into highly elliptical orbit (92.721-mi. apogee, 175-mi. perigee, 621%-hr. period, and 31° inclination to the equator). The huge 1,073-lb. satellite carried 20 experiments, inaugurating new “space bus” series of standardized observatories capable of conducting many related space experiments simultaneously in space. However, one of ogoi’s long booms, one short boom including the omnidirectional radio antenna did not deploy. This resulted in abnormal operation of the automatic control system, and most of the control gas was used in attempting to lock the satellite into its earth-stabilized orbit. Project officials attributed the satellite’s inability to lock onto the earth to the fact that its earth-seeking sensor was obscured by one of the undeployed booms. Scientists decided not to attempt turning on experiments for several days while calculating contingency operations for a spin-stabilized satellite. (nasa Release 64-213; gsfc Release G-26-64; AP, NYT, 9/6/64, 26; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/8/64)
In satellite communications demonstration at AIAA Washington meetings, Lt. Cdr. J. F. Debold, Commanding Officer, U.S. Naval Research and Development Satellite Communications Group, spoke via syncom ii satellite with his second in command on board USNs Kingsport. Kingsport, which can acquire, track, control, and communicate via a satellite while cruising at sea, was built by Navy to complement two Army-developed communications terminals on East and West Coasts, (aiaa Booster, 7/2/64, 2)
NASA announced that failure of ranger VI spacecraft to take pictures of the moon may have been caused by unscheduled tum-on of cruise telemetry from the TV system at about the same time as Atlas booster separation. For unexplained reason, telemetry turned on for about one minute and relayed measurements in the TV system, including battery voltages and temperatures. It was possible that TV system could have turned on at die same time; if so, severe electrical arcing would have occurred and damaged the system. However, TV telemetry turned on 17 min. after separation from Agena stage as scheduled, and nothing at that time indicated any abnormalities in the TV system. Tracking data showed that ranger vi impacted the moon within 20 mi. of its target and within one third of a second of the predicted arrival time. ( nasa Release 64-33)
Japan launched its first meteorological sounding rocket from the National Space Development Center’s testing range on Nii Jima Island. The two-stage rocket reached 68.2-mi. altitude. (AP, NYT, 7/23/64, 46; AP, Wash. Post, 7/23/64)
Gemini spacecraft launched into orbit in unmanned test April 8 (GT-1) re-entered the earth’s atmosphere and disintegrated midway between South America and Africa. Attached to the ll-ft.-long spacecraft was 20-ft.-long cylindrical rocket stage. They had been orbiting the earth at altitudes from between 100 and 190 mi. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/14/64; AP, Houston Post, 4/14/64)
Apollo program review was presented in special day-long session of fiveday national meeting of Society of Automotive Engineers (sae) in Los Angeles. Another highlight of the meeting was emphasis on in-flight maintenance problems associated with long manned space flights. General Dynamics/Astronautics reported its design philosophy of eliminating need for hand tools in spacecraft maintenance and repair. In address to the group, NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said that “virtually none” of U.S. space flight projects had been “successfully completed within their originally estimated resources and on their originally laid out schedules . . . historically, schedules have often stretched out to nearly twice their length and costs have sometimes grown by factors of three or four. . . . [However] we don’t accept that management can’t do something about it. . . .” He predicted fewer new projects would be initiated unless industry “can show real evidence of having overcome the point of view that says R&D cannot be controlled. . . .” (naa s&ID Skywriter, 10/2/64, 1; M&R, 10/12/ 64,18; Av. Wk., 10/19/64,32)
NASA launched explorer xx scientific satellite into orbit from Western Test Range, Calif., using Scout booster rocket. Initial orbit: 625-mi. apogee, 540-mi. perigee, 104-min. period, and 80° inclination to the equator. The ionosphere Explorer satellite, nicknamed “Topsi,” immediately began mapping the ionosphere and sending data back to earth. The findings of this satellite would be compared with those obtained by alouette, the Canadian-developed “topside sounder.” (NASA Release 64-207; Wash. Post, 8/26/64; AP, Chic. Trib., 8/26/64; Av. Wk., 8/31/64,25)
President Johnson stated in press conference: “This past week the United States has demonstrated in at least eight different situations this Nation’s determination to insure both peace and freedom in the widest possible areas. “Progress toward these ends is frequently slow and rarely dramatic, but it should be viewed in the perspective of history and not headlines. . . The President listed the first seven situations, then “And finally, we have witnessed and the whole world has witnessed with pleasure the remarkable success of our Saturn rocket, the most powerful rocket thrust known to man. This rocket, I am happy to say, was first recommended by our committee [Senate Preparedness Subcommittee, chaired by Johnson] in 1958.” (Transcript, Wash. Post, 2/2/64, A7)_	_	_	_
Final S-I booster in Saturn I rocket program was static-fired at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center for its second and final time. The 156-sec. test was “entirely satisfactory.” This S-I stage, the second one built by Chrysler Corp. for NASA, would power the last (SA-10) Saturn I launch vehicle. First Saturn I booster was static-fired at msfc in April 1961. Today’s firing ended about three-and-a-half years of testing in which r&d and flight vehicles underwent a total of 55 firings for cumulative time of 3,867 sec. (Marshall Star, 10/14/64,1)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster from WTR with unidentified satellite payload. It was later disclosed that two satellites were orbited with one launch vehicle. ( hhn-4 8)
Japan successfully launched three-stage Lambda III, its largest and most advanced research rocket, on a flight to collect data on the upper layer of the atmosphere. The rocket attained an altitude of 600 mi. in the 17-min., 20-sec. flight from Kagoshima Space Center in Kagoshima Prefecture, Japan. (AP, Wash. Post, 7/12/64; NASA Off. Int. Aff.)
Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory successfully completed eightminute power experiment with the Kiwi—B4E reactor, the eighth and final reactor built for power testing under the Kiwi phase of the NASA—aec nuclear rocket program. All planned test objectives were met and reactor performance was smooth. Duration of the test was limited by the liquid hydrogen capacity of the Jackass Flats, Nev., facility. (snpo; Wash. Post, 8/29/64)
NASA announced it had assigned management responsibility for large solid rocket motor development to its Lewis Research Center. The 260-in. solid motor development was formerly a program of the Department of Defense. Under its FY 1965 budget, NASA assumed funding responsibility for the program; it would begin management responsibility for it next July. Two contracts for the program, with Aerojet General Corp. and Thiokol Chemical Corp. and initiated by the Air Force in June 1963, had been transferred to NASA. Smaller, 156-in. solid motor program continued under Air Force development. (nasa Release 64-231)
usaf launched four-stage Athena re-entry test rocket from Green River, Utah, for a partially successful flight. Flight was aborted automatically before third-stage ignition because of an inverter malfunction. (M&R, 10/5/64,11)
NASA Aerobee 150A sounding rocket with University of Pittsburgh and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center instrumented payload was launched from Wallops Island, Va., to 74.5-mi. altitude. Primary objective of flight was to obtain propulsion and environmental data on the Aerobee 150A. New severance techniques also were employed. Additional experiments included low-energy gamma-ray measurements, study of yellow radiation from sodium vapor, Dovap transmitter studies for tracking rockets, nuclear emulsions for cosmic-ray studies, and attitude control system employing new techniques for pointing. Rocket performance was good, and excellent propulsion and environmental data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
It was reported that Douglas Aircraft Co., Santa Monica, had submitted a proposal to NASA for a system which would enable a single booster to launch as many as five satellites. The system, called Multiple OrbitMultiple Satellite (moms), consisted of a number of satellites fastened together by explosive bolts. The system was designed for use with a Douglas Delta launch vehicle. Several successful launches of two and three satellites together had been accomplished before, but never as many as five as proposed in the new system. (Houston Post, 7/16/64)
Paper surveying space nuclear propulsion by Harold B. Finger, James Lazar, and James J. Lynch of NASA and aec was presented to AIAA. “. . . a major forward step has been taken in the milestone established by the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory in its design, development, operation, and analysis of the KIWI-B4D nuclear rocket reactor experiment. This test provides good reason for confidence in the successful execution of the tests to be conducted this year and next and provides a good basis for confidence in the availability of nuclear rockets when they will be required for the performance of advanced space missions. The availability of these nuclear rocket propulsion systems will give this country a propulsion capability far advanced over any other rocket propulsion system available. . . . “Progress has been made in electric propulsion, particularly in the thrustor area, but important research data and technology are also beginning to be provided in the difficult area of nuclear reactor electric generating systems required for prime electric propulsion in space. “Beyond these systems, other advanced nuclear propulsion concepts are not yet well enough understood to justify undertaking significant development efforts. Careful and systematic accumulation of research information to evaluate the feasibility of these concepts and to arrive at a real understanding of them appear appropriate.” (Text)
Army Corps of Engineers announced award of $8,079,003 (NASA funds) fixed-price contract to Malan Construction Co. of Koppers Co., Inc., for construction of a rocket engine test stand at the NASA Mississippi Test Operations, (dod Release 856-64)
USAF launched Thor-Agena D space booster from WTR with unidentified satellite payload, (hhn—48)
Lightning damaged certain electrical systems in Titan II launch vehicle and ground checkout equipment at Cape Kennedy, where the booster rocket was being prepared for launching of unmanned Gemini spacecraft (GT—2). NASA spokesman said: “The over-all effect of this condition may result in a delay of the first manned flight [GT-3] into next year.” (Houston Post, 8/19/64; upi, NYT, 8/19/64, 15)
Usaf launched Thor-Agena booster combination from Pt. Arguello with unidentified payload, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/25/64)
usaf Project Asset space glider was launched from Cape Kennedy with single-stage Thor booster to 31-mi. altitude before returning downward at 8,800-mph speed and impacting 900 mi. southeast of the launch site in the Atlantic Ocean, usaf said die spacecraft temperatures had reached about 2,000° in the 25-min. flight, which was termed “very successful.” (AP, Wash. Post, 10/28/64; M&R, 11/2/64, 8)
President Lyndon B. Johnson said in article for The Journal of the National Education Association: “The nation that has the schools has the future. No less than our rocket thrusts into outer space, there is urgently needed a national education thrust of massive proportions that will help us master the problems of our age. “. . . figuratively and physically we are building not only a pathway to the stars but also—hopefully—bridges of understanding here on earth. “It is here on earth that our task begins. And for that task, the education attainments of our fellow Americans are, in some categories, far less than they should be. . , .” (AP, NYT, 1/3/64,21)
Studies of two-stage recoverable lifting body space vehicle, by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center were reported in Aviation Week. Envisioned primarily as a passenger/supply space ferry, the system could be launched by track-mounted rocket sled or take off horizontally similar to conventional aircraft. Both stages would be manned, the first with only a flight crew and the pickaback second stage with 10-14 men and supplies. In this concept, both delta-shape stages would be recoverable. (Av. Wk., 6/29/64, 38)
A. 0. Tischler, NASA Director of Propulsion and Power Generation, said in paper for aiaa : “At this time the United States stands on the threshold of transport in the space environment. Until now, with the exception of a relatively few payloads such as Syncom, payloads launched into space were put on their trajectory by the launch vehicle. Only minor path corrections were applied by the on-board propulsion systems. Even the Mercury capsule returns were made by a relatively minor slowing of the orbiting capsule, with aerodynamic braking providing the rest of the kinetic energy change. However in Gemini which may fly with men this year, and which will later effect rendezvous of separate payloads in space, and in Apollo, which will perform an intricate series of space maneuvers, we recognize systems that carry significant propulsion capability into space for use entirely in that environment. The time is rapidly coming when space is no longer something we throw darts into but is an environment in which working propulsion systems will maneuver and transport spacecraft payloads and eventually convey these payloads back to the earth’s atmosphere for descent to the surface to be used again. . . . “[Space] . . . booster engines have passed, or in the case of the Saturn V engines, are approaching their preliminary flight rating tests, while the more conservative spacecraft propulsion systems have not yet arrived at that milepost. While these spacecraft engines may be expected to come along at a faster pace than the big booster engine developments, the fact is that they are presently in a tail chase situation. I think we must observe that at this moment the status of spacecraft propulsion systems under development lags the development status of launch vehicle engines and is additionally behind in performing sophistication. That is the area that warrants propulsion attention.” (Text)
It was reported that dod had decided to invest $200 million in a military communications satellite system. The first launching was said to be scheduled for late 1965 or 1966. Plans called for seven or eight satellites to he placed in orhit by a single Titan III booster. The satellites, perhaps as many as 24 simultaneously, were to be placed in orbit at around 6,000 mi. altitude (see July 13). (upi, NYT, 7/19/64)
Hurricane Cleo battered Cape Kennedy rocket launching site with gale winds up to 65 mph. Technicians dismantled second stage of Titan II for GT—2 Gemini flight and stored it in hangar, lashed first stage of the Titan II to the pad. No damage was done to the Titan II or other lashed-down rockets. (Wash. Post, 8/28/64; AP, Balt Sun, 8/29/64) 766-598 0—66-----20
1.5 million-lb.-thrust S—1-8 Saturn booster was successfully fired in a fullduration static test at msfc. Built by Chrysler Corp. at Michoud Operations plant near New Orleans, the booster was the first to be produced by private industry. (AP, 6/12/64)
Atlas D launch vehicle sent NASA’s 200-lb. Project Fire spacecraft more than 500 mi. into space from Cape Kennedy in test to provide data on re-entry heating of spacecraft returning from the moon. As the spacecraft fell back to earth, a solid-fuel Antares II motor ignited for 30 sec. to hurl it through the atmosphere at the speed of 37,800 fps (about 26,000	mph). With exterior heating at estimated 20,000 degrees, instruments in spacecraft interior relayed data back to earth while cameras and other instruments recorded the “flaming meteor” descent. About 32 min. after launch the Project Fire craft impacted in the Atlantic more than 5,200 mi. from the launch site. Dr. Raymond L. Bispling-hoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, commented that the experiment, conducted by NASA Langley Research Center, “recorded the highest speed ever reached by a manmade object in free flight.” In conjunction with the Project Fire test, NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched to 97-mi. altitude from Ascension Island. Its instrumented payload, provided by Univ. of Michigan, measured pressure, temperature, and density in the equatorial atmosphere using pitot-static probe technique. (NASA Release 64-69; AP, Wash. Post, 4/15/64; Cine. Enqr. 4/16/64, nasa Rpt. srl)
usaf announced launching of Thor-Agena D space booster from Vandenberg afb with unidentified satellite payload, (upi, JPash. Post, 8/6/64; M&R, 8/17/64,9)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket reached 85-mi. altitude in launch from Chamical, Argentina. Instrumented payload apparently obtained good data in measurement of electron density, electron temperature, ultraviolet and solar x-radiation flux. Test was second of two Nike-Cajun launches by NASA and Argentina’s National Commission of Space Research. (NASA Rpt. srl)
nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office announced successful completion of cold-flow experiments on a Nerva (nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application) experimental reactor, designated the nrx-ai, by the Aerojet-General and Westinghouse Electric Corporations. The experiments were designed to check the structural stability and flow dynamics of the nrx-a reactor under nonpower conditions. All test objectives were met. (SNPO)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in Space Business Daily interview that use of Centaur as a third stage for Saturn IB launch vehicle was now a “matter of study with a serious approach to the various alternatives” it could serve. He mentioned one such use might be as a booster for logistics support vehicle called Stay Time Excursion Module (stem) for establishment of lunar bases. Dr. Mueller also disclosed that payload for Saturn SA-10 flight had been changed from an Apollo boilerplate to a micrometeoroid detection satellite (mds), supplementing those for Saturns SA-8 and SA-9. Added mds was to further confirm that skin thicknesses on boosters and spacecraft can be reduced, thus trimming weight requirements for Project Apollo. (SBD, 4/15/64,83)
Britain successfully launched a Blue Streak rocket from the Woomera Range in Australia. The rocket reached an altitude of 110 mi. and a top speed of 6,400 mph. Because the engines cut off seven seconds earlier than had been planned, the rocket fell 382 mi. short of impact area. The rocket traveled 620 mi. northwest of Woomera and disintegrated over Western Australia. (NYT, 6/6/64)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., reached 110-mi. altitude in experiment to collect data on celestial x-ray sources. Despite slight underperformance of the rocket, preliminary experimental results were considered good. American Science and Engineering, Inc., provided instrumented payload consisting of four Geiger counters, one photoelectric detector, two scintillation counters, and two star sensors. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
msfc . planners believed a post-Saturn V booster would be needed if the U.S. were to undertake a manned planetary exploration program, Missiles and Rockets reported. They also favored the so-called Block II vehicle, which would have two stages using new propulsion techniques and high-pressure engines. First stage would be recoverable. (M&R, 7/13/64, 9)
Dr. Eugen Saenger, eminent European space scientist, died at 58 in West Berlin. Dr. Saenger was best known for his World War II study “Rocket Propulsion of Long Range Bombers” and his post-war theoretical investigations of photon-powered rockets. He was one of the first to investigate use of liquid hydrogen as a fuel and of metal powders mixed with rocket fuels. Formerly head of Institute of Jet Propulsion Physics in Stuttgart, since last May he held chair of space flight technology at Berlin Technical Univ. Of him, Dr. Walter Dornberger said: “He didn’t see the goal of human endeavor as travel just in our planetary system. He wanted to see travel to the outer galaxies. He made very extensive studies in this field, which one day—maybe 40, 50 years from now—may be looked at very seriously.” (NYT, 2/11/64,39)
A report in the Journal of the Armed Forces noted that during FY 1964 199 new objects were placed in orbit, norad Space Detection and Tracking Center (spadats), which tracked the objects, reported that as of the end of FY 1964 there were 438 items in orbit. The items included not only satellites and probes, but also “junk” items such as upper stages of rocket boosters. As of the date of this report there were 101 satellites or probes in space. The U.S. had been responsible for 89 of them, the U.S.S.R. for 9, the U.K. for 2, and Canada for 1. Of the 199 objects launched in FY 1964, 122 were pieces of debris, and the other 77 were payloads. 58 were U.S., 18 were U.S.S.R., and 1 was from U.K. (J/Armed Forces, 7/18/64, 8)
Tass disclosed that zond II was equipped with a new type of rocket engine known as a plasma accelerator and that the engine, on radio command from earth, had successfully operated the attitude-control system that oriented the spacecraft with respect to the sun. It was the first time that such a plasma engine had been tested under conditions of actual space flight. Information continued to be received on the operations of die systems and units aboard the spacecraft; radio communication with the station was stable. (Tass, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 12/19/64, 1, atss-t Trans.; Shabad, NYT, 12/18/64, 12)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island, Va., with Univ. of N.H. instrumented payload reached 90-mi. altitude, but experiment results were not obtained because of telemetry failure at 4.05 sec. Primary purpose of flight was to check out instrumentation for Nike-Apache sounding rocket experiments to be conducted on the IQST Mobile Launch Expedition in early 1965. A second checkout launch was scheduled for mid-January, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
nasa announced selection of the name “Pegasus” for its micrometeoroid detection satellite, to be launched into orbit with Saturn I rocket booster. Named for the winged horse of ancient mythology, the satellite has a wing-like panel 96-ft. long and 14-ft. wide which would record and transmit the penetrations of meteoroids, (nasa Release 64-203)
mariner iv underwent a critical course change to make it possible for the craft to take useful pictures of Mars during the fly-by in July 1965. In response to commands radioed from earth, a small rocket on the base of the spacecraft, which could add anything between an eighth of a mile an hour to 188 miles an hour to the craft’s speed, was fired. Initial indications were that the correction was successful and accurate. Severed days later, tracking equipment and associated computers confirmed that the rocket firing had produced three changes in mariner iv’s flight path: (1) the Mars fly-by from 151,000 mi. in front of Mars to a closest approach of 5,400 mi. behind Mars; (2) the arrival date from July 16, 1965, to July 14; and (3) the flight path past Mars from the leading edge to the trailing edge of Mars. The maneuver was followed by sun and Canopus reacquisition. A second midcourse maneuver would not be required. The midcourse rocket used by mariner iv was the first to be used by this country that was capable of a second firing, (nasa Release 64-310; Witkin, NYT, 12/6/64,67; Miles, Wash. Post, 12/6/64)
Missiles and Rockets published interview made last summer with Dr. Eugen Saenger, who died earlier this month. Dr. Saenger, whose World War II concept of rocket sled-launched orbital bomber was later influential in design of X—20 (Dyna Soar), had said: “I am assisting a German group within Eurospace in looking into the economics of space transportation. We are considering reusable vehicles. Dyna-Soar is assumed to be the necessary first step. . . . We consider it essential to develop an aerospace plane able to lift off from Earth, go up to orbit in the form of an airplane with wings, return like the Dyna-Soar along a glide path to Earth and land like an airplane so it can be re-used.” He said he had modified his chemical rocket-sled idea into steam-rocket sled and had developed such a rocket. “It'develops 30 tons of thrust. We ran hundreds of tests on it. We would use it to accelerate a stage to subsonic or perhaps supersonic velocity.” Dr. Saenger described Egyptian rocket development, which he had assisted until late 1961 when West German government asked him to stop: “I was asked in the spring of 1960 by the Egyptian government to give lectures at Cairo University and help the country by doing consulting work on meteorological sounding rockets. . . . “It’s a rocket only for vertical launching and liquid fuel. There is no guidance. Although in principle the rocket could be launched into an inclined flight, there is no way of knowing with accuracy where it will impact. So I can’t imagine how it would be used for military purposes/’ (M&R, 2/24/64,35-38)
Space flight of NASA’s Sert I (Space Electric Rocket Test) spacecraft marked first successful operation in space of an electric rocket engine. NASA launched the Sert I on a suborbital trajectory from Wallops Island, using four-stage Scout booster rocket which lofted the Sert I to 2,500-mi. altitude before impacting in Atlantic Ocean about 2,000 mi. downrange from Wallops. One of the two ion propulsion engines aboard the 375-lb. Sert I was operated twice, for total run of 30 min.; this engine was built by NASA Lewis Research Center. The other engine, built by Hughes Research Laboratories, did not produce thrust. Primary purpose of the experiment was to verify that electrostatic (ion) engines can produce thrust in space, and all technical objectives were achieved. NASA later announced the test was so successful that a second test would not be necessary (Oct. 16). (nasa Releases 64^167, 64-180; lrc Release 64-63; Wallops Release 64-58)
S-I booster for Saturn I SA—9 was test-fired for 30 sec. in its initial firing at NASA JVlarshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala. This S-I was the last Saturn I booster built by msfc; future stages were being built by Chrysler Corp., and would be shipped to Huntsville for static firings. Since the first Saturn I booster firing March 28, 1960, msfc had conducted more than 50 firings on eight flight S-I’s and one ground-test booster, all of which were assembled at MSFC. (Marshall Star, 3/18/64, 1)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket reached 124-mi. altitude in U.S.-Pakistan experiment from Sonmiani. Sodium vapor trail from the rocket was photographed by ground cameras to measure direction and speeds of upper atmospheric winds. (NASA Rpt. srl)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb addressed Missouri Cotton Producers Association in Sikeston, Mo.: “Whether the Russians are attempting to build a rocket and spacecraft to match Saturn V and Apollo, we simply do not know. When they start flight tests of such a rocket, we should be able to identify it. Flight tests of our Saturn V will not begin until the 1967-68 period, and it is quite possible that the Russians may also be testing a super rocket by then. “This much we do know: It would be very foolish on our part to sit idle or to delay the Saturn V until we could confirm that the Soviets were also building super rockets. By that time, it would probably be too late for us to match them again in this century. “In our national space program we are moving rapidly and vigorously to do the things we need to do as a nation to prevent technological surprise, to prevent another major Soviet initiative based on space superiority. “We believe that peace and security and the possibility of useful cooperation with the Soviet Union all depend on our making doubly clear that they can hope to have no monopoly of space achievement to exploit for the purposes of communism. “Some people seem to think that our present space effort can be justified only if we are in a neck-and-neck race to the moon. These people miss the point. Our aim is not to race the Soviets, but to thoroughly discourage them from making an all-out effort to use space as a political, propaganda, or military weapon for greater power on earth. “I don’t believe the American people are investing $20 billion in the Saturn-Apollo program of manned space flight in this decade just to keep even with the Soviets. I think the American people want to lead, and lead without doubts and excuses. . . .” (Text)
Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, NASA, asserted that “we learned we had more work to do” in commenting on the fact that one engine in the Saturn I booster (SA-6) had shut down prematurely. Because the Saturn I booster was designed to operate successfully with one engine out, no damage was done by the early shutoff and the test was successful. (Houston Post, 6/2/64)
usaf Atlas-Agena D satellite booster combination was launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., with unidentified payload. It was later disclosed that three satellites were orbited. (AP, NYT, 10/24/64; hhn—48)
United Technology Center successfully test-fired its 120-inch-dia., 1million-lb.-thrust solid propellant rocket motor for nearly two minutes at Edwards AFB, Calif. The firing was the fourth static test within two months. The 250-ton rockets were being developed for the first stage of the Air Force’s Titan III—C standard space launch vehicle, under contract to the AF’s Space Systems Div. The Titan III—C was scheduled to orbit a variety of manned and unmanned payloads, including the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol). (M&R, 1/4/65, 26)
USAF fired advanced Minuteman icbm down the Atlantic Missile Range and 30 seconds later followed it with a Nike-Javelin sounding rocket to study the Minuteman’s exhaust. This was first in 16-test series, (upi, NYT, 4/1/64,60; M&R, 4/6/64,10)	. During March: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center received design recommendations for 24-man Large Orbital Research Laboratory (lorl) that could be operational by 1968—the six-month study conducted by Douglas Aircraft’s Missile & Space Div. and IBM’s Federal Systems Div. The cylindrical space station would operate under zero gravity conditions in a 260-mi.-high orbit. (Maloney, Houston Post, 3/21/64)
NASA conducted two sounding rocket launches from USNS Croatan, near Wallops Island, Va., to determine whether or not ship’s radar could track metalized-mylar spheres with sufficient accuracy to obtain significant geophysical data. Both payloads, each consisting of two metalized-mylar spheres, were provided by Univ. of Michigan. The first rocket, a Nike-Apache, reached 136-mi. altitude and two spheres ejected and inflated, but ship’s radar did not acquire track. Land-based radars did obtain sphere trajectory data. The second rocket, a Nike-Cajun, reached 92.6-mi. altitude, its spheres ejecting and inflating as planned but deflating earlier than expected. Ship’s radar provided questionable position data which would have to be analyzed further. (Wallops Release 64-86; NASA Rpts. srl)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s deadline for industry proposals to design a lOO-lb.-thrust rocket engine for manned space systems. Designated “C-l,” the engine would be powered by monomethylhydrazine and nitrogen tetroxide, which would be hypergolic and storable. The engine could be employed for attitude control, maneuvering, and ullage control purposes. (A&A, 12/64,75)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with instrumented payload to obtain comparison of electron density profile with wind profile and to measure electron temperature. Sodium vapor ejected as scheduled and Langmuir probe functioned well. Launch was to have been one of four spaced through a single night, but high winds and subsequent cloud cover forced cancellation of the other three, (nasa Rpt. she)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with sodium-vapor payload was launched to 106-mi. altitude from Thumba Range, Trivandrum, India, in joint effort of NASA Goddard Space Flight Center and Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad, India. Rocket performed as predicted, sodium ejected as predicted, and temperature and turbulence measurements were made with ground-based cameras and instrumentation. (NASA Rpt. srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched from White Sands, N. Mex., with JPL payload to measure ultraviolet light and fluctuations in earth’s magnetic field. Rocket started large yaw maneuvers soon after 30 sec. and reached only 18.2-mi. altitude; no new scientific data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Commenting on Republican Presidential candidate Goldwater’s recently published views on the space program, Warren Burkett, science writer for the Houston Chronicle, pointed out that a good deal of research which can be of use to the military services was being carried on as part of NASA’s Project Apollo. He suggested that an Apollo Orbital Research Laboratory, based on components being developed in the Apollo program, could be used for military aspects of the space program such as space patrol and interception. The article suggested that the Apollo program was generally developing a group of “off-the-shelf’ space systems which could be adapted for military use should this appear desirable. (Houston Chron., 7/26/64)
The last in a series of 11 tests of the F—2 Apollo service module engine was successfully conducted by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center engineers at White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. The engine was fired for 20 sec. and then shut down for a five-min. “purge” before a 100-sec. test firing. The F—2 rocket engine would be expected to bring astronauts back to earth from the moon. (Lee, Houston Post, 12/10/64)
James J. Kramer, research scientist at NASA Lewis Research Center, was named Project Manager of large (260-in.) solid-propellant rocket motor demonstration project at LRC. (Lewis News, 9/25/64, 1)
(1) Isolated locations and atmospheric dispersion, and “(2) Containment and neutralization. . . . “In . . . our nuclear propulsion activities, neither routine reactor development testing and flight operations nor conceivable accidents are expected to release sufficient radioactivity into the atmosphere to constitute a hazard to public health and safety. “In chemical propulsion, there are some propellants that are toxic prior to combustion and some rocket exhausts that contain toxic products. Fortunately, the NASA space program is primarily concerned with non-toxic propellants. In our largest program, the Apollo effort, for example, the giant Saturn I and V boosters both bum oxygen and kerosene in their first stages and oxygen and hydrogen in their upper stages. The Apollo spacecraft uses toxic nitrogen tetroxide and a mixture of hydrazine and unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine, but the quantity is small compared to that used hy the Saturn boosters . . . [and is not used] until the Apollo is well into space under normal operation. . . . “In most rocket testing and in vehicle launches, the rocket exhausts directly into the atmosphere. The very high exhaust temperature and velocity serve to rapidly disperse the exhaust products. In some rocket testing we must simulate the low pressures encountered at altitude. In these facilities, the rocket exhausts into a duct where there is an opportunity to scrub the products with water before discharging into the atmosphere. A unique facility, an example of the containment and treatment method for use in populated areas, was built at the Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, for rockets using fluorine. This facility, put into operation in 1956, was designed to handle hydrogen-fluorine rockets up to 20,000 pounds thrust. . . .” (Testimony)
38th anniversary of first liquid-fuel rocket flight—that of Dr. Robert H. Goddard whose rocket flew 184 ft. in 2y2 sec. at Auburn, Mass., in 1926.	(A&A/1915-60, 21)
Apollo spacecraft boilerplate command module and related equipment for first full-scale test flight of Apollo launch escape system arrived at White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., where it would be flight-tested with Little Joe II booster, (msc Release 64-39)	•
Rep. Olin Teague (D.-Tex.), chairman of Subcommittee on NASA Oversight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, held special hearings “to emphasize our interest in seeing that there is progress” in advanced propulsion systems. At opening session, representatives of four industrial firms recommended development of nuclear rocket power be accelerated and amplified. Officials testifying were George H. McLafferty, United Aircraft; William C. House, Aerojet-General; Dr. Woodrow E. Johnson, Westinghouse Astronuclear Laboratory; and Dr. Theodore B. Taylor, General Dynamics. (SBD, 3/19/64, 433; M&R, 3/23/64, 12)	....
First production J-2 rocket engine was accepted by nasa Marshall Space Flight Center from naa’s Rocketdyne Div., then turned over to Douglas Aircraft Co. for use in ground captive tests associated with Saturn S-IVB stage work. (Marshall Star, 5/6/64,1)
Test firing of Bell Aerosystems Co. 40,000-lb .-thrust fluorine-hydrogen rocket engine showed combustion efficiency exceeded 95 per cent of theoretically obtainable maximum. (Av. Wk., 4/27/64, 69)
Unnamed NASA official quoted 'by Howard Simons in Washington Post as saying there was “increasing evidence” that U.S.S.R. was building powerful new rocket booster. However, it was not used in launching three-man voskhod i spacecraft. U.S. Government officials were said to believe voskhod i launched by “old, reliable space boosters . . . mated into a multistage rocket.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 10/ 14/64)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., in successful flight to collect solar spectral data in the x-ray and ultraviolet regions, to test adaptation of solar spectrometer designed for Oso-C satellite, and to measure ionospheric electron density. Rocket reached 117.5-mi..altitude and data were collected in all experiments during the flight, (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, carried instrumented payload to 127-mi. altitude, in successful flight to obtain data on charged particles responsible for visual aurora and on those responsible for auroral absorption. Instrumentation included five charged-particle detectors, an aspect magnetometer, and an accelerometer, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
NASA launched Saturn I SA-5 from AMR in first successful Right test of both stages of the rocket. The 1.5-million-lb.-thrust S—I stage performed as planned, and the 90,000-lb.-thrust upper stage (S-IV) powered by six liquid-hydrogen RL-10 engines separated and burned properly for eight minutes, attaining orbital speed. The orbited body (spent S-IV stage, instrument unit, payload adapter, Jupiter nose cone, and 11,500 lbs. of sand ballast) weighed 37,700 lbs., nearly 20,000 lbs. of which was payload. As the first of the Block II Saturn I’s, SA-5 was first Right test of both Saturn stages and only the second flight test of a liquid-hydrogen powered rocket stage (see Centaur AC-2, Nov. 27, 1963). The five Block II Saturn I’s differ from Block I predecessors in that they have live upper stages, S—I propellant tanks are extended to provide 100,000 lbs. usable propeflant, and tail fins are added for stability. During the flight eight onboard motion picture cameras photographed various operations of the rocket and a TV camera provided real-time photographs of separation and ignition of S-IV stage. Shortly after S-I burnout, the motion picture cameras were ejected, impacting downrange where pararescue men recovered seven of them. This test of the world’s largest known rocket proved flight capability of Saturn I’s liquid-hydrogen, clustered-engine upper stage and demonstrated the vehicle’s capability to orbit 20,000-lb. payload. {Marshall Star, 2/5/64, 1; NYT, 1/30/64, 1; M&R, 2/3/64, 17-18)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket with upper atmosphere grenade experiment was launched from Wallops Island to 73-mi. altitude, and series of 12 grenades was ejected and detonated at intervals from 23-to 58-mi. altitude. Experiment was coordinated with similar grenade shot from Sweden’s Kronogard Range (81-mi. peak altitude) and with another experiment launched there on a Nike-Apache rocket to measure noctilucent clouds (77-mi. peak altitude). These launchings marked beginning of third series of grenade experiments conducted by NASA gsfc from Wallops Island, Fort Churchill Research Range, and Ascension Island, with Sweden joining the group for this series. The Fort Churchill and Ascension Island launchings were canceled because of weather conditions. (Wallops Release 64-59; NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA intended to award contracts for studying feasibility of improving the weight-lifting capacity of the Saturn V by more than one third in case the needs of the moon program dictated such an increase. Preliminary studies were to cost about $2 million. Proposals were being sought by msfc. With its 7.5-million-lb.-thrust booster, Saturn V would be able to launch either 120 tons into earth orbit or 45 tons to the moon. (AP, 6/12/64; NASA Release 64-140)
Second U.S. manned rocket flight was made 20 years ago today, when Northrop MX-324 flying wing was towed aloft and propelled by 200-lb.-thrust Aerojet rocket engine and flown for four minutes by test pilot Harry Crosby over Harper’s Dry Lake, Calif. (Clark, NYT, 7/5/64, 44; A&A, 1915-60, 47)
European Space Research Organization (ESRO) made first launching, a British Skylark sounding rocket, to altitude of 125 mi. from Salto di Quirra range in Sardinia. {NYT, 7/11/64, 5)
NASA and the Swedish Space Committee agreed to extend for another year their cooperative sounding rocket studies of the upper atmosphere and noctilucent clouds. Under the new agreement, the U.S. would provide the eight payloads and part of the ground equipment on a loan basis. Sweden would provide four of the eight sounding rockets and most of the ground instrumentation. Launching, payload recovery, and other support operations would be carried out by Swedish personnel. The joint studies began in 1961. (nasa Release 64-131)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ascension Island carried Univ. of Michigan instrumented payload to 98-mi. altitude to measure atmospheric pressure, temperature, density, and winds using the pitot-static probe. All objectives appeared to have been met. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with Univ. of Alaska instrumented payload attained 107-mi. altitude and obtained data on the visible aurora and on vacuum ultraviolet emissions. This information was supplemented by data from two electron particle detectors. Three photometers and two vacuum ultraviolet detectors also were included in die payload. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., with two cameras and two spectrographs to obtain spectra of nebulosities of certain star fields. Abnormal coning motion of the rocket and subsequent pitch-roll coupling caused the rocket to reach only 46-mi. altitude; and the attitude control system had no chance to point at the programed targets, so no experimental data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA announced Saturn contract modifications totaling $16,448,169 had been awarded to Chrysler Corp. Space Div., which was assembling two Saturn I first stages and 12 Saturn IB first stages at NASA Michoud Operations. One award was for expansion of Chrysler’s Saturn booster reliability testing program at Michoud. Other two awards were for increased engineering support at Marshall Space Flight Center and John F. Kennedy Space Center, NASA, (nasa Release 64-48)
NASA used an Aerobee rocket to launch two experiments from White Sands Missile Range. The experiments were to measure cosmic dust and electron densities in the upper atmosphere. (M&R, 12/21/64, 8) NASA also successfully launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket from White Sands, N. Mex., to peak altitude of 121 mi. Objective was to obtain data on the electron density distribution in the ionospheric D region by means of a radio propagation experiment, and to measure photoemission currents. (NASARpt. SRL)
It was announced that a new ultraviolet radiation spectrograph had been developed at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center in an effort to solve the mystery of “airglow.” The spectrograph would be carried aloft by a rocket and would be expected to reveal the constituents and mechanisms of the airglow. (nana, San Diego Union, 11/29/64)
NASA launched modified four-stage solid-propellant Javelin (Argo D-4) sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., carrying 120-lb. instrumented payload to 452 mi. Approximately 15 min. of data were telemetered to ground stations before fourth stage and payload impacted in the Atlantic Ocean 642 mi. from launch site. Primary purpose of flight was to test X—258 solid-propellant rocket motor, and secondary purpose was to conduct scientific investigations in the ionosphere. Test was part of GSFc’s development of the X—258 for NASA use in satellite launch vehicles and possibly in sounding rockets. (Wallops Release 64-36)
Space-General Corp. was building new five-ton rocket vehicle for usaf to use in testing recovery and re-entry parachutes at El Centro, Calif., Missiles and Rockets reported. Vehicle, called “Hi-Dive,” would be dropped from aircraft at 45,000 ft., slowed down by stabilization parachutes for firing of rockets to speed it up to mach 5. Test parachute would deploy at 30,000 ft. Delivery was expected next spring. (M&R, 9/14/64, 11)
usaf Titan III-A space booster was launched from Cape Kennedy and executed its first completely successful test flight. Midway in its first orbit, approximately 115 mi. above the earth, the 5,250-lb. “transtage” (a third stage with multiple start-stop-restart capability and ability to transfer a payload from one orbit to another) performed a 360° somersault to align the platform’s inertial guidance system gyroscopes. At the end of its first 100-min. orbit, explosive charges automatically kicked a 3,750-lb. cylinder-shaped dummy satellite into a separate orbit. After the Titan III-A firing, Brig. Gen. Joseph S. Bleymaier, project director, said: “The success confirmed our confidence in the system. We feel that the Air Force now has a real purpose in accomplishing space missions.” (AP, Balt. Sun, 12/11/64; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/11/64; AP, NYT, 12/11/64,20)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched within 10 min. of each other to provide data on evening atmospheric temperatures, winds, densities, and pressures from Ft. Churchill, Canada, and Wallops Island, Va., using explosive-grenade technique. Ft. Churchill rocket reached 77.5-mi. altitude, ejecting and detonating all 12 grenades. Wallops Island rocket reached 74.9-mi. altitude, ejecting and detonating all but the ninth grenade. (NASA Rpts. SRL)
The French Government reported two successful firings of its four-stage Berenice rocket, a mach-12 re-entry test vehicle, from the lie du Levant testing center in the Mediterranean. Tests were conducted by the Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales (ONERA). The Berenice project was designed to supply re-entry data for use in France’s strategic missile program. (Av. Wk., 12/7/64,25)
usaf launched unidentified satellite on Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb. ( hhn-4 8)
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from Wallops Island, Va., reached 96.5-mi. altitude in successful flight to measure brightness of stars in the ultraviolet. Experiment instrumentation for the NASA rocket was provided by Space Astronomy Laboratory of the Univ. of Wisconsin (NASA Rpt. srl)
Lewis Research Center announced awarding of three contracts: $3,117,387 contract for continued development of Centaur launch vehicle stage and $1,800,000 contract for Oao shroud system and Pt. Loma test program, both to General Dynamics/Astronautics; and $2,110,000 contract to Aerojet-General Corp. for continued development of M—1 rocket engine. (WSJ, 2/24/64)
NASA launched a Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., to an altitude of 78 mi., to test the prototype Nike-Cajun grenade payload produced by Zimney Corp. Instrumentation performance was satisfactory, except for failure of 12th grenade to explode. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Static test-firing of NASA-USAF 120-in.-diameter solid-fueled rocket motor was successful at Aerojet-General facility south of Miami, Fla. The motor produced about 600,000 lbs. of thrust, met its major objective of proving the design concepts, materials, and processes to be used in building 260-in.-diameter motor. Initiated by usaf in 1963, program was being directed by joint NASA—USAF team under existing contracts until the end of this fiscal year, with project management responsibility assigned to NASA Lewis Research Center, (lrc Release 64-87; Lewis News, 10/9/64, 1)
Thiokol Chemical Corp. Wasatch Div.’s 156-in. solid-propellant rocket motor was fired for 130 sec. and terminated within 0.5 sec. of predicted action time, although the last 30 sec, of the firing was completed without the plastic nozzle extension, which parted at the metal attachment flange. Severe erosion of the 5-ft. nozzle extension skirt, which was constructed entirely of ablative materials, weakened the structural integrity of the skirt and it blew off after about 100 sec. of motor burning. The firing continued normally after loss of the skirt with only about an 8% degradation in' thrust, which had peaked at just over 1.4 million lb. This was the first demonstration of thrust-vector-control using a movable nozzle. The rocket motor case used in this feasibility demonstration was undamaged, would be used in the follow-on 156-in. program which was awaiting dod approval. (Av. Wk., 12/21/64, 26)
In presentation to NATO’s agard, Frank E. Rom of NASA Lewis Research Center discussed fast and moderated low-power, lightweight nuclear reactors and their applications. Both one- and two-stage nuclear rockets had significantly superior performance over the best chemical rocket systems, Rom said. Further, he said, “The development of a low-power nuclear rocket would be the quickest and least costly way to achieve a practical nuclear powerplant for space use. Since early use of these smaller powerplants would be possible, operational and flight experience would aid in the development of larger nuclear rockets.” (lrc Release 64-88)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed Project Apollo before the Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space: “The overall time phasing ... is quite conservative. The Apollo spacecraft is being developed on a schedule four years longer than was needed for the Mercury spacecraft, and two years longer than was taken to produce the B-58 bomber. The Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles are being developed on a schedule two years longer than that of the Atlas missile, and a year longer than was required for the Titan. The total duration scheduled for the Apollo program is longer than that of any previous United States research and development effort. “The Apollo job, of course, is a big one and we will need all of the time allotted. . . . We found . . . that if the remaining six years of work [in Project Apollo] were stretched out over 12 years the total cost of the presently approved manned space (light program would increase by about 30 percent, or about six billion dollars. The economic considerations, therefore, support the maintenance of the present schedule. It is six billion dollars cheaper to continue on the course we are now following than to set out on a new course at this late date. . . . Among the benefits from Project Apollo is “the rapid advancement of United States capability in space—the ability to undertake whatever space activities the national interest may require. “There are seven major elements in this capability—people, industrial base, ground facilities, launch vehicles, spacecraft, operational know-how, and the ability to manage research and development. Together, they add up to space power, which provides this country with freedom of action in this new medium. . . .” (Text)
Neutron star, detected by x-ray instruments aboard sounding rocket launched last year from White Sands Missile Range, was discussed in paper delivered to National Academy of Sciences by nrl astrophysicist Dr. Herbert Friedman. The invisible star, located in constellation Scorpio, emits about 10 billion times more x-ray intensity than visible light, he said, and density of the star was probably about one billion tons to the cubic inch. Star’s surface was “so hot that practically all its luminosity is in the form of X-ray.” Another experiment to detect a suspected neutron star in the Crab Nebula was being planned for July 7. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/64; Haseltine, Wash. Post, 4/28/64; Sullivan, NYT, 4/28/64,19)	_	_
Fifteen years ago Eastern Test Range was activated at Long Range Proving Ground. Hq. were established at Patrick afb, then still the Banana River nas, some 18 mi. south of Cape Kennedy (then Cape Canaveral) rocket launch site. (A&A, 1915-60; AP, Tulsa Daily World, 10/1/64) October 2: NASA Manned Spacecraft Center conducted tests of astronauts floating in model Gemini spacecraft in the open seas, simulating astronauts awaiting recovery after splash-down from space flight. MSC project engineers considered the tests successful, despite the fact that the two astronauts became ill while the enclosed spacecraft pitched and rolled in the rough Gulf of Mexico waters. The astronauts considered the heat in the spacecraft to be cause of sickness. Tests were ended after 16 hrs. rather than lasting the planned 36 hrs. because of approaching Hurricane Hilda. Astronaut participants: Lt. Alan L. Bean (usn) and Lt. Cdr. James A. Lovell, Jr. (usn). (Maloney, Houston Post, 10/3/64)
Oran W. Nicks, Director of NASA Lunar and Planetary Programs, presented history and status of the Ranger project to the Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, detailing in particular the recommendations of NASA Board of Inquiry (Kelley Board) prior to RANGER VI and the Hilbum Board following RANGER VI. Hilbum report outlined: (1) design changes effected after analyses of RANGER VI flight data; (2) changes agreed to be desirable “if properly evaluated and qualified”; and (3) board recommendations “not entirely resolved by OSSA and JPL.” Notable change in the first category: NASA would closely monitor Ranger test program at JPL, would have to concur in spacecraft’s flightworthiness before it could be shipped. (Testimony) *	usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster combination from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., with unidentified satellite payload, (upi, Wash. Post, 4/28/64)
Details of Phoebus-powered nuclear rocket engine, as described by Harold B. Finger, Director of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, in series of lectures sponsored by NATO Advisory Group for Aeronautical Research and Development (agard) : The second-generation nuclear rocket would have 250,000-lb. thrust, using 5,000-megawatt Phoebus reactor. In clustered formation, the engines could launch manned spacecraft out of earth orbit on Mars trajectory. Ground-test firings of first-generation (low-power) Phoebus would be conducted in 1965-66, and tests of the heavier Phoebus reactor in 1967. (M&R, 10/12/64, 17)
NASA launched a Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Wallops Island to an altitude of 76.8, with grenade payload to obtain temperature, wind, density, and pressure measurements. Experiments were provided by Goddard Space Flight Center (csfc) scientists. Rocket performance was excellent but instrumentation performance was unsatisfactory since grenades did not eject or explode. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA Wallops Station launched a sounding rocket with instrumented payload to determine the effects of the ionosphere on delicate low-frequency radio radiation receiving sensors. A Nike-Apache rocket boosted the payload, designed to test instrumentation for possible use in the space astronomy program, to an altitude of 85 mi. Preliminary data indicated the experiment was successful. (Wallops Release 64^-57)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb with unidentified satellite. (M&R, 2/24/64,11)
Douglas Missile & Space Systems Div. preliminary study of a manned Mars mission, called Project Deimos, was described by James J. Haggerty, Jr., in Journal of the Armed Forces. Conducted by Douglas engineers J. L. Woodworth, G. A. Ursini, and Phil Bono, the study was based on six-man crew making 830-day round trip. Key to study was chemical-fuel rocket booster of 18,000,000-lb.-thrust power capable of placing 800,000	lbs. in earth orbit. Reusable booster would be fueled in orbit (by other reusable boosters making 10 trips) before sending spacecraft into Mars trajectory. (J/Armed Forces, 10/10/64, 8)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with Rice Univ. instrumented payload reached 94-mi. altitude in successful experiment to measure light intensities and particle fluxes. Rocket performed excellently and instrumentation—two photometers, two scintillators, three Geiger counters, and two magnetometers—functioned properly except for one scintillator, which failed at nose cone ejection. The Sammy II instrument package was designed and developed by Rice University’s Satellite Techniques Laboratory. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA launched Javelin (Argo D—4) sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., with 90-lb. payload containing instrumentation to measure low-level cosmic radio noise. The experiment was timed to coincide with passage of explorer xx (fixed frequency topside sounder satellite), which also was being used to investigate cosmic noise source at wavelengths which do not penetrate to earth because of shielding effect of ionosphere. The Javelin was sent up through the region of the satellite about 15 min. after explorer xx had passed through the area at about 650-mi. altitude. During the flight 18 min. of scientific data were telemetered from rocket payload, which reached 660-mi. altitude before impacting in the ocean 650 mi. from launch site. Preliminary analysis indicated flight results were good. (Wallops Release 64-77) October 23: Gemini Titan GT—2 spacecraft was mated with the Titan II launch vehicle at Launch Complex 19, Cape Kennedy, preparatory to unmanned ballistic flight later this year, (msc Roundup, 10/28/64, 3)
NASA launched an Aerobee rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., to a height of 95 mi. The payload, an inflatable paraglider equipped with mylar-sandwich-type meteoroid penetration sensors, was flown in a meteoroid shower to investigate meteoroid hazards in space. Experiment performed as planned, vehicle worked successfully, and payload was recovered. (M&R, 6/15/64, 10; NASA Release 64-141, 64-135)
ARIEL ii (UK—C) scientific earth satellite, the second in series of three U.S.—U.K. satellites, was orbited by NASA Scout booster launched from Wallops Island, Va. Initial orbital data: 843-mi. apogee, 180-mi. perigee, 101-min. period, and 52° inclination to the equator. Under overall administrative responsibility of the British Office of the Minister for Science, the three onboard experiments were designed and built by the U.K. to measure vertical distribution of ozone in the upper atmosphere, measure galactic Tadio noise, and detect micrometeoroids encountered by the satellite. The experiments were chosen by the British National Committee on Space Research, chaired by Sir Harrie Massey, in consultation with NASA. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center built and tested the spacecraft and contracted with Westinghouse Electric Corp. for subsystems. (Wallops Release 64-30; NASA Release 64-56)
A Delta rocket’s third-stage motor (X—248) inexplicably ignited in checkout building at Cape Kennedy, burning 11 engineers and technicians, three critically. The rocket stage had just been mated with Orbiting Solar Observatory (Oso) in preparation for prelaunch spin testing, when the motor suddenly ignited, rose from the alignment stand, hit the ceiling knocking off the Oso, and landed in a far corner. NASA and usaf immediately began investigating the cause of the ignition, usaf said this was the “first serious incident of its kind in 14 years of operations and over 1,400 missile launchings” at the Cape. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star 4/14/64; AP, Wash. Post, 4/15/64; Goddard News, 4/20/64, 3; Marshall Star, 4/29/64,1,3)
A Thor-Agena D booster was used by USAF to launch an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (M&R, 11/23/64, 8 HHN-48)
nasa launched second modified Areas sounding rocket with white rat as part of the payload, the rocket carrying the rodent to 21.4mi. altitude where payload separated from booster and parachuted to ocean surface. Payload was recovered by helicopter a few minutes later about 27.8 mi. from Wallops Island, Va., launch site. Total flight time was 24.5 min. Purpose of this launch and the previous one Sept. 3 was to demonstrate feasibility of using Areas to familiarize scientists with technological problems associated with space flight studies on small animals. (Wallops Release 64-67)
NASA awarded $158, 466,800 contract to North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div. for production of 76 F-l rocket engines for the Saturn V launch vehicle. The action defined and detailed the procurement action initiated with letter contract in June 1962. Delivery of static-test engines to NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had already begun, and the first flight F-l would arrive at msfc in November, (nasa Release 6448; Marshall Star, 4/1/64,1)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D space booster from WTR with undisclosed satellite payload. ( hhn—4 8 )
NASA investigative committee recommended series of tests to determine whether static electricity caused accidental ignition of Delta rocket motor in the Spin Test Facility at Cape Kennedy last April 14. In its preliminary report, the fact-finding committee said there were four possible causes for the ignition: heat, shock, outside radio signals, and electrical impulse. The first three possibilities seemed unlikely, but they would be studied further. Committee considered it “possible, however, that static electricity could have built up in such a way as to cause ignition.” Until the committee completed its study and made its fined report, NASA would not fly the X—248 motor. (NASA Release 64-98; KSC Release 55-64)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with French sodium-vapor payload was launched from India’s Thumba Range to about 192-km. altitude (about 119 mi.). Two ground camera stations photographed sodium vapor released from the rocket to obtain measurements of atmospheric winds, turbulence, and diffusivity. (nasa Rpt. SRl)
Reported that John Stack of Republic Aviation believed U.S.S.R. probably would beat the West with supersonic transport. Stack revealed Soviets had developed 1,200-mph delta-wing bomber, “the Bounder,” which could quickly be converted into transport “because the Soviets have lower performance standards than the U.S. for their aircraft and are not worried about the effects of sonic booms on their cities.” (Parade, 5/31/64) During May: Sylvania Electric Products, Inc., recommended to NASA that a data collection satellite system could be provided by a single satellite in polar orbit between 500 and 700 n. mi. altitudes. Satellite would collect meteorological and oceanographic data from about 1,200 sensors per day, store the information on magnetic tape, then relay it upon command to ground station. Sylvania’s study was performed under $97,000 contract awarded last year by NASA. (M&R, 6/1/64, 11; SBD, 5/13/64, 68) . During May: Sert I (space electric rocket test) payload began final series of tests in large vacuum tank at NASA Lewis Research Center, in preparation for space flight later this summer. (Lewis News, 6/5/64, 2)
After two previous failures, usaf successfully launched four-stage, solidfuel Athena missile. Rocket was fired from Green River, Utah, on estimated 15-min., 475-mi, flight to White Sands, N. Mex., carrying one of series of subscale experimental re-entry vehicles being tested as part of program to develop advanced re-entry vehicles for space travel and ICBm’s. No other details of flight were given. (AP, Hartford Courant, 7/9/64)
First industry-produced Saturn booster (S-I) arrived at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center after nine-day barge journey from Michoud Operations. To be used on SA-8, the booster was undergoing static firings and other tests at MSFC before being sent to Cape Kennedy where it would be launched. {Marshall Star, 4/29/64,1)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D.-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said Rift program should be reactivated because “mechanical difficulties which impeded early work on the nuclear propulsion reactor for space have largely been overcome.” He said success of recent nuclear reactor test for Nerva strengthened his view that NASA and AEC receive funds in the coming fiscal year “so that we can develop in a properly phased development program an operational nuclear propelled rocket.” He pointed out the need for “proper consideration to nuclear energy in planning new space missions. It is obvious that this is a necessary step and one that will require restoration of target dates for an actual flight test of a nuclear rocket system.” (SBD, 10/5/64, 179; M&R, 10/12/64, 17)
Titan II rocket booster for first manned Gemini space flight (GT-3) was turned over to the Government in ceremonies at Martin Co.’s Baltimore plant. Charles W. Mathews, Gemini project manager of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said parachute landing system and spacecraft’s ejection seats were all that remained to 'be flight-qualified, and GT-3 was still planned for first quarter of 1965. Mathews disclosed msc had been experimenting for more than a year with braking rockets to enable manned Gemini spacecraft to land on land instead of water. Para-sail also would be used in such a landing. Among other officials present were GT-3 crewmen, Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom and John Young. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/29/64; Witkin, NYT, 10/29/64)
NASA successfully launched a Javelin sounding rocket from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to an altitude of 444 mi., with instrumented payload to measure the earth’s geomagnetic field from the ground to Javelin peak altitude. Data from this experiment would be combined with that obtained from a Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched 90 sec. earlier. (NASA Rpt. srl)
USAF launched Titan II rocket from AMR on successful 5,000-mi. flight to test its ability to function both as an icbm and as booster for Project Gemini manned spacecraft. The Titan II carried Gemini malfunction detection system and damping device to counteract vibrations. (M&R, 1/20/64, 11)
General Dynamics/Convair shipped Little Joe II booster to White Sands Missile Range, where it would be used later this year to launch Apollo boilerplate spacecraft in test of the launch escape system, (msc Roundup, 2/19/64, 1)
Four-stage Javelin (Argo D-4) rocket vehicle was launched at 12:01 a.m. est from Wallops Station, Va., carrying 120-lb. instrumented payload to 587.22-mi. altitude. Payload experiments: magnetic mass spectrometer to identify ions in upper atmosphere and measure their distribution; Lyman-alpha radiation experiment to determine spatial variation of atomic hydrogen in atmosphere; and experiment to measure altitude distribution and intensity of night airglow from atomic oxygen. Impact occurred 727 mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean. Data were telemetered to ground stations and no recovery operation was attempted. Experiment was designed and built by E. 0. Hulburt Center for Space Research at U.S. Naval Research Laboratory and flown in cooperation with NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 64-6)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, nasc Executive Secretary, delivered keynote address at the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner. He compared U.S. and Soviet space accomplishments:	“1. As regards that key feature of booster power, the Soviets are ahead on an operational basis, although we are moving up rapidly, having attained the current weight-lifting record on a test shot by the Saturn I. “2. We have placed almost four times as many payloads into earth orbit, while they continue each year to increase their absolute lead in total weight of net payloads orbited. “3. Our numerical progress in orbiting payloads is impressive. Last year alone, the U.S. put more payloads into earth orbit than the USSR has since Sputnik I in 1957. “4. The increasing reliability of our launchings is also impressive. During the past three years, we placed successfully into earth orbit 82% of all the payloads which we attempted to put there. The Soviet record, while not identical, is comparable. “5. The Soviet heavy Vostok class of vehicle has accumulated some 1600 orbits, as compared with 37 for our smaller Mercury. . . . “6. The Soviets have devoted more of their attention to far-out space than we. have. As a percentage of total space launching attempts, they have devoted five times as much effort to escape-missions to the moon and planets as we have. The opposite is true as to near-earth orbits, in which the U.S. emphasis has been much greater than theirs. “7. Both countries have made impressive strides in accumulating scientific data about space. We may even be ahead in this regard, but it is not safe to assume so. “8. The U.S. is clearly ahead in world-wide sharing of space research in cooperative programs, and in direct application of space technology to practical use in communications, weather reporting, geodesy, and navigation. “In summary, we have made enormous gains in the past few years in the race with our able and aggressive competitor. “. . .1 want to emphasize that the Soviets have a strong orderly program, with every indication that it is continuing vigorously, apparently unaffected by adverse economic factors in their country. Wishful thinking to the contrary, we dare not slow down unless we are willing to pay the terrific price of second place. . . .” (Text)
The day after RANGER vn’s historic photographs of the moon climaxed a “textbook flight,” President Johnson was briefed on the mission by NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell and Jet Propulsion Laboratory Director Dr. William H. Pickering. Discussing the lunar surface photographs, Dr. Newell said the principal investigators (Dr. Gerard Kuiper and Dr. Eugene M. Shoemaker) had tentatively concluded that “because there exists such sharp little craters here on the surface, this indicates that there is not a deep layer of dust in this area. There would be expected to be a layer of dust on the lunar surface . . . there has been much speculation about how deep it would be. . . . Some people had speculated as much as a thousand feet. Many as much as 30 or 40 feet. Others had said no, it can’t be. And those who said no, it can’t be, Dr. Shoemaker now thinks were right. At least as far as this area is concerned.” Asked by the President whether the ranger VII success confirmed “that you folks had known what you were doing,” Dr. Pickering replied: “Yes, I think it does. “First of all, it confirms we know what we are doing technically when we design something to do this job. Secondly, that as far as the Apollo Program is concerned, it confirms that the basic assumptions that they were making about the sort of surface we are going to have to land on is probably correct.” The President asked, “What similar achievements, scientific achievements, can be compared to this?” and Dr. Newell replied: “Dr. Kuiper was asked this question yesterday. He stated he felt this was comparable to the photographing of the sun in the ultraviolet light by the Naval Research Laboratory a number of years ago. “Someone else said that this amounts to a big jump in lunar science, equivalent to the jump that occurred when Galileo turned the telescope on the heavens.” President Johnson said: “If we were to conclude—if I were to conclude, if the Budget were to conclude, or if the American people should conclude—that we want to effect a savings here of a few billion dollars, would it he your opinion, Doctor [Pickering], that we would be pennywise and pound-foolish?” Dr. Pickering replied: “It would indeed, sir, because I believe that this is truly an investment not only which is needed to demonstrate our leadership in the relatively near future, but it is a long-term investment for the future. ” (NASA Transcript)
The European Space Research Organization (esro) Council approved its program for 1965, which would include setting up tracking and telemeasuring stations in Belgium, the Falkland Islands, and Alaska. The program would also include 41 experiments during 28 rocket firings, four experiments with the polar ionospheric satellite Esro 1 to be fired in September, and six experiments with the Esro 2 satellite for the study of cosmic rays. Payment of $17.2 million was voted and contracts worth $34.6 million were authorized. (AP, NYT, 11/29/64, 20)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket with Johns Hopkins Univ. instrumented payload was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to 100mi. altitude. Rocket carried spectrophotometric instrumentation which measured absolute intensity of certain spectral features in the far ultraviolet region of the airglow during an aurora. Although rocket did not reach predicted 157-mi. altitude, the experiment provided general confirmation of the only previous experiment in that region, and with much higher resolution, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
Of the formerly operational Thor missiles that were being converted to space missions, nsaf spokesman said: “This program has proved that it is possible to take a complex vehicle that was designed as a weapon and convert it to peaceful uses at a substantial saving and without sacrificing reliability. We can expect that there will be more than this.” afssd estimated converted booster cost up to $150,000 less than new Thor booster. (M&R, 4/6/64, 31)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb said in speech to Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association, Washington: “At the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, it has been estimated that about 40 percent of our booster costs, 70 percent of our major spacecraft dollars, and 90 percent of our tracking and data acquisition funds go into electronics. Unfortunately, as Dr. Albert Kelley . . . recently pointed out in this same context, a vast majority of our flight failures, not to mention flight delays, arise from electronic failures. Success in this area is obviously a major factor in overall mission accomplishment. . . . “In space activity the United States is now at the mid-point of a 10-year program. It might be said, in a sense not entirely figurative, that we have reached the ‘mid-course maneuver point.’ Just as the Mariner II Venus fly-by mission would have missed by almost a quarter of a million miles instead of coming within 22,000-mile target area, we can fail to (achieve our full potential if we do not seize every opportunity to correct our course as we go along. . . .” (Text)
Army Corps of Engineers awarded two NASA contracts for work to be performed at NASA Mississippi Test Facility: $3,801,146 contract to Chaney and James Construction Co., Inc., for construction of booster storage building, RP-1 dock, and booster transfer dock; and $2,401,542 contract to Farrell Construction Co. for construction of main canal. (dod Release 128-64)
Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), Apollo program deputy director in NASA Hq. since last January, was appointed director of the Apollo program. NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller had been acting Apollo director for the past year. / (nasa Release 64-267)
usaf launched Titan III-A space booster from Cape Kennedy, and the first two stages burned perfectly; however, because transtage engines shut down prematurely, the Titan III—A fell slightly short of orbiting its 3,750-lb. dummy lead payload. AFSc’s Brig Gen. Joseph Bleymaier said preliminary investigation showed malfunction of onboard helium pressure valve was to blame for the shortened burn time from programed 406 sec. to about 391 sec. He also said the test was 95% successful—all primary objectives and most secondary objectives had been met. (dod Release 625-64; M&R, 9/7/64,11; Av. Wk., 9/7/64, 32)
NASA postponed indefinitely the launch of Ranger 7 lunar probe. New launch date would depend on further study of failure of ranger vi’s TV camera system before impacting the moon Feb. 2. nasa-jpl investigators still were concentrating on unscheduled turnon of telemetry from TV system which occurred at about same time as separation of Atlas booster engines, (nasa Release 64-38)
Rebuilt X-15 No. 2 was rolled out of North American Aviation, Inc.', facility at Los Angeles. Damaged in landing at Mud Lake, Nev., in Nov. 1962, the X-15 had been modified to increase its top speed by nearly one third. The rebuilt rocket research aircraft would be capable of short bursts of flight at mach 8—more than 5,300 mph. It would resume test flights later this year. (N.Y. Her. Trib., 2/16/64; AP, Wash. Post, 2/16/64; frc X-Press, 2/20/64,1)
NASA-modified Areas sounding rocket, launched at Wallops Island, Va., carried white rat in specially designed, instrumented payload compartment in nose cone of the rocket to 114,000-ft. altitude, where the payload separated from the booster, a parachute deployed, and the container floated down to the surface of the ocean. Package was recovered by helicopter a few minutes later about 20 mi. offshore, and the rat was returned to NASA Wallops Station for observation and analysis. During the flight, biomedical data such as heartbeat and body temperature of the rat were telemetered to ground stations. Launch was part of Bio-Space Technology Training Program. (Wallops Release 64—65)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island, Va., in coordination with Nike-Apache launch at Ascension Island, third set in current NASA series to obtain data on high-altitude winds and atmospheric temperatures. A correlated launch from Ft. Churchill, Canada, was postponed due to sound interference problems. The Wallops experiment was timed to coincide with the annual east-to-west “warming trend”, was to measure its effects on the upper atmosphere. The experiments were designed to obtain measurements at altitudes ranging up to 55 mi. The Wallops experiment used grenade payload; for the Ascension experiment, the grenade payload was replaced with pitot-static probe to measure densities, pressures, and temperatures. The series was being conducted for NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 64-12; nasa Rpt. srl)
mariner ill (Mars 64) was launched into interplanetary orbit from Cape Kennedy with an Atlas-Agena D launch vehicle, but spacecraft communications failed when fairing did not jettison, preventing solar panel deployment. The Agena stage pushed the mariner iii into a parking orbit around the earth and coasted to the proper position for injection into a Mars trajectory. The Agena again ignited 32 min. after launching and sent the spacecraft toward Mars. Tracking data indicated that the second-stage Agena D booster shut down four seconds early on the second burn, mariner ill’s four solar panels, designed to use power from the sun to recharge the spacecraft’s batteries, were prevented from deploying by failure of nose fairing to jettison. Further, the spacecraft did not align itself properly with the sun so that the communications antennas would be properly pointed. In addition to TV equipment for taking pictures of the Martian surface, mariner in carried instruments to study radiation, space dust, and magnetic forces near Mars and in unmapped space after swinging past the planet. This launch marked the first use of the USAF’s new Agena D upper stage and also the first U.S. space mission requiring a second igniting of the Agena D. (nasa Releases 266, 288; ksc Release 20664; msc Roundup, 11/11/64, 7; Sullivan, NYT, 11/6/64, 16; Chic. Trib., 11/6/64; Balt.Sun, 11/6/64,1; hhn-48)
Members of Local 1685, United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America, ended a 24-hr. strike at the Merritt Island Launch Area (mila) and nearby Patrick AFB facilities. The walkout had tied up $246 million in construction for space projects, including construction on an assembly building for the Saturn V lunar rocket, and work at the Titan III and Saturn IB launch areas. Carpenters had protested the use of nonunion workers by the Akwa-Downey Construction Co., a subcontractor on one of the projects. It was the fourth major labor difficulty at NASA Kennedy Space Center in 1964. (upi, NYT, 12/18/64, 39 and 12/19/64, 48; Chic. Trib., 12/18/64) During the eclipse, extensive heat-map measurements of the lunar surface were made from Egypt by team of Boeing Scientific Research Laboratories scientists. Preliminary analysis of their measurements showed hundreds of “hot spots,” or surface temperature anomalies, on the lunar surface, although the experimenters had expected to find only a few dozen. The experimenters made 12 20-min. scans of the moon during the eclipse, in both the visual and infrared portions of the spectrum. Measurements were made at El Kottamia Observatory, 50 mi. east of Cairo, at invitation of United Arab Republic Astronomical Service. (M&R, 1/4/65, 21; NYT, 12/22/64.; M&R, 1/18/65, 28)
NASA launched re-entry heating experiment aboard Scout booster at 2:06 a.m. edt from Wallops Island, Va., in test of low-density charring ablator materials’ ability to withstand intense heat during spacecraft re-entry into earth’s atmosphere. In addition to the four stages of the Scout launch vehicle, 17-in. spherical rocket was attached to the payload as velocity package. First two Scout stages lofted remainder of the vehicle to altitude of about 130 mi.; then the vehicle arced over in descending path and remaining stages fired the payload back into the atmosphere, attaining maximum speed of about 19,500 mph. Payload impacted about 1,265 mi. downrange after 11-min. flight. No attempt was made to recover it. Experiment was devised by NASA Langley Research Center scientists. (Wallops Release 64-62; NASA Release 64-202)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson, Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said in Pageant article: “Our [U.S.] drive since Sputnik I has led skeptics to call the manned lunar program only a race to beat Russia. This is a fallacy. The moon is not an advantageous spot from which to shoot nuclear-tipped missiles. We already have rockets that can hit the Soviet Union’s interior in 20 minutes. Polaris missiles can hit Russia in one or two minutes, maybe less. It would take two and a half to three days for a moon-based rocket to reach Russia. “But the Soviet Union’s design to rule the world makes it essential that we reach the moon. This goal isn’t, as skeptics argue, just a couple of weeks of good publicity. Sure, we have a signed United Nations agreement forbidding any nation from claiming the moon or space as a colony. But Russian domination of the moon would equate, in world opinion, with the dominance of all space. We can’t afford that false impression. The nation that retains space superiority holds an immeasurable psychological advantage. Space feats are an index of a country’s strength. If Russians were the only earthmen on the moon, you’d hear people around the world saying, ‘If they can do that, no telling what they can do to us.’ ” (Pageant, 7/64) During July: It was reported that nine payloads had been chosen for flight aboard the research and development launches of the USAF Titan III. Five of the experiments were said to be experimental communications satellites built by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, and the sixth a backup communications satellite from Lincoln Lab. The remaining three were scientific satellites using the modified Arents spacecraft shell. To avoid confusion with the defunct Arents program, the latter spacecraft were to be called Orbiting Vehicle 2 (OV-2). (M&R, 8/3/64, 8)
Apollo spacecraft (BP-23) was subjected to simulated catastrophic failure of its launch vehicle in a successful test of the ahort escape system at White Sands, N. Mex. Apollo command and service boilerplate modules were boosted on a Little Joe II launch vehicle to the region of maximum dynamic pressure at 29,000-ft. altitude and launch vehicle failure was simulated. The escape vehicle, mated to the spacecraft by a connecting tower, yanked the Apollo free of Little Joe and carried it almost two miles higher. The Little Joe rocket fell to earth; the Apollo modules were returned gently to the ground by three 88-ft. parachutes. This was the third successful test of functioning of the 33-ft. launch escape tower designed to jettison the command module and three Apollo astronauts to safety in an ahort before or during the launch phase of a Saturn V mission. It was the first test of the boost-protective cover subsystem, a contoured shell fitting over the command module and designed to protect the docking mechanism of Lunar Excursion Module (lem) from excessive heating during high temperatures of first-stage flight. It also protected command module windows from exhaust of the launch escape motor, (nasa Release 64-299)
USAF Titan III solid-fuel rocket motor was fired in static test at United Technology Center’s Coyote, Calif., test facilities. A joint in the nozzle skirt failed during last 10 sec. of the 112-sec. test, causing a fire that did only minor damage to the test stand, but all test objectives were met. afsc Space Systems Div. Deputy Chief of Staff for Manned Spaceflight Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier termed the test an absolute success. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/7/64; M&R, 8/16/64, 8)
Maj. Robert Rushworth (usaf) flew X—15 No. 2 to 83,000-ft. altitude and 2,966-mph speed (mach 4.49). Engine of the rocket research aircraft burned 76 sec. This was the first flight of the rebuilt No. 2 aircraft, and performance was successful, (nasa X-15 Proj. Off.)
Soviet newspaper Trud science writer Leonid Byshko said flight to the moon was “one of the most immediate problems of cosmonautics.” After lunar flight, he said, next goal would be flights to other planets in the solar system. “For this purpose, new rocket carriers based on atomic energy are needed. . . . There are no difficulties in principle for creating such nuclear rockets. Only a certain time is required for designing, building and testing.” (upi, Wash. Post, 10/16/64)
Dr. Alexander H. Flax, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development, addressed aiaa in Cleveland: “. . . the number of new systems which can be fully developed is limited. The future, on the other hand, is highly uncertain. The inevitable result ... is that the number of major weapon systems being developed for the inventory is relatively small. The number of concepts and potential weapon systems being explored in other categories of r&d are very large but still not all inclusive. The approach which we are taking to assure the availability of proven technology and prototypes of critical system elements is through exploratory and advanced development programs; this does not usually include full vehicle or system prototypes although in some cases it may. By working on the critical technical, cost or operational problems of a potential new system intensively while ignoring the other elements of the system, we are placing ourselves in a better position to decide to buy that system and to get it in reasonable time, in the event that either our own national policy, the international situation (especially the actions of our adversaries), or obsolescence arising from new technological developments in counterweapons make necessary the rapid acquisition of a new system, and we are doing this at considerably lower cost than the cost of developing all the candidate systems even if these developments were at a very low rate. For example research and exploratory development on high energy fuels for both solids and liquids support potential needs both for larger and improved ICBMs and for new space boosters. The 120" and 156" solid rocket under development by the Air Force and the 260" solids being supported by NASA provide at the prototype level the necessary components of much larger ballistic missile and space launch vehicle systems over a wide range of payload capacities. The application of the 156" solid technology to a new missile in the Minuteman tradition would provide a payload capability many times that of Minuteman. Studies are under way to examine the payoffs and tradeoffs relating to the application of high energy fuels to a new upper stage suitable for application to both dod and NASA launch vehicles. The aim of these programs is to reduce the degree of uncertainty and the element of risk which would he associated with the decision to proceed with such systems. Yet there is no assurance that these developments will, in fact, be used in their present form. They may simply be stepping stones to a later generation of propulsion systems in advanced development. The coupling of requirements for economy, reliability and commonality has led to the dictum for technical advances that many are called, but few are chosen. . . .” (Text, dod Release 361—64)
An experiment designed by youthful rocket scientists ended in tragedy when “Gus,” a two-ounce mouse, was killed in a mishap. Several youths from Schenectady had designed the rocket, which was to carry Gus to an altitude of 6,000 ft. The rocket went off at an angle upon launch and smashed into the ground killing its passenger. The launch, which had been protested by local humane societies, was viewed by a crowd of 400. (AP, L.A. Herald Examiner, 7/19/64)
NASA and esro announced signing Memorandum of Understanding for project involving two scientific satellites. Under the agreement, nasa would launch into orbit two satellites, esro l and esro 2, for the nine-nation West European organization. Both satellites would be launched on NASA Scout rocket boosters into near-polar eccentric orbits and were tentatively scheduled during 1967 from Western Test Range. (nasa Release 64-178)
Dr Willy Ley predicted at Texas A&M Univ. that U.S.S.R. would attempt manned orbital flight to the moon during 1964. He did not believe such a flight would “significantly advance the time of an actual landing . . . [because] that would take great strides in new rocket power.” He believed U.S. had a “50-50 chance of being the first to get there.” (Maloney, Houston Post, 2/14/64)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched from White Sands, N. Mex., to 119-mi. altitude in successful flight to collect data on celestial x-ray sources. American Science and Engineering, Inc., provided payload instrumentation, which included four Geiger counters, one photoelectric detector, two scintillation counters, and two star sensors. Rocket and instrumentation performance were considered good. This was the 500th launch of an Aerobee liquid-propelled sounding rocket, the booster that carried first U.S. rhesus monkeys into space on high-altitude flights in 1951 and 1952. Aerobee was outgrowth of rocket program begun in 1946 by what is now Aerojet-General Corp., which was then engaged in jet-assisted take-off (Jato) research. (NASA Rpt. SRL; Wash. Eve. Star, 10/28/64)
NASA and India’s Dept, of Atomic Energy announced they were jointly conducting series of four sounding rocket launchings from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station to investigate equatorial electro jet, electric current flowing along earth’s magnetic equator at about 60-mi. altitude. Thumba range is located near southwestern tip of India, on the magnetic equator. In the four electrojet experiments, India’s Dept, of Atomic Energy provides launching site and supporting facilities; personnel for sounding rocket launch operations, acquisition of data and data analysis; and supporting ground magnetometer and meteorological observations. NASA provides Nike-Apache rockets, loans the launcher, telemetry equipment, and supplementary magnetometers. Indian launch and telemetry personnel were trained by NASA. Rocket magnetometer was built by Univ. of New Hampshire through NASA contract. (nasa Release 64-19)
Four Soviet parachutists at world parachute jumping championships, Leutkirch, West Germany, set new world record for men’s team jumping from 1,000 meters, landing an average of 66.5 centimeters from center of target. Previous world record of 89.5 centimeters was set two days earlier by U.S. team. (Reuters, NYT, 8/12/64,35) Nike-Cajun launched from Ft. Churchill reached 77.5-mi. altitude with 12 grenades ejecting and detonating during rocket ascent. Ground-based microphone array recorded time and direction of detonation sounds’ arrivals to obtain atmospheric temperature, wind, density, and pressure data. Nike-Cajun launched from Wallops Island ejected 12 grenades during its ascent to 72-mi. altitude, with similar ground-based microphone array to obtain data. Nike-Apache launched from Kronogard reached 75.5-mi. altitude with micrometeoroid-particle-sampling payload. Although sampling cans did not seal completely, preliminary evaluation indicated that data would be recovered. Experiment was cooperative effort of usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories and Meteorological Institute of Stockholm Univ. Nike-Cajun launched from Kronogard, with grenade payload functioned properly, but no usable data were obtained because of loss of Dovap near Cajun ignition. For same reason, peak altitude was unknown. (nasa Rpts. srl)
Rep. Joseph M. Montoya (D.—N. Mex.) said Aug. 28 test of Kiwi B-4A nuclear reactor was “the culmination of seven previous tests—first begun in 1959. The Kiwi project has had as its basic objective the development of basic graphite nuclear rocket technology. With the completion of the Kiwi project, Los Alamos [Scientific Laboratory] will be directing its future nuclear rocket efforts to development of advanced, higher power, graphite reactor technology under the project name, Phoebus. . . . “In a great sense the groundwork for nuclear space propulsion has been laid through the success of the Kiwi project. We are on the brink of witnessing a great event—the beginnings of the nuclear space age. We might even compare the success of the Kiwi project in the space age with the combustible engine and its profound effect on the motorcar industry. “It is altogether fitting that this revolutionary accomplishment in the space age took place in Los Alamos—the Kitty Hawk of the nuclear age. And the birthplace of the atomic-bomb. . . .” (CR, 9/16/64, A4719-20)
NASA reported, that a magnetometer hammer developed at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to remove distortions from rocket fuel tank “gore segments” had salvaged rocket hardware valued in the millions of dollars. (nasa Release 64-328)
Seven noctilucent clouds visible in southwest U.S. in past six months probably were caused by pmr rocket launchings, according to Dr. Aden B. Meinel and Carolyn P. Meinel in Science magazine. The Meinels, astronomers at Univ. of Arizona’s Stewart Observatory (Tucson), described cloud appearing Nov. 2 at mean altitude of 35 mi. By measuring speed and direction of cloud’s drift, Meinels traced it back to vicinity of pmr, j ust as they had traced 44-mi. altitude cloud of June 15. Dr. Meinel and colleagues had described the clouds in Science last September, tentatively linking the June 15 cloud to Scout launching at pmr. Now, despite fact that no firing was announced for Nov. 2, Meinels concluded that “the coincidence of the clouds of June 15 and 2 November 1963 with a drift vector indicating origin from the Pacific Missile Range would appear to remove the probability of a fortuitous occurrence that could be argued from one cloud alone.” (Science, 1/3/64, CSM, 1/6/64)	_
President Johnson congratulated American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) on its first annual meeting and technical display, held June 29-July 2, Washington. He said: “I am particularly pleased that you have selected this occasion to honor the highly respected and capable Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.” (aiaa Booster, 7/2/64, 1)
India’s Dept, of Atomic Energy and NASA announced signing memorandum of understanding for Indian-U.S. cooperation in meteorological sounding rocket program. Data gathered in the program would contribute to International Indian Ocean Expedition, a continuation of research begun during igy, concentrating on weather and atmospheric conditions related to the Indian Ocean area. Under the agreement, India Dept, of Atomic Energy would provide, transport, assemble, and launch Loki-Dart sounding rockets and payloads; operate the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Range; and coordinate launchings with those of other countries in International Indian Ocean Expedition. NASA would lend radar equipment, train Indian personnel, and provide technical advice. (NASA Release 64-39)
usn commissioned the guided missile ship Norton Sound at Baltimore, Md. For 12 years previously Norton Sound had served as a seagoing test platform for various missile systems, particularly for numerous sounding rocket and “Rockoon” launches, (dod Release 468-64)
European Space Research Organization launched second British Skylark sounding rocket with scientific payload to altitude of 125 mi. from Salto di Quirra range in Sardinia. This launch and identical one the previous day were initial attempts of the 10-nation organization. (NYT, 7/11/64, 5)	_	_
usaf launched an unidentified satellite aboard a Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb, Calif. (M&R, 6/15/64,10)
The second of two dod satellites, reported by press sources to be one of two Nuclear Radiation Detection Satellites, maneuvered into station 65,000 mi. above the earth. On signal from the ground a rocket motor aboard the satellite fired, moving it from an eccentric orbit with an apogee of 65,000 mi. into a circular orbit at that altitude. The motor aboard the companion satellite, boosted by the same launch vehicle, was fired successfully on July 17. (AP, NYT, 7/20/64; Wash. Post, 7/20/64)
NASA Kennedy Space Center awarded a $1.5-million contract to Monitor Systems, Inc., of Fort Washington, Pa., for two digital telemetry systems to be installed at ksc’s Central Instrumentation Facility on Merritt Island. The systems would be used as intermediate data converters and processors during Apollo/Saturn V rocket launches from Merritt Island, (ksc Release 220-64)
Dr. Werner R. Kirchner, vice-president of Aerojet-General and director of Solid Rocket Operations, announced the firing of a small solid propellant motor which successfully started and stopped more than six times. In the test, Aerojet used a 4-in. motor with 6 lbs. of propellant. (M&R, 11/23/64,9)
James J. Haggerty, Jr., space editor of Journal of the Armed Forces, discussed the Agena rocket stage, calling it “a highly reliable, extremely versatile piece of hardware which serves triple duty as an orbital injection vehicle for satellites, as an upper stage booster for lunar and planetary probes, and as a spacecraft. From the standpoint of frequency of usage, Agena is far ahead of the field. In the seven years since Sputnik I went up, there have been about 290 spacecraft sent into earth orbit or deep space trajectory; Agena, in various versions, has been in on 142 of them—almost half. It is currently being employed at the rate of about 30 shoots a year and it will figure in some very important upcoming projects. . . Haggerty described Agena contributions, notably its remarkable accuracy in sending ranger vii on its course to the moon. (J/Armed Forces, 10/3/64, 8)
Placing a 100-in. telescope in orbit by 1975-1980 for studying the stars was “not an unreasonable goal,” Dr. Leo Goldberg told iau in Hamburg. The Harvard Univ. astronomer summed up arguments for telescope in space by saying that he could not agree with those “who prefer to look at the universe through a hazy, dirty, semi-opaque atmosphere.” Cost of such a project could be justified, he said, only if expected lifetime of such an instrument was long. However, he cited Soviet and U.S. progress toward space rendezvous techniques and expected increases in rocket booster power, and said: “The future looks terribly exciting.” (Sullivan, NYT, 9/1/64)
Fourth stage of four-stage Blue Scout rocket failed to ignite after USAF launch from Cape Kennedy. The booster was to have sent a USAF scientific probe 23,000 mi. into space to study earth’s magnetic field. Preliminary estimates indicated the 33-lb. payload reached altitude of several hundred miles before it fell back into the Atlantic Ocean. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/13/64)
First of improved H—1 engines, whose thrust had been upped from 188,000 lbs. to 200,000 lbs., were delivered recently by North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Division to NASA Michoud Operations. Cluster of eight H-l engines was to improve thrust of Saturn booster, augmenting thrust of 1.5 million lbs. for Saturn I to 1.6 million lbs. for Saturn IB. (Marshall Star, 6/10/64,1)
NASA launched four-stage Javelin (Argo D—4) sounding rocket from Wallops Island, Va., with sixth payload of Japan-U.S. experiments in cooperative program to investigate properties and characteristics of the ionosphere. Payload was sent to 521-mi. altitude before impacting in Atlantic Ocean 840 mi. from launch site. Telemetry during flight was intermittent, so preliminary results of the experiments were inconclusive. For the cooperative experiments, Radio Research Laboratory, Tokyo, supplied radio frequency (RF) resonance probe and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center supplied Langmuir probe. (Wallops Release 64-75)
A committee had been set up by Prime Minister Harold Wilson to review Britain’s future in space, it was announced. The committee would examine the merits of a national satellite-launcher program based on the Black Knight rocket as well as Britain’s commitment to the European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) which would hope to start launching satellites two or three years from now. The space committee’s report would be expected in February. (MacLeod, CSM, 12/9/64)
Catalyst for use with monopropellant hydrazine rocket engines has been developed by Shell Oil Co.’s General Chemistry Dept, working with Jet Propulsion Laboratory in NASA-sponsored project, NASA announced. Development of the catalyst permits use of hydrazine for spacecraft guidance and control rockets. NASA scientists reported that hydrazine compounds produced by the catalytic reaction were 50% more energetic than monopropellant hydrogen-peroxide now used. (NASA Release 6429)
Sidney J. Dagle, 29, Ball Brothers technician, died of injuries caused by ignition of X—248 rocket motor three days earlier at Cape Kennedy. This was the first death among the 11 injured personnel. Next day, John W. Fassett, 30, succumbed to bums sustained in the accident. An engineer in GSFC Field Projects Branch, Fassett was the only NASA employee among the 11; the others were employees of Douglas (booster contractor) and Ball Brothers (Oso satellite contractor). One other man remained in critical condition. (AP, NYT, 4/18/64, 12; upi, NYT, 4/19/64, 80; Goddard News, 4/20/64, 3 ; gsfc pio, 5/13/64)
