The U.S. manned orbiting laboratory was aimed at “the practical testing of orbital nuclear weapons, not scientific space laboratories” in violation of a U.N. agreement not to orbit weapons of mass destruction, wrote Col. Gen. Vladimir Tolubko, deputy commander of Soviet rocket troops in Za Rubezhom. His remarks were Russia’s first comment on President Johnson’s Aug. 25 announcement that U.S. would develop a manned orbiting laboratory. (Wash. Post, 9/10/65, A25; Reuters, NYT, 9/10/65,12C)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb with a Thor-Agena D booster combination, (upi, NYT, 5/19/65, 2)
Full-scale Saturn V booster (s-ic stage) weight simulator was shipped from nasa Marshall Space Flight Center to Kennedy Space Center on NASA barge Poseidon. Trip would require five days. Simulator would be used in checking equipment and handling procedures at KSC’s Launch Complex 39 in preparation for arrival of the Saturn V facility vehicle early in 1966. (msfc Release 65-295)
Two simultaneous iqsy launches for high-altitude research were made by usaf from Eglin afb, Fla., in support of each other, one with a Nike-Cajun rocket and the other with a Sparrow-Areas. (Eglin afb Release 65-449)
With arrival of the sea-going launch platform USNS Croatan at Valparaiso, Chile, NASA completed a successful expedition of launching scientific experiments off the west coast of South America. A total of 77 sounding rockets were fired, 45 of them Nike-Cajun and Nike-Apaches, and 32 of them single-stage meteorological rockets. Firings occurred at various position from 5° north to 60° south of the equator. Five experiments were conducted at or near the 60th parallel at about 78° west longitude. The project was part of the NASA sounding rocket program being conducted during the 1964-65 International Quiet Sun Year. Expedition data would be correlated with findings of scientists throughout the world conducting experiments on iqsy phenomena. (Wallops Release 65-22)
usaf awarded Thiokol Chemical Corp. a $2,000,000 initial increment to a fixed-price contract for production of solid rocket motors. Estimated final amount of contract was $5,000,000. General Dynamics Corp. received from afsc a $1,655,299 fixed-price contract for design and fabrication of reentry vehicle instrumentation and range safety systems, (dod Release 946-65)
NASA would negotiate with the Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., for 22 h-1 rocket engines with 200,000-lb. thrust for use on the 12 Saturn ib launch vehicles presently planned, NASA Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Engines, with supporting services, would cost more than $6 million, (msfc Release 65-155; Marshall Star, 6/23/65, 1)
In a letter-to-the-editor in Missiles and Rockets, Thomas M. Morse said that since there were no indications that the Russians were building a bigger booster for their lunar program, they might be planning to use a lihration orbit to reach the moon. He described the libration orbit as an almost stable earth orbit in which a spacecraft would always be on a direct line between earth and moon, about 33,000 mi. from the moon. Advantages offered over the U.S.-planned lunar orbit included easier rendezvous; pre-parking of unmanned freight, shielding, and modules; unlimited rendezvous and liftoff windows; continuous line-of-sight communications between earth, rendezvous craft, and lunar landing crew; better radiation protection; improved safety factor; reduced cost. {M&R, 3/8/65, 6)
USAF announced successful test firing of a simplified rocket engine called Scorpio. The engine had eight combusters in a ring around a nozzle and an injector that sprayed fuel into the combusters through several ports. Scorpio developed 200,000 lbs. thrust and would be modified to produce greater power, (afsc Release 44.65; ap, Balt. Sun, 3/30/65)
Contrasting the “image” of U.S. and U.S.S.R. at Sept. 13-18 iaf Congress, William Hines said: “Whether through the Russians’ skill at brainwashing or our own ineptitude, we emerged ... as the rocket rattlers and they as the peace lovers. . . .” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/23/65)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Station, Va., to obtain temperature, wind, density, and pressure at a time of minimum zonal wind flow by exploding twelve grenades during the ascent of the rocket. Two grenades did not eject and a third exploded before complete ejection, causing complete failure of experiment. Coordinated firings did not occur simultaneously at Ft. Churchill or Pt. Barrow due to weather conditions and payload problems. (NASA Rpt. srl)
The $2-billion Rover nuclear-propelled rocket program was approaching a decision whether to move forward and prepare for early post-Apollo missions or let the technology dwindle, Harold B. Finger, Director of nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, told Aviation Week & Space Technology. The two-part decision was (1) whether to move forward with a flight-type engine of 200,000-300,000-lb. thrust— an advanced Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application), and (2) whether to start a $50-million construction program in Nevada for testing in the vicinity of the Nuclear Rocket Development Station near Las Vegas. Unless these decisions were made soon, “there will be a tail-off of technology,” Finger said. (Av. Wk., 12/6/65, 57)
Thiokol Chemical Corp. would receive from usaf a $1,562,000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for work on a solid-fuel rocket program. (dod Release 659-65)
Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo program director in NASA’s Office of Manned Space Flight, said that 1965 would be a year of “heavy ground testing” in NASA’s lunar program. Among the major events he anticipated were completion of testing of the Apollo spacecraft for the first manned flight; qualification of all elements of the Saturn IB launch vehicle and delivery of first flight stages to Cape Kennedy; and initial testing of Saturn V elements, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 1/22/65, 4)
AEC’s 970-lb. snapshot spacecraft carrying Snap-10A nuclear reactor was successfully launched from Vandenberg AFB by an Atlas-Agena booster into nearly circular polar orbit; 820-mi. (1,320 km. I apogee; 788-mi. (1,269 km.) perigee; 112 min. period; 90.17° inclination. Four hours after injection into orbit, radio command from earth activated the 250-lb, nuclear reactor by moving internal shielding that had kept the emission of electrons from the uranium-235 fuel element from reaching the chain reaction stage. The reactor would provide electric power for a 2,2-lb. ion engine. This was the first attempt to test a reactor-ion system in orbit. Twelve hours after launch, radio signals from the Agena vehicle carrying the reactor indicated it was producing 620-668 watts of electricity—some 20r/< over its designed power. Electricity generated by the reactor would be stored in a 480-lb. bank of batteries and released as the ion engine was put through start-stop tests during a three-month period. The engine would manufacture its own power by electrically vaporizing the 3Yz oz. of the metal cesium in its fuel tank into atomic particles and expelling them at high speed through a nozzle to provide thrust of two-thousandths of a pound. aec said the satellite would stay aloft more than 3,000 yrs.—far beyond the 100 yrs. it would take for the reactor’s radioactive elements to decay to a safe level. The reactor would be shut down after a year, the ion engine after about three months. If successful, the test would signal the first operation in space of a light, compact, propulsion system that would produce power over long periods on small amounts of fuel for (1) surveillance and patrol satellites functioning in orbit for years, and (2) manned spaceships capable of speeds of 100,000 mph on trips to distant planets now beyond the reach of conventionally-fuelled rockets. Also orbited was U.S. Army secor iv geodetic satellite. (Hill, NYT, 4/5/65; ap, Wash. Post, 4/4/65; upi, Chic. Trib., 4/5/65; aec Release H-60; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 139; Atomic Energy Programs, 1965, 151)
Saturn IB booster stage (s-Ib) was successfully static-fired for 145 sec. at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center—its second captive firing. In early August, the 1.6-million-lb.-thrust, 80-ft.-long stage would be taken by barge to New Orleans and transported from there to Kennedy Space Center, nasa, for launching, (msfc Release 65-187; Marshall Star, 7/28/65, 1)
First static test firing of European Launcher Development Organization’s (eldo) Europa I booster was conducted at Spadeadam Rocket Establishment in Cumberland, England. The launch vehicle was composed of Blue Streak first stage, French Coralie second stage, West German third stage, and Italian satellite and nose casing. For this test, all but Blue Streak were dummy stages. (Av. Wk., 8/2/65, 35)
Freeman J. Dyson, professor of physics at the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, N.J., charged official Washington with the political “murder” of Project Orion, a nuclear-pulse-powered rocket, which he said would have been far better than any other kind of propulsion for rapid exploration of the solar system. The project was ended early this year after seven years of scientific and engineering studies that had cost $10.3 million and proved, Dyson said, the feasibility of nuclear-driven spacecraft. Its “killers,” Dyson said, were DOD, NASA, the promoters of the nuclear test-ban treaty, and U.S. scientists generally. Writing in Science, Dyson continued: “The story of Orion is significant because this is the first time in modern history that a major expansion of human technology had been suppressed for political reasons.” (Science, 7/9/65)
USAF launched an unidentified satellite on a Thor-Altair booster from Vandenberg afb, Calif. Altair was normally the solid-fuel fourth stage of the Scout booster, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/19/65)
Prof. S. N. Vernov, corresponding member of U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, noted in Tass interview the unusual weight of proton I and its special equipment for studying cosmic particles of super-high energy. He said the method for counting the particles, worked out eight years ago by Prof. N. L. Grigorov, had made it possible to determine the total energy of each particle separately. Scientists had hesitated to use the method in space because of the weight of the equipment. This problem had been solved with the creation of a more powerful booster, he said. (Bakinskoy Rabochiy, 7/20/65, 2)
One of the five F-l engines on the Saturn V booster was successfully static fired at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center for 16% sec. (.Marshall Star, 4/14/65, 1)
France’s first satellite, FR-1, arrived from Paris at Dulles International Airport and was taken to NASA Goddard Space Flight Center for testing. The satellite, to be launched for France by NASA in a joint project to study very low frequency radio waves and the distribution of ionization in the earth’s magnetosphere, would be sent to Ling-Temco-Vought, Texas, where it would be modified to fit a Scout-type rocket. Launching was scheduled for late 1965. Memorandum of understanding for the FR-1 program was signed Feb. 18, 1963, between nasa and the French Space Agency, Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes). (nasa Release 65-59; Wash. Post, 9/16/65)
A sounding rocket for study of ultraviolet radiation was fired from Salto di Quirra afb in Sardinia, the Italian Defense Ministry announced. The rocket was one of 400 to be fired by the Italian Air Force in collaboration with the European Space Research Organization (esro). (ap, Wash. Post, 8/11/65, 15)
NASA launched from Wallops Island a four-stage Journeyman (Argo D8)	sounding rocket with 130-lb. Univ. of Minnesota payload. Firing was timed to correspond closely with passage of the OGO I satellite in an unsuccessful attempt to compare and correlate radiation belt electron and proton measurements. Sounding rocket reached peak altitude of 1,031 mi.; experiment package impacted in the Atlantic Ocean about 1,200 mi. downrange. Telemetry indicated proper functioning of instrumentation during the 26-min. flight, but no useful data were returned because the nose cone covering the payload failed to eject and the experiment package was not exposed to energetic particles in the radiation belt. (Wallops Release 65-21; nasa Rpt. srl)
A land exchange between the U.S. Government and New Mexico was nearing completion, clearing the way for construction of a $20 million rocket testing complex to be built by Bell Aerosystems Co. near the White Sands Missile Range, (ap, Houston Chron., 3/24/65)
USAF launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB with a Thor-Able-Star booster, (upi, NYT, 6/26/65, 6)
S-IVB stage for the Saturn V booster was successfully test-fired for full duration at Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Sacramento Test Center. In a test simulating a lunar flight, the stage ran for three minutes, was cut off for 30-min. orbital coast period, and then re-ignited for 355-sec. run. (Marshall Star, 8/25/65, 1)
“Within a decade . . . space could be as vital to defense as nuclear weapons are today,” postulated an article in U.S. News and World Report. It continued:	“The deep conviction of top U.S. Air Force leaders is that Russia is directing its main energies and resources not to the moon, but to mastery of space nearer earth. Some are convinced that Russia, far behind in the missile race, is now striving to leapfrog the U.S. and move ahead with manned satellite weapons.” (U.S. News, 4/5/65) In answer to the question of what man could do in space to contribute to the military mission, Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, Commander of USAF Office of Aerospace Research, said at the Space Congress:	“I believe that the MOL will enable us to come up with some of the answers.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, speaking before the Space Congress, said:	“. . . extravehicular activity, as accomplished by the Soviets, and orbital changes, as accomplished by Gus Grissom and John Young . . . are essential to future progress in space exploration. Both are objectives of our Gemini Program and both are techniques that we must learn in order to carry out the Apollo Program. We have long assumed that both were objectives of the Soviet Program. “Given these assumptions, the difference between the scheduling of these experiments in the Soviet program and ours is a detail of relatively minor importance. It has been our judgment that maneuvering and changing orbits are more important than extravehicular activity for the progress of our program. For this reason, we scheduled the conduct of such maneuvers for the first manned flight in the Gemini Program. We must assume that the Soviets had their good reason for scheduling extravehicular activity on an earlier flight in their program.” (Text) E. Z. Gray, also of nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, discussed future programs. He stressed that one of the cardinal rules guiding the planning was that maximum use must be made of hardware either already developed or currently in development. (M&R, 4/12/65, 16)
First full-scale testing of a Coralie engine took place at Vernon, France, 15 days ahead of schedule. Firing of the engine, second stage of the European Launcher Development Organization’s ELDO Europa booster, lasted 96 sec. Compatibility of the four-nozzle liquid engine with the flight-type structure was checked out, and the low level of vibration was called highly encouraging. (M&R, 12/6/65)
F-l rocket engine completed its 1,000th test firing at nasa MSFc’s Rocket Engine Test Site where it operated at its full thrust of 1,500,000 lbs. for 165.6 sec. Test was conducted by North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div. In a cluster of five, F-l would provide 7,500,000 lbs. thrust in the s—ic first stage of the Saturn V booster that would launch Apollo lunar missions, (msfc Release 65—154; Marshall Star, 6/23/65, 1)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster from wtr with unidentified satellite payload. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 159)
Reviewing NASA’s activities in manned space flight in the last year, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “It is a pleasure to report that . . . there has been substantial progress in the development and testing of flight vehicles and earth-based facilities, in the nearly complete marshalling of the government-industry manned space flight team, and in the consolidation of firm program-wide management. “During the past year, the Gemini Program has advanced to the point that we are ready for manned flight operations. The Apollo Program is entering a year of comprehensive development testing of major systems prior to the ‘all-up’ unmanned earth-orbital flights, which will begin in 1966. And our study of advanced manned missions has established that it is feasible to return dividends from the current investment by applying the wide range of Apollo capabilities to a number of other potential missions.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 143ff)
NASA successfully launched Argo D-4 sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., to peak altitude of 588 mi. Objective of 17y2-min. lest was the measurement of phase differences to determine electron density along the rocket trajectory. Experiment was provided by Pennsylvania State Univ. (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA and DOD had approved first phase of a General Dynamics proposal for 30% -uprated Atlas slv x3 booster. This phase covered only reliability improvement by introduction of new components. Order to proceed on actual uprating was expected this month. (M&R, 3/15/65,
nasa and the Federal German Ministry for Scientific Research (BMwF) signed a Memorandum of Understanding for cooperation in a program of space research on the earth’s radiation belts. First phase of the program would consist of sounding rocket launchings and balloon flights to test instrumentation for German experiments. Following successful completion, the second phase would attempt to place a German scientific satellite in polar orbit by 1968. The satellite, to be designed and constructed in Germany, would be launched from the Western Test Range on a Scout vehicle provided by NASA. No exchange of funds between the two organizations was contemplated. Results 6f the experiments would be made available to the world scientific community. (NASA Release 65-238)
NASA had awarded a $3,135,977 contract modification to the Boeing Co. for preparatory work leading to dynamic testing of the Saturn V moon rocket at NASA msfc. Boeing would perform engineering services for the Saturn V dynamic testing program and would supply instrumentation equipment for the test stand, (msfc Release 65-94)
Lt. Gen. Nikolai Kamanin, commander of Soviet cosmonauts, said during a meeting with Moscow writers: “After the flight of Gemini v, Johnson said officially that the United States was inviting representatives of the Soviet Union to the next flight so that they could see U.S. rockets and rocket devices. We told him: Thank you but we do not intend to visit your launching site. We do not intend to go because we know all too well that all space devices are as a rule launched into space with the aid of military rockets. You do it this way and we do it that way. While military rockets are used for these purposes we are unable to show you our Soviet rockets because we know all too well that our rockets were, are, and we are convinced, will be the most powerful, with the greater distance and load capacity. This is of decisive importance for the defense of the country.” (Tass, 10/24/65)
Indonesia test-fired a research rocket from a site “somewhere in Indonesia,” Djakarta radio reported. The rocket reached 210-mi. (338-km.) altitude, (upi, Houston Chron., 8/8/65)
Dr. George Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at a news conference in Cocoa Beach, Fla., that Astronauts McDivitt and White would attempt to steer the Gemini 4 spacecraft to a rendezvous with the spent second stage of its booster rocket. This plan was outlined for the flight: When the Gemini 4 spacecraft separated from the second stage six minutes after launching, Maj. James A. McDivitt, as command pilot, would fire jet thrusters to hold a tight formation with the spent stage, which would trail the astronauts by about 300 ft. Throughout the first orbit, the astronauts would make a complete check of all their systems. At the start of the second orbit they would begin preparing for Maj. White’s emergence by unpacking life support packs, the maneuvering unit, and the 25-ft. lifeline. Sweeping over the Indian Ocean during this orbit, they would begin to depressurize the spacecraft cabin and pressurize their spacesuits. Over Hawaii, Maj. McDivitt would maneuver the spacecraft to within 25 ft. of the second stage. Maj. White would open his hatch and at a point west of Guaymas, Mexico, he would leave the vehicle. That would be about three hours after launching. Using the hand-gun maneuvering unit, Maj. White would slowly rotate toward the second stage, which is 27 ft. long and 10 ft. in dia. and would be equipped with two flashing lights. The astronaut would carry a 35-mm movie camera to take pictures of the earth, star background, the booster, and the spacecraft. After 10 min., over Florida, Maj. White would begin returning to the spacecraft. The cabin would be repressurized and the suits depressurized. Then Maj. McDivitt would fire thrusters so that the spacecraft would move about 16 mi. away from the booster. During the fifth orbit, about three hours later, the Gemini again would be maneuvered so that it would approach the second stage high over Africa. The craft would close to within 10 ft. this time to determine how well they can approach an orbiting craft, sighting on the flashing lights. (Transcript; Appel, NYT, 5/29/65, 1)
W. Y. Jordan, Jr., R. J. Harris, and D. R. Saxon, all of MSFC, said in Astronautics & Aeronautics article that clustering of nuclear rocket systems up to 10,000 mw. of power had been studied. These studies indicated the concept showed sufficient promise to warrant more detailed design studies, and these studies had been initiated. They stated that a “modular nuclear vehicle system concept, which offers a flexible multipurpose space-transportation capability, now appears possible through development of only one basic propulsion system and vehicle stage. . . .”	(A&A, 6/65, 48-52)
USN fired a Hydra-Iris sea-launched sounding rocket, to 184mi. altitude carrying a 100-lb. payload. The rocket was launched from a point about 1,400 mi. east of Montevideo, Uruguay. Mission was to measure radiation intensity within the inner Van Allen radiation belt. (M&R, 2/8/65, 8)
zond III automatic space station was launched into a heliocentric orbit by U.S.S.R. from a heavy artificial satellite placed in a parking orbit around the earth by a multistage carrier rocket, Tass announced. Tass said that the “trajectory of the automatic station is close to the expected one,” that communications were stable, and that all systems were functioning normally. The purpose of the launch was to “check the station’s systems in conditions of prolonged space flight and the holding of scientific studies in interplanetary space,” Tass said. Pictures of the farside of the moon taken by ZOND ill were later released on Aug. 20. (Tass, 7/18/65; Grose, NYT, 7/19/65, 1, 31; Loory, Wash. Post, 7/19/65)
Vesta, a new French meteorological sounding rocket, was successfully fired for the first time from the Hammaguir Range, Algeria. The single-stage rocket, propelled by liquid fuel, carried an instrumented payload to 118-mi. (190-km.) altitude. (NYT, 10/28/65, 74M)
Jane's All the World’s Aircraft carried a description of how Soviet cosmonauts were ejected from their space capsules at 23,000 ft. after reentry into earth’s atmosphere. The yearbook also published detailed descriptions of the Soviet spaceship VOSTOK I, the world’s first manned earth satellite. It showed a picture of the 120-ft. ballistic missile that was displayed last May in a Moscow parade and reported that the missile was a sister vehicle to the “mighty booster” that launched the Vostok in 1961. Jane’s also obtained information on a large Soviet hovercraft still under construction and published a photograph taken at the shipyard, (ap, NYT, 11/29/65)
A “catastrophic failure” had occurred some 10 min. after launch of the Atlas-Agena for the Oct. 25 Gemini vi mission, M/Gen. Ben I. Funk, commander of the Air Force Space Systems Div., revealed. M/Gen. Vincent Huston, commander of the Eastern Test Range, said radar at Patrick AFB had “picked up five pieces” of debris at the point in space where the Agena was supposed to be. G. Merritt Preston, NASA, remarked that just before ground stations lost contact with the Agena, telemetry records from the spacecraft showed a marked rise in pressure in both propellant tanks. Despite the inferred explosion of Agena, no fragments were recovered from the Atlantic Ocean where tracking radar screens had indicated the rocket should have fallen. None was seen by planes alerted to watch for their reentry. Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., manufacturer of the Agena, had scheduled a news conference to try to explain the problem, the Washington Evening Star reported. Conference was canceled, reportedly on instructions from the Air Force, and a secrecy lid imposed. (Wash. Eve. Star, 10/26/65, A6)
usaf Titan m-c, launched from Eastern Test Range, encountered trouble with its transtage—third stage—and failed to reach near-synchronous equatorial orbit with four pick-a-back satellites. At lift-off, the booster’s two 1.2-million-lb.-thrust strap-on engines and the Titan m-C core vehicle functioned as scheduled, propelling the booster to 400,000-ft. altitude at 10,300 mph. Second stage ignited and the stages separated simultaneously with first stage burnout. Ten-second coast period followed second stage shutdown before stage was separated; three seconds after separation, the transtage, powered by twin engines rated at 8,000-lb. thrust each, ran for 17 sec. to drive vehicle into temporary parking orbit with apogee, 194 mi. (311 km.); perigee, 103.6 mi. (167 km.); inclination, 28.6°; orbital insertion velocity, 25,609 fps. About three-quarters through its first orbit (75 min. after lift-off) guidance system commanded transtage engines to restart and burn for 297 sec. to drive transtage and payload upward toward synchronous altitudes; transtage entered transfer orbit with apogee, 20,948 mi. (33,725 km.); perigee, 113.4 mi. (182.6 km.). Vehicle coasted in this deep elliptical orbit almost five hours before transtage was scheduled to restart its engines for third and final time to circularize its orbit. For unknown reasons, the engines did not restart and the vehicle entered a highly elliptical earth orbit with apogee, 20,900 mi. (33,649 km.); perigee, 120.8 mi. (194.4 km.). Telemetry indicated the LES in and IV satellites were released, as was the oscar iv satellite, but all three much later than planned and into the wrong orbits. Fourth payload, OV2-3, remained attached to transtage. Titan ill, most powerful rocket currently in use by the U.S., was being developed by USAF for use with the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol). This was the second time in three Titan III tests that the transtage had failed, (ap, Wash. Post, 12/22/65, Al; ap, NYT, 12/22/65, 14; ap, Houston Post, 12/22/65; Av. Wk., 12/27/65, 27; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965,157-158)
President Lyndon B. Johnson was inaugurated. In his Inaugural Address, he said: “For every generation, there is a destiny. For some, history decides. For this generation, the choice must be our own. “Even now, a rocket moves toward Mars. It reminds us that the world will not be the same for our children, or even for ourselves in a short span of years. The next man to stand here will look out on a scene different from our own. “Ours is a time of change—rapid and fantastic change—baring the secrets of nature—multiplying the nations—placing in uncertain hands new weapons for mastery and destruction—shaking old values and uprooting old ways. . . . “Change has brought new meaning to that old mission. We can never again stand aside, prideful in isolation. Dangers and troubles we once called ‘foreign’ now live among us. If American lives must end, and American treasure be spilled, in countries we barely know, that is the price that change has demanded of conviction. “Think of our world as it looks from that rocket heading toward Mars. “It is like a child’s globe, hanging in space, the continents stuck to its side like colored maps. We are all fellow passengers on a dot of earth. And each of us, in the span of time, has only a moment among his companions. “How incredible it is that in this fragile existence we should hate and destroy one another. There are possibilities enough for all who will abandon mastery over others to pursue mastery over nature. There is world enough for all to seek their happiness in their own way. “Our own course is clear. We aspire to nothing that belongs to others. We seek no dominion over our fellow man, but man’s dominion over tyranny and misery. . . .” (Text)
NASA launched an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range to peak altitude of 115 mi. (185 km.). Objectives were to photograph the solar disc and to measure solar flux. Parachuted payload was recovered without observable damage; development of film was in process, (nasa Rpt. srl)
A guidance control system for the Little Joe II booster was released from a Las Cruces, N. Mex., hospital in satisfactory condition following emergency x-ray treatment. White Sands Missile Range technicians preparing for a Dec. 1 Apollo escape system test took the unit to the hospital after they failed to determine the cause of a malfunction. Industrial x-ray facilities at White Sands were closed for Veterans Day. (ap, Wash. Sun. Star, 11/15/65, A15)
A $784,600 contract had been awarded to Mechling Barge Lines, Inc., for towing three Saturn space vehicle barges, NASA MSFC announced. Two of the barges, Promise and Palaemon, would be used to carry the Saturn I and IB boosters. A third, being readied, would transport the larger Saturn V booster. The contract covered a one-year period. (msfc Release 65-128)
Soviet news agency Tass announced that firing of a new type of multistage rocket booster on Jan. 31 had been so successful that further tests in the Pacific series had been canceled. The rocket had travelled more than 8,000 mi. in the Pacific southwest of Hawaii, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 2/2/65; upi, IE ash. Post, 2/3/65)
The first J-2 liquid-hydrogen rocket engine built to flight configuration was delivered to Douglas Aircraft Co., Sacramento, for installation and testing in the Saturn S-IVB battleship stage. The 200,000-lb.-thrust engine had been recently accepted by NASA from Rocketdyne Div., North American Aviation, Inc. (Marshall Star, 1/27/65, 1, 6)
The s-ib— 1 stage of the Saturn IB booster was successfully static-fired by Chrysler for the first time at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center; the test lasted about 30 sec. Powered by 8 Rocketdyne uprated H—1 engines, each developing 200,000 lbs. of thrust, S-IB—1 stage would be fired at least one more time before being returned to Michoud Operations in New Orleans for checkout. It would then be shipped to Cape Kennedy for launch early next year, (msfc Release 65-75)
Snap 10-A, first nuclear reactor to operate in space, was probably shut down prematurely May 16, 1965, because of a spurious command from a decoding device triggered by a voltage regulator failure, AEC reported. Launched April 3 from Vandenberg afb, with an Atlas-Agena booster, Snap 10-A achieved an 806-mi. circular orbit and produced over 500,000 watt-hrs. of electricity before it shut down May 16. It would orbit for more than 4,000 yrs. (aec Release H-247) November 9: usaf fired Minuteman icbm from Vandenberg afb, to target area in the Eniwetok Lagoon, about 4,500 mi. across the Pacific. (ap, nyt, 11/10/65, 6)
200,000-lb.-thrust j—2 engine was captive fired for 388 sec. on a new test stand at nasa msfc. The J-2 engine would be used to power the Saturn s-ivb stage, second stage for the Saturn V. Ten tests of the liquid hydrogen-liquid oxygen powered rocket engine had been conducted at msfc since the J-2 engine test facility was put into use in August 1965. (msfc Release 65-300)
USAF launched two unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb. (upi, Chic. Trib., 11/9/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act, 1965, 154)
GSFC was pushing Aerobee 350 sounding rocket toward operational status to get second- and third-generation upper altitude data, wrote William S. Beller in Missiles and Rockets: “With much of the first-generation work already performed in the altitudes from about 50 mi. to 100 mi., a more sophisticated rocket is needed. . . . “The Aerobee 350 shows more than twice the performance of the 150: for heavy payloads, the factor tends toward 2.5, showing the most significant advantage; for lighter payloads, the factor approaches 2.0. “The Aerobee 350 launched from Wallops Island will carry a payload of 150 lbs. to 290 mi. altitude; or 500 lbs. to 210 mi. If the launching takes place at White Sands, N.M., which is at 4,000 ft., the rocket will put out 15—20 mi. more altitude performance for the same payload weight. An Aerobee 350 launch tower is to be built at White Sands.” (Beller, M&R, 9/27/65, 26)
Patent granted to Barnes Engineering Co. on an instrument that could distinguish a rocket flash from a sunset—an important distinction in the automatic tracking of missiles. The invention was already in use at a Government launch site for research in missile development, reported the New York Times. Lockheed Aircraft Co. received a patent for a reentry vehicle designed for more accurate landings than had been made with the Mercury and Gemini spacecraft. Invented by Charles H. Christenson, the craft had wings that could be extended for flight in the atmosphere or folded for launching and space travel. The vehicle’s tail section would exert considerable drag after reentry; ring-shaped control surfaces could reduce the drag when extended rearward. (Jones, NYT, 9/4/65, 27)
At a news conference at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center on the Gemini GT—4 spaceflight, Astronaut McDivitt said: “I saw three things that looked to me like they were satellites on the earth. I saw two over the Pacific, I guess. One . . . near Hawaii. ... I saw a white object and it looked like it was cylindrical and it looked to me like there was a white arm sticking out of it. . . . We saw another one at night. It looked like just a pin point of light in the sky. . . . And I saw another one over the western Pacific again just shortly before I got into the sunlight on the windshield. . . . The only one I could even define the shape of at all was the first one and it looked a lot like an upper stage of a booster.” Astronaut White commented: “. . . we were looking to find out: Could man control himself in space? And the answer is yes, man can control himself in space.” McDivitt continued: “The first thing we learned was that the Gemini 4 is a liveable spacecraft for at least four days.” (Transcript; NYT, 6/12/65, 3)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket with Univ. of Michigan pitot-static probe experiment to measure pressure, temperature, and density from 15-km. to 115-km. altitude was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada. Rocket and experiments functioned properly and good data were obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRl)
An S-ivb facility vehicle and an S—II simulator arrived in New Orleans aboard the usns Point Barrow enroute to NASA Kennedy Space Center. Both the s-ivb and S-n were upper stages of the Saturn V launch vehicle. The s-ivb would also serve as the second stage of the Saturn IB booster, (msfc Release 65-161; Marshall Star, 6/30/65, 2)
Four were honored with aiaa awards for achievements in manned flight at the aiaa 4th Manned Space Flight Meeting in St. Louis: the 1965 Astronautics Award to b/g Joseph S. Bleymaier (usaf), Commander of the Western Test Range, for “exceptional direction to Titan III space booster R&D program”; the Octave Chanute Award to Alvin S. White, Chief Engineering Test Pilot/xB-70 Project Pilot, North American Aviation, for “continued significant contributions to the aerospace sciences in the development of flying skills and techniques necessary to flight of an advanced aircraft at unprecedented speeds, altitudes, and weights”; the John Jeffries Award to Col. William K. Douglas (usaf), Director of Bioastronautics, usaf National Range Div., for “outstanding contributions to the advancement of aeronautics and astronautics, his writings, lectures, and research, and his continued dedication to the study of medical problems relating to the aeronaut and astronaut”; and the Robert M. Losey Award to George P. Cressman, Director of the Office of National Meteorological Services, Weather Bureau, for “his rapid and effective application of numerical weather analysis and forecasting techniques to aeronautical operations.” (A&A, 11/65)
British Black Knight research rocket reentered earth’s atmosphere at 10,800 mph after a successful firing at the Woomera range, Australia. Rocket had reached 390-mi. altitude, (ap, Wash. Post, 11/27/65, A2)
M/Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), director of the Apollo program in the NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, addressed the American Bar Association’s Seminar of the Committee on the Law of Outer Space in Miami Beach: “In many respects, the Gemini iv flight of Jim Mc-Divitt and Ed White could well be viewed as a turning point in the American manned space program. The success of this mission has given us greatly increased confidence that we will be able to carry out our national goal of a manned landing on the moon in this decade. “It is a pleasure to report that the Apollo Program is also moving ahead very rapidly, and we are meeting our key milestones on schedule. The progress on Apollo is especially rewarding since it is the largest and most complex single research and development project ever undertaken. This is a crucial year for Apollo, but our prospects look good and we are becoming increasingly confident that the lunar landings will take place before the end of 1969.” (Text)
17-yr.-old John J. Breaux, who exhibited a “soundovac” that could “solve any mathematical problem when a formula was available,” and 17-yr.-old Douglas A. Whithaus, who based his exhibit on development of a liquid-gaseous-propellant rocket engine, were entrants in the Greater St. Louis Science Fair selected to compete in the National Science Fair, May 6-8. (St. Louis Post Dispatch, 4/10/65).
NASA launched 3.5-ton Aerobee 350, new two-stage research rocket, from Wallops Station, Va., in first flight test. The 52-ft.-long, 22-in.-dia. rocket carried 367 lbs. of performance instrumentation to peak altitude of 235 mi. and impacted in Atlantic Ocean 160 mi. from launch site. Designed and developed by Space-General Corp., Aerobee 350 had a main stage “sustainer” propelled by four liquid-fuel engines, each developing 4,100 lbs. thrust. Booster stage used a solid propellant Nike motor with 51,000 lbs. thrust. Booster and sustainer stages fired simultaneously, with the booster burning out and separating about 3.2	sec. later. The rocket would boost a minimum-weight payload of 150 lbs. to an altitude of 290 mi. and a maximum payload of 500 lbs. to 210 mi. (Wallops Release 65—37; nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA launched a two-part 104-lb. sounding rocket payload from NASA Wallops Station, Va., to measure electron densities and ion composition of the upper atmosphere. Designed as a mother-daughter experiment—with radio signals to be sent from daughter to mother—the payload separated as planned at about 170-mi. altitude and the two-sections reached peak altitude at 605 mi. The sections were programed to rise separately for about 8 min. and reach a distance apart of about 3 mi. Experimental information was radioed to ground stations and no recovery of the sections was required; they impacted in the Atlantic Ocean. Measurement of the differences between the signals of the two devices, monitored by ground stations, was expected to provide more accurate profiles of upper atmosphere electron density. The launching was timed to occur while Canadian satellite alouette was passing nearby, alouette’s instruments would provide a horizontal profile of ionospheric and ion densities and temperatures to be correlated with findings of the mother-daughter experiment. (Wallops Release 65-30)
The 2,000th full-scale solid rocket motor of the Polaris A-3 model was shipped to Navy’s Pacific Missile Facility where it would be integrated into an operational missile. (}/Armed Forces, 4/24/65, 15)
Canada’s Black Brant research rocket underwent its first successful launch from Ft. Churchill, Manitoba. (M&R, 6/28/65, 11)
Brazil successfully launched the first Nike-Apache sounding rocket from its Natal Range in a joint program with NASA to investigate the lower regions of the ionosphere with emphasis on the effects of cosmic rays. Launching was conducted by the Brazilian Space Activities Commission (cnae). Instrumentation for the rocket payload and the telemetry ground support equipment was constructed by Brazilian technicians at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center. (Wallops Release 6580; nasa Release 65-328)
Reporting on the Lunar International Laboratory, under consideration by the International Astronautical Federation meeting in Athens, William Hines, in the Washington Evening Star, said the case for Lil had been outlined this way: “1. A spaceship is horribly expensive; it costs $15,000 now to boost one pound of instruments to the moon, and will cost $180,000 a man hour to sustain scientists in space in the 1970s. “2. The precedent exists for international scientific efforts: nuclear physicists already are discussing a trillion-volt atom smasher of which the world needs only one. “3. The concept of international science has been accepted by the United Nations since 1946. . . . “4. While the Russians have not taken an official stand, Sedov and others last year openly discussed Soviet studies on moon construction. “[C. Stark] Draper [Director of MIT Instrumentation Laboratory] ... has called for a computer center on the moon to collect data there and pass it on to earthly campuses and laboratories with information literally unavailable here. The Lil program has not yet reached the cost effectiveness and design stages yet, but at the rate the Apollo program to land men on the moon by 1970 is going, backers say only 10 to 20 years is needed. A curbstone opinion is that $20 billion to $30 billion . . . comparable to the Apollo costs—would handle the construction and start of Lil operations.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/65, A8)
In an interview with Tass, Soviet rocket designer Prof. Petrovich said that Soviet scientists intended one day to put scientific expeditions on the planets of the solar system to uOiuCStlCStC them. Designers were concentrating their efforts on developing highly efficient new engines which could lift extremely heavy payloads to the prescribed orbits, he added. (Tass, 11/15/65)
Thiokol Chemical Corp. successfully static-fired its 156-in.-dia., lOO-ft.-long solid propellant rocket motor—the largest yet fired— for 64 sec. The 900,000-lb. motor developed over three million lbs. of thrust, consumed over 800,000 lbs. of propellant, and generated temperatures up to 6,000°F. The solid propellant was encased in a halfinch-thick steel and nickel casing which apparently escaped damage. Also left intact was the 10-ton, 20-ft.-tall nozzle which rested on top of the 12-stories-deep testing pit. The motor was fired below ground level. Primary objective of the test was to validate design of the nozzle for use later on the 260-in. motor. A secondary mission was to check out the propellant processing system which would be used in the larger motor. The test was part of the large-solid demonstration program currently managed by NASA’s Lewis Research Center. (Shipp, Atlanta J/Const., 2/28/65; M&R, 3/8/65, 16)
NASA launched an ionosphere experiment from Wallops Station, Va., on a four-stage Javelin (Argo d-4) sounding rocket. Primary objectives of the flight were to measure ion and electron densities and temperatures and the ionic composition in the upper atmosphere. A malfunction in the launch vehicle caused the 140-lb. payload to reach an altitude of only 200 mi. instead of the planned 520 mi. Telemetry data were received for about nine minutes. Project officials termed the flight a partial success despite the failure to achieve peak altitude. (Wallops Release 65-31)
NASA’s ranger viii spacecraft, equipped with six television cameras to photograph part of the moon’s surface, was successfully launched from Cape Kennedy by an Atlas-Agena B. Seven minutes after lift-off, the spacecraft and the Agena stage went into a parking orbit some 115 mi. above Africa; the Agena engines were cut off. For the next 14 min., the combination coasted at 17,500 mph. Second burn of the Agena lasted 90 sec., increased the velocity to 24,476 mph, and freed the 808.8-lb. ranger viii from the major pull of the earth’s gravity. Several minutes after injection, ranger viii was separated from Agena, which entered an elliptical orbit. About an hour after launch, ranger viii received and obeyed the command to deploy the solar panels that would convert solar energy to electrical power for its equipment. About 31/) hrs. after launch, ranger viii completed its orientation maneuvering, achieved attitude stabilization, and pointed a high-powered antenna toward earth. The projected impact area was the Sea of Tranquility, a dark area relatively free of crater rays, near the shadow line on the three-quarter moon. Lower-angle lighting was expected to give more contrast and better definition of detail than was in the photographs made by ranger vii. A small rocket aboard the craft would be fired later to correct a moon-miss error on either side of the target; tracking calculations showed that the path of the vehicle would miss the edge of the moon by only 1,136 mi., well within the correction capability. (NASA Release 65-25; ap, Benedict, Wash. Post, 2/18/65; UPI, Chic. Trib., 2/ 18/65; ap, Houston Post, 2/18/65; Appel, NYT, 2/18/65, 1)
nasa launched a Nike-Apache sounding rocket with a 63-lb. payload from Wallops Station, Va., to peak altitude of 98 mi. The experiment was conducted for the Graduate Research Center of the Southwest, Dallas, Tex., and was designed to measure ion composition and neutral composition of the upper atmosphere as functions of altitude. Impact occurred 89 mi. downrange in Atlantic Ocean; no recovery was attempted. (Wallops Release 65-14)
A Gemini circumlunar flight had not been approved but the idea was receiving serious study, Kenneth S. Kleinknecht, Deputy Manager of the Gemini Project Office at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, told reporters. The Gemini capsule could circle the far side of the moon—• 240,000	mi. from earth—and then return to its home planet, a round trip of about six days. Kleinknecht said if the proposal were accepted, a Titan m-C rocket equipped with two upper stages called “transtages” would place one of the transtages in orbit. A Titan II would send the Gemini craft after the transtage and the two would be docked in orbit. Gemini then would use the transtage propulsion system and its maneuverability for the lunar voyage. The feasibility was being studied by NASA; the Martin Co., systems manager for Titan Iir-c; and Aerojet-General, which builds the transtage. “We are always studying possible future missions for Gemini,” Kleinknecht added. (Benedict, N.O. Times-Picayune, 7/26/65) July 26: NASA announced the addition of two new pilots to the joint nasa-usaf x—15 research program: Capt. William J. Knight (usaf) and William H. Dana, civilian. They were expected to make their first flights this fall, (nasa Release 65-244; frc Release 16-65)
The large “crawler-transporter” scheduled to move the 500,000-Ib. Saturn V booster and an 11-million-Ib. launching tower from the assembly area at Kennedy Space Center, NASA, to the launching site tnree and a half miles away, had been crippled by repeated failure of roller bearings. Eight tractor trucks equipped with treads and rollers like those of a bulldozer would propel the crawler. It was the bearings in 88 rollers that had caused the problem. Tests of the $6-million vehicle, manufactured by Marion Power Shovel Co., had been suspended until a solution could be found. A NASA spokesman stated that neither tests nor launchings of the Saturn V boosters should be delayed. (Clark, NYT, 8/18/65, C13)
NASA launched a Nike-Cajun with acoustic grenade experiment at Point Barrow, Alaska, to obtain upper atmospheric meterological data within the Arctic Circle. 12 grenades were ejected and detonated at intervals from about 25 to 56 mi. altitude as the rocket ascended. By recording the sounds on five sensitive microphones on the ground, scientists could obtain wind direction and velocity, atmospheric temperature, density, and pressure data. This was the first of a series of such experiments to gather upper atmospheric data within the Arctic Circle. Point Barrow was 1,100 mi. from the North Pole and 300 mi. within the Arctic Circle, at 71° north latitude. (Wallops Release 65—4; ap, NYT, 1/29/65)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a $1,600,000 contract to Aero Spacelines, Inc., to transport Saturn upper stages and outsize rocket components in its modified Boeing Stratocruiser, Pregnant Guppy. The contract would run through June 1966. (msfc Release 65-123)
Australia was negotiating with the U.S. to use American Redstone rockets instead of Britain’s Blue Streak for research at Woomera on rocket reentry into the atmosphere. National Development Minister Allen Fairhall told the Australian Parliament that the Redstone, though obsolete for orbital purposes, would be more suitable because it achieved greater altitude. (Reuters, NYT, 12/9/65)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket, launched by NASA from White Sands Missile Range to study the ultraviolet radiation of Orion and a group of stars, reached ll4-mi. (183.5-km.) altitude and performed successfully, (nasa Rpt. srl)
A descriptive report on the three generations of Soviet manned spacecraft—vostok i through vostok vi, first generation; voskhod i, second generation; and voskhod II, third generation—was prepared by Space Daily, in collaboration with Soviet space officials and the Novos-ti Press Agency: “The Soviet’s first three generations of manned spacecraft are injected into orbit within a standard cone-cylinder configuration with a maximum length of 30.3 feet and a maximum diameter of 8.7 feet . . . “The launch-to-orbit vehicle is comprised of four major components: the last stage of the rocket; the instrument and service module; the cosmonaut cabin and re-entry capsule; and the nose cone and fairing. . . . “The cabin for the first two generation spacecraft remained in external configuration essentially the same. The major modification . . . was the internal arrangement providing a capability for two astronauts instead of one which included the requirement for an additional hatch. The third generation spacecraft has required not only a major modification for the internal arrangement, for the third cosmonaut, but has forced a configuration addition to the 7.5 foot sphere with the attachment of the airlock. . . . “For the first generation spacecraft the cosmonaut was seated in the center of the sphere with his back to re-entry portion of the sphere. The capsule had three hatches: the egress hatch, the parachute compartment hatch and an equipment access hatch . . . The parachute compartment was located to the left and rear of the cosmonaut . . . Antennas for the radio system of the re-entry capsule were located 180 degrees from the stagnation point of the heat shield. Even in that location it is possible that heat build-up destroyed all protruding systems as evidenced by the landed VOSTOK. . . . “The first generation vehicles weighed about 10,430 pounds, after ejection of the nose cone and fairing and separation of the third stage of the booster. . . . The cabin for the first and second generation missions weighed about 5300 pounds. “In addition, voskhod ii represents an advancement to a more operational type of vehicle with an arrangement indicating its role for extensive Earth-orbital operations. “The airlock for the voskhod ii mission would represent the farthest evolution of the Soviet manned spacecraft program ... a cylindrical projection to the basic vehicle, positioned within the nose cone and fairing above or forward of the cabin in the antenna region. With respect to the cosmonauts the airlock would be above and to the front as they remained in their seats; its position would be 180 degrees from the stagnation point of the heat shield.” (SBD, 5/13/65, 68-70)
S—ic—1, first stage of the Saturn V booster, rolled out of the Manufacturing Engineering Lab at msfc exactly on schedule. The stage was moved to the Quality arid Reliability Assurance Lab where it would be checked out automatically in preparation for static firings, (msfc Release 65-239)
The six scientist-astronauts selected for the Apollo program were announced in the Nation’s press: Owen K. Garriott, 34, associate professor of physics, Stanford Univ.; Edward G. Gibson, 29, senior research scientist, Applied Research Labs., Aeronutronic Div., Philco Corp.; Duane E. Graveline, 34, flight surgeon, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center; Lt. Cdr. Joseph P. Kerwin (usn), 33, staff flight surgeon, Air Wing, 4, Cecil Field Naval Air Sta., Pa.; Frank Curtis Michel, 31, assistant professor of space sciences, Rice Univ.; Harrison Schmitt, 29, astrogeologist, U.S. Geological Survey. They W'ere chosen from a group of 16 nominees submitted to NASA by the National Academy of Sciences. NAS had screened about 400 applications forwarded by NASA earlier this year. The six new scientist-astronauts were to have been announced officially by NASA June 29 but NASA officials confirmed the six named on June 28, the day after the press stories. (Schefter, Houston Chron., 6/27/65; upi, Wash. Post, 6/27/65)
On the occasion of the Smithsonian Institution Bicentennial Celebration, President Johnson said: . . the Institution financed by Smithson breathed life in the idea that the growth and the spread of learning must be the first work of a nation that seeks to be free. “These ideas have not always gained easy acceptance among those employed in my line of work. The government official must cope with the daily disorder that he finds in the world around him. “But today, the official, the scholar, and the scientist cannot settle for limited objectives. We must pursue knowledge no matter what the consequences. We must value the tried less than the true. “To split the atom, to launch the rocket, to explore the innermost mysteries and the outermost reaches of the universe—these are your god-given chores. And even when you risk bringing fresh disorder to the politics of men and nations, these explorations still must go on.” {Pres. Doc., 9/20/65, 276)
Full-duration test firing of the second flight S-IVB stage of the Saturn IB launch vehicle was conducted at Sacramento by Douglas Aircraft Co. The 73/2-min. acceptance test was run to check engine performance, propellant tank pressurization systems, data acquisition systems, power and control systems, and structural reliability of the rocket stage. Following detailed post-test evaluation, the s-ivb would be shipped to Kennedy Space Center for launch as part of a complete Saturn ib vehicle in 1966. (Marshall Star, 12/8/65, 4)
Poland launched its first meteorological rocket. The two-stage vehicle was 2.5 m. (8.2 ft.) long and reached an altitude of 37,000 m. (121,360 ft.).	{M&R, 6/28/65, 10)
An article by Omer Anderson on U.A.R. rocket program was inserted in the Congressional Record by Rep. Silvio Conte (R—Mass.). Based on interviews with German scientists just back from Egypt and with West German defense ministry officials who debriefed them after their return, the article said: “Egypt’s missile program is considerably further advanced than is generally realized in the West. “Some of these scientists who have returned to West Germany say that Nasser will have the missiles to devastate wide areas of Israel by late 1967 and that he will have rockets with a 1-ton payload by the end of 1965. “West German defense ministry experts who have questioned the returning rocket scientists regard their assessment of Nasser’s rocket potential as entirely realistic and possibly too conservative. “The scientists say Nasser has accelerated greatly his rocket program since the first test firing of four missiles on July 22, 1962.” (CR, 1/26/65, 1160)
U.S.S.R. believed it was possible to land men on the moon and bring them back tO' earth with the same rocket, Soviet cosmonaut Lt. Col. Andrian G. Nikolayev said in Tokyo. Colonel Nikolayev and his wife, Valentina Tereshkova, also a cosmonaut, were on a two-week visit to Japan. (Reuters, NYT, 10/27/65, 19)
Construction of esro’s first launch site, located 100 mi. north of the Arctic Circle at Kiruna, Sweden, was nearing completion, reported John Herbert in Missile Space Daily. A $10 million investment, the range was scheduled to open in May 1966 with the launch of a French-made Centaure sounding rocket to probe the ionosphere. At least 50 launchings of high-altitude probes were programed annually for the next seven years with English Skylarks slated for use after the Centaure series. The rocket experiments would aid European researchers in their studies of magnetic storms, the Northern lights, temperatures, air currents, and communications—disturbing phenomena in an area ranging between 20 and 150 mi. above the earth. (Herbert, M/S Daily,
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was successfully launched from White Sands, N. Mex., to a peak altitude of 154.5 km. (96 mi.). The primary experimental objective was to obtain ultraviolet spectra of Mars and Orion by the use of four spectrographs, gsfc provided the payload instrumentation, (nasa Rpt. srl)
First Saturn IB booster, the S-ib-1, was placed into a static test stand at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center for scheduled static firings. Built by Chrysler Corp., the 1.6 million-lb.-thrust, 90,000-lb. booster contained eight engines, was 21 ft. in dia. and 80 ft. long. The stage would be shipped to NASA Michoud Operations for post-firing checks. (Marshall Star, 3/17/65, 1, 2)
usaf Titan iii-a rocket was launched from Cape Kennedy, hurled its third stage (transtage) and two satellites into orbit in a maneuverability test involving three different orbits. Primary goal of the mission was triple ignition of the transtage’s engine. First firing, about five minutes after launch, injected the 7,000-lb. rocket-payload assembly into near-earth orbit of 128-mi. apogee and 108-mi. perigee. After traveling once around the earth, during which the rocket performed a deliberate somersault, the transtage ignited again, burned 37 sec., and shifted the rocket into an elliptical orbit of 1,766-mi. apogee and 116-mi. perigee. During one and one half orbits around the earth, the rocket performed a second deliberate somersault; a third firing put it in circular orbit with parameters of apogee, 1,737 mi.; perigee, 1,721 mi.; period, 145.6 min.; and inclination, 32.15°. Titan hi-a’s transtage then ejected a 69-lb. experimental communications satellite (les i), and ejected a 1,000-lb. metal chunk to demonstrate its ability to launch more than one payload. LES I was to have fired a solid-propellant motor to move to an elliptical orbit with an apogee of 11,500 mi. and perigee of 1,725 mi., but the motor failed to fire. LES I continued to orbit near the transtage and the metal chunk, les 1 (Lincoln Experimental Satellite) had been built by mit’s Lincoln Laboratory to test advanced components, materials, and techniques which might apply to future communications satellites. Radio signals were to be exchanged between les i and ground stations, (upi, NYT, 2/12/65; ap, Houston Post, 2/12/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 2/12/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 133)
proton I, a scientific space station, was orbited by the U.S.S.R. with a “powerful new booster,” Tass announced. The 26,880-lb. payload—claimed to be heaviest ever launched—was placed into an orbit with the following initial parameters: apogee, 627 km. (389.4 mi); perigee, 190 km. (118 mi.) ; period 92 min.; and inclination, 63.5°. In addition to scientific and measuring instruments, the space station was equipped with special equipment for the study of cosmic particles of super-high energies and a radio transmitter. Tass said: “In order to insure realization of the planned space research program, a powerful new booster rocket has been developed in the Soviet Union.” Commenting on the Soviet launching, Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said he was “impressed but not astonished” by the Russian accomplishment. “W’e have been predicting for some Lime that they would develop into the space station field,” he said. “We have anticipated that they would practice rendezvous and docking before they developed what they said was a space station, but they haven’t followed that particular line.” (Tass, 7/16/65; NYT, 7/17/65, 6; Wash. Post, 7/17/65, Al)
Orbit of molniya I Soviet communications satellite was slightly corrected to increase its usefulness for relaying telecasts between Moscow and Vladivostok. Soviet Communications Minister Nikolai D. Psurtsev told Izvestia that the firing of a special rocket motor aboard the satellite had raised the apogee to 40,(M5.2 km. (24,872.8 mi.) ; perigee to 548.4 km. (340.6 mi.) ; and the period to 12 hrs. Previous orbital parameters: apogee, 39,467.7 km. (24,514.1 mi.) ; perigee, 498.4 km. (309.5 mi.); period, 11 hrs. 48 min. The corrected high elliptical orbit put molniya i within the visibility of Russia’s ground stations for the greater part of its period. (NYT, 5/5/65, 6) Discussing investigation of space by the U.S.S.R., Skuridin said that from 1962, the problem of going to the moon had been studied with the Cosmos series of spacecraft. He said cosmos iii and COSMOS IV had studied solor plasma, its energy and location in earth areas, and during the period April 24 to May 2, 1962, had transmitted to earth more than 50 million measurements; 20 million more had been stored in a data-storage system, cosmos xli had investigated charged particles at 40,000 mi. altitude. The Elektron series, he continued, had made important measurements of the atmosphere up to an altitude of 3,000 km. The ions of hydrogen, carbon, and oxygen had also been measured. Discussing future flights, Skuridin said the Soviet Union would like to study Saturn, Pluto, and the sun, but added that a satellite was needed that could be launched to far-off planets and the sun and return to earth, (upi, NYT, 5/6/65, 2; Kotulak. Chic. Trib., 5/7/65; M&R, 5/10/65, 12, 13) May 4^-6: Preliminary plans for Apollo Extension System (Aes) development required selection of three major spacecraft contractors, NASA official told Missiles and Rockets during Symposium on Post-Apollo Space Exploration in Chicago1: one to devise single payload plan, one to cover physical installation of experimental payloads and checkout systems, and one to translate Apollo spacecraft into Apollo extension vehicle with a six-week manned orbiting capability. NASA official attributed this decision to a reluctance to depend on a single contractor and a desire for broad-based readily available industrial capability. (M&R, 5/10/65, 13)
Ground test version of the Saturn V booster (s-IC-t) was fired by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center for 41 sec., msfc announced. It was the third and longest firing of the five engines, which developed 7.5 million lbs. thrust. The firing seemed entirely satisfactory, based on preliminary evaluation of data, (msfc Release 65-131)
Indonesia successfully launched the second (of ten) Japanese Kappa 8L two-stage meteorological sounding rocket from a site near Bandung, West Java. The 62-kg. (136-lb.) rocket reached an altitude of 90 km. (56 mi.). First firing had been Aug. 7. (Interavia Air Letter, 8/16/65, 5)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D booster rocket with unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb. (ap, Balt. Sun, 6/10/65)
A $2.3-million test facility expected to improve space storability of liquid and solid rocket propulsion systems would be completed at the Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory at Edwards afb, Missiles and Rockets reported. (M&R, 4/26/65, 10)
Dr. Werner R. Kirchner, vice president and manager of Aerojet-General Corp.’s solid rocket operations, announced that a new solid fuel multipulse rocket engine containing several charges of propellant that could be separately fired by electrical signal had successfully completed its first series of test firings. The rocket could zip, glide, and dart about much like a bird, he said, or could lie dormant in space a year and then be restarted on command. Key to multipulse firings was described as a lightweight thermal barrier separating each charge. Aerojet had conducted demonstration firings of six flight-weight configurations in the company-funded program, (ap, Denver Post, 4/21/ 65; Av. Wk„ 4/19/65, 30)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island with NASA Lewis Research Center experiment to study three wavelengths of light in the airglow: one in the red part of the spectrum, another in the yellow, and a third in the green. Altitude of the air-glow was measured with phototubes mounted on the rocket. A 26-in.-dia. mylar balloon helped scientists correlate measured light intensity and altitude with density of the atmosphere. (Wallops Release 65-19; lrc Release 65-26)
A plastic dust cover carelessly left in a fuel line would have blocked the Gemini vi launch even if an electrical plug had not dropped out of the tail and shut down the Titan n engines, nasa officials revealed at a press conference. The device apparently had been installed at the Baltimore Martin Co. plant and was not removed due to “human error.” The Martin Co., makers of the Titan II booster for Gemini spacecraft, could lose a $15,000 bonus because of the launch failure, (ap, Balt. Sun, 12/14/65; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/14/65, A1)
In a triple launch, USAF launched two 524-lb. Vela Hotel (Sentry) satellites and ORS ill—1 (Octahedron research satellite) with an Atlas-Agena D booster from Eastern Test Range. Orbital data: vela 6577-11: apogee, 72,014 mi. (115,942.5 km.); perigee, 66,583 mi. (107,198.6 km.); period, 6,713 min.; inclination, 34.6°; vela 6564-10: apogee, 75,761 mi. (121,975.2 km.); perigee, 63,224 mi. (101,790.6 km.); period, 6,716 min.; inclination, 34.8°; ors m-1: apogee, 69,640 mi. (112,120.4 km.); perigee, 123 mi. (198 km.); period, 6,715 min.; inclination, 34.3°. Expected to operate six months, the Vela Hotel satellites were part of DOD’s Vela program to monitor space for violations of the nuclear test-ban treaty, ors hi—1 was monitoring natural radiation above the earth and relaying information to ground stations. (USAF Proj. Off.; upi, NYT, 7/21/65, 43)
NASA launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., with 150-lb. payload containing French-built radio propagation experiments designed for later flight on the FR-1 satellite. It reached 114-mi. (183-km.) peak altitude during an eight-minute flight. (Wallops Release 65-59)
USAF launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb using a single Atlas-Agena D booster, (upi, Chic. Trib., 6/26/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 146)
NASA’s increased use of real-time planning in the Gemini program, in contrast to the “cast-in-concrete” planning of the Mercury program and the first Gemini flight, was praised by William Hines in the Washington Evening Star. He said this new elasticity had made possible the “revolutionary reprogramming” of the Gemini VI and Gemini VII missions where “quick and drastic re-thinking of almost every aspect of space flight operations was required. Also required was the junking of a great many shibboleths, not the least important being the fixed opinion long weeks of launching-pad checkout must precede liftoff of a mancarrying rocket. . . .” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/4/65, A12)
s-ib-2, the first stage of the second Saturn IB booster, left NASA Marshall Space Flight Center aboard nasa’s barge Palaemon for Michoud Assembly Facility, where it would undergo post-static-firing checkout. The 80-ft.-long launch vehicle had been fired for 30 sec. at msfc on July 8, and for 2x/> min. on July 21. (msfc Release 65195)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey and his party, which included Rep. Carl Albert (D-Okla.) and Sen. Fred Harris (D-Okla.), visited NASA Manned Spacecraft Center and were briefed on the Gemini program by Charles W. Mathews; on the Apollo program by Dr. Joseph F. Shea; and on the life support systems by Richard Johnston of Crew Systems. Mr. Humphrey—it was his first visit to MSC—took a “ride” in the Gemini docking trainer with Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Cdr., usn) and then he and his party observed a simulated Gemini liftoff at the Mission Control Center and a portion of a mission, (msc Roundup, 7/23/65, 1; Houston Post, 7/14/65)
usaf launched Atlas-Agena D booster with unidentified satellite payloads from Western Test Range. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 136)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., discussing the management of NASA’s aeronautics and space effort before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, said: “. . . our performance in terms of data returned is perhaps the most succinct evidence of success. The volume of information brought back from space in 1964 averaged 57 million data points per day in comparison with a previous high of some 6 million data points per day. This indicates not only more advanced instrumentation but also more reliable functioning of flight experiments. We averaged 54 working experiments throughout 1964, which represents an improvement of 35/7 over the 1963 average. “We have achieved significant results in ground based experimentation, testing, aeronautical flights, and sounding rocket launchings. Work conducted in our wind tunnels continues to refine aircraft configurations for vertical takeoff and landing, supersonic transportation, and hypersonic flight. We are continuing to experiment with materials, fuels, turbines, injectors, and nozzles in order to improve the efficiency of air-breathing and rocket propulsion systems. The 3 successful power tests of the kiwi reactor demonstrated the applicability of nuclear energy to rocket propulsion. In 1964 we conducted 27 more flights of the x-15 aircraft, 19 of them over Mach 5, amassing data important to supersonic and hypersonic flight. In addition, we launched 131 successful sounding rockets from stations around the world to test new instrumentation and to obtain important scientific data in geophysics, astronomy, and meteorology. In the areas of manned space flight, the Apollo escape system has been successfully tested, and a boilerplate spacecraft checked out and flown on the Saturn I. A mock-up of the lunar excursion module has been approved. The Saturn IB and Saturn V ‘battleship’ upper stages have been successfully fired. The F-l engine has passed its flight rating test. This record was established by the hard work and careful attention to detail of the government-industry-university team charged with aeronautic and space exploration. This total team, numbering 380,000 people, is managed by the relatively small hard core NASA organization of less than 34,000.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 76-114)
A gas turbine-powered tugboat, the first ever built, was delivered to NASA’s Mississippi Test Facility for use in the canal system there. The 69-ft.-long Clermont would perform a variety of chores in connection with future space rocket static firings at the Hancock County, Miss., facility, an element of Marshall Space Flight Center. Main duties would be to berth and tow space vehicle and cryogenic tanker barges in the inland canal system, (msfc Release 65-264; Marshall Star, 10/20/65,1)
Test results were received by NASA which promised a solution to the crawler-transporter bearing failure without jeopardizing the key milestones in the Apollo program. Roller bearings in a crawler-transporter had failed during a July 25 test at KSC and subsequent investigation had defined a new bearing system. (Cocoa Tribune, 10/18/65)
Cost and performance comparability of large solid-propellant rocket motors was topic of article by G.W.G. Van Winkle, Boeing Co., in Astronautics & Aeronautics. The information was based on research obtained in study made by Boeing for msfc. In the same issue, Dr. Walter G. Berl of Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physic Laboratory discussed combustion instability in solid-propellant rocket motors. Four types of instability were listed, and the status of solutions to these problems was discussed. Dr. Berl concluded that it was “too much to expect that the always latent instability problem has been banished from the new propellants of the future. It is more likely that the most obvious troubles can be eliminated, partly through analysis, partly through recognition and exploitation of past trends. . . .”	(A&A, 2/65, 48-61) During February: In a report titled “Federal Funds for Research, Development, and other Scientific Activities,” National Science Foundation said DOD obligations for r&d increased each year from $2.3 billion in 1956 to an estimated $7.5 billion in 1964. Although survey predicted a small decrease to $7.2 hillion for 1965, the 10-yr. period showed a 200% gain. Support to applied research accounted for about 22% of 1965 r&d Defense funds, with 2 or 3% used for basic research; about 75% went for development. Profit-making organizations had done most of dod’s r&d during the 10 yrs., increasing from about 50% in 1956 to 65% in 1965. The report added: “On the other hand, the relative share of Defense research and development performed intramurally decreased each year from ahout 40% in 1956 to 21% in 1963, but an increase to 25% was expected in 1965. . . (nsf Rpt. 65-13) • Experimental model isotopic thruster was tested at AEC Mound Laboratory, using heat from radioactive decay of polonium 210. Mound Laboratory was continuing development of polonium 210 fuel forms and fuel encapsulating techniques for specific space applications. The isotopic small rocket engine, or thruster, concept envisions use of a radioiso tope to heat hydrogen, which is expelled through a nozzle to produce low thrust. (Atomic Energy Programs, 1965, 149)
U.S.S.R. launched into orbit three earth satellites—cosmos LXI, cosmos lxII, and cosmos lxiii—with a single booster rocket. Tass said three satellites were orbiting in close initial orbits: apogee, 1,837 km. (1,141 mi.); perigee, 273 km. (170 mi.); period, 106 min.; inclination, 56°. It was reported that the scientific apparatus onboard was functioning normally. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/17/65, 1, Atss-T Trans.)
A 71-ton Little Joe n rocket fired from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., to test the Apollo spacecraft escape system split into fragments three miles above ground following a series of excessive rolls occurring about 25 sec. after launch. The escape rocket fired immediately, however, and carried the 14-ton Apollo boilerplate free of the debris; the parachute recovery system operated normally, lowering the command module to the ground. Apollo program manager Dr. Joseph F. Shea said: “Although the prime objectives of the high altitude abort test were not met, the launch escape system proved its mettle in an actual emergency, which is the purpose for which it was designed.” The launch escape subsystem would be used to propel the spacecraft and its crew to safety in the event of a Saturn launch vehicle failure either on the pad or during powered flight. Little Joe II had been programed to carry the test vehicle, Boilerplate 22, to 22-mi.-altitude in 89 sec.; an escape motor would propel the spacecraft to a peak altitude of about 35 mi. Finally, the three 84-ft.-wide parachutes would lower the command module to earth, (nasa Release 65—145; N.Y. Her. Trib., 5/20/65; naa S&ID Skywriter, 5/21/65, 1, 2; NYT, 5/20/65, 42; msc Roundup, 5/28/65, 8)
nasa successfully launched explorer xxviii Interplanetary Monitoring Probe (Imp-C) from ETR on a three-stage Thor-Delta booster. A slightly longer than planned burn by the third stage engines placed the 130-lb. probe into an orbit with 164,000 mi. (264,040 km.) apogee and 120 mi. (193 km.) perigee instead of the scheduled orbit of 130,000 mi. (209,300 km.) apogee and 120 mi. (193 km.) perigee. Inclination was 34°; period, 5 days, 22 hrs. The spacecraft was equipped with devices to report on the earth’s magnetic field, cosmic rays, and the solar wind throughout its highly elliptical orbit. Confused telemetry signals from the explorer xxviii for 3% hrs. after launching made it seem the spacecraft had not separated from the third stage of the booster; however, later signals indicated that all spacecraft systems were operating normally, that separation had occurred. The Imp series began with explorer xviii (Imp-A) launched Nov. 26,1963. (nasa Release 65-164; Wash. Sun. Star, 5/30/65)
Two seconds after lift-off, NASA’s Atlas-Centaur 5, carrying a dummy Surveyor spacecraft, exploded and burned on Launch Pad 36-B at Cape Kennedy. Failure occurred when two of the three Atlas engines shut off simultaneously due to closing of a fuel-line valve. The 150-ton, 108-ft. rocket rose three ft. from the pad, then fell back to the ground and exploded. Although burning propellant covered most of the launch complex, no injuries to personnel were reported. Damage to the launching pad was estimated at $5 million. Objectives of the Atlas-Centaur test had been to test the ability of its guidance system and hydrogen-powered second stage to send a payload the size of the 2,150-lb. Surveyor on a precise path to-the moon and to evaluate how well the mock-up Surveyor spacecraft would withstand the stresses of launching, (ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 3/2/65; upi, Chic. Trib., 3/2/65; ap, NYT, 3/3/65; Av. Wk., 3/8/65)
Designs for an aircraft with speed potential of 17,500 mph were being studied by both usaf and NASA, reported the Washington Daily-News. Called the Scramjet (Supersonic Combustion Ramjet) by usaf and the hypersonic Ramjet by nasa, the aircraft could reach about 180,000-ft. altitude with the Ramjet engine and then be boosted into space by a small auxiliary hydrogen rocket motor. Above 180,000 ft. there would not be enough oxygen to support the Ramjet engine’s combustion. The aircraft would fire retrorockets to reenter the atmosphere and return to earth. One of three competing companies would be selected to begin work on test engine hardware by summer 1966. (Wash. Daily News, 12/7/65, 3)
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever predicted at a Retired Officers’ Luncheon in Washington, D.C., that “the next major breakthrough in international commerce will be low cost, long haul air transportation, which could be derived in large part from prior military experience.” Gen. Schriever said he recognized “that there are problems involved in translating military systems into commercial systems . . . but these problems can be successfully attacked and solved if there is adequate long range planning now.” (Text) White’s extravehicular activity, planned for the second orbit, but delayed until the third to allow astronauts more preparation time, began at 3:45 p.m. edt. The cabin was depressurized; White, equipped with tether carrying oxygen and communication and with chest pack for emergency oxygen supply, emerged from the spacecraft just past Hawaii. Carrying a modified 35 mm. single-lens reflex camera loaded with color film and propelled by a hand-held, oxygen-jet gun, he went three times to the full length of his 25-ft. tether and then returned, using the gun to halt his motion and prevent his hitting the spaceship. When the gas supply in the gun was depleted, he returned to the spacecraft by gently tugging on the tether line. At one point, McDivitt exclaimed:	“You smeared my windshield, you dirty dog.” Flight plans had called for a ten-minute walk in space but White remained outside the spacecraft for 22 min. He experienced no disorientation during his “walk.” When he finally heeded commands to return to the capsule, he had difficulty closing the hatch and decided not to reopen it to jettison excess equipment. “It’s the saddest moment of my life,” White said as he reentered the spacecraft. On June 5 during the 17th orbit, the astronauts spoke to their wives at msc. During the 20th orbit, McDivitt spotted a satellite with “big arms sticking out.” He was unable to identify it positively. On June 6 during the 48th orbit, trouble developed with the spacecraft’s computer and attempts to repair it with the aid of ground instructions failed. The malfunctioning computer made it necessary for GEMINI IV to reenter on a ballistic trajectory. Throughout the flight the daily routine of the astronauts included eating, exercise, and performance of medical and scientific experiments. They alternated rest periods. During 12 of the 62 orbits, when gemini iv passed through a heavy radiation area called the South Atlantic anomaly, Astronauts McDivitt and White switched on radiation and magnetic field measuring devices to take readings inside and outside the spacecraft and near their bodies. They also attempted to improve the knowledge of the earth’s terrain through high-quality color photographs; to measure with instruments the electrostatic June 3; Space walk o{ gemini iv Astronaut Edward H. White. charge that accumulates in space and on objects in space; to better define the magnitude and direction of the earth’s geomagnetic field; to test the accuracy of part of a prototype navigational system for future space capsules; to measure heartbeats to try to determine the effects of prolonged weightlessness on functioning of the heart; to determine the effects of limited exercise in space through use of a tension cord; to take high-resolution photographs of cloud formations over the earth to aid weathermen in improved forecasting from weather satellites; to determine more exactly the elevation of the earth’s atmosphere and its layers through use of filtered film; and to determine if long periods of weightlessness might make the bones brittle. On June 7, to begin reentry, McDivitt fired a 100-lb. thrusting rocket for two minutes, 41 sec.—one second too long—to guide the capsule into an orbit with 156.2-mi (252-km.J apogee and 100-mi. (161-km. perigee. Twelve minutes later, McDivitt fired the retro-rockets; 2% min. later he placed the spacecraft into slow rotation to reduce reentry dispersion. Communications with the spacecraft then ceased for about 4 min. as ion-sheath blackout phase of reentry began. GEMINI iv entered the final stage of reentry at 1:07 p.m. edt when the stabilizing chute emerged and damped the oscillations of the descending craft. The main parachute opened shortly afterward and slowed the spacecraft for its final landing at 1:13 p.m. EDT, about 450 mi. east of Cape Kennedy. The landing was 40 mi. off target because of the one-second error in the firing of the thrusting rockets and one-second delay in the firing of the retrorockets. Fifteen minutes after splashdown, Navy frogmen, lowered into the water by helicopter, placed a flotation collar around the capsule. Before egressing from the spacecraft to be hoisted to helicopter, astronauts took biomedical data on themselves. About 40 min. later, Majors McDivitt and White were landed by helicopter on the flight deck of the'carrier Wasp. They were taken immediately to the ship’s sick bay for postflight examinations. Dr. Charles Berry, Chief Flight Surgeon for the astronauts, said after the examinations:	“We have knocked down an awful lot of straw men. We had been told that we would have an unconscious astronaut after four days of weightlessness. Well, they’re not. We were told that the astronaut would experience vertigo, disorientation when he stepped out of that spaceship. We hit that one over the head.” The most serious problem was fatigue. “Both men were bushed,” said Dr. Berry. Maj. McDivitt had a few flecks of caked blood in his nostrils, caused by the dryness of the mucous membranes from inhaling pure oxygen for so long. X-rays taken of the astronauts’ little fingers and heel bones both before and after the flight to determine if long exposure to weightlessness would cause a substantial loss of calcium were being studied. Commenting on the historical significance of the Gemini flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, Associate Administrator of nasa’s Office of Manned Space Flight, said the flight had included “at least two world firsts”: a record length for two-man flights and the first time a pilot had maneuvered outside a ship with a propulsion gun, which gave him control over his movements. American astronauts had flown a total of 259 hrs. 34 min. in space; Soviet astronauts had accumulated 507 hrs. and 16 min. (NASA Release 65-158; nasa Proj. Off.; NYT, 6/4/65, 1,15; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/4/65, A1,A6,A10; Wash. Post, 6/4/65, A1,A7,A8; WSJ, 6/4/65, 4; Clark, NYT, 6/5/65, 1,12; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/5/65, A3; Wash. Post, 6/5/65, A1.A7; NYT, 6/6/65, 1,70; NYT, 6/7/65, 22C; Wash. Post, 6/7/65, A1,A4,A6; Balt. Sun, 6/7/65; Justice, Wash. Post, 6/ 8/65; Simons, Wash. Post, 6/8/65; Time, 6/8/65, 20,25,25A; NYT, 6/8/65, 22C; NYT, 6/9/65, 1,22; Lee, Houston Post, 6/9/65; Wash. Post, 6/11/65, Al; Wash. Eve. Star, 6/13/65, Al; Wash. Post, 6/15/ 65, Al.)
Harold B. Finger, Director of NASA Nuclear Systems and Space Power and Manager of the aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, discussed NASA’s electric thrustor program in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology: “We conducted the first successful flight test of an electric rocket engine in July, using the SERT 1 spacecraft. This flight demonstrated that ion beam neutralization will take place satisfactorily in space and, therefore, eliminated the only uncertainty regarding the basic feasibility of successful space operation. A second major accomplishment was the design, fabrication, and test of a 30 kilowatt thrustor. This thrustor is 10 times larger than previous ion engines, and demonstrates that we are successfully developing the engineering relations required to build the mega-watt size thrustors needed for spacecraft prime propulsion.” Discussing nuclear propulsion programs, he said: “1964 was a year of significant progress in the Nuclear Rocket Program. It was marked by the successful completion of the kiwi series of reactor development experiments and the successful initiation of the nerva reactor testing. These reactor experiments, coupled with work in other portions of our Nuclear Rocket Program, provide assurance that the graphite core nuclear rocket can be available to fulfill its role as the next major space propulsion system. “Of particular significance in 1964 was the successful demonstration of the adequacy of the reactor structural design, the elimination of reactor structural vibrations, full power reactor operation for over ten minutes at an altitude equivalent specific impulse of about 750 seconds, a rapid automatic startup, the ability to restart the rocket reactor, the determination of the effect of a maximum reactor power excursion, and the neutronic investigation of two rocket reactors located side-by-side as would be necessary in clustered engine configurations. . . . “During this year emphasis will be placed upon extending our reactor technology to higher temperature, longer duration, and higher power while we proceed as rapidly as possible to close coupled nuclear rocket engine system testing. We face this task of developing nuclear rocket technology including component, subsystem, and engine system work, with a confidence that is based on the solid accomplishments in our reactor development program and with the knowledge that the technology we are developing will provide the propulsion capability that will ultimately be required for extensive space exploration.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 243-300)
A half-length 260-in.-dia. solid rocket motor generated 3.5 million pounds thrust during a successful two-minute test firing at Aerojet General’s Dade County, Fla., facilities. Firing tested strength of the maraging steel motor case, structural integrity of the cast propellant, the insulation, and the ablative nozzle; it demonstrated that massive quantities of solid fuel could be controlled under firing conditions. Test was part of the national large solid motor technology program initiated by usaf in 1963 and transferred to NASA in 1965. (nasa Release 65-295, 65-311; lrc Release 65-65)
LUNA VI, 3,179-lb. instrumented moon probe, was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. with a multi-stage rocket into a parking orbit and then fired on a trajectory toward the moon. All onboard equipment was said to be functioning normally and the trip was scheduled to last about three and a half days, according to Tass announcement. (Tass, 6/8/65)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to altitude of 204.67 km. (127.2 mi.) with Rice University experiment to make time resolution measurements of electron fluxes within an aurora for use in determining transit times of these electrons from their sources. Performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt. srl)
A Centaur rocket similar to the vehicle launched successfully into a simulated lunaT-transfer trajectory Aug. 11 from Kennedy Space Center, NASA, and a model of mariner iv photographic Mars probe were being exhibited in the NASA display at Cleveland’s Natural Science Museum. NASA had contributed displays to the museum for about 10 yrs. (lrc Release 65-60)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by nasa from Wallops Station, boosted 51-lb. payload with ionosphere experiment for the Univ. of Illinois and the gca Corp. to 113-mi. (182-km.) peak altitude. Payload carried instrumentation to measure electron and ion density and solar radiation in D and E layers of the ionosphere. No recovery was required since data from the experiments were radioed to ground stations during the seven-minute flight. Experiment was last nasa 1964—65, iqsy project. (Wallops Release 65-79; ap, Wash. Post, 12/17/65, A8)
Basing his judgment on successful Feb. 27 firing of Thiokol’s 156-in. solid propellant rocket motor, Harold W. Ritchey, President of Thiokol Chemical Corp., predicted U.S. could produce within 30 months a flya-ble rocket capable of generating 7 million lbs. of thrust. Brig. Gen. Joseph J. Bleymaier (usaf), Deputy Commander (Manned Systems) of usaf Space Systems Div., commented: “. . . this firing provides us with final proof that we can configure an all-solid space booster of tremendous capability when the requirement presents itself.” (Appel, NYT, 3/5/65)
Sir William Hildred, Director General of the International Air Transport Association, said in an address at the Association’s 21st annual meeting that proposed supersonic jet airliners would face stiff competition from giant subsonic jets expected on international airways by 1967. Sir William said the airlines favored supersonic airliners, such as the planned British-French Concorde, if they could provide faster transportation “without insuperable financial, technical or operational problems.” He said the Concorde was likely to be available in 1971-72, and its American counterpart in 1973-74. But before that, Sir William continued, giant air buses, “stretched” subsonic jets seating up to 250 passengers, would be available. (NYT, 10/25/65, 66) During week of October 25: First two H-l rocket engines uprated to 205.000	lbs. thrust were delivered from Rocketdyne’s Neosho, Mo., plant to Chrysler Corp.’s Space Division in New Orleans. Later, at the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, H-l engines would be installed in Saturn ib vehicles to be used in the early stages of the Apollo program. The uprated engines would add a total of about 40.000 lbs. thrust to nasa’s Saturn ib booster, increasing the total thrust of the eight-engine cluster to 1,640,000 lbs. (msfc Release 65-269)
Soviet Cosmonaut Col. Pavel Popovich, who orbited the earth 48 times in August 1962, said during a televised news conference in Moscow: “In the future, we shall be able to discard the cord connecting the cosmonaut with his craft. A small rocket engine will help the man to return to his ship.” Vasily Seleznev, Soviet doctor of technology, told the news conference he thought the significance for further space research of Leonov’s leaving his craft was that “in [the] future cosmonauts will take part in assembling spaceships. There may also arise the need for repairing the craft and, what is most important, there is the prospect of travel to other planets.” Seleznev said the Russians hoped to reach the moon in the not too distant future. (Rosenfeld, Wash. Post, 3/19/65, 1, 2)
USAF 1,175-lb. Project Asset reentry glider, last in a test series of six, was launched from Cape Kennedy by a Thor-Delta rocket booster on a 13,300 mph suborbital flight; the spacecraft then was lost at sea. The experiment was to test materials for future lifting body reentry designs; it consisted of 2,000 tiny heat-sensitive spots in ten different colors designed to change hue as the glider came back through the atmosphere from an altitude of 40 mi. usaf said that most of the information sought had been radioed to the ground during the 30 min. flight, but that visual examination of the glider was necessary for data on heat distribution. Officials presumed the glider sank into the sea, although intermittent radio signals received had indicated it had been at least partially afloat for some hours. Planes and ships were combing an area in the Atlantic Ocean about 2,750 mi. southeast of Cape Kennedy for the missing craft, (ap, Wash. Post, 2/24/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 134)
A successful 60-sec. ground test of the solid-fuel rocket programed to launch Japan’s first artificial satellite in 1968 was announced by Tokyo Univ. scientists. The rocket had a maximum thrust of 200,000 lbs. (Wash. Post, 5/30/65)
DOD’s Hibex, the high acceleration experimental booster, was successfully tested at White Sands Missile Range, N.Mex. (M&R, 3/8/65, 11)
Evaluation of the Soviet space effort should be done in terms of Russian rather than U.S. requirements and considerations, suggested William Hines in the Washington Evening Star: “To look at things from the Russian angle for a change may provide a new view of the whole space race.” Hines suggested that the orbits of the Molniya satellites were egg-shaped because with 12-hr. periodicity “the Molniya-type satellite stays over the homeland about two-thirds of the time and comes back at exactly the same time each day.” He said that the U.S.S.R. probably had no weather satellites “because it does not need this branch of the weatherman’s art.” A possible reason that there were no polar-orbiting Soviet photographic reconnaissance satellites like the U.S.’s Samos was that they were not needed. No Saturn V-type launch vehicle development was evident, Hines concluded, possibly because “Russia’s approach to [lunar landing] is not necessarily ... the same as America’s. ... A revealing hint along this line is contained in a recent issue of Moscow News. . . . The author puts forward the suggestion that a lunar landing and return mission might be organized using two spacecraft rather than one, each of which could be launched by a rocket smaller than Saturn V.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/21/65, A14)
Two-stage Saphir rocket successfully fired by France from Hammaguir Range, Algeria, reached 720-mi. altitude, French Armed Forces Minister announced. Saphir, combined with a third stage already tested successfully, would he used to orbit the first French satellite toward the end of November 1965. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 10/12/65, A3)
First cooperative sounding rocket experiment sponsored by NASA and the Netherlands Organization for the Advancement of Pure Research (zwo) was successfully conducted by Dutch scientists at Coronie, Surinam. Object of the experiment was to measure winds in the equatorial upper atmosphere by releasing a cloud of sodium vapor to be illuminated by the sun and tracked. Launching, using a Nike-Apache rocket, was first of four to be conducted under a memorandum of understanding signed in June 1964. The three subsequent launches were successfully conducted Sept. 21, Sept. 24, and Sept. 27. Dutch launch team had trained at Wallops Station, Va., earlier this year. (NASA Release 65-299; nasa Rpts. srl)
Dr. Werner R. Kirchner, vice president and manager of Solid Rocket Operations, Aerojet-General Corp., received aiaa’s James H. Wyld Propulsion Award during the Institute’s Propulsion Joint Specialists’ Conference in Colorado Springs. He was cited for “outstanding contributions to the field of solid rocketry for over 15 years, including the development of thrust-vector control and thrust-reverser systems that made possible the use of solid rocket motors in ballistic missiles.” (NYT, 6/17/65, 54M)
In an article suggesting the possibility of catastrophe during the Gemini gt-4 flight, William Hines had said in the Washington Evening Star: “The truth is that the only ‘first’ the United States has a chance to achieve in Gemini 4 is ‘first casualties in space’—and nobody (including the Russians) seek this dubious record.” Commenting on the planned “rendezvous,” he said: “. . . the other and more questionable added spectacular on the present mission—is a risky business of unknown proportions . . . There are several purely technical objections to this exercise. First, it is not part of the original Gemini 4 mission, but an afterthought. Second, the spacecraft was not built for rendezvous. Third, the rocket was never envisioned as a target vehicle and is uncontrollable in space. . . . “But if tragedy should strike as a result of something that happens on the first few orbits of Gemini 4, how will the responsibility be fixed: As pilot error ... or politician’s error?” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/3/65)
nasa launched an Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., to investigate characteristics of the Ikeya-Seki comet. Reaching peak altitude of 111 mi., the 245-lb. payload, designed by scientists at the Univ. of Colorado and JPL, contained a scanning spectrometer, a filter wheel photometer, and related equipment to obtain spectra of the head and tail of the comet and to measure radiation. Data would assist in analyzing the materials in the comet and would be coordinated with observations conducted by other scientists. (Wallops Release 65-67)
At Austin, Tex., Administrator James E. Webb announced that Dr. Robert C. Seamans would become the Deputy Administrator of NASA, filling the position held by the late Dr. Hugh L. Dryden. Dr. Seamans joined NASA as Associate Administrator of NASA on September 1, 1960. In this post he was general manager of NASA’s operations, including field laboratories, research centers, rocket testing and launching facilities, and a world-wide network of tracking stations. (eph)
nasa’s pioneer VI interplanetary probe was successfully launched into heliocentric orbit from Eastern Test Range with an Improved Thrust Augmented Delta booster. Main Delta engine and three solid strap-on motors fired together and burned for 43 sec.; burned-out casings were jettisoned 70 sec. after launch; main engine burned out after two minutes 45 sec. Delta second stage ignited after two minutes 59 sec.; first stage separated and fell away; shroud was jettisoned at two minutes 59 sec. Second stage burned six and two-thirds minutes, then stage coasted for some 16 min. During coast phase, spacecraft was pointed in direction for injection into solar orbit and, with third stage, was spin-stabilized. Nine seconds after spin-up third stage separated from second, then third stage ignited and burned for 23 sec. Two seconds after third stage burnout, pioneer vi separated from the burned-out stage 346 mi. above Africa and was now in solar orbit. Two seconds after third stage separation (about 25 min. after launch), spacecraft booms automatically deployed; automatic changes began to orient the spacecraft perpendicular to the sun. Sun orientation maneuver took about five minutes. The 175-lb., drum-shaped pioneer vi, first of four Pioneer spacecraft to be launched at six-month intervals, would study the solar windstream; investigate the sun’s magnetic field and chart it from several locations in the plane of earth’s orbit; attempt to differentiate between cosmic rays coming from the sun and galactic cosmic rays originating from beyond the solar system. Closest approach to the sun would be about 76 million miles and would be reached after 155 days of flight. The six scientific experiments, provided by four universities and arc and gsfc, were functioning normally, (nasa Release 65-375; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/16/65, A14; Wash. Post, 12/17/65, A8; ap, NYT, 12/17/65, 29; WSJ, 12/17/65,1)
British designers had perfected a miniature rocket costing only $2,240 per copy, it was reported. Nine ft. in length with a 7%-in. diameter, the rocket would use solid fuel and reach a speed of 3,500 mph, sending the casing containing scientific instruments to maximum altitude of 80 mi. plus, (ap, Kansas City Times, 1/4/65)
First Saturn V booster (S-ic-t) had been moved to static test stand at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center to prove out its propulsion system. The 280,000-lb. stage, developed jointly by msfc and Boeing Co., had two tanks with total capacity of 4,400,000 lbs. of liquid oxygen and kerosene, and five F-l engines, each weighing ten tons, which provided total thrust of 7.5 million lbs. (msfc Release 65-47; Marshall Star, 3/3/65, 1, 6)
Hopper,” a versatile rocket-propelled Lunar Flying Vehicle (Lfv) to transport Apollo astronauts on exploration flights of the moon’s surface, had been designed by Bell Aerosystems Co. as a result of a 12-month study conducted for NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Bell announced. The 400-lb., four-legged, rectangular Lfv would be desk size and propelled by a cluster of five 100-lb-thrust rocket engines; it could fly 50 mi. nonstop. Bell also disclosed receipt of a $489,898 follow-on nasa contract to design a Manned Flying System (Mfs) capable of carrying one astronaut-scientist and 300 lbs. of equipment or two astronauts. Intended primarily as an exploratory device, the Mfs would be able to fly 15 mi. round trip without fueling. (Bell Aerosystems Co. Release)
Marshal Nikolai I. Krylov, Soviet commander of the strategic rocket forces, said in Krasnaya Zvezda:	“Representatives of the aggressive imperialist circles often brag about their rocket-nuclear weapons. In answer to this we can state with assurance that in respect to the quality and quantity of rocket-nuclear weapons, we not only do not lag behind those who threaten us with war, hut far surpass them.” (Krasnaya Zvezda, 2/6/65, 2, atss-t Trans.)
Italy launched a French Centaure rocket in collaboration with the European Space Research Organization (esro), the Italian Defense Ministry announced. The rocket was launched from the Salto di Quirra range in Sardinia to gather information on atmospheric particles at between 60- and 100-mi. altitude. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 12/8/65, 3)
Super Guppy, a five-story-high aircraft designed to carry large rocket sections, made a safe emergency landing at Edwards AFB after part of its aluminum skin peeled off during a high-speed dive. No one was injured. Aircraft was undergoing flight tests for certification by faa. (ap, Wash. Post, 9/26/65)
Referring to a French rocket launching site, comparable to Kennedy Space Center, that would be operating in French Guiana by 1968, Pierre J. Huss said in the New York Journal American: “French experts claim the Guiana location makes it possible to fire toward the east at an angle that makes use of the earth’s rotation speed. They say it also offers optimal conditions for launching vehicles to the moon or Mars.” (Huss, N. Y. J/Amer., 7/8/65, 9)
Thiokol Chemical Corp.’s Reaction Motors Div. was awarded a $10,600,000 Navy contract to continue production of packaged liquid rocket engines for the Navy and Air Force Rull Pup missile. (Thiokol Release; WSJ, 7/6/65)
Brazilian Space Commission (cnae) would cooperate with U.S. and Argentine scientists in a study of hemispheric weather patterns, NASA announced. NASA and cnae had signed an agreement July 1 providing for the cooperative project, which would be part of the inter-American Experimental Meteorological Sounding Rocket Network (exametnet). First launchings were scheduled before the end of 1965 from Natal, Brazil, and Wallops Station, (nasa Release 65-258)
Aerobee 150A sounding rocket, launched from Wallops Station, Va., attained peak altitude of 90.5 mi. (145 km.). Primary experimental objective was to measure spectral irradiance of the stars Spica and Alkaid in the wavelength interval from 1,100 A to 4,000 A. Instrumentation consisted of an ultraviolet stellar spectrometer with photometers and optical telescope. Attitude control was obtained with a modified Attitude Control System (Acs), a roll-stabilized gyro platform, and an optical tracker—the combination known as Strap. The Strap system performed correctly. Due to an incorrect gain setting, the star-tracker failed to lock-on throughout most of the flight. The telescope and spectrometer functioned properly, but obtained no data due to the failure to lock-on. Experiment was conducted by GSFC. (nasa Rpt. srl) During May: A camera capsule from the Saturn I sa-7, launched from Eastern Test Range Sept. 18, 1964, was found in shallow waters off San Salvador in the Bahamas. Color film in the capsule had deteriorated and was not usable. The capsule was the third one found of the eight flown on the sa-7. The first two were found in November 1964, near San Salvador and Eleuthera Islands. Film in these capsules was in good condition. (Marshall Star, 5/19/65, 6)
A moving model of a proposed lunar exploration vehicle under development by the Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. was demonstrated on two acres of simulated moonscape. The two-section wheeled craft, known as a mobile base simulator, lumbered at five mph around moonlike craters made of cinders and coal dust at the Grumman test field, Calverton, L. I. The Grumman engineer in charge of the project, Edward G. Markow, explained that the aluminum working model, valued at $250,000, was being developed in the hope that NASA officials would buy the project for use possibly by 1975. The exploration craft would have a lunar range of 250 mi. and accommodate two astronauts with 50 lbs. of equipment for perhaps two weeks. It was designed for use with the Saturn V booster. {NYT, 11/30/65, 22)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed the national space program in address before the Hartford Rotary Club, Hartford, Conn. Looking toward the future, he said: “The Gemini and Apollo-Saturn programs are providing this country with a broad base of technological, managerial, and resources capability which makes feasible a wide spectrum of space missions beyond the first lunar landings. This capability can be exploited in a wide range of earth orbital, lunar orbital, and lunar surface missions. . . . “Over 90 percent of the Apollo program is directly applicable to our earth orbital capability. Many interesting ideas are under consideration on how to use this extended earth orbit capability to yield great benefits to mankind in his daily life on earth, and to conduct much significant scientific research. “We are also studying the use of modified Apollo vehicles for missions both in orbit about the moon and for exploration of the moon’s surface. In lunar orbit, we can do mapping, surveying, and exploration of the moon. On the moon, we can conduct detailed exploration of the surface environment and the moon’s overall properties. We are also looking at the moon as a base for astronomical and for biological studies. “All of these applications will capitalize on the presence of men in space. There is no substitute for having man’s abilities available right on the spot during a mission, with his human intellect to cope with the unexpected and operate in an unplanned or unprogramed manner. . . .” (Text, CR, 4/7/65, A5656-58)
At the dedication of a new laboratory at Worcester Polytechnic Institute in memory of rocketry pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard, afsc Commander General Bernard A. Schriever said that Dr. Goddard’s writings still provided guidance to 1965 rocket men. General Schriever said the nation had made significant strides since Goddard conducted his first successful rocket launch 39 years ago. “His booster and its payload reached an altitude of 41 feet and traveled 184 feet before it impacted after a flight lasting about 21/; seconds. By contrast, the first two-man Gemini orbital space shot scheduled for later this month will reach several hundred miles into space for three orbits. . . . “The Air Force Titan n booster and the Gemini capsule stand almost 110 feet—over twice the altitude achieved by Dr. Goddard’s historic rocket.” Mrs. Esther G. Goddard, Dr. Goddard’s widow, attended the ceremonies, (ap, Balt. Sun, 3/17 '65)
Canada’s National Defence Research Council said it would negotiate an agreement with NASA for Canadian operation of the rocket launching range at Churchill, Manitoba. The announcement said such an agreement would open the way for a new partnership between the two countries in research. (NYT, 2/26/65, 13)
U.S. would make the first lunar landing because the “Saturn 5 booster ... is the only one anywhere powerful enough to do that,” predicted NASA Administrator James E. Webb, speaking to the International Radio and Television Society in New York. He believed the U.S. was ahead of Russia in cumulative knowledge of manned spaceflight, but conceded that Russia was probably 18 mo. ahead in other areas—specifically, multimanned spacecraft and the building and use of big boosters. Webb refused to classify Russia’s LUNA VII mission as unsuccessful, explaining: “They’re practicing how to do these things. They must have gained a good deal of information from it.” (San Diego Union, 10/10/65)
ogo n Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (Ogo-C) was launched by NASA from Vandenberg afb with Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena D booster. Because of a slight malfunction in the launch vehicle’s primary guidance system, orbit achieved had the following parameters: apogee, 939 mi. (1,511 km.); perigee, 250 mi. (403.1 km.); period, one hour 45 min.; inclination, 87°. Planned orbit had been somewhat lower: 575-mi. (925-km.) apogee, 207-mi. (333.3-km.) perigee, one-hour 37-min. period, and 86° inclination. Most of the 20 onboard experiments were not expected to be affected by the malfunction; OGO n’s solar panels and instrumented booms deployed as planned and the spacecraft achieved three-axis stabilization. Second of the seven spacecraft programed for NASA’s Ogo program, OGO II weighed 1,150 lb. and contained more than 100,000 parts, including a communications system capable of transmitting 64,000 bits per second in real time and 128,000 bits of information per second from tape playback. Its mission was to concentrate on near-earth space phenomena with emphasis on global mapping of the geomagnetic field, measurements of the neutral, ionic, and electronic composition of the earth’s atmosphere. Data would be correlated with solar ultraviolet and x-ray emissions, and such events as particle dumping in the auroral zones and airglow. Although it returned good experiment data, OGO II was to be considered a failure (see Oct. 24). (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Releases 65-314, 65-368; ap; NYT, 10/15/65, 14; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/15/65, A8; ap, Wash. Post, 10/15/65, A4)
Writing in the January 1965 issue of Astronautics and Aeronautics, Dr. Harold B. Finger, Manager of aec—nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office (snpo), summed up the various components of the advanced nuclear propulsion program and emphasized the importance of the solid-core nuclear rocket within the field: “Solid-core nuclear rockets are the best understood and most nearly developed of the many advanced nuclear-propulsion concepts being investigated in this country. They offer the most assured and earliest possible means for very substantial improvements and advances in space-flight propulsion capability. Furthermore, because solid-core nuclear rockets rely heavily on technology and techniques of chemical rocket engines and although much extension of these techniques is required, no fundamentally new engineering approaches are required to develop this new breed of substantially improved rocketry for actual flight use. Solid-core nuclear rockets can be relied on for our future space missions. “Progress has been made in electric propulsion, particularly in the thruster area, and important research data and technology are also beginning to be provided in the difficult area of nuclear-reactor electric generating systems required for prime electric propulsion. “Beyond these systems, other advanced nuclear propulsion concepts are not yet well-enough understood to justify undertaking significant development efforts.” (A&A, 1/65, 30-35) During January: Nine areas of scientific experiments for the first manned Apollo lunar landing mission had been summarized and experimenters were defining them for NASA. Space sciences project group expected to publish the complete report by Mar. 1, to be followed by requests for proposals from industry on designing and producing instrument packages. A major effort was under way by a NASA task force making a time-motion study of how best to use the limited lunar stay-time of 2 hr. minimum for the first flight. (Av. Wk., 2/1/65, 13)
NASA successfully launched an Aerobee 150a sounding rocket to peak altitude of 110 mi. from Wallops Island, Va., with instrumented payload to measure the ultraviolet and visible light emitted from the earth’s atmosphere between 37 mi. and 125 mi. An Attitude Control System (Acs) was also flown. Good spectral data were collected. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA announced completed negotiations with Aerojet-General Corp. for two-phase $11,163,051 contract to design, develop, and deliver three exhaust nozzles for use in testing the 5,000-mw Phoebus nuclear rocket reactor. Phase I would be a $1,837,971 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract and would include four-month preliminary design study of the nozzle, and evaluation of fabrication and testing methods as well as a joint design effort involving Aerojet, lasl and American Car and Foundry, Inc. Phase II would be a $9,325,080 incentive contract and, relying on the results of Phase I, Aerojet would be required to design, develop, test and deliver three nozzles to the Nuclear Rocket Development Sta., Jackass Flats, Nev., by the end of 1967. The contract would be under management of the joint aec-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, (nasa Release 65—196)
A copper-plated 461//>-lb. “minilab,” instrumented to measure radiation variations in the earth’s magnetic field, was launched to 8,700-mi. altitude from Cape Kennedy on a four-stage Blue Scout Jr. rocket. It carried three sensing devices designed to produce a radiation profile during its two-hour climb into the Van Allen radiation belt and the two-hour plunge back through the earth’s atmosphere to the Indian Ocean, (upi, NYT, 3/31/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 138)
Along with the development of a nuclear weapon, Communist China has also conducted a program to develop rockets,” wrote Cheng Chu-yuan in Military Review. He continued: “Since early 1956, when Peking mapped out the 12-year plan for the development of science and technology, jet propulsion has been listed as one of the 12 major tasks, exceeded only by the use of nuclear energy. The project is under the supervision of the Institute of Mechanics in the CAS. “In 1958 several new institutes were set up within the Academy—an Institute of Upper Atmosphere Physics in Wuhan; and an Institute of Automation and Remote Control and an Institute of Mechanics and Electronics both in Peking. All of these institutes participate in the rocket program. . . . “The Science and Technology University of the CAS, the Tsinghua University in Peking, and the Peking Aeronautical Engineering College are the three important centers for training engineers and technicians in rocketry. During the past ten years, more than 3,000 college students, specialists in aeronautical engineering, have been graduated. In 1963 the China Aeronautical Engineering Society was formally established, indicating the rapid growth of technical manpower in this field. “Since Communist China has several capable men with long years of experience in the rocket field, and since China began her rocket project almost in the same period with the nuclear weapons program, the development of a rocket booster might soon be anticipated. It is quite possible that China may launch her first rocket within the next two or three years.” (Military Review, 5/65, 10F)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center analysis showed that radiation shielding offered by the Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) was negligible: a particle flux producing a 1-rem dose in the Apollo command module would produce a 17-rem dose in the Lem. The Apollo space radiation warning system would provide advance indication of need for astronauts to return from the Lem to the command-service modules. (.M&R, 3/22/65, 23) During March: usaf San Bernardino Air Materiel Area reported that Atlas and Titan icbm’s scheduled for phase-out by summer would be used in antimissile and space booster research and development assignments. Requests had been received to use the silos as civil defense shelters and for storage of petroleum, gas, and grain. (M&R, 3/22/65, 12)
tiros x meteorological satellite was launched from Eastern Test range by a Thrust-Augmented Delta booster into a near-perfect sun-synchronous orbit from which it would photograph tropical storm breeding areas. Orbital parameters: apogee, 517 mi. (832 km.) ; perigee, 458 mi. (737 km.); period, 100.6 min.; inclination to the equator, 81.4°. The spacecraft at first was spinning too fast for picture-taking because of inability to command activation of an automatic slowdown device. A more intense ground signal sent during the second orbit activated the device, slowing the satellite’s spin rate from 138 rpm to about 13 rpm. tiros x would photograph the hurricane-breeding area between 70° north and 30° south latitude, about 60 to 80 percent of the earth. Its two vidicon cameras would take more than 400 pictures daily, tiros ix in its “cartwheel” movement in orbit had been able to provide about 100 percent coverage of the earth daily. The weather observation spacecraft was the 10th successful Tiros (Television Infrared Observation Satellite) to be launched by NASA in as many attempts, tiros x was funded by the Weather Bureau, while the previous nine were NASA research and development spacecraft. It was one of three satellites purchased by Weather Bureau in 1963 “to be used to assure continuity of satellite observations for operational purposes.” (nasa Release 65-229; NASA Release 65-197; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/65, A3; ksc Spaceport News, 7/8/65, 4)
Dr. Joseph F. Shea, Apollo Program manager at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, announced at a press conference at North American Aviation’s Tulsa facilities that the Tulsa plant would build 16 Apollo service modules. Apollo contract work there totaled more than $61 million. (Leslie, Tulsa Daily World, 4/15/65)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said in a telephone interview with the New York Times that the proposal to fly the Gemini 6 and Gemini 7 spacecraft on a dual flight originally had been made by Walter F. Burke and John F. Yardley of McDonnell Aircraft Corp., the spacecraft’s manufacturer. This might permit rendezvous, but no docking, earlier than if NASA waited for the Agena malfunction to be found and corrected. If the launching pad, the Titan booster, and Gemini 6 could not be made ready in time to catch the Gemini 7 in orbit, “we would not have lost anything but the trying,” Dr. Gilruth said. As for the risk of having two manned spacecraft flying a few feet apart, “That’s no more dangerous than two fighters up there flying with each other,” he added. (Clark, NYT, 10/29/65, 13)
s—IC-T, 138-ft.-tall test version of Saturn V’s first stage, was static-fired for 2% min. at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center in first full-duration test-firing. The five F—1 engines, each consuming liquid oxygen and kerosene at the rate of three tons a second, generated 7.5	million lbs. thrust. Ability of the engines to steer the rocket was also successfully demonstrated. The five-engine cluster was mounted so that only the one in the middle of the cross-shaped array was stationary. The others could gimbal slightly in pairs, (msfc Release 65197; Marshall Star, 8/11/65, 1)
U.S.S.R. had offered to launch a French satellite with a Soviet rocket during space cooperation talks in October, a Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (ones) official told Space Business Daily, cnes had proposed launching an Imp-type payload into a 125,000-mi.-apogee orbit, but the Soviets preferred a 25,000-mi.-apogee orbit. (SBD, 11/16/65, 1)
Two Nike-Apache sounding rockets launched two sodium vapor trail experiments from Wallops Station, Va., as part of NASA’s upper atmosphere meteorological research program. Vapor trails were ejected through a region 40 to 124 mi. above earth. One rocket was fired on an azimuth of 90° (due east) and the other on a 130° azimuth (southeast) so1 that the sodium trails were in the same altitude region at about the same time but several miles apart to provide data on wind behavior variations over a lateral distance as well as at various altitudes. (Wallops Release 65-38)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., went to a peak altitude of 155.5 km. (96.6 mi.) The primary experimental objective was to obtain ultraviolet spectra of Mars and Orion by the use of four spectrographs, provided by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Because of an attitude control system failure no experimental results were obtained. (NASA Rpt. SRL)
nasa had awarded a $67,135 contract to the Univ. of Utah for a one-year study of chemical processes occurring during combustion of solid-propellant rocket motors. Study would attempt to better understand the interaction of gaes in the combustion zone by using recently developed fast-scanning spectroscopic instruments, (nasa Release 65-390)
In testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, summarized significant mission results: “U.S. scientific satellites achieved the following firsts: discovery of the radiation belt, determination of the earth’s irregular geoid, ionospheric topside sounding (with Canada), solar spectroscopy, x-ray and ultraviolet satellite astronomy, polar orbits, and highly eccentric orbits to map the earth’s magnetosphere. Our deep space probes achieved the first successful direct monitoring of the interplanetary environment, the first lunar surface detail, and the first successful flight to Venus. We may soon achieve the first successful flight to Mars, if mariner iv completes its mission. In launch vehicle development, this program has yielded the first rocket stage using the high energy propellant combination of hydrogen and oxygen. It has also yielded the first and only all solid propellant space booster. U.S. meteorological satellites have yielded the following firsts: daylight cloud photography, night cloud observations including surface and cloud top temperatures, world cloud coverage, global heat balance and stratospheric temperature measurements, and direct cloud picture transmission to local users. Our communication satellites have been first in the following achievements: erection of large structures in space and their use as passive reflectors of radio signals; active repeating of radio signals at various altitudes and orbits of interest to system designers; transoceanic and intercontinental relay of teletype, facsimile, voice, data, and television; and achievement of the first true geostationary orbit. “The specific record of 1964 space missions of the Space Science and Applications Program ... is particularly informative because most major program areas achieved at least one highly significant success in 1964. Of the 10 scientific satellite missions attempted, 7 achieved full success and 2 partial success.” Dr. Newell observed that syncom ill communications satellite had been placed in a “virtually perfect circular equatorial orbit,” then maneuvered “to within about 1 mile of its station over the western Pacific where it successfully performed all its planned experiments. . . . The Syncom maneuver was comparable to the feat of Ranger VII in flying to within 6 miles of its target on the Moon. “Having completed our experiments with Syncoms II and III, we are turning them over to the Department of Defense. ... If required, full-time communications could be provided between the United States and southeast Asia by Syncom m. . . .” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 136-62)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket, with 51-lb. payload instrumented to measure electron and ion density and solar radiation in the D and E regions of the ionosphere to peak altitude of 110 mi. Experiment, conducted for the Univ. of Illinois and the GCA Corp. from Wallops Station, was part of International Quiet Sun Year 1964-65. (Wallops Release 65—58; nasa Rpt. srl)
David N. Buell of Chrysler Corp. told the Aviation-Space Writers’ Association Conference that an unmanned spacecraft could be launched to the sun by 1975 or 1980 with a modified Saturn IB/Centaur booster and that it could obtain information vital to space exploration and a better understanding of the universe. Buell envisioned the solar spacecraft as a bi-conal structure with the forward cone pointing toward the sun and acting as a sunshade, bolstered by refrigerants inside the craft, (upi, Wash. Post, 5/23/65)
USAF launched a Thor-Agena D booster with an unidentified satellite toward polar orbit from Vandenberg AFB. (upi, Denver Post, 1/17/65)
LUNA v, a 3,254-lb. instrumented moon probe, was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. on an undisclosed mission. According to Tass announcement, the probe was launched by multi-stage rocket into a parking orbit and then fired toward the moon. All onboard equipment was said to be functioning normally and a U.S.S.R. station tracking the probe was receiving “scientific information.” Tass reported that LUNA v was “moving along a trajectory close to the planned one.” At 10:00 p.m. Moscow time, the probe was 110,000 km. (68,323 mi.) from earth. (Tass, 5/9/65)
Successful completion of formal flight qualification tests of the uprated II—1 rocket engine for use in the Saturn tr space vehicle was announced jointly by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, under whose technical direction the engine was being developed, and by Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., its manufacturer. Two engines were used for the qualification program. In 51 firings they operated successfully for 4,581 seconds—more than 75 min.—and produced 200,000 lbs. of thrust (188,000 lbs. was previous power rating). i msfc: Release 65-96)
We must use a completely different approach. We must get away from this launching from pads, which costs millions and billions of dollars, to the more conventional way of taking off from a runway.’ ” Witze continued: “He predicts that after we have gone to the moon we will start over again. Project Apollo cannot be turned back, he says, but the next time ‘we must create an environment in space that can be used by men, not only for research but for commercial and military purposes.’ “This environment he is talking about is a permanent space station, one that will never come back into the atmosphere. This will require a logistics system—a recoverable, reusable space transporter to carry people and supplies back and forth to space. The Dyna-Soar was a crude but necessary step in this direction, replaced today by the concept of the aerospace plane. . . . “The Dornberger thesis is that a manned station in near space is as practical as a military base on Okinawa, a laboratory at the South Pole, or an aircraft parts and maintenance depot in Chateauroux. Once established, all that is needed is a logistics system to keep it going. From such a space station, expeditions can be sent to the moon, or many other places in space, with engines that give a thrust of only 20,000 pounds, instead of the millions of pounds required on one-way booster trips. . . .” Quoting Dr. Dornberger: “ ‘It took mankind hundreds of years to learn to use the sea, but only fifty years to use the air. Space can be used in twenty-five years, if we get started. I doubt that the use of space vehicles will be more hazardous than the use of submarines.’ ” (AF Mag., 10/65, 80-88)
A Saturn,/Apollo Applications Directorate had been established in the Office of Manned Space Flight, NASA announced. The new directorate would plan and direct programs utilizing technology developed in Project Apollo. M/Gen. David M. Jones (usaf) would be Acting Director of Saturn/ Apollo Applications in addition to his duties as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Manned Space Flight (Programs). Deputy Director would be John H. Disher, formerly Test Director in the Apollo Program Office. Melvyn Savage, who had served under Disher as Chief of Test Planning, would become Apollo Test Director, (nasa Release 65-265)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, with Univ. of Michigan pitot-static probe to measure pressure, temperature, and density from 15-km. to 115-km. altitudes. Experiment was not successful because of undetermined malfunction in the rocket during Apache-stage propulsion, (nasa Rpt. srl)
A J-2 rocket engine had been retired from service after being test-fired a total of 10,686 sec. in 60 separate tests, msfc announced. J-2, developed for NASA by Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, would burn liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen and develop 200,000	lbs. thrust at altitude. Five clustered J—2’s would provide a million lbs. thrust for the S-ii (second) stage of the Saturn V booster. A single J-2 would power the s-ivb, top stage for both the Saturn ib and Saturn V launch vehicles, (msfc Release 65—177)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a one-year $1.6-million contract to Aero Spacelines, Inc., for flying large rocket cargoes in its Super Guppy aircraft—the only aircraft in existence which could fulfill the size and weight requirement for the S-IVB stage of the Saturn vehicle, the Saturn IB and Saturn V instrument units, and the Lunar Excursion Module adapter. The agreement also provided for an extension of a previous NASA-Aero Spacelines contract for use of the Pregnant Guppy aircraft, (msfc Release 65-311)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf), addressing American Management Assn, conference in New York City, announced recent approval and initation of usaf Spacecraft Technology and Advanced Reentry Tests program (Start), “a four-fold research spacecraft program to develop unmanned test vehicles capable of maneuvering to a precision recovery site after reentering from orbit.” In a Baltimore Sun editorial, Albert Sehlstedt, Jr., said that the Martin Co. had designed for this program a new, wingless V-shaped plane, maneuverable in atmosphere because its shape would provide aerodynamic lift. The program would:	(1) launch the SV-5 by Atlas booster, (2) continue Asset experiments to test vehicles entering atmosphere at very high speeds, (3)	study effects of vehicles passing through atmosphere at slower speeds, and (4) relate to allied studies that had not yet led to specific designs for identifiable reentry vehicles. (Text; AFSC Release 31.65; Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 3/4/65)
Dr. Donald P. Burcham, Voyager project manager at jpl, told the Christian Science Monitor in an interview that NASA had decided to launch the Voyager spacecraft with the Saturn V booster instead of the Saturn IB. “This,” Dr. Burcham said, “means we can put a heavier retro-rocket pack on the spacecraft. It will enable us to release the lander after the spacecraft has gone into orbit around Mars instead of 10 days before reaching the planet, as planned earlier, and that will give us a better chance of putting a lander on the surface.” (Cowen, CSM, 12/1/65)
On U.S.S.R.’s Aviation Day, Soviet Defense Minister, CommanderinChief of Antiaircraft Units, Air Marshal V. A. Studets said in an interview with Nedelya that Soviet antiaircraft units could destroy any flying object with the first rocket: “. . . we have means that can in good time detect and destroy any flying apparatus of any size, at all altitudes, even the lowest. If the country is threatened by a ballistic missile, it will be met far away by an antimissile.” Soviet TV showed a film of a new aircraft reported to fly to nearly 95 km. (59 mi.) altitude at a speed of 6,500 km/h (4,500 mph) — mach 6. This aircraft would be used for cosmonaut training (as with the U.S.’s x-15a or nf-104a). No further details were available. (Nedelya, no. 33, 1965, 4-5; Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 8/18/65; Inter avia Air Letter, 8/20/65, 5)
A 160-ft.-tall Saturn I rocket had been erected in display of missiles and space vehicles at the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center Orientation Center, (msfc Release 65-305)
A Soviet booster capable of generating more than 60-million hp. had launched the instrumented spacecraft of the Proton series, Prof. Georgi V.	Petrovich disclosed in Aviatsiya i Cosmonavtika. Each engine had produced about 3-million-lbs. thrust at liftoff, usaf Titan m-c had produced 2.4-million-lbs. thrust when it was launched with an instrumented payload June 18. (Shabad, NYT, 11/14/65, 74)
German Space Research Commission (dkfw) recommended $460million West German space program between. 1966 and 1970: $250-$280 million would be spent on broad-based “vital-point” program; the balance would be used for West German participation in the European Space Research Organization (esro) and the European Launcher Development Organization (eldo). The Commission’s report emphasized three programs from its list of “vital points”: development of satellites, development of a recoverable sounding rocket, and construction of research installations. The report deplored the previous neglect of space research in Germany, emphasized that the funds recommended were minimal and that Germany’s late start in the space field would entail a high rate of annual increases in cost. At the end of the building stage, costs could “be adjusted to fairly fixed share of the gross national product.” (Wetmore, Av. Wk., 9/6/65, 51)
In U.S. launch vehicles hearings before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, NASA Administrator James E. Webb discussed recent study by the Aeronautics and Astronautics Coordinating Board’s Launch Vehicles Panel: “In considering the merits of canceling certain vehicles in order to provide quantity production of the remaining vehicles, the Launch Vehicle Panel of the AACB evaluated several alternatives against a forecast of DOD’s and NASA’s needs over the next 10 years. This space-mission forecast served as a basis for determining the number of launch vehicles required and the cost of producing the various combinations of these launch vehicles. “The result of the study is particularly interesting in that it shows a cost difference of less than 1 per cent among the alternative options. This difference is less than the accuracy of the data used in the analysis. The results indicate that any economies that might be realized by increased quantity production of boosters would be lost through cost of adapting specific mission spacecraft to a new vehicle where the costs of such work have already been incurred. . . . “The major advantages of the recent comprehensive study . . . , as distinct from previous reviews, were the development of much improved methods for estimating the costs of launch vehicles considering the effects of quantity production, variety of vehicles, and inplant workload; the use of an inclusive or overall forecast as a basis for determination of both dod and NASA space missions against which total launch vehicles costs could be calculated; and the value of the results of the study to NASA to confirm our judgment on the use of the SATURN i-b for the apollo and voyager missions. . . we are making extensive use of DOD-developed launch vehicles and will continue to do so for some time to come. However, a wider variety of first-stage boosters and upper stages is required by NASA space missions than by those of the DOD. We have requirements for a wider range of variety of size, payload, and velocity for our missions. We have been carefully investigating our future vehicle needs; optimum vehicle configurations; and the most promising advanced propulsion methods to be sure that our program will provide the options that the country will need in making decisions to undertake future missions. “. . . we are utilizing the channels and procedures established by the DOD—NASA launch vehicle agreement and by the AACB to coordinate the needs and activities of NASA and the DOD to assure the most effective national launch vehicle program. However, we are presenting to the Congress, in our budgets each year, the specific booster needs we have over and above those which can be met by DOD-developed systems. . . .”	(Hearings . . . National Space Launch Vehicles, 6-19)
William Cohen, Chief of Solid Propulsion Experimental Motors in NASA’s OART, discussed the great strides in large solid-propellant rocket motors taken in the past few years, in Astronautics & Aeronautics article. Among the new technologies he mentioned were maraging steels, ablative nozzles, vector control, and the cast-cure-test facility. Looking toward the future, Cohen said among the advanced concepts associated with large solids showing promise of success were reusable motor cases, insulation, and nozzle component; and failure-warning systems. (A&A, 2/65, 42-46)
Tokyo Univ. Aeronautical Institute announced successful firing of a three-stage Lambda research rocket from Uchinoura in southern Japan. The rocket reached an altitude of 680 mi. and landed in the Pacific northwest of the Marianas. (Reuters, NYT, 3/19/65)
Orville H. Daniel discussed small rockets—chiefly meteorological sounding rockets—in International Science and Technology. “Forty years ago, when Dr. Goddard was performing his first experiments, all rockets were small rockets. Today, with thrusts nearing 10 million pounds and rocket vehicles approaching the size of small skyscrapers, a 500-pound-thrust rocket seems like a relic of the past. Nevertheless, such small rockets remain as important to science and as challenging to technology as Dr. Goddard’s fledglings were in his day. About 1500 of them were fired last year for various scientific purposes. . . .” (Int. Sci. & Tech., 4/65, 32-37)
First S—IB flight model stage for the Saturn IB booster which left NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s Michoud Assembly Facility for Kennedy Space Center, NASA, aboard the barge Promise, was scheduled to arrive at KSC August 14. The 80-ft.-long S-IB stage would be joined with S—IVB second stage to make up the first Saturn ib launch vehicle. NASA planned to launch the 225-ft.-long booster in 1966. (msfc Release 65-206)
USAF awarded $6.5-million contract to Boeing Co. to build one groundtest and three flight-test models of a highly-reliable, low-cost upper stage for orbiting small and medium unmanned satellites. Called “Burner II,” the stage would be used with Thor standard launch vehicles and be adaptable for use with Atlas and Titan boosters. Burner II, which include a spherical solid-propellant rocket motor, inertial guidance system, and attitude-stabilization system, would bridge the payload gap between the dod/nasa Scout launch vehicle and the more expensive USAF Agena and Able-Star upper stages, (afsc Release 95.65)
Saturn V booster (s-ic—T stage) was successfully static-fired for 90 sec. at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center. During the test, longest to date, the five F-l engines developed 7.5 million lbs. thrust and all four outer engines were gimbaled to simulate the motion required to control the vehicle in flight, (msfc Release 65-148; Marshall Star, 5/16/65, 1)
Commenting on cancellation of the Gemini vi mission, an editorial in the New York Times said: “The Atlas-Agena rocket has performed so well on so many different missions in the past that its failure to achieve orbit—and the consequent impossibility of the planned rendezvous and docking experiment—comes as a sharp disappointment. But it will be worth while if it destroys the tendency toward complacency that has been increasingly visible recently. The difficulties that still lie ahead of the effort to land a man on the moon are far greater than those that have been surmounted to date.” (NYT, 10/26/65, 42M)
A brightly illuminated object in the sky near Langley afb, Va., was widely reported as a Ufo but identified by usaf as a weather balloon with the sun reflecting off its surface. (Newport News Daily Press, 2/3/65) February 3; oso li I Oso R2), nasa*s Orbiting Solar Observatory, was successfully launched into orbit from Cape Kennedy by a three-stage Delta rocket. Preliminary orbital elements: apogee, 393 mi.; perigee, 343 mi.; period, 97 min.; inclination, 33°. The 545-lh. spacecraft included parts salvaged from the Oso B. damaged last April prior to launch, and components of a spacecraft built for prototype testing. The second of eight spacecraft planned by NASA for direct observation of the sun, oso II carried eight scientific experiments and had two main sections: the wheel (lower) section provided stability by gyroscopic spinning and housed the telemetry, command, batteries, control electronics and gas spin-control arms, and live experiment packages; the sail (upper) section was oriented toward the sun and contained solar cells and solar-pointing experiments. For the first rime, the instruments, controlled by ground command, would scan the entire solar surface. Each scan required four minutes. February 3; NASA’s Orbiting Solar Observatory, OSO 11, was launched from Cape Kennedy, Fla. oso li experiments were intended to map the frequency and energy of solar emissions and represented a joint Govern meat-university-industry effort. NASA Goddard Space Flight Center managed the project. (NASA Press Kit Release 65-11: NASA Release 65-32; Goddard News. 2/3/65. 1-2)
Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge Space Technology Laboratories chosen as the winner in a two-year design competition to produce the rocket engine for Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem). The liquid-propellant engine was designed to vary its power output between a low of 1,000 lb. thrust and a high of 10,000 lb.	(NYT, 1/29/65)
usn recommissioned two rocket launching ships, the Carronade and the White River, and assigned them to the Pacific Fleet to support amphibious landings. On Sept. 18 the rocket launching ships Clarion River and St. Francis River had been recommissioned, (dod Release 65265)
Application for patents on a recoverable single-stage spacecraft booster was filed with the U.S. Patent Office by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Invented by Philip Bono, a space engineer at Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div., the booster was called Rombus (Reusable Orbital Module—Booster and Utility Shuttle) and would have the capability of placing approximately 1 million lb. in circular orbit 175 mi. high and could be reused 20 times. Rombus would have its own propulsion for orbiting, deorbiting, and landing retrothrust, would employ eight strap-on, jettisonable liquid hydrogen fuel tanks. The vehicle resulted from a NASA—funded study but was not presently being developed. (Marshall Star, 1/13/65, 1-2; Seattle Post-Intelligence, 1/8/65)
An unmanned instrument-packed Gemini spacecraft (gt-2) was launched from Cape Kennedy on Titan II launch vehicle in suborbital shot preliminary to U.S.’s first two-man venture. Aboard was an automatic sequencer which issued orders at precise times en route to fire the rocket’s second stage, to separate the spacecraft from the rocket, to jettison the spacecraft’s storage section, to cartwheel the spacecraft into a reentry attitude, and to open the spacecraft’s parachutes. The rocket reached a maximum altitude of 98.9 mi. and a speed of 16,708.9 mph before impacting 2,127.1 mi. downrange. The Gemini spacecraft descended by parachute into the Atlantic 16 mi. short of the planned impact point and 52 mi. from the carrier U.S.S. Lake Champlain which recovered the capsule an hour and 45 min. after launch. The capsule was reported in excellent condition. Major experiments for which the test was intended were apparently complete successes: a test of the heat shield; a test of the retrorocket system; and a test of the sequencing system. Despite its successes, the test had some difficulties: a fuel cell that would be the primary electrical system in the spacecraft during long-duration manned flights failed to operate before launching because of a stuck valve; the temperature was found to be too high in the cooling system of the spacecraft, (nasa Release 64—296; MSC Roundup, 1/3/65, 1; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/19/65; Houston Chron., 1/19/65; upi, Rossiter, Wash. Post, 1/20/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 1/20/65)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched in the second apparently successful attempt this week of Project Luster to capture particles of interplanetary matter during the Leonid meteor (shooting star) shower. The 105-lb. payload, containing special collection surfaces, was launched from White Sands Missile Range to peak altitude of about 100 mi. Instrument package separated from the rocket and descended into the range recovery area. Initial radar and telemetry data indicated that inflight performance of the rocket and its payload was as planned. Similar flight conducted Nov. 16 with an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands also performed flawlessly. (NASA Release 65—358)
U.S. launched eight military satellites into orbit from Vandenberg afb March 9 with a Thor-Agena D booster, nasa disclosed. This was the greatest number of payloads the U.S. had ever orbited with a single launch vehicle and was believed to exceed any multiple launching made by the Soviet Union. Orbital parameters: apogee, 585 mi. (942 km.) ; perigee, 561 mi. (903 km.) ; inclination to the equator, 70°. Two payloads would measure solar radiation; two would test stabilization methods for future spacecraft; one would map the earth’s surface; another, Surcal (Space Surveillance Calibration), would help improve precision of satellite tracking networks; another, Oscar (Orbiting Satellite Carrying Amateur Radio), would broadcast on frequencies that amateur radio operators could track. The satellites had been unidentified until NASA listed them in its periodic satellite summary. The summary also showed that unmanned cosmos LXI, cosmos lxii, and cosmos lxiii, launched by U.S.S.R. March 15 with a single launch vehicle, had become 26 satellites or pieces of satellites. COSMOS LXVI, and two companions, launched May 7, had fallen out of orbit, (gsfc SSR, 4/15/65; Clark, NYT, 5/19/65; Wash. Post, 5/20/65, A12)
NASA Atlas-Centaur 6 launched a dummy Surveyor spacecraft along a simulated lunar trajectory in the fourth successful vehicle flight of six made to date. The Atlas booster operated as planned; Centaur ignited, burning for 7 min. 12 sec., and injected the dummy Surveyor spacecraft into a highly elliptical simulated lunar transfer orbit with apogee, 509,829 mi. (820,824 km.); perigee, 105 mi. (169.15 km.); period, 31 days; inclination, 28.55°. Speed of injection into orbit was 23,700 mph. The 2,084-lb. metal payload continued on a path toward a point 240,000 mi. from earth which would simulate a lunar transfer orbit. The target zone was on the path the moon follows as it orbits the earth. The 113-ft., 303,000-lb. launch vehicle produced 389,000 lbs. thrust at liftoff. The Centaur 2nd stage was powered by two RL-10 liquid hydrogen-liquid oxygen engines with a thrust of 15,000 lbs. each. The AC-6 mission, sixth in a series of eight scheduled Centaur development flights, was a rehearsal for the ac-7 flight scheduled for later 1965 in which an engineering model of Surveyor was to make a soft landing on the lunar surface. Flight was designed to obtain data on several new Atlas-Centaur features and to continue evaluation of other components and systems tested during previous missions. Atlas-Centaur vehicle development for direct ascent missions was complete, and the vehicle was now capable of supporting fully operational Surveyor missions, (nasa Release 65-235; ksc Spaceport News, 8/12/65, 1; ap, ATT, 8/12/65, 11; nasa Proj. Off.)
USAF launched unidentified satellite payload from WTR using a Thor fw4s booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 151)
In a report on the pacing systems of the Apollo Program, the Subcommittee on nasa Oversight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics concluded that the “general progress of the Apollo program is good at this time with a reasonable expectation of a lunar landing in this decade. . . .” It noted two major pacing items requiring maximum effort: lunar excursion module and command and service module. The report pointed out that NASA had been maintaining the Apollo program schedule within funds authorized and appropriated; “however, additional funds of the order of $200 million over and above the funds requested by NASA for fiscal year 1966 would have provided: “1. Increased assurance of meeting the Apollo goal of a lunar landing in this decade; “2. Broader latitude in providing system alternatives when engineering difficulties are identified; and “3. Additional management latitude in utilizing all of NASA resources of personnel, facilities, and equipment in the Apollo effort. . . (Text)
Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.) urged the Subcommittee on NASA Oversight of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics to consider priorities in the U.S. space program. He noted that the Agena Target Vehicle failure which postponed the Oct. 25 Gemini vi mission might have been avoided if the modified Agena had undergone flight-testing before the Gemini mission attempt. Reiterating his view that “the last two Pegasus [satellites] shots were not clearly necessary,” he suggested: “. . . this modified Agena rocket could have been test fired by means of utilizing the last two Saturn I rockets, which carried the additional Pegasus satellites instead. Such a test might have avoided the failure. . . .” (CR, 11/2/65, A6259)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center had awarded a $358,808 contract to Bryson Construction Co., Inc., Ala., for building a non-destructive facility for testing rocket materials in simulated space environments. Four shielded “radiographic laboratories” would provide areas where rocket materials would be exposed to radiation and would have equipment for searchray, motion radiography, radioisotope, and radiography testing, (msfc Release 65—290)
Gemini 5 Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (Lt. Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad (LCdr., usn) and their backup pilots Neil Armstrong and Elliot See met a news briefing at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center on the Gemini V mission, scheduled for August 19. Cooper explained that during the flight the astronauts would try to sight a USN Polaris missile to be launched from the East Coast and an unidentified missile to be launched from the West Coast. It was not disclosed at what point during the mission either of the launches would occur. In addition, Cooper said he and Conrad would attempt to sight rocket engines ignited on a rocket sled at Holloman afb, N. Mex. Also on the program would be an attempt to rendezvous with a Rendezvous Evaluation Pod (Rep) which would be ejected from the spacecraft and would drift to a distance of about 60 mi. from the spacecraft. The radar equipment onboard would then assist in performing maneuvers to achieve rendezvous with the Pod, although actual contact was not planned. Cooper said that backup system for reentry would not be used again because the thrust fuel would be used in the rendezvous experiment. No extravehicular activity would be performed during this mission. The astronauts announced they would attempt to communicate with fellow astronaut Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn) participating in the USN Sealab ii experiment beneath the Pacific. Flight plans called for a landing in the West Atlantic. Both astronauts felt that personal hygiene would be one of the main problems of the flight. (Transcript)
U.S.S.R. made public a statement issued by Soviet Foreign Ministry accusing Britain of using its territory to train West German troops in “handling rocket weapons that can bear nuclear warheads.” The British Embassy in Moscow, recipient of the statement, made no comment, (ap, NYT, 9/13/65)
France announced successful launching in the Sahara of the Emeraude stage of the Diamant booster. (M&R, 3/15/65, 11) dies on declining basis until 1970. Sen. A. S. Mike Monroney (D-Okla.), Chairman of the Senate Aviation Subcommittee investigating ways to keep helicopter lines alive, suggested increased support from major airlines as possible alternative to Federal aid. Stuart G. Tipton, President of Air Transport Association which represented almost every scheduled U.S. airline, testified that helicopter lines received about $1 million a year in indirect support and that “as a matter of principle, this is as far as the airlines should go or be expected to go.” He added that experience and advances in helicopters and poor-weather landing equipment were about to make helicopters potentially profitable in all large cities. Withdrawal of Federal support now would be disastrous. (Clark, NYT, 3/9/65; Clark, NYT, 3/10/65, 69)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (afsc), in talk on “Materials and Tomorrow’s Air Force” at the Air Force Materials Symposium in Miami Beach, said: “The rate of progress in materials will be measured by accomplishments in four areas. First, the acquisition of new fundamental knowledge which will lead either to new materials or to the utilization of existing materials to meet specific needs. Second, the exploratory development of materials in advance of specific system requirements. Third, the evaluation of new materials for potential applications. And fourth, the investigation of economical manufacturing techniques and equipment. The importance of vigorous efforts in all of these areas is obvious when we remember that it takes from 5 to 10 years to translate a laboratory result into hardware. “. . . the people of the Air Force Materials Laboratory are making significant contributions to present and future Air Force systems. Their recent accomplishments include development of methods for ultrasonic detection of corrosion in aircraft fuel tanks and for installation of corrosion-resistant rivets in aircraft skins. They have done important work with reinforced structural composites; with graphites for leading edges, nose cones, and rocket nozzles; and with chemically resistant seals for liquid rocket propulsion systems.” (Text)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., went to a peak altitude of 188.5 km. (117 mi.). Primary experimental objective was to study the group of stars of Orion in the ultraviolet. Because of a failure with the attitude control system the experiment had no chance to operate. Experiment instrumentation was provided by Princeton Univ. Observatory. (NASA Rpt. SRl)
Japan launched Lambda III—2, the largest rocket that country had yet developed. The 62-ft., three-stage rocket attained an altitude of 620 mi. and impacted northwest of the Mariana Islands, some 1,130 mi. from the launch site at Tokyo University’s space center on Kyushu. (M&R, 2/8/65, 8)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by Brazil from the Natal Range reached an altitude of 117 mi. The second Brazilian sounding rocket launch in a cooperative meteorological program with nasa, the flight was a nighttime twin-experiment of daytime experiment Dec. 15. (nasa Rpt. srl; Reuters, NYT, 12/20/65,45)
Potential of the Saturn IB was noted in the New Orleans Times-Picayune: “The payload potential of the Saturn I—B boosters now under production at Michoud seems to have escaped general attention in discussions about space missions and the rocket assemblies assigned or assignable to carry them out. These and other factors are significant in connection with efforts under way, just coming to light, to intrude on, supplant or degrade the SI-B in the Apollo or other programs for which it is fitted. “The first of the ‘new Saturns,’ or intermediate Saturns, of the Chrysler Corporation’s Space Division has reached Cape Kennedy for the initial lift-off in tests and flights that will lead to human exploration of the moon. “Payload requirements vary of course for different objectives of this 12-shot series. Regardless of what is first put aloft, the i-b assembly is designed to send into desired orbit 36,000 pounds of functional vehicle—not to mention the 30,000 pounds of a burned-out second-stage, should that lagniappe be added. “This rating compares with the 26,000-pound payload Soviet spacemen boosted into orbit last July 16; with 21,000 pounds sent into orbit by the Titan 3-C June 18; with the rated 25,000-pound payload capacity of the Titan 3-C; with the 22,000-pound payload rating of the ‘old Saturn’; with the 18,000-pound payload dispatched by an ‘old Saturn’ a year or two ago; and with 4,000 pounds orbited by the Atlas.” {CR, 8/19/65, A4674)
NASA selected Philco Corp.’s Aeronutronic Div. for negotiations leading to a nine-month, $1 million contract for research, development, and preliminary design of a lunar penetrometer system applicable to the Apollo program. The penetrometer, an instrumented package capable of assessing the hardness, penetrability, and bearing strength of a surface upon which it is ejected, could furnish lunar surface information to an orbiting Apollo spacecraft for scientific assessment of remote sites inaccessible to manned spacecraft or unmanned earth-launch probes. NASA Langley Research Center would negotiate and manager the contract, (nasa Release 65-59; LaRC Release)
Discussing the missions and plans of NASA’s new Electronics Research Center, Dr. Winston E. Kock, erc Director, told the Harvard Engineers Club in Cambridge: “I believe that the recent strengthening of research in NASA can act to overcome any such braking of scientific enthusiasm which the recent changes in our defense program . . . may have instigated. I have seen at first hand true research enthusiasm at two NASA Research Centers, Lewis in Cleveland, and Ames in California, and, at Cambridge’s new NASA Research Center, the response we have had from inventive, research-minded individuals, expressing an interest in association with the Center has been phenomenal. I have always believed in the saying ‘necessity is the mother of invention,’ and I feel certain that it was the necessities of World War II that brought into bloom radar, the jet aircraft, nuclear power, the v-2 rocket (which led to our present missile and space rockets), and many other developments which have proved to be of vital importance to our way of life. So, I feel that a counterbalance to today’s reduced necessities of the broad, new opening field of space research . . . will help to keep our nation’s research talent active and enthusiastic, and maintain it in the strong virility it has exhibited since the start of World War n.” (Text)	_	_
It is time now to put the manned military control of space on a crash basis equal in priority to the Apollo program,” said Rep. John W. Wydler (R-N.Y.), member of the House Science and Astronautics Committee, in a letter U> the editor in the New York Times. He suggested the following steps be taken:	“The first M.O.L. flight is scheduled from two and one half to three years from now. This should be speeded up at least a year and the necessary sacrifices made to achieve it. The Gemini capsules required for the M.O.L. project should be ordered at once. To achieve our goals effectively the manned earth orbiting program should be placed under military control. . . . “I believe the only way the Department of Defense can meet its responsibilities in ‘near space’ is to assume direction of the manned earth orbiting program. It should reorganize the U.S. Air Force into the U.S. Aerospace Force and make it truly that. . . . “The decision we must make is not whether there will be military control of space but rather whether that control will be Russian or our own. . . .” (NYT, 6/19/65, 28)
To date, 46 sounding rocket launchings had been made from the USNS Croatan operating at sea off South America’s west coast, NASA announced. 32 of the firings were two-stage sounding rockets carrying upper atmosphere and ionosphere experiments; 14 were singlestage vehicles to obtain high-altitude meteorological data. Launchings were part of NASA’s sounding rocket program for the 1964—65 International Quiet Sun Year (iqsy) when solar flare and sunspot activity were at a minimum. Expedition data would be correlated with findings of scientists throughout the world conducting experiments to study iqsy phenomena, (nasa Release 65-104)
Decision to narrow the choice of type of broadcast satellite it would consider from three to two was announced by ComSatCorp president Joseph* V. Charyk at a stockholder’s meeting in Washington, D.C. Two of the approaches under consideration involved satellites that would operate about 6,000 mi. above the earth: one would have 18 satellites, orbiting in random positions; the other would have 12 satellites, orbiting at “phased” or controlled positions. The third approach, being tested in early bird I, had satellites placed at an altitude of 22,000 mi. in synchronous orbit. In his speech, Charyk revealed that the corporation had decided to drop from consideration the 6.000-	mi. random version. It had been discovered, he reported, that a 6.000-	mi.-high satellite could be controlled more easily than ComSatCorp had believed when it first started studying random satellites as one alternative approach. Moreover, Charyk said, it now appeared that a satellite could be designed that would operate either at 6,000 mi. in controlled positions or at the 22,000-mi.-high, synchronous position. LiOinSatCorp therefore wo: :Id invite satellite designers to offer bids to build this type of satellite. (Denniston, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/11/65, 12) . held in Mar del Plata, Argentina, where it was moved from Buenos Aires because of student demonstrations. A new working group was formed, with Morris Tepper (Chief of Meteorological Programs, nasa) as chairman. Called Working Group VI, for Scientific Space Experiments Concerned with Properties and Dynamics of the Troposphere and Stratosphere, it was formed to “further international understanding of, and cooperation in, the use of rocket and satellite systems and techniques for meteorological research, and to promote international discussions involving meteorologists with scientists of other disciplines in order to provide a good climate for the development of imaginative new approaches to the use of rockets and satellites for meteorological research.” (nas-nrc News Report, Vol. xv, 5/6/65, 6) Dr. 0. Z. Gazenko, physiologist and member of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, said that cosmonauts had no difficulty knowing the orientation of their bodies and experienced no nervous disorders if they were given visual cues. He based his remarks on experiences of Soviet cosmonauts, especially those of Lt. Col. Aleksei Leonov in VOSKHOD ii: “When he saw the spacecraft, he had no problem knowing his orientation, but it was different when he didn’t see the spacecraft.” During the launch phase, the cosmonauts’ pulse and breathing rates were greater than noted during centrifugal tests in ground laboratories. In voskhod II, it took a comparatively long time for the normal levels to be reached, according to Gazenko. Comparison of the data of the Voskhod flights with other space flights showed fewer cardiovascular variations and better responses to stress. He recommended crews of several people since “the feeling of togetherness of cosmonauts is very important.” (Text) Success of the fully stabilized British Skylark rocket in obtaining new astrophysical data was described. Skylark was a single-stage, solid-fuel vehicle designed to carry 150-200-lb. payload to 200 km. (124 mi.) altitude. Using the sun as a reference, Skylark could achieve pointing accuracy of between two and three minutes of arc in pitch and yaw, reported Kenneth Pounds, lecturer at Leicester College, England, and one of its users: “The new Skylark has revolutionized the whole field of rocket research as far as we’re concerned.” He pointed out that many scientific experiments, such as taking x-ray photographs of the sun, could not be done by an unstabilized rocket: “You need 100 sec. or more exposure time, plus roll stabilization, or the photographs will be blurred.” (cospar Rpt.) M.	S. V. Rao, reporting on the Thumba, India, experiments conducted on World Days during the 1964—1965 iqsy, said east northeasterly winds with speeds of 60-90 knots were observed in the stratosphere during the monsoon. In the mesosphere, data revealed a region of unusually strong winds with high shear. Rao reported that radar observations of the rate of dispersion of chaff confirmed existence of complex pattern of high shears and pronounced turbulence in the equatorial mesosphere in the monsoon season. (Text) NASA scientists at Wallops Station, Va., had made a similar rocket launching during the Thumba experiments to get a synoptic picture. Arnold Frutkin, NASA Director of International Programs, said at the cospar meeting that “these data were the first relating to the monsoon problem on a global scale. It shows what very important work less advanced countries can do.” (M&R, 5/24/65, 17) Activities in the 1964 U.S. space program were summarized by Dr. Richard W. Porter, National Academy of Sciences delegate to COSPAR:	“. . . Satellite storm warnings, intercontinental television, voice and data transmissions via satellite, all-weather navigational ‘fixes’ for ships at sea, and precise map making by means of satellite observations have become almost commonplace events. Space launchings at frequent intervals are providing a continuous stream of new information of value to science and mankind. ... In total, the various agencies of the United States carried out sixty-one successful satellite and space probe launchings; however, because of the occasional practice of launching several satellites at a time . . . the total number of useful discrete payloads in Earth orbit or escape trajectory was seventy-seven. . . . “In addition, the United States launched seven large high-altitude rocket probes, in the range from 700 to 1100 km., and well over one hundred other scientific sounding rockets, most of which reached altitudes between 110 and 250 km. Twelve hundred twenty-three small meteorological rockets, having a payload of about 5 kg. and a maximum altitude of about 60 km. were fired on regular schedules by the meteorological rocket network and more than one hundred scientifically instrumented large balloon flights were made during the period. “Technological advances made during this period which will contribute significantly to the space-research capability of the United States include the launching of three SATURN I booster rockets, capable of putting about 7500 kg. of useful weight into Earth orbit, one titan IIIA booster, and successful tests of the CENTAUR liquid hydrogen rocket. Electrostatic ion accelerator rocket propulsion devices were tested in space during 1964, and more recently a nuclear reactor with thermoelectric energy conversion devices successfully began an endurance run in space which is still continuing. Passive gravity-gradient stabilization techniques have been perfected by means of additional satellite tests to the point where this technique is ready for useful employment in a variety of space applications. The highly directional properties of a lasar beam were successfully used in tracking a satellite. Significant improvements were also made in sounding rocket, high altitude balloon design and in data conversion facilities.” (Text) K.	Maeda, chief Japanese delegate to the sixth international space symposium of cospar, told Missiles and Rockets Japan would launch its own satellite with its own launch vehicle within the next three years. A four-stage, solid-fueled rocket would be used, with the Mu rocket as first stage. The satellite, to be used solely for scientific research, would weigh between 50-100 kgs. and be sent into a 500-1,000-km. (311-621-mi.) orbit. (M&R, 5/17/65, 9) At a news conference during the cospar meeting, A. A. Blagonravov, chief Soviet delegate, said that in view of the difficulties of soft landing on the moon, the Soviet Union would probably try to soft land another Lunik before attempting to land cosmonauts. He said the lunar surface must be known in detail and “should be examined by automatic stations.” Because of the problems involved, he added, “it is not possible to set any date for a lunar landing.” (M&R, 5/24/65, 17)
explorer xxx (iqsy Solar Explorer) was successfully launched by NASA from Wallops Station, Va., by a four-stage Scout booster. Orbital data: apogee, 548 mi. (883 km.) ; perigee, 440 mi. (709 km.); period, 100.8 min.; inclination, 59.7°. Ninth Solrad Satellite developed by Naval Research Laboratory, explorer xxx would monitor and measure x-ray emissions from the sun as part of the U.S. contribution to the International Quiet Sun Year project. (NASA Release 65—352; gsfc)
Thompson-Ramo-Wooldridge had proposed to NASA a design for a Deep Space Planetary Probe System to he used in a flyby of Jupiter, Saturn, or Pluto. The spacecraft would consist of a large dish antenna, possibly as large as 16 ft. in diameter, which would telemeter data back to earth. Power would be supplied by 10-watt Snap-19 generator. The spacecraft could be boosted by either Atlas-Centaur or Saturn IB-Centaur with upper-stage assist from available solid rockets or from the Poodle, a low-thrust radioisotope rocket engine. Flyby missions for the probe could be made in 1970 to Jupiter, to Saturn in 1972, and ultimately to Pluto. (SBD, 4/23/65, 297)
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center had selected the Apparatus Div. of Texas Instruments, Inc., for contract negotiations expected to exceed $1 million for development of a weather-measuring device to be carried on the Nimbus B weather satellite: an experimental sensor, Iris (Infrared Interferometer Spectrometer), would he designed to collect information on the atmosphere’s vertical temperature, ozone, and water vapor distribution on a worldwide basis. Nimbus B was scheduled for launching by a Thorad Agena D booster in 1967. (gfsc Release G-21-65)
It was reported that Lockheed Propulsion Co. had successfully test-fired a new solid-propellant rocket motor at the proving ground in Redlands, Calif. The lightweight “pulse motor” measured 10 ft. in length, 2 ft. in dia., and contained 40 solid-propellant wafers, each of which could develop more than 1,000 lbs. of thrust. This was possibly the rocket motor that would power the Sram (short-range attack missile) mentioned by President Johnson in his defense message to Congress [See Jan. 18, 1965]. (Miles, Wash. Post, 1/20/65; SBD, 1/18/65, 74)
Memorandum of Understanding for a cooperative Argentina-U.S. program of meteorological sounding rocket research was signed by Teofilo Tabanera for the Comision Nacional de Investigaciones Espaciales (cnie) and Hugh L. Dryden for NASA. Specific purpose of this experimental program was to obtain high-altitude meteorological data in the vicinity of Chamical, Argentina, by Boosted-Dart and Areas sounding rockets and to evaluate Argentine ground support equipment in conjunction with the payloads. General purpose of the experimental program was “to develop a basis for future meteorological rocket soundings on an operational basis.” The program was contemplated as “one element in a projected inter-American, experimental, metero-logical sounding rocket research network (exametnet) .” (Memo of Understanding)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island, Va.. to altitude of 37.7 mi, <141.1 km.I with experiments to measure the neutron intensity above the earth’s atmosphere, the flux of solar x-rays, and Lyman-alpha radiation; and to determine ionospheric electron densities. All instruments functioned as predicted. (NASA Rpt. SJtL)
Commenting on anxiety about the Soviet Union’s capability of delivering strategic weapons from near space, Dr. S. Fred Singer said in an article in Reporter: “If a bomb is released from a satellite without giving it any propulsion, it will stay with the satellite and simply blow it up. For a bomb from a satellite to be directed to a point on earth, it must be propelled not only with a lot of rocket power but also with exceedingly fine guidance. In principle, this can be done from a satellite or from the moon or even from the planet Pluto; but the cost and complexity is enormously greater than that of an equally effective ICBM buried deep in the earth itself.” (Reporter, 6/17/65, 14)
Radio station wtop in Washington, D.C., assisted NASA in conducting a radio signal interaction experiment employing a Nike-Apache rocket launched from Wallops Sta., Va., with a 55-lb. instrumented payload. WTOP transmitted a steady modulated tone for several minutes during the flight to enable Univ. of Illinois scientists to measure interaction of the WTOP signal on a signal of a different frequency broadcast from Wallops Sta. Both were received by instruments in the payload as the rocket rose to peak altitude of 110 mi. (NASA Release 65-195; Wallops Release 65—35)
W. C. Fortune, manager of nasa Marshall Space Flight Center’s Mississippi Test Facility since November 1962, had been selected to evaluate the cooperative efforts of the Government-industry Saturn rocket team and “to ascertain that maximum utilization is obtained from the giant new super rocket family now under development,” announced MSFC. (msfc Release 65—146)
Abort Dec. 12 of the scheduled Gemini vi flight received editorial comment in the New York Times: “Disappointing as this was, the event had its brighter aspects as well. It gave a vivid demonstration of the effectiveness of the failsafe arrangements. These permitted survival of the rocket and its crew despite the fact that ignition and a buildup of power had taken place before the safety mechanism sensed trouble and shut down the powerful motor.” (NYT, 12/13/65, 38)
First flight of Super Guppy, developed by Aero Spacelines, Inc., for NASA and the world’s largest aircraft in terms of cubic capacity. The aircraft was made up of sections from four Boeing 377 Stratocruisers as well as extensive new manufacture. Specifically designed to airlift outsized cargoes such as the s-ivb stage of the Saturn V launch vehicle and the Lunar Excursion Module Adapter for the Apollo program, the aircraft made its first flight from Van Nuys Airport to Mojave, Calif. (Huntsville Times, 9/9/65)
Saturn V booster (s-ic stage) was static-fired for the second time at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. The five F-l engines were ignited in a 15-sec. test during which they generated 7.5 million lbs. thrust. Tests of this stage would gradually increase in duration until full-length firing of 2% min. was reached in late spring or early summer, (msfc Release 65-117)
LRC completed 10 experiments to explore nuclear engine chilldown (cooling by liquid hydrogen propellant) and to determine the range of conditions for which flow oscillations would occur in an engine system. An additional 16 runs were conducted to obtain data on the “bootstrap” starting of a nuclear engine. Results of these tests indicated that nuclear rocket engines should be able to start smoothly and stably over a wide range of startup conditions. (Atomic Energy Programs, 1965,148-49)
NASA had awarded Thiokol Chemical Corp. approximate $16-million, multiple-incentive-development contract to develop a 100-lb.-thrust rocket engine for use in spacecraft attitude control and maneuvering systems and for launch vehicle ullage and attitude control systems. Designated c-1, the engine would be powered by storable hypergolic liquid propellants, (nasa Release 65-322; msfc Release 65-262)
We’ll be lucky if we have nuclear propulsion around 1980,” and electric propulsion is still further down the line for sometime after 1985, according to Dr. John C. Evvard, Deputy Associate Director for research at NASA Lewis Research Center. Evvard gave his views on advanced propulsion systems at the sixth annual Space Technology Series sponsored by the Canaveral Section, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, at Brevard Engineering College, Patrick afb, Fla. A pioneer in electric propulsion and advanced nuclear rocket studies, Evvard believed such concepts should not be considered for Mars missions of under 100 flights per year. Only frequent flights would increase the need for higher specific impulse and would justify the expense, he said. Meanwhile, he predicted, chemical rockets of less than 500 sec. specific impulse would lift men to Mars, not by direct ascent but through a succession of parking orbits and assembly of hardware in space. Evvard told the meeting that since May 13, 1964, at least nine tests on Kiwi, Nerva, and Phoebus nuclear reactors had proved out a thrust greater than 50,000 lbs., at a specific impulse in excess of 750 sec. (Text)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket with four nrl solar-study experiments was launched from wsmr to 115-mi. altitude. Rocket performed well and three experiments functioned as planned, providing good data: ultraviolet spectroheliograms were obtained, spatial detail in Lyman-Alpha light on the solar disk was photoelectrically recorded, and solar Lyman-Alpha flux measurements were made by the ion chamber. The fourth experiment was to have recorded the comet Ikeya-Seki against the corona, but because of a mechanical failure in the white-light coronagraph experiment these data were not obtained, (nasa Rpt. srl)
fr-I (fr-1a), second French satellite to be launched within two weeks, was successfully injected into near-polar orbit from the Western Test Range by a NASA Scout booster. Orbital parameters: apogee, 480 mi. (773 km.); perigee, 462 mi. (743.8 km.) ; period, 100 min.; inclination, 75.9°. NASA provided the four-stage launch vehicle and launch service as part of its cooperative agreement with the French Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes), which designed, built, and tested the 135-lb. satellite, fr-i would study propagation of very low frequency (Vlf) radio waves and measure electron densities. Telemetry reports indicated all systems were operating nominally and were returning useful data. (NASA Release 65-366; Wash. Post, 12/7/65, A6; upi, NYT, 12/8/65, 13)
France’s Emeraude rocket, first stage of the Diamant booster, was successfully launched from Hammaguir Range, Algeria, after three failures. Its liquid-fueled engine provided 62,000-lbs. thrust for 88 sec. Twelve Emeraude launchings were originally scheduled. Second and third stages of the Diamant launch vehicle, both solid fueled, had already been successfully tested. No attempt had been made to launch the three stages linked together. (Av. Wk., 3/22/65, 18; M&R, 3/22/65, 9)	....	.
nasa Marshall Space Flight Center announced that 48 additional 3—2 liquid-hydrogen rocket engines would be purchased from Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., under an amendment which converted the engine production contract to a cost-plus-incentive-award-fee agreement. The initial contract was a cost-plus-fixed-fee agreement. Cost of amendment was $75.8 million which brought the total value of the contract to approximately $206 million. A total of 103 J-2 engines was now on order for the Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicle program, (msfc Release 65—289)
NASA and India’s Dept, of Atomic Energy (dae) signed a memorandum of understanding for a joint space research program to be conducted in India by NASA and the Indian National Commission for Space Research. Program would include two sounding rocket launchings to investigate upper atmosphere wind shears, turbulence, and diffusion by chemical release payloads; six launchings to investigate relationship between wind shears and sporadic E; two launchings to investigate the equatorial electrojet; and two launchings to measure electron and ion densities and other phenomena in the D region. DAE would make available the scientific payloads; range and range support facilities; and personnel for conducting the scientific experiments, for range support, and launching operations. NASA would furnish the sounding rockets, two test payloads, cameras, and nose cones as well as necessary training for DAE personnel at NASA centers. No exchange of funds was provided for. All scientific results of experiments would be made freely available to the world scientific community. (nasa Release 65-259)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., went to peak altitude of 113 mi. (180 km.). Preliminary experimental objective was to obtain clear spectrograms of ultraviolet light from stars. Experimentation was provided by Princeton Univ. Observatory. (nasa Rpt. srl; ap, NYT, 6/28/65, 2)
Project Luster, managed by NASA Ames Research Center, successfully recovered samples of matter from interplanetary space with an Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., during the annual Leonid meteor shower. The sampling instrument comprising the payload consisted of three deployable arms, each containing four flat pans holding special collection surfaces. The arms deployed as programed at 47-mi. altitude on the way up, closing again at that altitude on the way down. Payload reached 89-mi. altitude, traveled 44 mi. downrange, and landed by parachute in soft sand. Vacuum seal of the 12 collection pans was found to be perfect on recovery. Unopened collectors would be distributed by ARC to 12 guest experimenters in the U.S. and Europe for study of the nature of comets and of extraterrestrial material in general, (arc Release 65-26; nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA’s 200-lb. Project Fire II spacecraft—similar in shape to an Apollo command module—was launched into a ballistic trajectory from etr by an Atlas D booster that sent it over 500 mi. into space in test of reentry heating of spacecraft returning from the moon. Some 26 min. later, when the ballistic path of the payload turned it toward earth, a solid-fueled Antares rocket fired for 30 sec., accelerating the payload into the atmosphere at 25,400 mph. As a fireball estimated at 20,000°F formed a shock wave in front of the spacecraft, instruments in its interior radioed information to tracking stations. Tracking reports indicated that the heat probe impacted 32 min. after launch in the south Atlantic about 5,130 mi. southeast of Cape Kennedy. The spacecraft had been dubbed a “flying thermometer” because it was to radio more than 100,000 temperature readings. First Project Fire flight took place from Cape Kennedy April 14, 1964, and was the fastest controlled in-flight reentry experiment ever conducted. The spacecraft reached a speed of more than 25,800 mph and telemetered many important direct measurements of reentry heating, (nasa Release 65-131; ap, Wash. Sun. Star, 5/23/65)
Construction work at Cape Kennedy halted as 3,700 building trade workers stayed off the job in a two-year-old contract dispute with NASA. The present dispute was between building trades unions and the Marion Power Shovel Co., a NASA contractor, over pay scales. Work on 44 projects involving contracts totaling $192 million had been brought to a standstill. The biggest project affected was the 52-story Saturn V moon rocket assembly building that was to be ready for the first of these rockets within two yesrs. (upi, MYT^ 1/29/65, 6; ap, Houston Post, 1/29/65)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey said in address before American Nuclear Society-Atomic Industrial Forum in Washington, D.C.: “If anyone doubts the impact that science and technology have had on society, in just the past 20 years, he need look only at the new industries employing many thousands of people which have come into existence during that time—industries based solely on the evolution of new products and services. These include—and i mention only a few —television, the computer, the jet engine and nuclear energy. “Some of these industries have sprung from the application of a single invention or chain of scientific thoughts. “During these past 20 years, too, we have seen in the United States the creation of a constructive partnership unknown in our previous history—a partnership of government, university, management, labor, science and citizen—a partnership devoted to maximum development of science and technology not for the narrow interest of any single group, but for the common good. “To witness the space launchings at Cape Kennedy, as I have, is to see this partnership in action. . . .” Turning to the peaceful uses of atomic energy, he said; “As chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, I am particularly concerned with the atom’s work in space. “In 1961 our first operating space radioisotopic power source was orbited. And in 1965 our first space reactor was operated in orbit. “The atom will soon become a major power source for our space program—an auxiliary source for spacecraft and life support systems and a necessary source of propulsion for extended space exploration. “I can, in fact, foresee the time when our space efforts will be able to continue only through use of rocket and nuclear power units transported and assembled in space. . . .” (Text)
Award of the [$40 million] contract [for 28 Atlas sl.v-3s] reflects plans by the Air Force and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to use the Atlas in a variety of future space missions,” Robert Zimmerman said in an article in the San Diego Union. He continued: “Its versatility as a launching vehicle lies in the ‘plug-in’ concept which allows electronic instruments for various missions to be installed on the basic booster as requirements for the mission may dictate. “Before the Atlas was standardized into the SLV-3 it would take a year to 18 months to equip one booster for a particular mission. Now, an slv-3 can be outfitted for any mission in three to four months.” (Zimmerman, San Diego Union, 4/13/65)
usaf launched Thor-Able-Star booster from Western Test Range, placing in orbit an unidentified satellite and U.S. Army’s secor II geodetic satellite, secor II “failed to deploy properly from its piggyback container.” (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 136; M&R, 4/5/65, 12)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket reached a peak altitude of 91.1	mi. from Wallops Island, Va. Purpose was to simultaneously measure the altitude of sodium airglow with sodium vapor and interference filters and determine atmospheric density with a 26-in., metallized, inflated mylar sphere, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
A Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Sta., Va., to peak altitude of 109.9 mi. (176.8 km.) in an experiment Lo measure electron densities. Good signals were received on all telemetry channels throughout the flight; indications were that good data were obtained. Instrumentation was provided by gca Corp. (nasa Rpt. srl)
Observers in Moscow believed that the Soviet Union would shortly launch a gigantic spacecraft with as many as four to six people aboard, said an article in Poland’s Trybura Ludu. The spacecraft would most likely be commanded by one of the experienced cosmonauts and would have a weight of over 12 tons. It would be placed in orbit by the booster which launched PROTON I. The latter, according to the correspondent, probably used solid fuel. The correspondent speculated that the spacecraft would remain in orbit one week and that several cosmonauts would take a “walk in space” simultaneously. (Trybura Ludu, 7/18/65)
The Christian Science Monitor asked Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, and Dr. Philip H. Abelson, Director of the Geophysical Laboratory of the Carnegie Institution of Washington and editor of Science magazine, to present elements of the debate on the question “Man in space: is it worth $40 billion?” Dr. Newell presented the case for manned space flight: “The manned space flight effort serves to round out the total program. Its primary aim is to develop a broad space capability that will secure to this nation strength, security, flexibility, and freedom of choice in space. Landing men on the moon and returning them to earth has been chosen as the means to this broader, more substantive end, and it is not to be considered as the only justification for our manned space effort.” Dr. Abelson, speaking for the critics, said: “The unmanned program has been a substantial contributor to our international prestige. Moreover, prestige based on science and technology tends to be enduring. ... “Our Apollo program was launched for reasons of international prestige. The yield has not been very good or very lasting. How many citizens can now recall the names of the astronauts and of their capsules? We can expect much the same reaction when we finally accomplish a moon landing.” (CSM, 4/9/65)
usaf’s Titan m-c rocket could match the Soviet Union’s most powerful booster pound for pound in launching heavy-weight satellites into orbit, according to William G. Purdy, General Manager, Launch Vehicles, Martin Co. “Engineering analysis of Titan III—c’s performance on its maiden flight of June [18] shows that a payload of nearly 27.000	pounds could have been orbited. In the past, Titan in—c’s maximum payload has been computed at 25,000 lbs.” Mr. Purdy said that the Soviet Union’s best was the 26,840-lb. proton i satellite launched July 16 by powerful new rocket. (Martin Co. Release) NASA Science Advisory Committee was considering a proposal by radio astronomers to create a lO-mi.-dia. antenna array to permit a “look” into the past with radio energy, disclosed Bernard M. Oliver, Vice President of a Palo Alto electronics firm. He estimated that 1.000	antennas, each perhaps 10-ft.-dia., spread out over the area of a 10-mi. circle, would provide the resolution of signal intake necessary for the kind of radio observation he was suggesting. Intake of all the antennas would be focused at a single laboratory. There the radio energy would be converted to sound energy and then into light to provide photographic images equivalent to optical images now taken of the moon. Oliver said: “We quite strongly believe that such an exploration tool can provide the maximum amount of information relating to the origins of the universe, to the life cycle, and to the destiny of the universe, and, in a sense, to the destiny of the human race as a whole.” (Chic. Trib., 7/28/65) Missions to Jupiter could be conducted by 1969, suggested Eugene Lally, Space-General Corp. engineer, in a paper presented to the AIAA outlining a program of six missions to the planet Jupiter, beginning with a fly-by in 1969 and culminating with a Jovian orbit in the mid-1980’s. A Jupiter mission would take about two years. Lally postulated that payload weights ranging from a 650-lb. payload to a 12,400-lb. orbiter payload could be easily handled by boosters ranging from Atlas-Centaur with an added kick stage, through the Saturn V which would be used to place a man on the moon. Lally speculated that an instrumented probe would be able to obtain information on the constitution of the core and surface layers, the atmosphere, nature of the largest of the planet’s spots, topography, constitution of meteoroids in its vicinity and the presence of small satellites not yet discovered with telescopes. Lally’s probe would contain experiments to measure the atmosphere, magnetic fields, and gravitational fields; to conduct infrared and microwave examinations of the surface; and to provide pictures similar to those taken of Mars by mariner iv. (Space-General Corp. Release) An Electro-Optical Systems (eos) bombardment ion engine had successfully operated for more than 2,610 hrs. in vacuum chamber conditions and, as a result of that extended run, “lifetimes in excess of 10.000	hours can now be calculated for the tiny engine under conditions of space flight,” Gordon Sohl, Electro-Optical Systems, Inc., told the aiaa meeting in San Francisco. Fueled with cesium, the EOS engine was less than two feet long and weighed 10 lbs. fully loaded with a five-pound fuel supply. It provided a power-to-thrust ratio of 182 kw. per pound. Financed by NASA Lewis Research Center, the EOS research program recently received a follow-on funding from LRC to determine “if the ion engine with 100 pounds of cesium fuel is equivalent in thrust to a conventional chemical rocket carrying a ton of propellant.” (eos Release) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, presented the third annual Theodore von Karman lecture. Dr. Bisplinghoff discussed advances in air transport, such as V/Stol aircraft and the hypersonic transport. He pointed out that within 20 yrs. an estimated 130 million persons (about 50% of the U.S. population) would be living in three main metropolitan areas and that there would be an increasing demand for “air buses.” Dr. Bisplinghoff suggested that the hydrogen-fueled hypersonic transport could be used as a cheap transport, or as an earth-to-orbit aircraft. He said that the hypersonic transport would carry passengers halfway around the earth nonstop at speeds up to 8,000 mph, but there was one problem area: . . . “Where the airplane threatens to overpower the pilot with characteristics which make the airplane unflyable by human systems.” Dr. Bisplinghoff called for increased research for operational experience with the scram jet (supersonic combustion ramjet) engine as a prelude to developing the hypersonic transports. In a press conference preceding his lecture, Dr. Bisplinghoff predicted “another revolution” for personal aircraft in the form of highly simplified controls similar to those in automobiles. He also urged quick Government action to begin the acquisition of a follow-on hypersonic research aircraft to succeed the X-15 and run the flight profile out to mach 10 to 12. (nasa Release 65-247; Text, M/S Daily, 7/28/65; eph) nasa Electronics Research Center Director Dr. Winston E. Kock discussed erc in address. During fy 1965, he said, erc “awarded 33 contracts totaling almost $2 million. The organizations to whom these contracts were awarded are spread widely throughout the country. . . . “The average value of the 33 contracts was $59,000, the largest being $285,000. These contracts were almost all in fairly basic research fields, ranging from integrated circuits and thin film space-charge limited triodes, through research in millimeter and submillimeter waves, optical wave-guides and optical components, to space-borne memory organizations, laser gyros and fluid storage and control devices. . . .” He discussed erc personnel: “We have grown from a group of 65 at our inception last year [Sept. 1] to a total of 244. As we are still in the formative stages, our scientific and engineering personnel now total only 92 out of the 244, but when we have reached our full strength of 2100, we expect that our staff will be about equally divided between scientific and engineering, technical support and administrative. . . .” (Text) Thomas Bilhorn, Manager, Mechanics Section, Scientific Balloon Facility at the National Center for Atmospheric Research (ncar), revealed that facilities for launching balloons capable of carrying 16,000-lb. payloads were expected to be completed by next summer at NCAR’s Scientific Balloon Flight Facility in Texas. The device under construction, called an inflation shelter, would have a ceiling height of 140 ft. and interior diameter of 120 ft. It would reduce handling problems during inflation and would give the capability of periods of hold, recall, and post-inflation inspection and repair. (Text) “There is nothing hostile or aggressive in the military space program we foresee. It is entirely within the context of a national program expressly devoted to peaceful purposes,” said Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director (Space) of Defense Research and Engineering. He continued: “It is likely that military interest will remain focused primarily on near-earth missions, out to synchronous orbit, certainly through 1975. We expect to continue our very large and vigorous unmanned military space program which is performing very important functions. The need for these programs will not diminish since they are by far the most efficient and cheapest way of performing specified tasks. With a steadily increasing experience and know-how in manned space flight, we may expect that spacecraft will acquire characteristics permitting rendezvous, station-keeping, docking, and transfer of man and material. We will likely acquire the means of sustaining military men in space for the periods of time we require. Booster capacities are not likely to limit the applications, but the booster and payload costs will continue to do so.” (Text) In aiaa session on the “History of Rocket Research Airplanes,” John Stack, former naca-nasa designer, pointed out how little was known about transonic and supersonic flight in 1943, when X-l was conceived. Walter C. Williams, Dr. Raymond Bisplinghoff, and Walter T. Bonney, among other speakers, also stressed the key role of engineer test pilots in the success of the X-l, d-558, x-2, and X-15 programs. Session was chaired by Robert Perry of rand Corporation, who traced the history of rocket-powered aircraft,	(eph; rand DeMarquis D. Wyatt, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Programing, told the meeting: “Any discussion of the NASA space program for the next 10 years must be given and received with a grain of salt. Reconstruct in your minds the situation 10 years ago and evaluate the validity of any discussion at that time of the NACA program for the period 1955-1965. Such a discussion would not have even mentioned space in any serious fashion. A paper delivered in 1960 that attempted to outline the NASA program for 1960-1970 would have widely missed the mark in the prediction of today’s realities. One can, therefore, conclude that one of the major management problems of the national space program is the lack of an adequate crystal ball for forecasting the future. “In the 6% years of its existence NASA has carried out a vigorous program of space activities designed to yield: “(a) a description and scientific understanding of the space environment; (b) the development of a broadly based national capability and capacity for manned and unmanned operations in space, and (c) the development of practical uses of space. “Decisions will have to be made with an appreciation of, and indeed the shaping of, our whole national attitude toward space in relation to our other national requirements and interests. Far too many future studies within and without the government are predicated on the assumption that the national investment in space research and technology will at least grow at the rate of the Gross National Product. This has not been true for the past several years and does not afford a necessarily sound planning assumption for the future. Our total federal budget has leveled off in spite of the great increase in the national product in recent years. If this trend holds, then marked increases in space expenditures can only come about through decreases in other federal spending. Such an assumption would indeed be a slender reed upon which to prognosticate the future.” (Text) Dr. Vincent P. Rock, Director of George Washington Univ.’s Program of Policy Studies in Science and Technology, said: “People are shaped by their environment. Technology is creating a new environment. In these circumstances power flows to those with access to technology—all technology, not simply military weapons. The exercise of power brings with it responsibility. The ultimate responsibility of those who exercise technological power is the achievement of a hospitable environment for mankind.” “Text)
NASA’s seven-year Saturn I program was concluded with the successful launch of pegasus iii. It marked the tenth success in as many attempts for the Saturn I booster. A significant development of the program was the clustering of several large rocket engines: the power plant in the first stage of the Saturn I was a cluster of eight H-l engines each with 188,000 lbs. of thrust to give this stage 1,504,000 lbs. of thrust. The first four flight tests (sa-1 through SA-4) were with dummy upper stages; beginning with SA-5, both stages (s-l and S—IV) were “live”; and the last three Saturn I’s each orbited a Pegasus. Other significant developments growing out of the Saturn I program included: “1. First extensive use of multi-engines (six RL-10-a3’s) and liquid hydrogen in the upper stages. “2. Advancement of guidance and instrumentation technology. “3. Facility expansion, and development of new transportation modes for large rockets. “4. Orbiting meteoroid technology satellites, the largest instrumented satellites launched to date. “5. Developing the capability of placing into earth orbit payloads of more than 37,000 pounds. “6. Developing guidance and instrumentation technology which could be used in other programs.” (nasa Release 65-253)
Test of the Apollo command module and launch escape system, scheduled for Dec. 8 at White Sands Missile Range, was postponed due to a malfunction in the Little Joe ii booster rocket guidance system. Malfunction was caused by bad soldering connections, (msc Info. Proj. Off.; Las Cruces Sun News, 12/6/65)
A four-stage, 60-ft.-long Journeyman (Argo d-8) sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station, Va., carried a 137-lb. instrument package to an altitude of 1,060 mi. on a 25-min. flight that ended 1,700 mi. offshore in the Atlantic, east of Bermuda. After launch, the payload, unfurled two 35-ft. antennas to provide a single dipole antenna, measuring 70 ft. from tip to tip. Main objective of the mission was to measure the intensity of radio frequency energy originating largely from outside the solar system. This was done at three frequencies: 750, 1,125, and 2,000 kc. Secondary objectives were the investigation of previously detected radio noise on the top side of the ionosphere and measurement of electron density in that part of the ionosphere. Information would be used in planning future space radio astronomy experiments to investigate certain characteristics of antennas in the ionospheric region. Experiment was conducted in cooperation with the Univ. of Michigan. (NASA Release 65-214; Wallops Release 6540; ap, Balt. Sun, 7/1/65)
Vincent R. Lalli of NASA Lewis Research Center described to the 11th National Symposium on Reliability and Quality Control in Miami Beach the R&QA procedure applied at Lewis to engine subsystems of the Sert-I (Space Electric Rocket Test) spacecraft to establish reliability standards for equipment never flown in space before. He said an experimental assembly of components, or “electrical breadboard,” was built for electrical stress measurements; once the analysis of stresses during operation was complete, safety factor could be defined. “Stress” did not refer to mechanical stress but to all physical factors—fatigue, corrosion, current, temperature, etc.—that could degrade or destroy equipment. Lalli pointed out: “The real uniqueness of this process is revealed in the stress analysis area where the role of the reliability engineer is extended beyond the analytical approach into obtaining transient experimental stress data.” (lrc Release 65—4)
NASA announced it would negotiate a two-phase contract with Aerojet General Corp. for design and development of a liquid-hydrogen, regeneratively cooled exhaust nozzle for the Phoebus nuclear rocket reactor test program. First phase of the contract would include a four-month preliminary design study of nozzle concepts and an evaluation of fabrication and testing methods. This phase would be negotiated on a cost-plus-fixed-fee basis at an estimated value of $400,000. Using results of Phase I, the contractor would design, develop, test, and deliver three nozzles to the Nuclear Rocket Development Station at Jackass Flats, Nev. Phase II would be awarded as an incentive contract with an estimated value of $10 million. Phoebus, a 5,000-megawatt reactor, would be tested as part of the program to develop nuclear propulsion devices for space missions. ( nasa Release 65-28)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb with a Thor-Agena D booster. (Wash. Post, 12/10/65, A29)
ComSatCorp’s 85-lb. early bird i, the first commercial communications satellite, was successfully launched from Cape Kennedy with a three-stage Thrust-Augmented Delta (Tad) booster. An hour after launching, flight control center confirmed that the satellite had entered an elliptical transfer orbit with apogee, 22,677 mi. (36,510 km.) ; perigee, 908 mi. (1,463 km.) ; period, 11 hrs. 10 min., and was sending clear radio signals. NASA handled the launching under a contract with ComSatCorp. About 40 hrs. after launching, a kick motor aboard early bird i would be fired to adjust the path of the satellite to a synchronous circular orbit at 22,300 mi. altitude above the Atlantic, early bird i would become the first link in ComSatCorp’s proposed worldwide satellite communications system and would relay radio, television, teletype, and telephone messages between North America and Europe. (Clark, NYT, 4/7/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 4/7/65; ComSatCorp)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb received an honorary doctorate from Wayne State Univ., Detroit, Mich. During a speech there he said: “Our goal is 100 per cent assurance of [space booster] success. This is difficult to achieve, but until we are certain in our own minds that we can count on success we do not go [on] with a manned shot. My directive on this is very clear. It came first from President Kennedy and has been restated by President Johnson. It is ‘Go when ready and don’t go until ready.’ ” (Text)
Smithsonian Institution disclosed architectural plans for a national air and space museum to be built in Washington, D. C., opposite the National Gallery of Art. Designed by Gyo Obata, a St. Louis architect, the building would be modern in concept with an internal design that would provide a sweeping vista of exhibit areas. Smithsonian officials hoped to receive Congressional authorization to build the museum at a cost of $42 million. (NYT, 1/31/65) During January: Reviewing Apollo program progress, Dr. Joseph Shea, Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said that NASA had characterized the program as a series of phases. He explained that 1963 and 1964 were years of detailed designs and initial developmental testing; 1964 and 1965 were years of extensive ground tests and qualifications for flight; from 1966 on, ground tests would be supplemental to extensive flight tests, initially on the Saturn IB and later on the Saturn V. From his visits to almost all of the major Apollo hardware contractors, Dr. Shea said he could report that all of the subsystems associated with the command and service modules “are well along in their ground test programs. “Almost all elements are on schedule and the test results indicate that the designs will meet our program objectives. By early this year, all subsystem hardware will be undergoing the rigorous qualification tests which we require before certifying such hardware ready for flight. ... By the end of 1965, there will be three Apollo spacecraft in continuous ground testing. 1964 was, in retrospect, a year where milestone by milestone, we have achieved Apollo objectives.” (naa S&1D Skywriter, 1/15/65, 1, 4; Witkin, NYT, 1/24/65, 60)
Canadian alouette ii and American explorer xxxi (Direct Measurement Explorer) were launched in a pick-a-back configuration by nasa from the Western Test Range with a single Thor-Agena B booster. Their orbital parameters were nearly identical: apogee, 1,837 mi. (2,958 km.); perigee, 329 mi. (516.8 km.); period, 121 min.; inclinations, 80°. The two satellites would make related studies of the earth’s ionosphere as they orbited in close proximity. Both the 323-lb. alouette II and the 218-lb. explorer xxxi were performing well. Called Isis-X, the double-launch project was first in a new NASA-DRB (Canadian Defense Research Board) program for International Satellites for Ionospheric Studies (Isis). (NASA Release 65—355; gsfc)
British Meteorological Office’s Skua solid-propellant sounding rocket was described by Kenneth Owen in Indian Aviation. The eight-foot-long, five-inch-diameter rocket had been in use since the beginning of the year as a tool for weather observations and other research. A series of Skuas would be launched as part of iqsy; launchings were planned at the rate of three a week during the nine two-week periods of IQSY known as “World Geophysical Intervals.” (Indian Aviation, 3/65, 73-74)
usaf designated Textron’s Bali Aerosystems Co. an associate prime contractor to supply rocket engines for the Agena space vehicle, it was announced. Change would enable the afsc Space Systems Div. to procure Agena rocket engines directly from Bell Aerosystems. Bell had designed, manufactured, and tested the Agena rocket engine since 1956 under subcontracts from Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. Agena had orbited more than 80 percent of the usaf and NASA satellites and had placed approximately 60 per cent of the free world’s functional unmanned payloads in space. The Bell Agena engine, which had contributed largely to that percentage, had been fired in space approximately 200 times and had achieved a record exceeding 99.3 per cent. (Bell Release)
Lance battlefield missile was successfully test fired at the White Sands Missile Range. Built for the Army by Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., the Lance was said to combine guided missile accuracy and range with the low cost and high reliability potential of a free rocket. It would complement division artillery and expand the capability for nuclear and non-nuclear fire, (ap, NYT, 3/18/65, 57)
Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said before the New York Academy of Sciences that “scientists should not set themselves up to judge the overall value” of the national space program. Past advice from scientists had not always been sound advice, he noted. “. . . Organized science has not always been outstanding for its courage, its vision, or its optimism regarding goals for human efforts. Elements of conservatism, parochialism, and even reactionary thinking do appear among scientists just as they do among many other groups in our society.” Dr. Welsh was also critical of the practice of criticizing the space program “by narrowly comparing” the dollars spent for space with what those same dollars might accomplish “if devoted to other endeavors, scientific or otherwise.” He said that often such dollars were not transferable; that space dollars might change the general climate to one favoring broader aid to the whole spectrum of science; and that since space expenditures sought broader goals than those of science, “the comparison may well be invalid on the face of it.” He continued: “The visionaries, whether primarily scientists or policy makers, must be given the opportunity to point out the many benefits which can flow from the manned and unmanned uses of aerospace. But, given such opportunity, they should use it effectively and affirmatively. Regardless of their motivations, the pessimists who cry out against aerospace research and technological endeavors have clearly set themselves against progress. The United States can no longer relax and rest on its past industrial laurels. The race for survival, literally and philosophically, is on. Of course, we would all like to believe in the solely non-aggressive uses of aerospace by all countries which have the needed technology. However, the realities of life dictate adequate preparation to preserve our national and Free World security. We should follow the axiom that a pound of prevention is worth mega-tons of cure.” Howard Simons commented in the Washington Post that these remarks were probably precipitated by a report from a committee of the American Association for the Advancement of Science which had charged that social, economic, military, and political pressures were distorting the traditional values and effectiveness of science. The report was highly critical of Project Apollo: “The Apollo program, in its present form, does not appear to be based on the orderly, systematic extension of basic scientific investigation.” (Text, CR, 1/28/65, A36T-65; Simons, Wash. Post, 1/12/65)
NASA launched a two part 994b. sounding rocket payload from NASA Wallops Station which reached an altitude of 614 mi. but did not separate in flight as planned. Launched on a four-stage Javelin (Argo D-4) and designed as “mother-daughter” experiment, the payload was to separate into two sections at about 170-mi. altitude with radio signals to be sent from daughter to mother as they continued to rise separately. The technique was devised to provide more accurate profiles of electron density in the upper atmosphere. Telemetry data would be analyzed to determine why the sections did not separate. (Wallops Release 65-3; nasa Rpt. srl)
Formation of a program to achieve a more powerful Atlas booster for future Agena and Centaur missions was announced by NASA. Presently designated slv-3x, the program would seek a 21,000-lb. propellant capacity increase in the standard Atlas booster by making the top of the vehicle cylindrical and would increase the thrust of three Atlas engines by using modified Saturn H-l fuel injector and improved turbines, afsc Space Systems Div. would act as NASA’s procurement agent. NASA Lewis Research Center would supervise; General Dynamics Convair Div. was expected to receive the contract. Use of an uprated Atlas would increase the Surveyor mission capability by 600 lbs. and would permit similar payload increases for Lunar Orbiter, Ogo, Oao, and Applications Technology Satellite (Ats). (NASA Release 65-192)	.
Missile lead of the U.S. was put at three to one in an article by Richard Fryklund in the Washington Evening Star: “U.S. intelligence estimates are that the Soviet Union has 245 to 295 intercontinental ballistic missiles on launchers ready to be fired. “The United States has 900.” (Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/26/65, 2) NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L. Dryden, delivering the keynote address, said: “The rate of growth of space activities in the first six years of the space age has been unprecedented in the history of a new field of science and technology but there are signs of attainment of a certain degree of maturity. The most obvious is the establishment, following several years in which available funds nearly doubled each year, of a level of five to five and a quarter billions for congressional appropriations to NASA, or about seven billions for space activities of all agencies at the suitable level. . . . “Maturity is also indicated by the drastic reduction in the number of unsuccessful missions, the result of increased knowledge and experience in the previously unknown field of space. Thus in calendar year 1958 in the first three months of NASA, four missions were attempted without a single success. In the following year eight of fourteen were successful, whereas in 1964 twenty-five of thirty more difficult missions were successful, a percentage of 83 which has been maintained now for three years. . . .” (nasa Release 65-83; Text, nasa Release 65-165) Answering the query “What does the future hold in store?” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the Symposium about future manned flight options: “In near-earth space, missions could include low and high inclination, polar, or synchronous orbits to accomplish research, technological, and applications objectives. . . . “In a low inclination orbit, below the Van Allen belts, the basic problems of keeping men in space for extended periods can be studied, rendezvous and resupply problems could be worked out, and scientific experiments conducted. “In synchronous orbit, where the spacecraft hovers over a fixed area of the earth all the time, experiments could be carried out which involve manned observations over a given portion of the earth or which use man to assist in the operation of various experimental systems. “In polar orbit, scientist-astronauts could monitor and observe the entire surface of the earth as it passes beneath the spacecraft, mapping it and surveying most of the world’s resources. . . . “In earth orbit ... a medium-size manned orbiting research laboratory might be developed. Such a space station would accommodate six to nine men and remain in orbit for up to five years. . . . Resupply vehicles, or space shuttles, could be used for crew rotation and for delivery of equipment and supplies. The laboratory would provide roomy quarters with a shirt-sleeve environment for conducting a wide variety of experiments in space. It would also contain a centrifuge, should it be found essential for reconditioning crew members to withstand the effects of gravity after periods of weightlessness. “Following this a larger permanent manned orbiting research laboratory accommodating 20 to 30 men, might then be developed, by assembling three or four of the medium-size laboratories in space. Artificial gravity could be provided in the laboratories by rotating them about their axes. “Possibly the most challenging long-term goal of the entire space program is manned exploration of the planets—especially of Mars.” (Text) Comparing the space programs of the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “1. In number of earth-orbiting payloads the United States has launched almost three times as many as has the USSR, although the 1965 rate is less than two to one. “2. In the weight of such payloads, the USSR has put up almost three times as much as has the United States. “3. In propulsion, the Soviets have from the beginning enjoyed an operational advantage over the United States. However, we are currently making great strides in this regard and it is hoped that we will keep moving up the propulsion ladder so as not to be overtaken again. “4. In manned space flight, the USSR is ahead of the U.S., not only in hours of flight but also in multi-manned flight and extravehicular activity. So far, the U.S. astronauts have completed 40 orbits of the earth, the Soviet cosmonauts have completed 342 such orbits. Moreover, as our Gemini schedule proceeds and contributes continued progress, we must look for much more activity on the part of the Soviets. “5. In the application of space developments to directly useful purposes, the United States is well ahead, particularly in such fields as weather observations, navigation, and communications. However, the Soviets have potential capabilities of these types and have already begun to show some actual experience in space communications. “6. In lunar and interplanetary activity, the U.S. may have an edge with the spectacular success of the Rangers and Mariners. We have developed this advantage, even though the Soviets have made a greater relative commitment in this regard, both from the view of absolute numbers of launches and also in regard to weight of payloads. “7. Based upon clear knowledge of our own program and upon assertions by the Soviets about theirs, one can reasonably conclude that both countries have manned lunar landing projects under way. It would be impossible to state definitely who is ahead in this regard but I am hopeful that we will turn out to be. “8. As regards the collection of scientific data from space, both countries have made impressive strides, resulting in a possible advantage to the USSR regarding the effects of space environment on human beings. “9. Both countries are in a position to make many observations from space, but both countries have pledged not to orbit weapons of mass destruction and have stressed that their programs are dedicated to peaceful uses. I can only speak for this country in regard to our intent and do state that we will maintain our defenses while pledging not to use space for aggressive purposes.” Dr. Welsh warned: “Let us not expect our space program to proceed indefinitely without some tragedy involving our astronauts.” (Text) Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, said: “In assessing our growth in space capability in terms of three steps from earth to earth orbit, from earth orbit to moon, and from moon to planets, it is important to recognize that the first two steps rest on essentially the same technologies. These are technologies which have evolved for decades and which are familiar: chemical energy conversion, relatively common engineering materials, measurement and control systems generally consistent with aircraft and ground technology and microwave communications. However, the third step will demand performance and efficiency well beyond the first two. An entirely new level of technology is needed; nuclear energy conversion, new refractory materials, accuracy of sensors—improved by orders of magnitude—and laser communications. There are the underlying requirements of higher reliability and longer lifetimes than have yet been demonstrated, together with low specific weight. “The requirement for improvement in this spectrum of space-related technologies will drive them well beyond their present level. The presence of difficult goals can have a profound influence on earth-bound consumer products through the advancement of common fields of technology in addition to opening the gateway to deep space. The NASA program of advanced research and technology embraces most of these elements at least in their fundamental forms. Without this research the space program would soon wither and die. With it, by the year 2000, an enormous influence can be exerted on national prestige and strength.” (Text) Discussing space projects of the future at the Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Space, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, said: “The reusable vehicle seems to be the key to development of an economical earth-to-orbit transportation system. Passenger conveniences must be improved so that scientists, engineers, technicians, military personnel—and even politicians and journalists—can make the trip. “One of the methods we have been studying several years combines the experience gained in the x-15 rocket plane program with present Saturn know-how, for building a high performance two-stage rocket “plane”—called the Re-Usable Orbital Transport. It appears entirely practical to develop a vehicle that would not subject passengers to more than three g’s in ascent or descent. “In the orbital transport under study, the first stage would fly mission paths similar to the X-15, with the second stage, carrying passengers and cargo, launched from a piggy-back position. The second stage would fly into and out of orbit, gliding to a power-off landing after re-entry in the same manner the X-15 does now as routine procedure. “It would offer passengers who are in a hurry transportation over global ranges with about one-hour flight time. If we can develop a single or two-stage chemical rocket aerospace vehicle and learn to fly it over and over before it is worn out, the high-income traveler should find the operational cost acceptable. But, of course, the thing we must have is the demand—the traffic, cargo, and passengers to make the system economical. “After we have tried our wings in the immediate earth environment, our next major step in exploring and utilizing the solar system is the moon. And after that, the planets.” (Text) Dr. Joseph V. Charyk, ComSatCorp president, announced at the Space Symposium that the corporation might invite the aerospace industry to submit detailed proposals for satellites that would connect the television networks to their affiliated stations and would provide new facilities for airplane companies to communicate with aircraft in flight. Dr. Charyk’s disclosure was a consequence of the American Broadcasting Company’s recent proposal to put up its own comsat to relay TV shows to affiliated stations for rebroadcast to home viewers. Dr. Charyk said a satellite to relay television programs to affiliated stations involved no new basic engineering problems and offered “real potential, sound economic basis.” He envisioned a television satellite equipped with 12 channels, three of which would serve each of the four time zones. A satellite of essentially the same design could serve the airplane companies, he noted. (Gould, NYT, 5/29/65, 55)
USAF announced a four-stage Blue Scout Jr. rocket combination with a scientific payload had failed after launch from Cape Kennedy. The second stage developed trouble about 100 sec. after launching, causing the range safety officer to send destruct signal. The stage broke apart on its own. The third stage, meanwhile, separated from the second stage, ignited, and followed approximately its preplanned path. The fourth stage failed to ignite; it and the payload plummeted harmlessly into the Atlantic Ocean southwest of Ascension Island. The probe was to have sent its instrumented payload 24,500 mi. into space to study earth’s magnetic field. (NYT, 1/29/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 132)
First sounding rocket launching undertaken jointly by the U.S. and Brazil under a memorandum of understanding signed April 21, 1965, was conducted successfully at nasa Wallops Station. The Nike-Apache rocket carried a 60-lb. payload to peak altitude of about 101 mi. (162.6 km.) during the seven-minute flight. Instrumentation for payload and telemetry ground support equipment were constructed jointly by Brazilian Space Commission (cnae) and nasa engineers at nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, nasa furnished the rocket and use of Wallops Station facilities. The Brazilian launch team, presently in training at Wallops Station, directed the launch operations and acquired telemetry data during the flight. (Wallops Release 65-51)
Dr. A. J. Drummond of Eppley Laboratory, Newport, R.I., told Missiles and Rockets that a number of Russian cosmonauts were said to have died in booster failures at launch. Dr. Drummond got his information through unofficial sources while attending a technical meeting in Leningrad last year. He also said there were no large solar-simulation testing facilities in the Soviet Union and that Soviet spacecraft used crude bulk insulation for thermal control instead of emission-absorption coatings. (M&R, 1/25/65, 7)
First major piece of flight-type hardware for the Apollo program, Service Module 001, successfully underwent a 10-sec. shakedown static test firing at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center’s White Sands Operations. Service Module 001 was unlike previous boilerplate models in that it was constructed primarily of aluminum alloy and had an outside skin of honeycomb bonded between two aluminum sheets. Made by Aerojet-General, the service propulsion system engine had 22,000 lbs. of thrust. It would slow down the Apollo for entry into lunar orbit and speed up the spacecraft for escape from lunar orbit and the return to earth. (msc Roundup, 2/17/65, 8; naa S&ID Skywriter, 2/12/65, 1, 3)
Soviet Union gave assurances to U.S. through Ambassador Anatoly F. Dobrynin that it was abiding, and would continue to abide, by the 1963 U.N. resolution calling on all states not to orbit weapons of mass destruction. U.S. had raised the question whether the resolution was being violated after the Nov. 7 display during a military anniversary parade of “an orbital missile” capable of delivering a surprise blow from space. Comment in Pravda on American press reaction to display of orbital rockets during the Nov. 7 parade: “By raising a racket about the Soviet orbital rocket, somebody in the USA evidently calculated to divert the attention of the world public from the American military preparations in the cosmos. The activity of the USA . . . is . . . subordinated to the idea of using space for military purposes . . . Program mol. The military equipment reviewed on Red Square on November 7 demonstrated . . . the power of our rocket weapons not in order to threaten anyone. Nuclear rocket weapons, which the Soviet Government has at its disposal, are the powerful means of guaranteeing the peace.” (Pravda, 12/8/65, dod Trans.; Finney, NYT, 12/11/65,1)
Britain’s Blue Streak Rocket, first stage of the European Launcher Development Organization’s (eldo) satellite project, was successfully launched to an altitude of 150 mi. from Woomera, Australia. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 3/23/65)
Second two-stage Dragon sounding rocket launched by France from Skogasandur, Iceland, to 248-mi. peak altitude. Payload was instrumented to study protons and electrons in the Van Allen radiation belt, (ap, NYT, 9/5/65, 48)
Lockheed’s 156-in.-dia., solid-fueled rocket motor fired for approximately 58 sec., developed over 3-million-lbs. thrust, and produced about 715 psi of pressure. Vector control system went through its three programed cycles without flaw. Fifth firing of a 156, test was conducted at Lockheed’s Potrero, Calif., facilities. (Av. Wk., 12/27/65,61)	.	_
An atomic clock so accurate it could help determine the position of a rocket hurtling at 238,000 mph toward the moon within three-quarters-of an inch was in production at Varian Associates, UPI reported. The clock would be about the size of a hatbox. (upi, NYT, 6/16/65, 31)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket with grenade payload to obtain temperature, wind, density, and pressure data was launched from Wallops Island, Va. to altitude 73.5 mi. (118.2 km.). Twelve grenades were to have exploded during rocket ascent, but two did not explode. All other instruments performed as anticipated. A similar experiment was launched from Point Barrow successfully. (NASA Rpt. srl)
NASA launched a second Aerobee 150A sounding rocket from Wallops Station containing French-built radio propagation experiments designed for later flight on France’s fr-1 satellite. The 197-lb. payload reached peak altitude of 120 mi. (192 km.) during the eight-minute flight. First launch had carried an identical payload Sept. 17. (Wallops Release 65-61)
100 university, research laboratory, and government scientists met in Falmouth, Mass., to recommend modifications or additions to NASA’s Apollo Program and Apollo Extension Systems lunar science program. Participants included three astronauts—R. Walter Cunningham and two of the six scientist-astronauts selected on June 28, 1965: Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt of the U.S. Geological Survey and Dr. Frank C. Michel of Rice Univ. This meeting resulted in recommendation of a 10-year post-Apollo lunar exploration program of mainly manned missions, with wide variety of scientific experiments in geology, geochemistry, geophysics, and bioscience. Top priority recommended for early Apollo landing missions was collection of greatest possible number and variety of lunar material samples. Conference was sponsored by the Manned Space Science Program of NASA’s office of Space Science and Applications. Report of the conference (nasa sp-88) was later published in January 1966. (nasa Release 66-4; NASA sp-88; nasa Release 65-239)
Reaction to the cancellation of the NASA Gemini VI mission October 25 indicated that the space program and its public acceptance had matured during the first eight years of the space age, wrote Robert Hotz in Aviation Week and Space Technology. He recalled the “abuse heaped on the Vanguard program, the demands for Ranger’s cancellation, and the timorous whimpering that tried to suppress the Mercury program and bury the Apollo plans,” and suggested that “the lesson we should learn as a nation from our space program is that no task is too difficult to achieve and no challenge too great ... to surmount if its top-level leadership points out the goals and sounds the charge.” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 11/1/65, 11) During week of November 1: Two 16-in. guns welded-together end to end would serve as first stage of a three-stage launch device believed capable by its developers—USA Ballistic Research Laboratories and McGill Univ. Space Research Institute, Montreal—of orbiting a 50-lb. satellite. The gun had launched 185-lb. payloads to approximate 84-mi. altitudes last year. Components of the rocket assembly had been successfully tested separately, but not as a unit; test firing of the first stage would take place in Barbados within four months. Dr. Charles H. Murphy, Ballistic Research Laboratories, and Dr. Gerald V. Bull, McGill Univ., reported on the project at a meeting of the New York Academy of Sciences. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/9/65, 3)
Dr. Albert J. Kelley, Deputy Director of NASA Electronics Research Center, said in an article in Boston Sunday Globe: “The need for increased electronics research to develop devices which will meet the demands and rigors of long space flights will affect our industrial outlook and economy in many ways. By requiring a ‘new look’ at electronics, NASA, led by ERC, will provide a research emphasis such as we have not had since World War II when the golden age of electronics started. “We have been in the ‘rocket phase’ and are now entering the ‘electronic phase’ of space flight development, a phase which will affect us dramatically over many years.” (Boston Sun. Globe, 1/3/65)
usaf launched an Honest John-Nike Hydac high-altitude research rocket with 250-lb. payload from Eglin afb, Fla. (Eglin afb Release 65449)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos lxxx, lxxxi, lxxxii, lxxxiii, and lxxxiv into orbit with a single booster. Initial orbital data: cosmos lxxx, apogee, 1,552 km. (963.3 mi.); perigee, 1,356 km. (842 mi.); period, 115 min.; cosmos lxxxi, apogee, 1,556 km. (967 mi.); perigee, 1,385 km. (860.2 mi.); period, 115 min.; cosmos lxxxii, apogee, 1,563 km. (971 mi.); perigee, 1,410 km. (876 mi.); period, 115 min.; cosmos lxxxiii, apogee, 1,569 km. (975 mi.); perigee, 1,438 km. (893.1 mi.); period, 116 min.; cosmos lxxxiv, apogee, 1,574 km. (978 mi.); perigee, 1,467 km. (911.1 mi.) ; period, 116 min. Inclination for all five satellites was 56°. One of the satellites was powered by a radioactive isotope, but Tass announced that full measures had been taken “to preclude the possibility of the radioactive isotope contaminating the atmosphere or the surface of the earth.” All onboard equipment was functioning normally. (Tass, 9/3/65)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, speaking at the Annual Convention of the American Trial Lawyers Association in Miami Beach, said: “I would like first to comment on what appears to be a general misconception about the overall purposes of the Apollo program. Many people seem to believe that a landing on the moon, ahead of the Soviets, is the paramount objective. This is not so. The principal goal is to make the United States first in space by the end of this decade, and to make this pre-eminence unmistakably clear to the world. “Why ... is it so vital that the United States be pre-eminent in space? There are many reasons that can be cited, and they fall generally into two major categories—the imperative reasons and the ancillary, or spin-off benefits. It is imperative, in the Cold War arena, that the United States be first for reasons of national security, national pride of achievement, and the international prestige. The ancillary . . . reasons include the benefits of scientific discovery; the stimulation of economic and social progress; technological advancement, including the civilian application and utilization of the products of space-oriented research; and the compelling urge of man to explore and to discover.” (Text)
Dr. John C. Evvard, Deputy Associate Director for Research at NASA Lewis Research Center, discussed possible propulsion systems for future space-flight beyond the moon before the Conference on Civilian and Military Uses of Aerospace sponsored by the New York Academy of Sciences. He cited a manned Mars project as a prime example of a mission that could be performed by a number of different propulsion concepts. For example, manned trips by chemical rockets would be weight-restricted, but chemical rocket systems would have the advantage of having been extensively flight-tested on many other missions. Although the reactor for planned nuclear propulsion systems had only been ground tested, evaluations of complete nuclear rocket engine systems were expected within the next few years. Electric propulsion systems for manned spaceflight were even further in the future and might not be ready by 1980; but by then the mission capability of the nuclear rocket would have been so thoroughly demonstrated that it would be more attractive than chemical engines for those missions requiring increased propulsion capability. Even further into the future were nuclear systems such as the gaseous-corecavity reactor which would yield higher performance, (lrc Release 65-5)
NASA announced that it would negotiate with Space Technology Laboratories and Thiokol Chemical Corp. for six-month, fixed-price contracts of approximately $1.5 million for definition of a program to develop and produce a 100-lb.-thrust rocket engine. The multipurpose engine, designated c-1, would be designed for spacecraft attitude control and maneuvering systems and also for launch vehicle ullage and attitude control systems. It would be powered by the hypergolic, storable liquid propellants monomethylhydrazine (mmh) and nitrogen tetroxide. (nasa Release 65—41)
NASA announced its agreement with the Brazilian Space Commission (cnae) to cooperate in scientific sounding rocket program to investigate the lower regions of the ionosphere, emphasizing the effects of cosmic rays. NASA would provide and cnae would launch two sounding rockets from Natal, Brazil; scientific payloads would be constructed by Brazilian technicians at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. NASA and CNAE would combine to provide ground support equipment, to analyze data, and to publish the results of the experiment. In addition, NASA would launch one instrumented sounding rocket from Wallops Station, Va., in a complementary experiment. The project would contribute to observance of 1965 as International Cooperation Year, (nasa Release 65—149)
usaf launched Thor-Altair booster from Western Test Range with unidentified satellite payload. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 136)
In a Missiles and Rockets editorial, William J. Coughlin questioned NASA’s wisdom in drawing up mission requirements for lunar exploration. The article said:	“Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA associate administrator, told Congress last year:	‘Ranger will play an important role in the support of Project Apollo.’ . . . “Not a single change has been made in any part of the Apollo system or in the program’s operational plan as a result of the Ranger findings. None is contemplated. The reason for this is simple. The Block in Rangers were incapable of producing any such data. . . . “The case for Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter as supports for the Apollo program ... is not a very strong one. . . . “Dr. Newell sees them as part of what he calls the ‘total program for exploring the Moon.’ . . . [He said] in the following statement to Congress:	‘You will have a lunar landing. That lunar landing will involve a few hours of stay on the Moon, a look that the astronauts can make, a few collections of samples, maybe some simple tests, and maybe the implacement by the astronauts of monitors to be left on the lunar surface.’ “After their departure, Dr. Newell sees the instruments carrying on. Lunar Orbiter wheels overhead. Surveyor explores areas on the moon which Man would have difficulty in reaching. . . . “We suggest that if anyone proposed exploring the Antarctic in such a manner, he would he clapped in the pokey as a nut. Man is going to the Moon and he is going to explore it. Expenditure of billions of dollars on instruments remotely controlled from Earth to do the same job is folly.” (M&R, 4/12/65, 46)
In a Washington Evening Star article, “Costs Soar in Lagging TFX Project,” Richard Wilson wrote: “Here’s the latest word on that $8 billion miracle airplane program, the tfx. It is costing about $5 million per plane instead of the estimated $2.2 million. It is too heavy for the Navy to use. It could have been ready now but it isn’t because the Kennedy administration lagged a year while evaluating and reevaluating the aircraft so that General Dynamics Corp. could get the contract. . . . “Nobody knows for sure that the Boeing plane would have worked out any better but the top military men all thought so. . . . So far as realizing any billion dollars savings as was at first advertised, this doesn’t appear very likely if the Navy has to have a lighter version. In view of the nearly doubling of cost per plane, it does not seem likely in any case. . . .” (Wilson, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/65) September 13-18: International Astronautical Federation’s 16th Congress was held in Athens. Participants were greeted by King Constantine of Greece. Introductory speeches were made by the president of the IAF, Dr. William H. Pickering; chairman of the International Academy of Astronautics, Dr. Charles S. Draper; and president of the International Institute of Space Law, Dr. I. Pepin. (Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/12/65; Izvestia, 9/14/65, 5, atss-t Trans.) Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, reported at a plenary meeting of the Congress that the Apollo program had now passed the half-way point and was moving forward at full momentum. He listed three primary commitments: “—the first Saturn V carrying an unmanned Apollo spacecraft is scheduled to be launched in 1967. “—the first Saturn V carrying a manned Apollo spacecraft is scheduled to be launched in 1968. “—the manned lunar landing is scheduled to be accomplished prior to 1970.” Following his presentation, von Braun told a news conference that “many Soviet and American scientists will participate to lay the foundation for extensive cooperation on the moon.” He said there were indications that the moon’s surface was solid enough to bear the weight of the spacecraft. Soft spots had been identified and would be avoided. He estimated that a landing on Mars would occur 15 yrs. after a successful lunar landing. (Text; NYT, 9/15/65, 24) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, outlined broad objectives of the Saturn-Apollo applications missions, earth-orbital and lunar: “(1) Evaluate and extend man’s capabilities to operate in space effectively as an astronaut and as a scientist. “(2) Conduct observations of the Earth, extra-terrestrial phenomena, and experiments dependent on the space environment. “(3) Qualify systems and crews for subsequent long-duration space missions.
Jet airline pilots would no longer be required to wear oxygen masks when flying above 35,000 ft. according to a FAA rule effective as of this date. Under the new rule, the requirement for one pilot at the controls to use oxygen would apply now only above 41,000 ft., where the time element would be much more critical in case of sudden decompression. (faa Release 65—84) During, September: First useful photograph of the nightglow was recorded aboard a NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands Missile Range. Rocket was at 173-km. (106.8-mi.) altitude; distance from the earth’s horizon to the center of the nightglow was 90 km. (55.9 mi.). Tri-X film was used. (M&R, 9/27/65, 15)
Canada’s Black Brant research rocket underwent its second successful launch from Ft. Churchill, Manitoba. (M&R, 6/28/65, 11)
Successful 41-sec. test firing of the Saturn V booster (s-ic-t) at nasa Marshall Space Flight Center concluded a test series underway since April. 15 tests of the booster were held, 14 of them at full thrust of 7.5-million lbs. The 14 full-power tests accumulated a running time of 862 sec. First test was of only one engine for 17 sec. (msfc Release 65-306; Marshall Star, 12/15/65, 2)
First developmental test of a possible landing system for the Apollo Spacecraft was successfully performed at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center with the drop of a boilerplate spacecraft from a crane into a 700,000	gallon water tank. The boilerplate was fitted with two pairs of rockets and an 8-ft.-long altitude sensor. Rockets were mounted in the outer rim of the heat shield; thrust vector of the rockets was aligned with the gravity vector of the spacecraft. Structural reinforcement of the heat shield area was current solution for preventing damage to the spacecraft in a rough water landing. If the landing rocket system proved desirable, it would cut several hundred pounds from the weight of the Apollo command module in addition to providing an improved emergency and landing capability. (msc Roundup, 5/28/65, 8)
The Communist New China News Agency (ncna) said in a broadcast that Indonesia had successfully launched a two-stage scientific rocket Jan. 5 from somewhere in West Java. The rocket was reportedly made by the Indonesian air force. There were no other details, (upi, Miami Her., 1/18/65)
NASA would stick with its Saturn launch vehicles for the Apollo program, Maj. Gen. Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), Apollo Program Director, reportedly said in Tulsa. Asked about the possibility of “leap-frogging” in the Apollo and making use of Titan m-c—because of its launch potential—instead of Saturn V, Phillips said “no,” and commented: “The Saturn vehicle will do what we want insofar as the Apollo program is concerned, and leapfrogging now probably would mean some setbacks rather than advancing the Apollo project.” He said launch vehicles such as Titan iii-C, which had a potential of 11 to 15 million lbs. of thrust, most certainly would have major roles in future space operations. “But NASA is committed to the Saturn for the Apollo and we plan to stick with this vehicle.” (Leslie, Tulsa Daily World, 6/24/65)
nasa’s explorer xxvii (be-c ) satellite was successfully launched into orbit from Wallops Island aboard a four-stage Scout rocket. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 796.5 mi. (1,162.4 km.); perigee, 579.7 mi. (921.3 km.) ; period, 108 min.; inclination to the equator, 41°. Primary mission of the 132-lb., windmill-shaped satellite was geodetic measurement: irregularities in the earth’s gravitational field would be mapped by analysis of the Doppler shift of radio signals from the spacecraft. As a secondary mission, EXPLORER xxvii would provide data related to ionospheric studies and would evaluate further the use of laser techniques in deriving orbital and geodetic information and for deep space communication. All systems were operating as planned. (Wallops Release 65-24; nasa Release 65-147; nasa Proj. Off.)
R. E. Clarson, Inc., of St. Petersburg, Fla., was awarded a $2,179,000 contract for alterations to Launch Complex 34, Cape Kennedy, to accommodate the Saturn ib rocket. Army Corps of Engineers made the award, (ap, Miami Her., 2/3/65)
France successfully launched a—I, her first satellite, with the Diamant booster from Hammaguir Range, Algeria. Countdown had been interrupted for seven hours when a faulty diode was discovered in the boosters’ third stage. Initial orbital data: apogee, 1,768 km. (1,098 mi.); perigee, 525 km. (326 mi.); period, 108 min.; inclination, 34.65° (compared with planned 2,154-km. [1,562-mi.] apogee, 553-km. [331-mi.] perigee, 53° inclination). The 88-lb. satellite, comparable to the U.S. Vanguard, carried a radio and radar transmitters but no scientific equipment; it was designed for a two-week lifetime. Radio was functioning feebly. Primary purpose of launch was to test the Diamant booster, whose three stages had been tested individually but not as a three-stage launch vehicle. Second and third stages used solid fuel; the first used liquid. (Root, Wash. Post, 11/27/65, Al; ap, NYT, 11/27/65, 1, 4; SBD, 12/11/65, 172)
The first flight-model S-IVB second stage for the Saturn IB booster was test-fired at Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Sacramento Test Center to demonstrate its flight readiness before formal acquisition by NASA. The stage’s 200,000-lb.-thrust J-2 engine was fired for 452 sec. (7V2 min.) without mishap. Test was computer-controlled throughout, marking “the first time a fully automatic system has been used to perform a complete checkout, propellant loading, and static firing test on a space vehicle.” (nasa Release 65-267; msfc Release 65—202; Marshall Star, 8/11/65, 1, 10)
Principal source of advanced technology in the U.S. had been and would remain the aerospace industry, postulated an article in Aerospace. Only in its programs were technical goals high enough and national requirements urgent enough to move forward in major steps. As these steps were completed and technical goals achieved, the entire economy fell heir to the new technology. Key goals in defense and space programs were listed as: (1) lowering costs; (2) improving the efficiency of motors, generators, and all other energy conversion devices and processes; (3) improving design, that is, reducing the weight and increasing the strength of all machines, by either improved knowledge of the machine or by using lighter, stronger materials; (4) improving the accuracies to which machines could be controlled; (5) improving reliability; (6) improving communications between men, between men and machines, and between machines. (Aerospace, Winter 1965) During 1965: In 1965, NASA attempted 28 missions with 23 successes, a score of 82% mission success. Two spacecraft were launched on a single booster. NASA attempted 30 launches of space boosters and had 26 successes, a score of 87% launch vehicle success. Of the 92 payloads orbited by the U.S., NASA orbited 25—five of which were two-manned spacecraft and four were escape-mission probes. U.S.S.R. orbited 64 payloads, of which one was a manned spacecraft and seven were escape-mission probes. France entered the space age with two satellites, one orbited by France herself (a—i) and one by the U.S. (fr-i ) . Most spectacular of NASA’s space missions were the real-time reception of close-up lunar photographs by ranger ix, first U.S. extravehicular activity by gemini iv Astronaut White, man’s first close look at Mars (including 21 photographs) by mariner iv, and manned rendezvous to within one foot by gemini vi and vn. The Gemini program began 1965 with GT-2 unmanned suborbital flight; this was followed by four two-man orbital flights which logged more than 1,300 manhours in space, gemini v and vn, long-duration missions (8 and 14 days respectively) proved man can withstand extended conditions of spaceflight and validated plans for manned Apollo lunar flights. At the year’s end Gemini spaceflights had set for the U.S. more than 10 records, among them the record for total manhours in space: 1,354 hrs., 38 min., vs. U.S.S.R.’s 507 hrs., 16 min. 1965 was a year of extensive ground tests of the Apollo spacecraft and the Saturn launch vehicles. There were static firings of engines for the various Saturn IB and Saturn V stages, highlighted by full-duration firing of all three Saturn V stages. Saturn I program ended with a record of 10 successes out of 10 attempts, its three 1965 launches orbiting Pegasus meteoroid detection satellites. Fire II provided valuable data for Apollo on reentry from simulated lunar trajectory. In lunar and planetary achievement, rangers viii and IX provided more than 13,000 lunar surface photographs and brought that project to a close. Atlas-Centaur ac-6 launched a dummy Surveyor on a simulated lunar transfer orbit and proved itself capable of operational Surveyor missions. NASA stepped up its interplanetary research with pioneer vi, first of four projected interplanetary satellites. tiros ix became the first weather satellite to provide close to 100% coverage of the earth daily, and tiros x was the first in a series of interim operational satellites for the. U.S. Weather Bureau. Five Explorer scientific satellites, oso n, Canada’s alouette ii, and France’s FR-I were orbited. NASA orbited secor v for the U.S. Army, SOLRAD ix (explorer xxx) for the U.S. Navy, and early bird i communications satellite for the Communications Satellite Corporation. NASA turned over syncoms II and III to dod for operational use at the completion of their r&d function. The five NASA mission failures: vehicle test of Atlas-Centaur ac-5; test of Apollo launch escape system on a Little Joe II booster; failure of OGO ii, which did return good (but incomplete) experiment data; failure to orbit a third Orbiting Solar Observatory; and failure of Gemini 6 because Agena Target Vehicle did not achieve orbit. In 39 successful launches, dod orbited 67 satellites. In addition, there were four unsuccessful DOD space launches, losing five payloads. Decision was made that DOD proceed with the Manned Orbiting Laboratory, and launches were begun of the powerful Titan iii-C which would eventually orbit the Mol. Highlighting the U.S.S.R.’s busy space year was man’s first extra-vehicular space activity, by voskhod ii’s Cosmonaut Leonov. Soviet lunar exploration intensified, with apparent soft-landing attempts by lunas v through viii, as well as photographs of the moon’s hidden side by interplanetary probe zond III. U.S.S.R. launched VENUS II and III on the long flight toward the planet Venus. (Western experts speculated that cosmos lx was an unsuccessful lunar soft-landing attempt and cosmos xcvi an unsuccessful Venus probe.) U.S.S.R. orbited 52 Cosmos satellites, two heavyweight Proton spacecraft, and her first communications satellites—two Molniyas I. (nasa Release 65-368; msfc Release 65-312; nasa hhr-8; nasc Staff; nasa A&A 1965; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/12/65) During 1965: Some nasa research highlights of 1965: NASA launched 191 scientific sounding rockets to obtain a variety of scientific data and about 10 for advanced research an d techno!-ogy. By the end of the year, the three x-15 research aircraft had made 156 flights, 32 of them in 1965. Tests proceeded of the modified x—15 (No. 2), expected to exceed 5,000-mph flight speed, nasa supported the National supersonic transport program and evaluated wind tunnel models of the two proposed Sst designs. NASA continued using usaf XB-70 aircraft for research in flight problems of Sst and large supersonic aircraft in general. Feasibility studies of adapting V/Stol concepts to commercial transportation and wind-tunnel studies of several V/Stol designs continued. As part of research toward efficient design of hypersonic aircraft, comparative performance and heat transfer measurements were obtained on a variety of aircraft wings, bodies, and wing-body combinations. Ramjet engine research was in the engine design concept phase. NASA developed and tested a new near-field theory useful in predicting sonic boom characteristics of Sst configurations during transonic climb-out. Flight research of M-l lifting body was advanced, and construction of HL-10 lifting body was being completed. Solid propulsion technology was advanced with static-firing of the 260-in. solid-fuel rocket motor. In nuclear rocket technology, three Nerva reactor experiments were completed and the new Phoebus advanced graphite reactor test program was begun. The success of a 2,600-hr. ion engine test provided evidence that life-times of 10,000 hrs. for electric rocket thrusters may be within reach. Among highlights in electronics and control was reentry communications experiment on GEMINI hi demonstrating feasibility of water injection to overcome communications blackout during reentry. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 25-38; ossa & oart S.Rkt. Proj. Off.; NASA Release 65-368) During 1965: About 90% of NASA’s budget was going to contractors to pay for work being done by nearly 400,000 people of about 20,000 prime and subcontractors. In the university program, NASA was doing business with about 200 universities in every state on space-related projects at the year’s end. NASA’s requirement to transfer its technology to other sectors of the economy had developed into an information system with more than 200,000 technical documents abstracted, indexed, and filed in a computer-based nationwide system. (NASA Release 65-368)
Agreement was signed for a cooperative Brazilian-U.S. sounding rocket project to obtain meteorological information, NASA announced. Project provided for cooperation in obtaining wind, temperature, and other meteorological information between 40 km. and 100 km. by rocket soundings using the acoustic grenade technique. Experiments would be conducted from the Brazilian launch range at Natal. The agreement, in form of a memorandum of understanding, was signed by representative of the Momissao Nacional de Atividades Espaciais (cnae) of Brazil and nasa. It was the third to be concluded between CNAE and nasa during 1965. (nasa Release 65-372)	r
In a television interview, Israeli Premier Levi Eshkol urged West Germans to end the activity of German rocket experts in the United Arab Republic, said that these experts were helping the Arabs to prepare a war against Israel. The West German government had officially deplored the participation of German scientists and military experts in Arab rocket projects, but had not interfered on the grounds that the group was composed of private citizens who, according to the German Constitution, could work where they pleased. German rocket expert Prof. Wolfgang Pilz, leader of Germans working for the U.A.R., spoke in an interview of the pressure brought to bear by the Israeli Government, particularly the terrorist tactics of Israeli secret agents which made it necessary for Germans to be accompanied by body guards at all times. (ATT, 1/7/65, 5; Buchalla, NYT, 1/8/65, 1)
AEC granted a full-term, ten-year operating license to NASA’s Plum Brook Reactor Facility, NASA announced. The Plum Brook reactor, which produced 60,000 kw. of thermal power at peak operation, was being used in basic research relating to development of a nuclear rocket and of systems and components for space nuclear auxiliary power. The Facility is part of nasa Lewis Research Center, (lrc Release 65-27)
usaf launched unidentified satellite payload with Thor fw4s booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965,142)
rocket apart or caused an explosion that destroyed it, reported a USAF Flight Safety Review Board which had met with the NASA Design Certification Review Board. Series of continuing tests was being scheduled to assure reliability of future Gatv flights. (Text; Clark, NYT, 11/9/65, 3)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a $8,774,000 research and development contract modification to North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div. for continued uprating of the H—1 rocket engine from 188,000 to 200,000 lbs. Uprated engines would be used in clusters of eight to provide a total thrust of 1.6 million lbs. in first stage of Saturn ib launch vehicle. Modification brought H-l contract total to $20,648,500.	(Marshall Star, 2/24/65, 6)
Fred Callahan, 16, of Ft. Benning, Ga., prepared to launch Zeus 2, possibly the largest rocket built by an amateur. Zeus 2, nine ft. long with 2,000-lb. thrust, could reach peak altitude of 64 mi. Zeus 1 was launched by Callahan three years ago. (Wash. Daily News, 4/10/65)
Soviet professor V. V. Fedynskiy, in an interview with UchiteVskaya Gazeta, said that proton i had demonstrated the possibility of getting more powerful spaceships into orbit, which, if necessary, could lift into space a crew and a large quantity of research equipment. He said use of the new rocket booster would permit more intensive studies of space, including those that would allow a more thorough research of the physical fields and internal structure of the earth directly from space. Such studies would be of primary interest for geophysics and geology, he said.	(17chitel’skaya Gazeta, 7/22/65, 4)
NASA Aerobee 300A sounding rocket was successfully launched from Wallops Station, Va., to a peak altitude of 326.2 km. (203.6 mi.). Primary objective was the nighttime measurement of the density and temperature of neutral No using an omegatron mass spectrometer, and the simultaneous measurement of electron temperature and density using a small cylindrical electrostatic probe. A secondary objective was the testing of a lunar optical sensor especially developed for thermosphere probe application. Univ. of Michigan provided the experiment instrumentation. (NASA Rpt. srl)
USAF Titan III—A rocket was fired from Eastern Test Range in a maneuverability test in which the third stage (transtage), carrying two satellites, executed a series of consecutive and intricate maneuvers. Primary goal of the mission was four separate ignitions of the transtage’s engines—a feat never before attempted. First firing, after burnout of the first two stages, lasted 296 sec. and injected the 7,000-lb. rocket-payload assembly into near-earth orbit of 125-mi. (201.3 km.) apogee, 108-mi. (173.9-km.) perigee, and 88.1min. period. After one earth orbit, about 90 min. after launch, the third stage ignited a second time, for 37 sec., driving the stage upward into an elliptical orbit of apogee, 1,757 mi. (2,828.8 km.) and perigee, 115 mi. (185.2 km.). Two and one-half hours later, transtage’s two 8,000-lb.-thrust engines burned a third time, for 27 sec., to circularize the orbit at 1,743-mi. (2,806.2-km.) apogee and 1,729-mi. (2,783.7km.) perigee. Thirty seconds after shutdown of the transtage, an 82-lb. Lincoln Laboratory experimental communications satellite (les Ii), equipped with its own rocket motor to shoot itself into a higher elliptical orbit, was spring-ejected from the stage. LES II attained orbit of 9,364-mi. (15,076-km.) apogee; 1,753-mi. (2,822-km.) perigee; 315-min. period; and 31.35° inclination. Then, 42 sec. after les II was released, a 44.5-in.-dia., 75-lb. hollow aluminum radar calibration sphere (lcs i) was ejected from the transtage. lcs I was to remain in near-circular orbit with 1,743-mi. (2,806.2-km.) apogee, 1,729-mi. (2,783.7-km.) perigee. Seven hours after launch, the transtage was fired a fourth time, driving it into a final elliptical orbit of 2,317-mi. (3,730.4-km.) apogee; 1,725-mi. (2,777.3-km.) perigee; 157min. period; and 32.07° inclination, (upi, NYT, 5/7/65, 12; Av. Wk., 5/10/65, 33; usaf Proj. Off.; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 141)
General Bernard A. Schriever, AFSC Commander, said in an address to the Aviation-Space Writers’ Association Conference in Albuquerque: “The Air Force responsibility for our nation’s military developments in space is clearly established. This morning I would like to review our current progress in the areas of unmanned space programs, boosters and propulsion, and finally, manned space programs. . . . “In the late 1950s, a small group of Air Force officers began a program to develop a space-based missile detection and warning system. To obtain information on the background as observed from space and on the signature of ballistic missile rocket motors, the Air Force initiated a series of measurement programs. Instrumented aircraft were used to obtain data on our missile target, from many aspects and in various weather conditions. Concurrently, a spacecraft ‘piggyback’ program for background measurements was instituted. This program has resulted in information of great value and is still collecting valuable data. . . . “The second area of interest is anti-satellite defense. Last September, President Johnson announced the existence of operational U.S. anti-satellite defense systems. . . . “The third area of interest is the detection of nuclear detonations in space. The original effort was formerly known as ‘Vela Hotel,’ and has now emerged as the present Vela Satellite Program. . . . “In 1963 the first pair of Vela Satellites was launched from Cape Kennedy; the second launch occurred in 1964. Both launches were completely successful, and the four satellites are still functioning. . . . “The last area that I would like to consider in unmanned military space systems is communication satellites—commonly called comsat. Our current philosophy of controlled response has placed an additional emphasis upon communications between field commanders and the highest level of our nation. . . . “In summary, space is a new environment of activity. We need to exploit it effectively for our own purposes to prevent it from being used against us. We are aware of the many problems confronting us and do not pretend to have all the solutions. But much has been done, and we are building a broad technological base to meet the even greater challenges of the future.” (Text)
Second Aerobee 150 sounding rocket with experiment to obtain measurements of comet Ikeya-Seki was launched by nasa from Wallops Station, Va. The 205-lb. payload, consisting primarily of an Ebert-Fastie scanning spectrometer and an attitude control system for pointing the instrumentation at the comet, was boosted to peak altitude of 117 mi. (Wallops Release 65-69)
First flight model of s-ivb, second stage of NASA’s Saturn ib booster, was en route via water from Douglas Aircraft Co., Sacramento, to Kennedy Space Center, NASA, where it might be flown as early as December in the first launch of an Apollo flight-type spacecraft. (Marshall Star, 9/22/65, 10)
Soviet Union launched a “new type” space booster that spanned more than 8,000 mi. of the Pacific, according to Tass. The firing was said to have been so successful that a second planned shot was canceled. (M&R, 1/8/65, 8)
NASA was seeking buyers for rocket launches, and the improved Delta, incorporated into the launch package, might prove most economical, William S. Beller reported in Missiles and Rockets. Cost of launching the Delta, either to low-earth orbit or into interplanetary space, would be the same. Cost to send a package to the moon would be $16,000/ lb.; on a Mars flyby, $21,000/lb. Beller’s article continued: “It is ironic that the fabulously successful series of Delta rockets is based on much of the hardware and concepts used in the presumed failure called Vanguard. In 1959, the Air Force took the upper two Vanguard stages, mounted them on Thor, and called the combination Thor-Able. NASA then made minor modifications in the vehicle’s coast attitude-control system and put in a new auto-pilot control system; but the basic Thor-Able shell was used. This was the Delta that failed in its first firing in 1960 with an Echo satellite payload. The subsequent Deltas orbited their payloads in 22 successive launchings. “The Vanguard program, too, besides giving birth to Delta was probably one of the most economical buys of the U.S. space program. Originally budgeted for a total cost of $20 million, Vanguard ended up costing $105 million, which was paid not only for development of the Vanguard hardware and several launchings but also for setting up the worldwide Minitrack network used in Project Mercury. “Improvements in Delta from 1960 to the present involved using more energetic propellants, lengthening the second-stage tanks, replacing the third-stage motor for a more active one, adding solid strap-ons to the first stage, and again enlarging the second stage. “The result is an inexpensive and reliable bus whose launch can be bought for less than $3.5 million.” (Beller, M&R, 8/16/65, 24)
LUNA VII 3,313-lb. instrumented moon probe was successfully launched by U.S.S.R. Tass said the last stage of the multistage launching rocket was put into parking orbit and then LUNA VII was fired on a trajectory toward the moon. All onboard equipment was said to be functioning normally. Launching occurred on the eighth anniversary of the orbiting by the Soviet Union of the first earth satellite, sputnik i. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/4/65, 1; ap, Wash. Post, 10/5/65, All; Nordlinger, Balt. Sun, 10/5/65, 5)
Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director, Kennedy Space Center, NASA, received the Pioneer of the Wind-Rose Award, Order of the Diamond, in Munich, Germany. Dr. Debus, first recipient of the award, was cited for his historical contribution to rocket launch technology and for his contributions to science through his work in rocketry. Award was made at the First International Transport Exhibit. (Brevard Sent., 8/1/65)
Four-stage Javelin (Argo d-4) sounding rocket with an Ionosphere experiment was launched by nasa from Wallops Station, Va. The 138-lb. payload reached 495-mi. (797-km.) altitude and impacted 625 mi. downrange in the Atlantic Ocean. Primary objectives of the flight were to measure ion and electron densities and temperatures in the upper atmosphere. Launch was timed to coincide with a pass of the Canadian alouette satellite; measurements would be compared with those of the satellite and with ground-based ionosonde measurements. (Wallops Release 65-60)
The four largest closed die forgings ever produced from maraging steel were delivered by the Wyman-Gordon Co. to Launch Complex 34 at Kennedy Space Center, NASA. Weighing 15,500 lbs. each and measuring 105 in. by 36 in., they would be used to anchor the mobile service tower for the Saturn ib rocket. (NYT, 7/4/65, 25)
President Johnson sent FY 1966 Budget Request to Congress, recommending a total space budget of $7,114 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $5.26 billion, DOD $1.6 billion, AEC $236 million, Weather Bureau $33 million, and National Science Foundation $3 million. The NASA request provided for initiation of a major new project— Project Voyager, budgeted at $43 million—and intensive study of Apollo-X, with funding of $50 million. Hardware development funds were requested for the Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory ($25.1 million), and the Radio Astronomy Explorer Satellite. Advanced research was reduced by cancellation of development of the 260-in.-dia. solid-fuel rocket motor, the M-l liquid-hydrogen engine (1.2-million-lb.-thrust), and Snap-8 nuclear electric power unit. nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., labeled the budget an austere one, but said the chances of landing a man on the moon by 1970 were still good. In discussing the new programs, Dr. Seamans said the requested $43 million for Voyager would be spent on project definition of the spacecraft bus and landing capsule to explore Mars in the next decade. This funding would also enable NASA to make a Martian fly-by in 1969 to test the spacecraft and launch vehicle prior to the 1971 and 1973 missions. Major portions of the DOD space budget were alloted for the following: (1) pre-program definition phase of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) ; (2) accelerated research on reentry and recovery of spacecraft; (3) continued development of the Titan in space booster; (4) development of the Defense Communications Satellite System. Two thirds of aec’s budget request was earmarked for development of nuclear rocket propulsion and nuclear power sources for space applications. The nuclear propulsion program, Project Rover, was alloted $84.1 million; the nuclear power source program, Snap, $70.5 million; and advanced projects applicable to space, $12 million. The Pluto reactor program was not included in the budget request. The Weather Bureau would start its investment in an advanced weather satellite system in fy 66 with a $500,000 request for sensors and subsystem studies in conjunction with NASA studies. Funds for three Tiros Operational System (Tos) satellites and four Delta launch vehicles to be delivered in two years, $21.6 million, were included in the budget request. Most of the rest was requested for the National Weather Satellite Center (nwsc) and would be spent to convert the present Tiros command and data acquisition facilities to full-time, operational centers run solely by the Weather Bureau. President Johnson asked Congress for $650 million as a White House contingency fund to meet the possible need to accelerate supersonic transport development. (Text, M&R, 2/1/65, 10—17; Text, NYT, 1/26/65. 26-28; Av. Wk., 2/1/65, 16-17; nasa Budget Briefing FY 1966)
Gemini vi, scheduled to be launched from Eastern Test Range, with Astronauts Walter M. Schirra (Capt., usn) and Thomas P. Stafford (Maj., usaf), was canceled by failure of the Agena rocket, vehicle with which Gemini spacecraft was to rendezvous and dock. The mission was to have been the fourth manned flight and the first rendezvous and docking mission in the Gemini program. Simultaneous countdown of both the Titan n-Gemini 6 and the Atlas-Agena had been developed to maximize launch reliability for a “same day” launch. Atlas-Agena liftoff was at 10:00:04 est. The Agena Target Vehicle separated from the Atlas at 10:05:12 with all sequences and parameters nominal at separation. Following a nominal Agena coast period, loss of Agena telemetry and radar beacon track occurred at 10:06:20 after initiation of primary propulsion system burn. Attempt to establish radar or telemetry track by the Canary Islands tracking station and subsequently by the Carnarvon station was unsuccessful. A hold was called at t-42 in the Gemini 6 countdown to determine the status of the Agena Target Vehicle. Mission was terminated at 10:54 a.m. because the Agena Target Vehicle had failed to achieve orbit. Formal Gemini vi mission failure investigation was immediately initiated, (nasa Release 65-237; Marshall Star, 11/3/65, 1; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/25/65, 1; Clark, NYT, 10/26/65, 1)
Kenneth Gatland, Vice-President of the British Interplanetary Society, urged U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in manned lunar exploration in New Scientist article. “. . . it seems we are faced with the ludicrous situation of the world’s two most powerful nations, each with massively expensive rival programmes, heading for a common objective which each proclaims is being pursued in the highest interests of peaceful scientific exploration.” A joint venture would have the advantage of providing for contingencies such as rescue of astronauts possibly stranded on the moon or in lunar orbit—a capability not included in Project Apollo. “This situation can only be satisfactorily resolved by the provision in lunar orbit of a second soft-landing vehicle and back-up crew capable of mounting an emergency rescue operation. To achieve this would require a specially adapted version of the craft already designed to soft-land astronauts. “This is where the merit of US-Soviet cooperation lies for, as an international venture, a project to land men on the Moon would surely not be undertaken as envisaged in project Apollo; and certainly not with such rigid constraints on time. In all probability it would be planned as an operation rather than a solo mission, with logistic support from a second space vehicle placed in lunar orbit ahead of the main expedition. . . . “The essential requirement in terms of the eventual lunar expedition is that launchings should be coordinated so that expedition components arrive in lunar orbit together. By the mid-1970’s, orbital rendezvous techniques should be well established with the ability of men to move between orbiting vehicles. An agreed crew could then descend to the lunar surface while another ship remains in reserve orbiting the Moon in case of need. Alternatively, a reserve vehicle might be landed, unmanned, in advance. . . . “Although at this stage such ... [a combined lunar expedition] would have little influence on overall costs, it could mean a great deal to the safety of initial manned missions. “Such a move would demand concessions on both sides. It would mean America abandoning her 1970 target date for placing men on the Moon, and while allowing Russia to keep her rocket secrets she would have to be prepared to reveal her programme for manned spaceflight. . . .” (New Scientist, 3/25/65, 774^76)
Alfred Gessow, Chief of Fluid Physics Research, nasa, discussed before the Compressed Gas Association in New York City the problems of spacecraft deceleration and heating involved in return through the earth’s atmosphere. He explained why the blunt shape solved deceleration and much of the heat problem in returning Mercury spacecraft from orbit through the atmosphere to earth. Looking beyond the satellite return speed (Mercury and Gemini) and lunar return speed (Apollo), return from interplanetary flight poses the problem of much higher spacecraft speed (and thus heating). Research indicates “that the more pointed shape, although it doesn’t show up too well at the lower re-entry speeds, is better than the blunt nose at the higher speeds because the bow shock is weaker, thus producing lower radiant heating losses. Thus, in a very short time scale, but taking a big leap forward in the velocity-temperature scale, we find ourselves going into another phase of the blunt vs. pointed nose cycle. “. . . The switching between slender and blunt shapes is not new in the race for higher speeds at all times of history. Going through history, compact rocks were replaced by slender arrows; the concept of powder guns created round cannonballs; the rocket age produced slender forms again, which ironically, finally got blunt noses. It is interesting to see how long it took to make such changes empirically and how rapidly these variations have been made by following scientific principles. . . .” (Text)
Soviet press published first technical details and a sketch of the communications satellite molniya i, launched April 23. The satellite, which was visible nine hours a day from Soviet ground stations, had been used for experimental transmissions of television programs, including color, between Moscow and Vladivostok. According to the drawing and the text description, molniya i had an airtight cylindrical body with conical ends, one of which contained a rocket engine used to correct the orbit, as well as other solar orientation devices. Expanding like spokes of a wheel from the cylinder were six long panels of solar batteries to supply electrical power to the satellite for retransmission of signals received from earth. It was equipped with two parabolic antennas, one active, the other in reserve. These were pointed toward earth with a high-precision direction finder for earthbound transmissions, molniya I would make two 12-hr. revolutions around the earth every 24 hrs. One loop would take it over the Soviet Union during daytime periods, when it could be of most use for transmissions. The other loop would take it over the United States. (NYT, 5/31/65, 6)
Wendell F. Moore of Textron’s Bell Aerosystems Co. was recipient of The Franklin Institute’s John Price Wetherill Medal for his invention of small rocket lift device, Franklin Institute announced. (Av. Wk., 9/13/65, 23; Franklin Institute)
France hoped to orbit its first earth satellite in November—nearly two months ahead of schedule, reported the Houston Post. An Armed Forces Ministry satellite would be fitted to the first Diamant booster and test-fired from Hammaguir, Algerian Sahara. (Reuters, Houston Post, 9/15/65)
NASA and the Brazilian Space Commission (cnae) signed an agreement in Sao Jose dos Campos, Brazil, providing for a cooperative project for studying hemispheric weather patterns by launching meteorological sounding rockets from Brazil. Project would be part of the Inter-American Experimental Meteorological Sounding Rocket Network (exametnet). Under the terms of the agreement, Brazil would transport the rockets and equipment from the U.S. to Brazil, assemble and launch the rockets from Brazilian launch facilities, and provide meteorological data to other participants in the network. NASA would lend ground support equipment such as radar to cnae; train Brazilian personnel in the handling of sounding rockets and in reducing meteorological data; and provide data obtained at NASA’s Wallops Station, Va., to other participants in the network. Agreement was similar to one signed by the U.S. and Argentina on May 18, 1965. The project entailed no exchange of funds between the two countries, (nasa Release 65-258)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos lxxi, lxxii, lxxiii, lxxiv, and lxxv into orbit with a single booster. Initial orbital data: cosmos lxxi, apogee, 542 km. (337 mi.), perigee, 521 km. (324 mi.); cosmos lxxii, apogee, 588 km. (365 mi.), perigee, 538 km. (334 mi.); cosmos lxxiii, apogee, 564 km. (350 mi.), perigee, 531 km. (330 mi.); cosmos lxxiv, apogee, 619 km. (384 mi.), perigee, 537 km. (334 mi.); cosmos lxxv, apogee. 644 km. (400 mi.), perigee, 539 km. (335 mi.). Period for all five satellites was 95 min.; inclination, 56°. Satellites contained scientific equipment for outer space research as well as “Mayak” radio transmitters. All instruments were said to be functioning normally. (Izvestia, 7/17/65, atss-t Trans.)
usaf launched two unnamed satellites from the Western Test Range with an Atlas-Agena D booster, (upi, Wash. Post, 8/4/65; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 149)
Soviet Union announced new rocket tests in the Pacific Ocean west of Hawaii and asked all countries to leave the area during the testing period. An official announcement by Tass, the Soviet press agency, said “a new modification of a space vehicle booster” would be launched. Tass said the test area covered “a circle with a radius of 40 n. mi., with a center of 19°8' north and 178°46' west.” The test firings would take place between October 31 and December 30. (Pravda, 10/30/65, 1, atss—T Trans.)
Launching pad damage caused by the Mar. 2 explosion of an AtlasCentaur rocket at Cape Kennedy amounted to $2 million and would take three to four months to repair, NASA reported. To avoid delay in the Atlas-Centaur launching scheduled for mid-summer, NASA was speeding completion of a new launching pad that was 90% completed and that could be ready in two months, (upi, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 3/14/65)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos liv, cosmos lv, and cosmos lvi on one rocket booster. All three satellites were moving in close initial orbits: apogee, 1,856 km. (1,141 mi. I ; perigee, 279.7 km. (170 mi.) ; period, 106.2 min.; inclination, 56°4'. Equipment aboard “for the further investigation of outer space” was functioning normally. (Tass, Pravda, 2/22/65, atss-t Trans.; NYT, 2/22/65, 12)
NASA announced explorer xxxi and Canadian alouette ii, launched together on the same booster Nov. 28, were functioning as planned. EXPLORER xxxi’s apogee was less than a mile higher than alouette n’s and its perigee less than a mile lower. Orbits were some 1,850 mi. (2,978.5 km.) at apogee and 310 (499 km.) at perigee. The 13 experiments on the ISIS satellites were working well with excellent data on the ionosphere being obtained, (nasa Release 65-377)
Discussing Russian-American cooperation in space in a letter to the editor in the New York Times, Donald Spero, a student at Columbia Univ. School of Engineering, said: “. . . technical integration of the U.S. and (assumed) Russian lunar programs is out of the question. Hardware for every phase of the Apollo program has already been designed and built. . . . “The integration of a Russian booster and an American capsule would be a technical impossibility. . . . The only plausible alternative for initial lunar exploration would be to include a Russian cosmonaut in the Apollo crew or one of our astronauts as a member of the Russian expedition. Even if problems of language and pilot training could be overcome, political and propaganda considerations eliminate this alternative. “Realistic possibilities for cooperation lie in the areas of unmanned probes, communication and weather satellites, and eventually manned planetary exploration and establishing of lunar bases.” (NYT, 6/14/65)
Atlantic Research Corp. announced the Frangible Areas meteorological sounding rocket, developed for USAF, had successfully passed flight tests at the Western Test Range. (M&R, 3/8/65, 11)
USAF presented a Lockheed Agena-B to the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., for permanent display in the National Air Museum. The Agena had performed as an orbital injection vehicle, space satellite (first to achieve circular and polar orbits), and as an intermediate stage booster for deep space probes. (Smithsonian Release)
First clear spectrograms of ultraviolet light from the stars were obtained on a Princeton Univ. rocket experiment originally thought to have been a failure, a spokesman for the university’s rocket program announced. The films from the June 1 flight from White Sands Missile Range had at first been feared to be fogged, but after being developed by special techniques, showed spectra of starlight with a fineness of detail never before achieved. A detailed report would be issued after the films had been studied further, (ap, NYT, 6/28/65; Wash. Post, 6/29/65)
dod announced award to Thiokol Chemical Corp. of $2,300,000 increment to existing contract for production of Minuteman Stage I operational and flight test rocket motors, (dod Release 255-65)
Attempt to launch Gemini vi from etr was unsuccessful when an electric plug connecting the Titan II booster to the launch pad fell loose 2}4 sec. early, causing the automatic sequencer to shut down the engine booster 1.2 sec. after ignition. Inside the Titan II a wire extended from the tail plug to tap a circuit which carried current from the batteries to an intervalometer—electric clock—which controls the first 21/% min. of powered flight. When the plug shook loose prematurely and started the clock, signals that liftoff had occurred were sent to the Titan ii’s automatic pilot, local guidance stations, and an automatic sequencing device at KSC Launch Control Center. The sequencer registered the mishap and shut down Titan Ii’s engines. Astronauts Stafford and Schirra remained calm throughout the misfire with Command Pilot Schirra rejecting the option to actuate the ejection seats. The astronauts were removed 99 min. later from the spacecraft and the launch rescheduled for Dec. 15. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/13/65, Al; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/13/65, Al; MSC GEMINI V11/GEMIN1 VI Fact Sheet)
The first stage of the Titan II booster which orbited GEMINI V was recovered intact in the Atlantic about 450 mi. northeast of Cape Kennedy. An Air Rescue Service plane reported that the 71-ft. stage was in the water 25% submerged, (ap, Wash. Post, 8/22/65, A34; upi, NYT, 8/22/65, 13)
U.S.S.R. launched cosmos lxxxvi, lxxxvii, lxxxviii, lxxxix, and XC artificial earth satellites with a single booster. Orbital parameters: apogee, 1,609 km. (999.3 mi.); perigee, 1,380 km. (857 mi.); period, 116.7 min.; inclination, 57°. An electrical pack operating on energy released by a radioactive isotope was onboard power system on one of the satellites. Instruments were functioning normally. (Krasnaya Zvezda, 9/21/65, 1, atss-t Trans.)
osc—C was launched from Eastern Test Range, with a Delta booster, fell into the south Atlantic Ocean after failing to achieve orbit. First two stages of the launch vehicle performed perfectly: following second stage cutoff and an approximate 7-min. coast period, small rockets mounted on a table between the second and third stage ignited and spun the table up to 120 rpm; second stage separated, but the third stage ignited about 5/4 sec. prematurely, was not properly aimed, and did not attain orbital speed. oso-c was third in a series of eight orbiting solar observatories planned by NASA. First two satellites were launched from Kennedy Space Center, nasa, March 7, 1962, and February 3, 1965. oso-c I had provided more than 2,000 hrs. of scientific information during its lifetime; oso II was still operating. The Orbiting Solar Observatory program was designed to advance understanding of the sun’s structure and behavior and to determine the physical processes by which the sun influences the earth. Next Oso launch would occur in mid-1966. (NASA Release 65-261; Wash. Post, 8/26/65, A 4; N.Y. Her. Trib., 8/26/65)
usaf Titan ni-c, launched from the Eastern Test Range, became the most powerful rocket known to have been lofted and the first liquid-fuel spacecraft to be lifted from its pad with solid-fuel rockets. Two 120-in.-dia., 86-ft.-long solid strap-on boosters generated a peak thrust of 2.647 million lbs. % sec. after ignition to propel the liquid-fuel core vehicle to an altitude of 24 mi. Less than two minutes after lift-off, the boosters were jettisoned by firing of 16 small rockets. The liquid-fuel engines of the 127-ft., three-stage core vehicle then fired a 474,000-lb. thrust burst that injected the vehicle’s third stage (tran-stage) with 29,285-lb. lead ballast and instrument payload into an orbit with apogee, 116.2 mi. (187 km.); perigee, 110.4 mi. (177.7 km.); period, 88.1 min; inclination to the equator, 32.175°. This was the heaviest payload ever orbited; insertion velocity was 25,584 fps. The solid-fuel motors, made by United Technology Center, were formed in lO-ft.-dia. segments stacked inside metal casings. Adding two segments to each of the two five-segment boosters used would permit Titan III-C to put 32,000 lbs. into orbit. Payload could be increased to 40,000 lbs, using 13-ft.-dia. segments of another type already test-fired by UTC. Liquid stages used nitrogen tetroxide and Aerozene 50 (a 50/50 mixture of hydrazine and unsymmetrical dimethylhydra-zine) as the oxidizer and fuel; the propellants ignited hypergolically. A series of twelve Titan ill—c tests was projected. Most powerful rocket previously launched was NASA’s Saturn I, which produced 1.5 million lbs. thrust. The most powerful known Soviet rocket, which orbited voskhod i and voskhod ii, had been rated by American experts at 800,000-900,000 lbs. thrust. The two-stage Titan II that launched GEMINI III and GEMINI IV into orbit produced 430,000 lbs. of thrust. (Clark, NYT, 6/19/65, 1; ap, Benedict, Wash. Post, 6/19/65, A3; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/19/65; Av. Wk., 6/28/65, 16-19)
Kiwi-TNT (Transient Nuclear Test) was successfully completed at Jackass Flats, Nev. This was a safety test to verify predictions of behavior of graphite nuclear reactor during a maximum power excursion. Using data from the test scientists would establish safety standards, particularly for launching nuclear-powered rockets. Nuclear energy released in the test was well within the designated maximum of nuclear test ban treaty of 1963. Preliminary test results indicated: (1) from l/j-mi. to 50-mi. downwind from the test site, radiation did not approach accepted danger levels; (2) lethal radiation was confined to 200-to-300-ft. radius of the site, and beyond 500-to-600-ft. radius “a person would probably have survived unhurt unless struck by a piece of debris”; (3) pre-test predictions of the reactor’s behavior were accurate; and (4) cleaning up radioactivity at the site was easier than expected. Kiwi ground-test version of a nuclear-reactor rocket engine was a nasa-aec project, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/13/65; NYT, 1/13/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 1/13/65; JAMA, 2/8/65, 27—29; Rover Chron., n.d.)
Russia was developing long-range intercontinental missiles that could maneuver in flight, Col. Gen. Vladimir Toluhko, First Deputy Commander of the Soviet Strategic Rocket Forces, told Tass. (upi, NYT, 11/14/65, 74)
Col. John H. Glenn, Jr. (usmc Ret.), speaking at a National Space Club luncheon, said: “Looking back over the 3 years since the flight of Friendship 7, I am impressed most of all by the tremendous progress the United States has made in space science and technology. “I am proud of the determination the American people have shown to become the world’s leading spacefaring nation. . . . “Three years ago, Mercury spacecraft were limited in weight to about 3,000 pounds. Today, the Saturn I booster is operational and can put 22,500 pounds into Earth orbit, or seven times the weight of Mercury. Saturn i-b, which will begin flying next year, will be able to orbit a payload equal to 11 Mercury spacecraft. Saturn V, which will fly in 1967, will be able to orbit a payload equal to more than 80 Mercuries. That’s some jump—but it is no more than typical of the great gains we are making in national space capabilities. “The accuracy requirements for all these missions are almost incomprehensible and are one of the least understood parts of the space program. A good case in point was the launch of Friendship 7 3 years ago. The speed at insertion into orbit was over 25,000 feet per second or 5 miles per second, and the booster and spacecraft were accelerating at approximately 240 feet per second at a steadily increasing rate. At booster cutoff, each error of 1.4 feet per second resulted in a difference of approximately 1 mile in apogee on the far side of the Earth. When you consider that before the onboard signal for cutoff was received, information had to be obtained by radar at the Cape, transmitted by landline to Goddard, run through the computers, returned by landline to the Cape, checked against Cape data and then transmitted 350 miles down range to the spacecraft, still allowing time for onboard delays in operation of relays, valves, and thrust termination, it looks like an almost impossibly accurate requirement. “Those accuracies, however, are rather crude compared with some now being obtained on the deep space probes. “Now we have Mariner IV which at 6 o’clock tonight will be 20,194,023 miles out from Earth on an extremely difficult and significant mission. As you know, there was a checkout of equipment aboard the spacecraft last week that indicates the chances are still good that we will get revealing pictures of Mars next July, when Mariner IV will be 134 million miles from Earth, so far it will take 12)/> seconds to get a radio signal back. “To wax philosophical for a moment, we might liken our space program to one of Plttto?s ollsgories. fie told of prisoners ciisined in s cave for so long they had lost touch with reality and felt that their whole existence was wrapped up in the shadows they could see on the wall ahead of them. He goes on to say that if one escaped to the outside world and returned to tell the others of what really lay outside the dark cave, they would probably think him completely crazy. “Even though we have seen such tremendous break-throughs in scientific knowledge in recent years, our knowledge has necessarily been limited to such a cave, for practically all we know has been limited to this one tiny speck of earth in a much larger environment. But that is in the process of becoming changed and with a rapidity no one can forecast.” (Text, CR, 2/22/65, A751-531 February 19: Sen. A. S. (Mike) Monroney (D-Okla.) said in an interview that if commercial airlines would voluntarily join the Federal Government in subsidizing helicopter lines, these services might be saved. Commercial helicopter lines operating in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, and San Francisco had received Federal subsidies since 1947, but President Johnson proposed in his budget message that they be cut off after Dec. 31. Sen. Monroney said: “Congress isn’t going to appropriate any more money. We haven’t a chance of selling them or continuing the subsidy without added help from the airlines.” His plan involved artificially lowering helicopter fares so that a greater portion of the flying public would use them. This higher load factor, combined with the use of larger, more economical aircraft and hoped-for improvements in helicopter technology might lead to self-sustaining helicopter service in a few years, the Senator said.	(NYT, 2/19/65, 69)
In first Pacific Ocean sounding rocket experiment from nasa’s Mobile Range Facility, two two-stage Nike-Apaches were launched from USNS Croatan about one mile north of the equator at 84° west longitude. Conducted by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, the mission of first tocket was to measure ionospheric currents and magnetic fields in “equatorial electrojet,” a system of electrical current circulating in ionosphere in the region of magnetic equator which could be responsible for intensifying equatorial magnetic field at about local noon. Second Nike-Apache, conducting an experiment for Univ. of Michigan, was launched about 2 hrs. later carrying Pitot-static probe to measure pressure, temperature, and density in the region of 20 to 75 mi. altitude. (NASA Release 65-82; Wallops Release 65-12; NASA Rpts. srl)
In a memorandum report to President Johnson on Gemini vi NASA Administrator James E. Webb said: “This is to report to you that the Titan ii booster which we expected to use on October 25 to launch Gemini 6, carrying astronauts Schirra and Stafford, is now being removed from the launching pad. We have examined carefully the question of whether this booster could be used for the launching of Gemini 7 into a 14-day orbit, and our studies show that the Titan booster which we have especially prepared for Gemini 7 is more suitable. This is the reason for the change from the booster now on the pad to the one especially designed for the Gemini 7 launch. “Also, we have examined a number of ways to speed up the accumulation of the information which the Gemini 6 rendezvous flight was designed to give us. We find that it may be possible to take advantage of the work we have already done in mating the Gemini 6 to its booster and to the launching facility and thus save considerable time in its re-erection. If we can launch Gemini 7 without serious damage to the launching pad, there is some possibility that we could immediately re-erect the Gemini 6 spacecraft and booster and launch it in time to rendezvous with Gemini 7 before the 14-day flight comes to an end.” (Text; Pres. Doc., 11/1/65, 734)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket was successfully launched from USNS Croatan carrying an instrumented payload to provide data on the neutron intensity, solar x-ray flux, Lyman-alpha radiation, and ionosphere electron density at different latitudes. Experiment was conducted for the Univ. of New Hampshire, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
According to Missiles and Rockets, Dr. Joseph Shea, director of Apollo spacecraft program at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said Apollo spacecraft was having no weight problems. He explained that the current weight of 89,000 lbs. was under 90,000 lbs. goal and there was room for additional growth since Saturn V booster had increased estimated payload capability to 95,000 lbs. Weight of Lem was increasing in early development stage, but new evaluation stemming from NASA decision to make it as safe in terms of redundancy as command and service modules, could raise weight from 29,500 lbs. to 32,000 lbs. Shea commented that a stable baffled injector had been selected for service module’s propulsion system and it was currently undergoing qualification test series. Recent tests of heatshield in reentry tests with Scout (Aug. 18, 1964) achieved high total heat of 250 Btu’s per square foot—about 80'/< of the heat expected to be encountered during return from moon. (M&R, 3/8/65, 14)
USAF launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg aFB on a ThorAgena D booster. It also fired its 85th Minuteman icbm. (upi, Phil. Inq., 3/26/65)
First of four Stellar Acquisition Flight Feasibility (Staff) flights planned by usaf failed 73 sec. after launch of the experiment aboard a Polaris A-l booster. The experiment’s Stellar Inertial Guidance System (Stings) was operating open-loop and was not guiding the missile, which had to be destroyed when it veered off course. Stings had been locked onto the star Polaris and had tracked properly through the first 54 sec. of flight until time of second-stage ignition, when the trouble with the launch vehicle apparently developed. Period during which the Stings operated was time of highest dynamic pressure; data received were termed excellent. Main purpose of the Staff flight was to test a telescope-like device intended to allow a Stings to take a reading from Polaris after piercing the earth’s cloud cover and to plot an exact trajectory to a target area. (M&R, 4/19/65, 9)
mariner iv, 78,277,013 mi. from earth at 9 a.m. est, had covered 251,691,170 mi. along its orbit. The Mars probe was travelling 46,214 mph relative to earth and was returning data and scientific information continuously, (nasa Release 65-159) President Johnson transmitted to Congress a plan to merge the Weather Bureau, the Coast and Geodetic Survey, and the Central Radio Propagation Laboratory of the National Bureau of Standards into an Environmental Science Services Administration. “The new administration will then provide a single national focus for our efforts to describe, understand, and predict the state of the oceans, the state of the lower and upper atmospheres and the size and shape of the earth ... as well as enhance our ability to develop an adequate warning system for the severe hazards of nature . . . which have proved so disastrous to the Nation in recent years.” He added that Federal agencies “concerned with the national defense [and the] exploration of outer space” would receive improved services and that combining of offices and technical facilities would save money, (White House Release) Gemini GT—4 countdown rehearsal at KSC with Astronauts James A. McDivitt (Maj., usaf) and Edward H. White ii (Maj., usaf) was delayed because of a minor fueling problem. Launch of the GT—4 mission was scheduled for June 3. (ap, Galveston News-Tribune, 5/14/65) An Emeraude rocket was successfully fired by France from the Hamma-guir range, Algerian Sahara, to a planned altitude of 112 mi. It was topped by a mockup of the Topaze rocket which was to be the second stage of the Diamant launcher that France was developing. (Reuters, NYT, 5/18/65; Root, Wash. Post, 5/18/65; M&R, 5/31/65, 11) NASA Goddard Space Flight Center researchers Dr. John B. Schutt and Charles M. Shai announced development of a new series of inorganic spacecraft paints with promise of commercial application; report given at a meeting of the Philadelphia Society for Paint Technology and the Philadelphia Section of the American Chemical Society. The paints would utilize an alkali-metal silicate as a binder and an inorganic phosphate as a wetting agent. They would adhere to most metals and non-metals; would not crack, peel, chalk, flake, or fade when subjected to temperatures between 1,800°F and —320°F; would be washable; could be made in any color; and would have a long shelf life, (gsfc Release G-13-65) American Broadcasting Co. notified the Fee it was preparing plans for a domestic communications satellite to relay network television programs to affiliated stations for rebroadcast, thereby raising for the first time the question of a company other than ComSatCorp owning and operating a comsat. (Gould, NYT, 5/14/65, 1) NBC announced it would televise the June 3 Gemini GT^l spaceflight in color. It would be the first live-color coverage of a space flight, (Doan, N.Y. Her. Trib., 5/14/65) Cornell Univ, astronomers at Arecibo radiotelescope facility revealed that their radar observations of the planet Mercury April 25 indicated that Mercury rotated on its axis once every 59 days, rotating in the same direction as its orbit. This new study confirmed clearly that Mercury did not have a retrograde rotation and laid to rest the classic view that Mercury did not rotate on its axis at all. The astronomers had reported their findings on Mercury’s rotation in Washington last
An editorial in Red Star, the Soviet Defense Ministry newspaper, revealed that the booster that had launched voskhod ii had developed 1.43 million lbs. of thrust. The article said Soviet rockets were “unmatched” and that the voskhod ii flight “expedites the appearance of orbital stations and the landing of people in the heavenly bodies.” (Loory, N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/24/65)
United Airlines announced that fog-dispersal plans involving aerial seeding of clouds were being discussed in nine cities in addition to those where the technique had already been successful. United had conducted successful seeding operations last winter using light planes to drop ice pellets into the top layers of super-cooled fog. The airline estimated that the fog-abatement program had permitted 135 of its flights, carrying 3,200 passengers, to operate at airports that otherwise would have been closed, (ap, NYT, 8/21/65, 48) August 21-29; CE.MiNi v launch (left), and Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., and L- Gordon Cooper, Jr., onboard U.S.S. Lake Champlain after eight-day mission and recovery (above). First stage of the booster burned for 156.8 sec. Second stage then separated, burned for 179.6 sec. Traveling at 17,605 mph. 7,947-lb. Gemini v was inserted into orbit: apogee. 215.4 mi. (347.4 km.); perigee, 100 mi. (161.3 km.); period, 89.58 min.; inclination to the equator, 32.6°. Fifty-six minutes after liftoff, astronauts fired thruster rockets to raise the perigee to 106 mi. (179.9 km.) in preparation for rendezvous with Rep, a practice maneuver to prepare for Gemini 6’s rendezvous in orbit with an Agena stage. At beginning of 2nd orbit, astronauts ejected Rep from the adapter section behind the spacecraft. Rep moved away at five miles per hour. About two hours after insertion of gemini v into orbit, oxygen pressure for the new fuel cell dropped from 800 to 60 lbs. psi because of a failure in the heater element circuitry. This pressure-drop severely reduced the fuel cell’s output of electrical power. The Rep experiment was abandoned and there was some apprehension as to whether the flight could continue. At 27 hrs, into the flight. Cooper and Conrad successfully locked their spacecraft radar on a spare Rep transponder mounted on a tower at NASA Merritt Island Launch Area during a six-minute pass. Oxygen pressure began building up in the fuel-cell system and hopes of completing the mission were raised. On Aug. 23, as gemini v made its 32nd revolution around the earth, the spacecraft began a series of maneuvers to rendezvous with a simulated Agena upper stage in lieu of the Rep experiment. By the 34th orbit Gemini v was only 16 mi. behind the simulated Agena, very close to the planned 15-mi. separation NASA hoped to have on GEMINI VI prior to final closing and docking maneuver. Last maneuver was not attempted because of the need to conserve fuel on GEMINI V. On Aug. 24, Astronauts Cooper and Conrad twice spotted objects on the ground; they observed a Minuteman icbm launch from Vanden-berg afb, and tracked and photographed it; they sighted a huge checkerboard design laid out on the ground near Laredo, Tex., and reported direction in the which arrows in the center of the blocks were pointed. During the flight, the astronauts both remained in good spirits. Sixteen of the planned seventeen experiments were conducted. Despite the heavy work schedule, Cooper and Conrad each slept about five hours a day. The astronauts ate about 2,000 calories of food a day, less than the 2,900 calories prescribed for the mission, and each drank six pounds of water daily. Aug. 27 saw problems with the steady accumulation of water in the fuel cell, which threatened to exceed water-storage capacity; faulty attitude and maneuvering thrusters; and the boiling off of hydrogen gas which caused the spacecraft to roll. On Aug. 28, the fuel cell and the left thruster were functioning well. Conrad reported seeing “a carrier and a destroyer steaming right into Jacksonville”; it was actually a tug pulling a large barge. On Aug. 29 Cooper and Conrad talked via radio with Astronaut M. Scott Carpenter (Cdr., usn), in Sealab II on the floor of the Pacific off La Jolla, Calif. Approach of Hurricane Betsy from the coast -of South America forced NASA officials to order GEMINI V to land one revolution early. Two more of gemini v’s thrusters froze, but there was still sufficient steering power to correct minor variations. To begin reentry, the astronauts fired four braking rockets as the spacecraft passed 700 mi. north of Hawaii. Reentry was normal. gemini v splashed down into the Atlantic at 8:56 a.m. edt, 600 mi. east of Jacksonville—90 mi. off target. A human error in computing the elapsed time of flight caused the target error. Assisted from the capsule by Navy frogmen 45 min. after splashdown, the astronauts were taken by helicopter to U.S.S. Lake Champlain for medical debriefing. (nasa Release 65-262; nasa Proj. Off.; NYT, 8/22/65, 1, 72, 73, El; 8/23/65, 1, 16; 8/24/65, 1, 16; 8/25/65, 1, 24; 8/26/65, 1, 15; 8/27/65, 1, 12; 8/29/65, 1, 68, 69 ; 8/30/65, 1, 16, 17; Wash. Post, 8/22/65, 1, 34; 8/23/65, 1, 3; 8/24/65, 1, 6; 8/25/65, 1, 10, 24; 8/26/65, 11; 8/27/65, 1, 6, 7; 8/28/65, 1, 7; 8/29/65, 1, 8, 10; 8/30/65, 1, 9, 11; WSJ, 8/23/65, 1; 8/24/65, 1; 8/27/65, 1; 8/30/65, 1; Av. Wk„ 8/30/65, 24^28)
nrx a-3 Nerva reactor, joint nasa-aec project to develop a nuclear rocket, was restarted and operated for the third time at Jackass Flats, Nev. Total operating time was 45 min., including about 7 min. at more than 40% of its designated 55,000-lb. thrust capacity. Function of the test was to explore control system response characteristics in low and intermediate power ranges. (snpo-N-65—9; upi, NYT, 5/29/65, 8; Rover Chron.)
Argo D—4 Javelin sounding rocket was successfully launched with 80-lb. instrumented payload from NASA Wallops Station to peak altitude of 549 mi. (883.9 km.). Furnished by the Univ. of Pittsburg under contract to NASA, the experiment measured the quantity of helium and hydrogen gases and the ionization of helium in the exosphere. Impact occurred 653 mi. (1,051.3 km.) downrange in the Atlantic. (Wallops Release 65-52; nasa Rpt, srl)
Cosmic x-ray detection experiment carried aloft by an Aerobee sounding rocket discovered the first two extragalactic x-ray sources and identified a variable x-ray source within the Milky Way galaxy. The two extragalactic sources—Sygnus A and M-87—were found to emit x-radiation 10 to 100 times their radio and light energy. The variable x-ray source was Casiopeia A. Details of the experimental results were announced March 2, 1966, by Dr. Herbert Friedman, Naval Research Laboratory physicist. Project was conducted by Dr. Friedman, E. T. Byram, and T. A. Chubb of NRL under sponsorship of nrl and National Science Foundation. (Clark, NYT, 3/3/66; A&A, 4/66, 98, 100)
Thiokol Chemical Corp. received from usaf a $3,195,500 fixed-price contract for design, development, and firing of a 156-in. solid rocket motor. USAF also awarded United Technology Center a $10,500,000 increment to a previously issued contract for design, development, fabrication, delivery, and flight testing of large segmented solid propellant motors, (dod Release 426-65)
The countdown rehearsal for the Gemini (gt-3) flight, conducted at Cape Kennedy, was delayed two hours because of (1) a propellant leak in Titan II rocket, (2) crossed wires in ground support equipment, (3) failure of some of the batteries to reach peak power immediately, and (4) faulty reading in control center. Project Gemini officials said none of these problems had been serious, but the combination would have caused a postponement on launch day. {NYT, 3/9/65; N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/9/65; Balt. Sun, 3/9/65)
West Germany was waging vigorous campaign by letter, circular, and word-of-mouth to persuade German technicians to leave their jobs in Egyptian aircraft and rocket industry. The campaign could be result of recent arrests in Cairo of several West German citizens on espionage charges. (Olson, NYT, 3/6/65, 7)
A contract for about $60 million would be signed by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center with Republic Aviation Corp. for Phase II development of the Advanced Orbiting Solar Observatory (Aoso), NASA announced. Republic would furnish two flight spacecraft and a prototype; work would also include final development and design, checkout, experiment integration, and launch support services. The Phase I portion of the project was completed in July 1965. Launching of the 1,250-lb. Aoso, planned for the late 1960’s, would be from Vandenberg afb by a thrust-augmented Thor-Agena rocket; the observatory would provide a constant search for isolated or unusual solar activity, (nasa Release 65-234)
An unidentified satellite with a Thor-Agena D booster was launched by usaf from Vandenberg afb. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/20/65)
NASA terminated its contract with the Thiokol Chemical Corp., and its subcontractor, Newport News Shipbuilding and Drydock Co., for development of a 260-in.-dia. solid rocket motor. Reason for the decision was the difficulty encountered by the contractors in processing and welding special steel required for the rocket case and the time which would be required to develop an alternate method. During a hydrostatic pressure test April 11 of the first rocket case produced under the Thiokol contract, failure had occurred at a pressure considerably below the normal operating firing pressure with the consequent destruction of the case. A second case, presently about 60% complete, had been constructed by the same method and was subject to the kinds of faults that resulted in destruction of the first case. Aerojet-General Corp., a second contractor undertaking development of a 260-in. solid rocket motor, was not affected by termination of Thiokol contract, (nasa Release 65-187; Marshall Star, 6/16/65, 6) June 6: Dr. Edward C. Welsh, Executive Secretary of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, told the graduating class of Clark University: “Your country has wisely although belatedly made a firm decision to conduct a vigorous national space program. It is a clear responsibility of each of us to learn what he can about that program, find out what it means to the country as a whole and to the individuals who live here.” He continued: “As we attempt to carry out our responsibilities in educating the general public about space, there are a few concepts which need particular emphasis: “1. Education. The space program has been a catalyst, a stimulus to education at all levels, with particular attention to science and engineering. . . . “2. National Security. . . . How much more secure are we, due to improved communications, more accurate navigation, and more complete weather information? How much is it worth to be better informed about potential sources of danger? How can we assess the advantage of developing competence to detect and offset possible aggression from space? How important is it to know that we intend to keep peace and freedom in space so that all who would go there with peaceful intentions are free to do so? I cannot judge the worth of this national security. . . . “3. Innovations. The space program stimulates the development of new materials, new products, new productive processes, and new managerial techniques. . . . “4. International Status. A substantial difference in influence in world affairs evolves from whether a country is in a first position or a second position in power. In many respects, a nation’s relative position depends on how it stands in advanced technology. Power and influence in world affairs depend to a great degree upon the technological capability of a nation. . . . The ideal picture is that of a nation strong in ideas, in technology, in freedom, in standard of living, and in military power to protect the viability of the other prestige ingredients. The space program, effectively and imaginatively conducted, contributes positively to all of those ingredients. Of even greater importance is the potential impact the space program can have on world peace through substituting competence in space exploration for competence in building implements of aggression. ... “5. Economics. Combining the best talents in management, in engineering, and in science, with the most modern facilities available, the net result of the space program is the production of progress. . . .” (Text)
A new F—1 engine test stand was used for the first time at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center’s West Test Area. The 10-sec. initial firing of the 1.5 million-lb.-thrust engine was primarily for checking out the new facility. On another test stand at msfc, Chrysler Corp. fired the second Saturn ib booster, manufactured by Chrysler at MSFc’s Michoud Assembly Facility. The test, scheduled to run for 30 sec., was terminated automatically after three seconds because of a faulty signal from an engine pressure switch, (msfc Release 65-178; Marshall Star, 7/14/65,1)	_
Soviet Marshal Vasily Sokolovsky said during a Moscow press conference held in connection with the 47th anniversary of the Red Army that the U.S.S.R. was armed with intercontinental and global rockets whose nuclear warheads were equal to 100 million tons of TNT. He claimed strategic rocket troops now formed the backbone of the Soviet armed forces so that the effectiveness of the Soviet air force had been sharply increased by supersonic planes equipped with nuclear-tipped, long-range rockets. He said the Soviet navy was now built around atomic submarines of virtually unlimited range that were equipped with powerful missiles. New Soviet antiaircraft defenses were capable of reaching targets flying at any speed at any altitude. He claimed that the Soviet Union had undertaken several measures toward the relaxation of international tension, among them a reduction of $555 million in military spending for the current year. (Sovietskaya Moldaviya, 2/18/65, 1, ATSS-T Trans.; ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/17/65; Wash. Post, 2/18/65)
Aerobee sounding rocket successfully launched from NASA Wallops Station, Va. carried 317-lb. payload to 90-mi. altitude and impacted about 54 mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Conducted by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, the stellar spectroscopy experiment measured special radiation of two stars, Spica and Alkaid, utilizing an ultraviolet stellar spectrometer and an input telescope with a 13-in. aperture. Performance of a gimbaled star tracker and modified attitude control (Strap) was also tested. Data were telemetered to ground station during flight. (Wallops Release 65-26)
Paris newspaper Le Monde reported that first launch of a satellite by the Diamant booster might come at the end of November, before the December 5 presidential election, and might include an attempt to put the A—1 satellite—an 80-lb. experimental spacecraft with an orbital life of several weeks—in orbit. In case of an A-l failure, Le Monde added, a second launch might take place before Dec. 5. Mid-January was quoted as the deadline for orbiting the D-l satellite, and d-1b might be launched at an earlier date. (Av. Wk., 9/20/65, 29; M&R, 9/27/65, 9)
U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill authorizing appropriations to NASA for FY 1966 totaling $5,183,844,850, as follows: $4,537,121,000 for research and development; $60,675,000 for construction of facilities; and $586,048,850 for administrative operations. NASA had requested $5.26 billion. During the debate preceding passage of the bill, Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) said: “We have moved quickly. But we are not in a crash program. We are now conducting a reasonable program . . . it is a well-planned program. “It is impossible to believe that in the fiscal year 1959 only $48,354,000 was authorized for space [nasa]. In fiscal year 1960 it went up ten times to $485,550,000. It doubled again in fiscal year 1961 to $915 million. “In fiscal year 1962 it went to $1,361,900,000. “In fiscal year 1963, it went to $3,742,162,000 and in fiscal year 1964 to $5,238,119,400. “In fiscal year 1965 it went to $5,193,810,500. “For this fiscal year, the committee has recommended $5,183,844,850, which is down from last year’s level. “I want the House to know we have gone over these programs thoroughly. We have made cuts in the committee, and the cuts were worthwhile. They are responsible, and they are substantial. They are not small.” Regarding funds restored to the NASA budget, Rep. Fulton said: “The M—1 engine development, the 260-inch engine development, and the snap-8 development, were ongoing programs of research that were approved by the committee and authorized by the House over the past several years. However, for reasons of economy, the Administrator cut these three programs entirely from the NASA budget. The committee on the other hand, believed that such actions in the long run would be extremely wasteful and later result in very high costs when it would become necessary to reactivate these programs. “Consequently, the committee restored $15 million to the M-l program to continue it on a technological development level, $6.2 million to the 260-inch solid rocket program to carry it through the test firing of two full length rockets, and $6 million to the SNAP-8 to continue it at the scheduled level of effort.” Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) discussed changes made by the Manned Space Flight Subcommittee: “The total request by NASA for manned space flight for fiscal year 1966 is $3,567,052,000. . . . The subcommittee is recommending a total reduction of $42,825,000. “NASA requested $3,249,485,000 for research and development in manned space flights. Total reduction in research and development amounts to $30 million. All of this reduction comes from the Apollo program. It is the view of the subcommittee that in the areas of Apollo mission support and engine development that program improvements could be made. However, the reduction was made in the total request to allow NASA to make program alterations with a broad management latitude of choice without adversely affecting the total program. It was recognized by the subcommittee that NASA, prior to coming before the committee, had made substantial reductions in their total research and development program. A further reduction was also made by the Bureau of the Budget. Based on this, the $30 million reduction is considered a maximum amount that could be taken without jeopardizing the pace and progress of the Apollo program.” (CR, 5/6/65, 9291, 9296, 9301)
Contributions of NASA’s space program to the future of the Nation were outlined by nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Hugh L. Dry-den at the Governor’s Conference on Oceanography and Astronautics in Hawaii: “We are building toward pre-eminence in every phase of space activity. ... “We are building a network of large-scale engineering facilities, spaceyards, proving grounds, and spaceports to assemble, test, and launch the space vehicles we need now and in the future. “We are creating new national resources of lasting value in these facilities; in the industrial and managerial capabilities we are developing; and in the growing number of scientists and engineers who are learning about space and space technology. “We are filling the pipelines of hardware and knowledge, and, as measured by the financial resources required, we’re about halfway toward our first manned lunar mission in mid-1965. “We are accumulating, in space, the basic scientific knowledge about the earth, the solar system, the universe, and about man himself. “We are bringing benefits not only to the United States but to all the world through the use of space and space technology. . . . “We are providing a much-needed stimulus to the energies and creativity of people everywhere. . . . “We are bringing about increased economic activity. . . . “And we are making certain . . . that the realm of space now opening up to us shall be a domain of freedom. “It is for these reasons that we have mounted the greatest peacetime undertaking in the history of mankind. . . .” (Text) “The Military Implications of Space” were discussed for the Governor’s Conference by Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, afsc Commander: “Our military efforts in space can be placed into three broad categories: first, the development of space systems to support military missions on earth; second, the development of defensive measures against possible enemy actions in space; and third, the conduct of experimentation and of programs aimed at pushing technology forward. . . .” Schriever noted two examples of unmanned satellite systems: (1) the Nuclear Detection Program consisting of six Vela satellites gathering information on radiation backgrounds in far space and defining an operational nuclear detection system; and (2) communications satellites. He revealed that an initial R&D system to satisfy military communications’ requirements had been authorized by dod for launch early next year and would include up to 23 satellites orbiting earth at random spacing at about 21,000-mi. altitude. The satellites would be launched in clusters of eight from three Titan me boosters and then would be positioned along an orbital path. An advanced system was also planned in which expected life of each satellite would be increased from one and a half years to between three and five years. In the advancement of space technology he listed several major programs: manned orbiting laboratory, space cabin experiments, development of cryogenic rocket engines, development of the scramjet, development of a spacecraft capable of maneuvering during reentry, and the Spacecraft Technology and Advanced Reentry Program (Start). (Text)
Speaking on the Senate floor, Sen. Richard B. Russell (D-Ga.) said: “I am greatly disturbed that funds for the continuation of the large solid rocket engine program have been eliminated from the 1966 budget for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. “. . . I am concerned about the effect that the proposed termination of this program will have over our long-range space effort and upon the security of the country. For it will cut off, at a particularly inappropriate time, a crucial research and development program that already has shown significant potential for fulfilling future space booster needs—for both defense and nondefense purposes. This is particularly true for launching large payloads and missions into deep space that are contemplated in the not-so-distant future. “The booster technology and capability that we are developing under the large solid rocket engine program could become a vital factor in preventing the Russians from achieving a position of dominance in space. . . . “Indeed, the decision to terminate this program appears to be a direct contradiction of Mr. Webb’s own views, as expressed as recently as Tuesday of this week to the Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. He said unequivocally that space missions contemplated for the next decade and beyond will require ‘new launch vehicles and new space vehicle developments.’ He said our experience with the Apollo moon program has shown that ‘a policy of support for the development of carefully selected advanced propulsion systems must be followed if we are to assure they will be available when needed.’ “It is highly inconsistent—to say the least—to speak boldly of exploring the moon, reaching and charting the planets, establishing manned stations in space, and extending our national strength into the space dimensions, while at the same time killing off one of the most promising programs for the achievement of these very goals. . . .” (CR, 1/29/65, 1535)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from White Sands, N. Mex., carried instrumented payload to 125 mi. (200 km.) altitude. Payload was a spectroheliograph to obtain a monochromatic picture of the sun. Experiment was conducted by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Rpt. srl)
A job classification dispute at the Chrysler facility of the Michoud Saturn plant in New Orleans caused over 200 United Auto Workers (UAW) to walk off the job. Chrysler was responsible for developing first stage of Saturn ib rocket for nasa. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/10/65)
Sen. Strom Thurmond (R-S.C.) expressed concern on the floor of the Senate about advances in Soviet strategic weaponry and inserted in the Congressional Record an article which compared Soviet and American development of large solid rocket motors: “First, the development of rockets has received a high priority continuously in the Soviet Union for 20 years, since the end of World War II. “Second, the Soviet effort has been broadly based and produced several generations of vehicles with increasing performance capability. “Third, solid-propellant rocketry is playing a major role in current Soviet operations and in their future plans. “Fourth, U.S. intelligence has suffered a major failure if the Soviet missiles in the May 9 parade were not fake. “An early review of U.S. intelligence and military planning operations by both the Congress and the administration definitely is in order if the Soviets are operating large solid rockets.” {CR, 7/8/65, 15359-61)	"
A German amateur radio station used OSCAR iv, sent into an unplanned orbit Dec. 21 by the Titan iii-c rocket, to relay a signal to the Bochum Institute for Satellite and Space Research which had spotted the amateur radio satellite. Signal was reportedly loud and clear. USAF said 42-lb. comsat was expected to be useful to amateur radio operators around the world despite its poor orbit. (Wash. Post, 12/23/65, A6)
France announced it had successfully completed tests of its three-stage Diamant rocket scheduled to orbit a French satellite in 1966. (Reuters, Detroit News, 6/10/65; Reuters, NYT, 6/10/65)
usaf launched unidentified satellite payload with Scout booster. {U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1965, 159)
NASA’s TIROS IX successfully injected into a polar orbit by a three-stage Delta rocket launched from Cape Kennedy. The spacecraft was to have gone into a circular orbit about 460 mi. above the earth but the second stage of Delta burned 11 sec. too long and pushed TIROS IX into an elliptical orbit with apogee 1,602 mi., perigee 426 mi., inclination 81.6°, and period 119 min. First NASA attempt to place a satellite in near-polar sun-synchronous orbit from Cape Kennedy involved three dog-leg maneuvers. In a sun-synchronous orbit the precession (westward drift) of the satellite would be about 1° daily, the same rate and direction as the earth moves around the sun. A hat-box shaped structure, tiros ix was an 18-sided polygon, 22in. high, 42-in. in dia., weighing 305 lbs., with one of its flat sides facing earth when initially injected into orbit. Ground signals to the control system tipped the craft up 90° so that it assumed the appearance of a fat wheel rolling on a track around the earth. Two cameras were placed on the perimeter opposite each other so that as the wheel rolled
