Boosted Areas sounding rocket, last in series launched during solar eclipse from usns Range Recoverer near Koroni Beach, Greece, carried gsfc experiment to obtain data on electron and ion density distribution in ionospheric D region, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afr with AtlasAgena D booster. {Tech. Wk,, 11/7/66, 10; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 157)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmh carried high angular resolution x-ray collimators to estimated 103-mi. (165-km.) altitude in NASA-American Science and Engineering, Inc.-MIT experiment to determine size and location of strong x-ray sources in Scorpius. Rocket and instrumentation performed successfully [see May 23]. (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station reached 99-mi. (159-km.) altitude and impacted 64 mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Objectives of flight were to compare five ionospheric plasma probes using stable ionosphere as a laboratory for evaluating the probes and to check relevant theories of probe operation, (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station reached 94-mi. (151-km.) altitude in GSFC-Univ. of Michigan pitot-static probe experiment to measure atmospheric density, pressure, and temperature. Experiment, designed to observe diurnal variations in fine structure of region from 9-68 mi. (15-110 km.), was launched in conjunction with thermosphere probe experiments launched Aug. 26. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA issued a fact sheet on U.S. international space programs which listed criteria applied to determine value and acceptability of cooperative arrangements in space activity: (1) cooperative project must have scientific validity and mutual interest; (2) cooperative project must be conducted openly, with the scientific results being made freely available to the world scientific community; (3) each participant must accept financial responsibility for its own contribution to the project. Since their inception, nasa’s international programs had involved 71 countries or separate jurisdictions and had included satellite projects, individual experiments flown on NASA satellites, sounding rocket investigations, and a variety of programs in which foreign ground-based observations were coordinated with flight projects. U.S. had concluded bilateral agreements providing for launch of 14 scientific satellites instrumented and, in all but two cases, engineered abroad. Six of these satellites had already been successfully launched (one each for France and Italy and two each for Canada and U.K.). Other satellites would be contributed by the European Space Research Organization (esro), U.K., Canada, Italy, and Germany. U.S. had also opened its own satellites, manned and unmanned, to participation by foreign experimenters. Sixteen such experiments had been accepted for flight. Some 17 countries had entered into agreements with NASA for one or more cooperative sounding rocket projects. Such investigations had been initiated by both U.S. and foreign proposals. They had accounted for roughly 150 launchings in a five-year period with rockets ranging widely in size and type, from boosted Darts and Areas to Nike combinations, Aerobees, Shotputs, British Skylarks, and French Centaures. Ten cooperating countries made substantial contributions to experimental communications satellite work by constructing and operating overseas ground terminals used for TV and radio demonstrations. Conventional weather observations in 42 countries helped interpretation of cloud-cover photographs from weather satellites. A 1962 agreement with U.S.S.R. had resulted in: (1) one-way communications demonstrations using echo ii, (2) some exchange of ground-based magnetic field data in anticipation of an agreed exchange of satellite data, and (3) exchange of conventional weather data over a special communications channel set up between Washington and Moscow on a shared-cost basis pending the availability of satellite data from U.S.S.R. (Text)
First of fleet of nine, 135-ft. nasa barges for transport of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen had been placed in service on inland waterways between New Orleans and msfc’s Mississippi Test Facility, Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., announced. Company had designed double-walled cryogenic tanks for mounting on modified existing hulls according to requirements of NASA, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and Coast Guard. The three 250,000-gal.-capacity hydrogen barges and six 105,000-gal.-capacity oxygen barges could carry "the largest quantities of the two liquids ever transported in individual vessels.” Docking facilities in test stand area at mtf would permit pumping of liquids directly into rocket fuel tanks, (ap&c Release, 3/24/66)
Full 2M-min. duration test of fourth Saturn IB booster (S-IB-4) was conducted on msfc’s East Test Area facility. S-IB-4 would leave msfc in late January for Michoud Assembly Facility for post-firing checkout. (msfc Release 66-25)
usaf Flight Safety Review Board announced it had pinpointed cause of the Atlas booster failure during the aborted Gemini IX mission May 17: gimbaling of the booster engine which forced the Atlas-Agena into a hardover trajectory was caused by a short circuit in the electrical command system of the engine pitch servo valve. Although several other failures could have caused a similar occurrence, the Board said, only this one could have caused the exact set of data received from the launch vehicle. Malfunction was called a random failure, but to ensure that it would not happen again, new tests would be made on the Atlas and electrical connections in all new boosters would be x-rayed. nasa scheduled the mission, redesignated Gemini IX-A, for June 1. (upi, Wash. Post, 5/26/66, E17; NYT, 5/26/66; nasa Proj. Off.)
Second 260-in.-dia. solid-propellant rocket motor (SL-2), Nation’s largest, was successfully test-fired for NASA in Dade County, Fla., by Aerojet-General Corp. Fueled with polybutadiene, aluminum and ammonium-perchlorate and fired nose down in a 150-ft.-deep pit, motor developed within 1% of the predicted 3.5-million lbs. thrust and burned for almost precisely the planned 126 sec. Test showed repeatability of the firing, proved that manufacturing techniques were reliable, and demonstrated that the motors could be produced at a predictable cost. First 260-in. motor (SL-1) was successfully fired for two minutes Sept. 25, 1965, producing 3.6-million lbs. thrust. Strength of the maraging steel motor case, structural integrity of the cast propellant, insulation, and the ablative nozzle were tested. Large solid motor project was designed to demonstrate feasibility of building and operating solid motors of greater size than those in current use for multistage launch vehicle systems carrying heavy payloads into space, (nasa Release 66-31; Stern, Wash. Post, 2/24/66, A5; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/24/66)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried instrumented payload to 103-mi. (166-km.) altitude. Conducted for Johns Hopkins Univ., experiment measured auroral spectral emission lines in the upper atmosphere as a function of altitude. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
nasa launched four-stage Pacemaker rocket from Wallops Station to test performance of spacecraft heat shield design. First two stages lifted 135-lb. payload to 75,000-ft. altitude. As payload began to fall back to earth, last two stages were fired to drive it downward at about 6,800 mph. Information was obtained by tracking and photography and from the payload itself, which was recovered after parachute descent into Atlantic. (Wallops pao; upi, NYT, 11/1/66)
Rocket Propulsion Research Laboratory at afsc’s Arnold Engineering Development Center was completed, (aedc)
Soviet aircraft designer Andrey N. Tupolev described U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 supersonic airliner in Soviet trade-union newspaper Trud. Four-engine aluminum aircraft would carry 121 passengers at 1,500 mph (compared with U.S. supersonic transport’s 250 passengers at 2,000 mph); speed had been deliberately limited to allow construction "of highly durable aluminum alloys,” Tupolev said. Tu-144 would be needle-nosed with small delta wing far back on fuselage and four jet engines in single container under rear section. Aircraft would be operational in "the nearest future”—possibly by 1970. (Anderson, NYT, 5/30/66, 36C) May 29-Ju.ne 4: Mapping the moon for man’s first lunar landing was discussed by leading scientists at an 11-nation International Conference on Selenodesy at Manchester, England. (Reuters, NYT, 5/30/66, 22) May 30-June 1: nasa’s surveyor i was successfully launched from etr by Atlas-Centaur (AC-10) booster on 63-hr. direct ascent lunar transfer trajectory. Spacecraft—carrying survey television system and instrumentation to measure lunar surface bearing strength, temperatures, and radar reflectivity—was first in series of seven designed to prove out design, develop technology of lunar soft-landing, and provide basic scientific and engineering data in support of Project Apollo. It would softland on the moon June 2. After surveyor I separated from Atlas, spacecraft pointed its solar panels toward the sun to power its equipment; at five hours get, sensing devices fixed on the star Canopus for cruise attitude stabilization. surveyor I spacecraft successfully completed mid-course correction of flight path on electronic commands relayed from antenna near jpl. Only flaw in launching occurred within one hour get, when radio signals indicated that one of two antennas on spacecraft might have failed to deploy, jpl’s Surveyor project manager Robert J. Parks said the problem was "not going to preclude a possibility of getting full success out of this mission since one antenna is sufficient to receive radioed commands unless the spacecraft gets in a position where the working antenna is out of range of earth.” The other antenna was properly deployed and working perfectly. Surveyor program was under direction of ossa Lunar and Planetary Program Div.; project management was assigned to jpl; prime contractor for spacecraft development and design was Hughes Aircraft Co. Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle was under direction of LRC. (nasa Release 66-127; Wilford, NYT, 5/31/66, 1, 33; Simons, Wash. Post, 5/31/66, Al)	.	...
Purposes of Saturn/Apollo Applications program, M/G David M. Jones (usaf), nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in an interview in Data magazine, were to serve as transition program from Apollo to next space goal and to accomplish "significant scientific experiments.” Apollo Program Director M/G Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) said in an ' interview in the same issue that "barring some major setback, some major failure in a static test on the ground or major failure on a flight, it is reasonable to expect that the lunar landing . . . will be accomplished before the end of 1969.” (Data, 6/66, 27, 32)
Sydney (Australia) Univ. physicist Stuart Thomas Butler said that U.S., U.K., and U.S.S.R. were studying the possibility of using a "nuclear rocket” to prevent the asteroid Icarus from colliding with earth, upi reported. Icarus would pass within four million miles of earth in June 1968. Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, world clearinghouse for all astrophysical information, said it had no knowledge the three nations were studying the possibility. Two authorities on asteroids, Dr. Paul Herget, Univ. of Cincinnati, and Dr. Gerald Clemence, Yale Univ., said there was not "one chance in a billion” Icarus would strike earth, (upi, Chic. Trib., 7/28/66)
U.S.S.R. announced successful completion of rocket tests in the Pacific to test equipment for spacecraft landings at sea. Another series of tests, which had begun April 24, was being continued to improve booster rockets necessary to propel manned spacecraft to moon. (Tass, 5/25/66, uss-t Trans.)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Andoeya, Norway, carried scientific payload to estimated 133-km. (82.6-mi.) altitude. Experiment, conducted by gsfc and Norwegian Defense Research Establishment (ndre), was designed to obtain measurements at high spectral resolution of D-region composition, using a new spectrometer based on ion cyclotron resolution principles. Instrumentation functioned properly,- and clamshell nose cone ejected at programed 55 sec. (nasa Rpt. SRL)
Two-stage Wasp (Weightless Analysis Sounding Probe) sounding rocket carried 1,500-lb. payload to 148-mi. (238-km.) altitude in ballistic trajectory from NASA Wallops Station in experiment to study behavior of liquid hydrogen under near-zero gravity conditions. Payload, consisting of scale model of liquid hydrogen fuel tank, impacted 330 mi. downrange in Atlantic; no recovery was involved. Experiment under weightless conditions, continuing for seven minutes, was recorded by television cameras through transparent lucite tank and was telemetered back to Wallops. Cameras, mounted on five-foot extension booms, photographed the liquid’s sloshing motion when small thrusters were activated to show how well baffles positioned the liquid in the tank. (nasa Release 66-147)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 156)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified in support of NASA’s FY1967 budget authorization before the House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Manned Space Flight Subcommittee. Questioned by Congressman Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.) about the Apollo program schedule, Dr. Mueller said current budget request left no room for a major problem; any test failure would be directly reflected in a schedule slip. In connection with possible further use of Apollo/Saturn V hardware beyond the lunar landing mission, Dr. Mueller stressed necessity for early decisions on the FY 1968 budget. Industrial research, development, and manufacturing employment had already reached its peak and, ironically, would begin to decline sharply before the first manned flights with Apollo/Saturn hardware. Facilities now becoming operational would be scheduled for "mothballing” within two years if no further use were planned for capability beyond the lunar landing, Dr. Mueller said. (NASA Auth. Hearings, 279-384; msf Historian)
NASA Nike-Apache meteorological sounding rocket launched from Sonmiani, Pakistan, carried acoustic-grenade payload to 118-mi. (190-km.) altitude in experiment conducted for Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Committee (suparco) and British National Space Research Committee. Grenades did not eject, but data were obtained from trimethyl-aluminum (tma) cloud release and spectrum photography. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Two rocket engines which had key roles in U.S. space program—RL-10 and H-l engines—were being given to Smithsonian Institution by msfc for National Air Museum’s display on the history of rocketry, (msfc Release 66-95)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 156)
nasa awarded two nine-month study contracts to determine the impact of a proposed improved J-2 rocket engine on the S-II and S-IVB stages of the Saturn V launch vehicle: (1) $148,000 contract to North American Aviation, Inc., developer of S-II stage; and (2) $225,000 modification to an existing contract with Douglas Aircraft Co. msfc Propulsion and Vehicle Engineering Laboratory was seeking to simplify the J-2 and give it, and the stages it powered, more flexibility, (msfc Release 66-1)
Fourth stage of Mu-1, Japan’s newest and most powerful booster, was successfully tested in low-pressure chamber in Noshiro, Univ. of Tokyo scientists reported. Mu was scheduled to orbit Japan’s first satellite by 1968.	(AP, Balt. Sun, 11/8/66)
Fifth Saturn IB booster (S-IB-5) was successfully captive-fired by Chrysler Corp. for 2k£ min.—longest duration firing—at NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. Stage would be shipped to Michoud Assembly Facility for post-static-test checks and would be used in checking out the Apollo spacecraft, perfecting rendezvous and docking techniques, and training astronauts in preparation for manned lunar landing, (msfc Release 66-69)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb praised development of the Nerva nuclear rocket engine following a tour of aec’s Las Vegas, Nev., test site. He observed the nuclear engine was capable of producing longer-duration flights than engine systems in current use. (upi, Houston Chron., 4/22/66)
Unidentified usaf satellite launched by Thor-Altair booster from Vandenberg afb did not achieve orbit. (U.N. Public Registry, 5/31/66)
NASA postponed third attempt to launch unmanned Apollo spacecraft with Saturn IB booster 44 sec. before scheduled liftoff because of continuing bad weather. (Wash. Post, 2/25/66, A7; WSJ, 2/25/65, 1)
Simulated Aerobee 150 was launched from wsmr to 2-mi. (3.2-km.) altitude in gsfc flight test of proposed new Aerobee booster. Instrumentation performed satisfactorily, and booster performance was excellent, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
usaf Titan III-C booster launched from etr released unmanned Gemini spacecraft on reentry trajectory and inserted canister containing nine experiments and three satellites into high, circular orbit in successful mission marking first flight test of hardware for DOD’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol). Power flight of Titan III-C was close to planned parameters. Modified Gemini spacecraft was released at 125-mi. altitude in test to determine whether new heat shield with hatch could withstand reentry temperatures. Traveling 17,500 mph, spacecraft followed 5,500-mi. trajectory, landing only seven miles off target in the Atlantic. Recovery was made by U.S.S. LaSalle. Titan III-C’s transtage restarted twice to achieve planned 184-mi.-altitude circular orbit and release 38-ft. experimental canister, proving booster’s ability to launch long payload. Canister— OV4-III—ejected OY4-IR and OY4-IT comsats and OV1-VI satellite, which achieved separate, circular orbits. Launch, sixth in series of 12 designed to qualify composite Titan III-C for operational service, was characterized by usaf officials as a "major step” in the Mol program. (Wilford, NYT, 11/4/66, 1, 10; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/3/66, Al; AP, Wash. Post, 11/4/66, Al; Av. Wk., 11/14/66, 30; 17.5. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 158)
Comment on lunar orbiter i mission: New York Times: "Unfortunately, the decision made a half decade ago was to give priority to the Apollo program for landing a man on the moon . . . Lunar Orbiter’s achievements remind us that there is no pressing necessity for putting manned lunar flight first. If President Johnson should decide to slow down the Apollo project by cutting its budget appreciably, scientific investigation of the moon with instrument satellites could continue and be richly productive. "In a few years pictures of the earth’s orb as seen from distant space will become commonplace. Tomorrow’s schoolchildren will find it hard to believe there was a time when no human eyes had seen the full crescent arc of earth’s globe from the perspective of the moon or beyond.” Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: "Looking rather like a crumbly piece of Roquefort, there it was—Earth, as seen from the Moon by a camera aboard Lunar Orbiter 1. The picture was a black-and-white, but no matter. Since the Moon has no appreciable atmosphere, Earth will never take on the bright orange and yellow hues of a harvest moon. And since there are no forests, no lakes, no oceans, no snowcovered fields on the Moon, Earth will never be framed, for lunar lovers, in the sylvan or aquatic settings that lend so much enchantment and mystery to earthly views of the Moon.” Sam Shenton, leader and secretary of the International Flat Earth Society, claimed that the circular body shown in lunar orbiter i’s photos Aug. 25 was not really earth, but "one of the non-luminous bodies between us and the moon.” He admitted that photos of the earth had been "a great shock” to the 24-member society. (NYT, 8/19/66, 29; 8/27/66; Phil. Eve. Bull., 8/27/66; Reuters, Wash. Post, 8/29/66, A3) During August-September: usaf Chief of Staff Gen. J. P. McConnell discussed military future of manned aircraft in NATO’s Fifteen Nations. Aeronautical technology in fields of propulsion and composite materials— and less radical improvements in performance, navigation aids, fire control systems, and conventional ordnance—indicated that "by 1975 we will have increased by major increments the speed, range, altitude, payload and over-all versatility of manned aircraft for military roles.” Noting that X-15 could fly faster and higher than V-2 ballistic missile, General McConnell said he believed "that well in advance of the estimates that most people would make, Air Force pilots will be flying genuine aerospace craft that can take off under their own power, operate in space and return to a controlled landing.” (NATO’s Fifteen Nations, 8-9/66) During Summer: First four sessions of Legal Subcommittee of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space were summarized in an article by NASA Deputy General Counsel Paul G. Dembling and Daniel M. Arons, Attorney-Adviser, nasa Office of General Counsel, in Journal of Air Law and Commerce. (J/Air Law and Commerce, Summer/66, 329-86)
usaf launched unidentified satellite fr;om wtr with Thor-Agena D booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 148)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb, discussing applications of space technology at a meeting of Dallas County Medical Society in Dallas, said that "by adding to our knowledge of space, and of man in space, ... we are building a very large bank of knowledge that will serve generations of man in all major fields of activity.” In a news conference in Dallas, he said that the Soviet space program was ahead of the U.S.’s "and will be for the next year or two.” He said he felt the U.S. would beat the U.S.S.R. to a lunar landing, but was not as confident as 12 mos. ago: "A year ago I would have said the Saturn V would be far bigger than anything they could do. I’m not so sure now. They have a very vigorous program. . . . This year they have flown proton i and II—both four times the size of Gemini—and they have announced a big new rocket.” Asked if the Proton series promised ability to maneuver like U.S.’s Gemini spacecraft, Webb replied: "Anytime you can put up a spacecraft that weighs 27,000 pounds, you’ve got a capability to do a lot of things you cannot do with a smaller craft. You can develop the maneuverability, but it’s hard to develop the large capacity of large spacecraft—and this is where we have been behind and are still behind.” (Text; AP, Denver Post, 1/13/66)
nasa’s lunar orbiter ii (Lunar Orbiter B) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from etr in second U.S. attempt to orbit the moon and photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts [see Nov. 10-30]. Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb. spacecraft into 100-mi. (161km.) altitude parking orbit, reignited after 14-min. coast period, injecting spacecraft on 94-hr., 232,000-mi. translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule lunar orbiter ii deployed its four solar panels and two antennas and locked its five solar sensors on the sun. Only difficulty occurred when spacecraft’s star-tracker lost its fix on Canopus, delaying critical midcourse maneuver eight hours. Correction was accomplished at 44:09 get and jpl predicted spacecraft would come very close to original aiming point. Primary objectives of nasa’s lunar orbiter ii mission, second in series of five, were (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into lunar orbit; and (2) to obtain high-resolution photos on various lunar surface areas to assess their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor spacecraft, and to improve our knowledge of the moon. Photos would cover 13 primary target sites, located generally within northern half of the Apollo zone of interest on the moon’s front face. It would also monitor micrometeoroids and radiation intensity in lunar environment and refine definition of moon’s gravitational field. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under direction of nasa’s ossa. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of jPL-operated Deep Space Network, (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Release 66-286; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 11/7/66, Al, A3; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/7/66, A3; upi, NYT, 11/9/66, 77; AP, Wash. Post, 11/10/66, A2)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from wtr with Atlas-Agena D booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 151)
essa ii (Tos OT-2), second meteorological satellite in Tiros Operational Satellite (Tos) system, was launched by NASA from etr for essa with three-stage Thor-Delta booster. Launch vehicle performed three "dogleg” maneuvers before injection into near-polar, near-circular, sun-synchronous orbit. Initial orbital parameters: apogee, 885 mi. (1,425 km.); perigee, 843 mi. (1,357 km.); period, 113.5 min.; inclination, 101.16°. A cylindrical, 18-sided polygon, 290-lb. essa ii was equipped with two Automatic Picture Transmission (Apt) camera systems for photographing local cloud cover. During first orbit, spacecraft was spin-stabilized at 10.9 rpm with bottom of spacecraft toward earth; during second orbit, orientation maneuvers initiated by ground command began to turn satellite on its side; after 18 orbits—approximately 33 hrs. after launch —essa ii would be in cartwheel position. Combination of cartwheel configuration and near-polar, sun-synchronous orbit would permit 100% photographic coverage of earth’s cloud cover during daylight hours with a given area photographed at the same local time each day. Primary objective of essa ii (Environmental Survey Satellite No. 2) flight was to provide direct readout to worldwide network of Apt receiving stations. essa financed, managed, and operated the Tos systems, gsfc managed NASA participation in the project. Tracking operations were responsibility of stadan. First satellite in Tos system, essa i, was launched Feb. 3. (essa Release 66-14; nasa Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/28/66, Al; ufi, Wash. Post, 8/1/66, A4)
U.S. should divert funds from nasa’s Apollo program and from Federal highway projects to improve urban housing and transportation systems, Sen. Eugene J. McCarthy (D-Minn.) suggested to International Conference of Social Work in Washington, D.C. (Honsa, Wash. Post, 9/9/66, A14)
Attempt to launch NASA’s Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao) was halted by failure of one of the three engines in the Atlas booster to reach full 60,000-lbs. thrust upon firing. Launch was rescheduled for April 2, later for April 8. (upi, Phil. Inq., 3/31/66; upi, NYT, 4/1/66,15)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by nasa and Brazilian Space Commission (cnae) from mobile facility at Natal, Brazil, carried 225-lb. payload of four x-ray detectors on ballistic trajectory to 120-mi. (193km.) altitude. Payload, which impacted 66 mi. downrange in the Atlantic, telemetered scientific data to ground stations. First nasa x-ray astronomy experiment on a sounding rocket in the Southern Hemisphere, flight searched for specific galactic x-ray sources, observed Magellanic clouds for x-ray emissions, and obtained spectral information on known x-ray sources, (nasa Release 66-311)
usaf SV-5D lifting body was successfully launched from wtr by Atlas booster on reentry mission, but "due to an undetermined malfunction in the final phases of descent” was not recovered. Released at desired altitude, the 900-lb. vehicle had deployed parachute to slow its descent rate and reentered planned recovery area using lifting body principle. Goals of mission—first of four in usaf’s Precision Recovery Including Maneuvering Entry (Prime) program—were to study aerodynamic characteristics of SV-5D shape, heat shield performance, guidance and flight control systems, instrumentation, and recovery system, (upi, Wash. Post, 12/22/66, A4)
Lockheed-California Co. revealed that F-104 Starfighter had taken off from a Zero Length Launch (Zell) platform in 1963 at Edwards afb, using a Rocketdyne booster rocket in combination with aircraft’s General Electric J-79 engine. After 80-min. flight, Lockheed’s pilot Ed Brown said of no-runway takeoff: "It was one of the easiest... I ever made.” The secret tests, conducted under contract to the German Air Force, had been made public following Luftwaffe announcement that new series of Super Starfighter Zell tests would be carried out at Lagerlechfeld Base, near Munich. (Lockheed Release, 3/21/66)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr reached 89-mi. (144-km.) altitude in NASA-American Science and Engineering, Inc., experiment to make a high-resolution survey of celestial x-ray sources. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
French Minister of Research Alain Peyrefitte, commenting on the 1967 space budget, disclosed that France planned to launch two D-l-type satellites from Hammaguir Range in February 1967 and one D-2-type satellite from Guiana Range in 1969, Technology Week reported. He said a Super Diamant booster was under development to launch French-built satellites from Guiana, but stressed that main French effort was centered on continuing development of eldo booster. (Tech. Wk., 11/14/66, 3)
Thirtieth anniversary of Jet Propulsion Laboratory of Cal Tech. In March 1936 Dr. Theodore von Karman approved initiation of rocket propulsion studies by Frank J. Malina with the assistance of John W. Parsons and Edward S. Forman at the Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory, (nasa Historian)
nasa Nike-Apache meteorological sounding rocket launched from Sonmiani, Pakistan, carried 25-grenade payload and dummy trimethyl-aluminum (tma) canister weighing 25 lbs. to estimated 118-mi. (190-km.) altitude. 23 grenade flashes were photographed by K-24 ballistic camera network in experiment conducted for British National Space Research Committee and Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Committee to obtain wind, temperature, and other meteorological data between 31-93 mi. (50-150 km.), (nasa Rpt. SRL)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried nrlinstrumented payload to 109-mi. (175-km.) altitude in experiment to photograph solar corona and disc and to measure solar disc variations and total solar flux in Lyman-alpha. Performance of rocket and instrumentation was considered excellent, (nasa Rpt. srl)
First picture of earth from the vicinity of the moon, taken by NASA’s lunar ORHJTEH I. summer maximum of noctilucent cloud sightings approached. Rocket and instrumentation performances were satisfactory. (NASA Rpt. SRL) August 14: The critical voices raised during Aug. 8-9 Senate debate on the NASA portion of the Independent Offices Appropriation bill (H,R. 14921) indicated the U.S. space program was in "political trouble,” concluded New York Times editorial. "Fundamental questions are being asked about whether this country should have gotten involved in the moon race in the first place, and invidious comparisons are being drawn about the dividends from money spent in space and those that might have been realized had those same funds been used to meet urgent human needs. . . . "There are important and useful things to be done in a post-Apollo space program, but it is doubtful in the extreme that the nation should go on indefinitely paying five billion dollars or more annually for such a program....” (NYT, 8/14/66, E10)
A "commercial missile” that could transport 170 passengers from Bombay to New York in 39 min. was described at the Pacific Area Travel Association Conference in New Delhi by B. F. Coggan, corporate vice president of Douglas Aircraft Co. He said the rocket—which would reach a speed of 17,000 mph—would be a bell-shaped vehicle 114 ft. high with a diameter of from 33 to 49 ft. It would weigh more than three million pounds at liftoff. Passenger compartment would have 45 individual passenger couches arranged on each of four decks; during the period of weightless flight, passengers would be held to the couches by belts. On a typical flight plan, Coggan said, the rocket would reach 125-mi. peak altitude. Then, it could hover and maneuver horizontally before landing on four extendable legs. (NYT, 1/29/66, 54)
Invention of reusable turbo-rocket engine, which could launch spacecraft for 1/10 current U.S. costs, was announced by Rolls Royce at British Assn, for the Advancement of Science meeting in Nottingham, U.K. Engine had been designed in titanium, but compressor blades could be made of hifil—new fiber-reinforced plastic five times as stiff as titanium, more reliable, lighter, and less expensive. Partly air-breathing turbo-rocket—cross between jet engine and rocket—would be fueled on kerosene and liquid oxygen. Battery of 48 turborockets—each weighing 1,000 lbs. and capable of generating 22,000 lbs. thrust—could boost Apollo spacecraft to 25,000-ft. altitude in fraction of a second and then be landed by remote control. Reported cost of launch would be $2.8 million compared to $28 million with U.S. booster. (Houston Chron., 9/5/66)
nasa’s ogo iii (Ogo-B) Orbiting Geophysical Observatory was successfully launched from etb with Atlas-Agena B booster into orbit with 75,874-mi. (122,157-km.) apogee; 183-mi. (295-km.) perigee; 48.6-hr. period; and 31° inclination. Third of seven spacecraft in NASA’s Ogo program and first to successfully operate three-axis stabilized in highly elliptical orbit, ogo iii weighed 1,135 lbs.; it carried 21 experiments—largest number ever carried by U.S. scientific spacecraft—to study solar wind, solar flares, magnetic field disturbances, radiation belt particles, aurora events, ionization, and variations in atmospheric density. Ogo program was managed by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-132; AP, NYT, 6/8/66, 15; AP, Wash. Post, 6/7/66, A7)
NASA and West Germany’s Ministry for Scientific Research had signed cooperative agreement to investigate the physics of comets, interplanetary medium, and earth’s magnetosphere. Initial experiments, to be launched in fall 1966, would release vaporized metal in upper atmosphere, creating artificial ion clouds which would be observed from ground. Results would be reviewed to determine desirability of conducting similar experiments on larger vehicle at a distance of several earth radii. Under agreement, BMwF would provide rocket payloads, supplementary cameras, and photometric equipment. NASA would furnish one Javelin and one Nike-Tomahawk rocket, launching range, support facilities, and equipment for optical observations. (nasa Release 66-121)
NASA Aerobee 150 and Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched 35 min. apart from wsmr reached 116-mi. (186-km.) and 74-mi. (119-km.) altitudes in GSFC-essa Institute for Telecommunication Sciences and Aeronomy experiment. Aerobee rocket and instrumentation, designed to measure micrometeoroid and cosmic dust impacts and electron densities, performed satisfactorily. Although Nike-Cajun did not reach predicted altitude and two of seven experiments to obtain data on ionospheric D-region did not function properly, satisfactory results were obtained, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
Administration officials had no indication that U.S.S.R. was man-rating a new booster for manned lunar landing program, Technology Week reported. They also doubted reports that U.S.S.R. would attempt landing mission in October 1967—fiftieth anniversary of Bolshevik Revolution—but anticipated another Soviet manned earth-orbital flight in 1966. (Tech. Wk., 9/5/66, 3)
U.S.S.R. began new carrier rocket tests in the Pacific that would last until Dec. 30. Tass said area with 56-km. (35-mi.) radius had coordinates of 0°5' south latitude and 163°45' west longitude. Ships and aircraft were requested not to enter this area daily between noon and midnight local time. (Tass, 11/19/66)
ijsaf’s OV3-II research satellite was launched from Vandenberg afb by Scout rocket into orbit with 991-mi. (1,595-km.) apogee; 198-mi. (319-km.) perigee; 104-min. period; and 82° inclination. Launch was planned so satellite would be in orbit during Nov. 12 South American solar eclipse to provide data on charged particle variations in extreme upper atmosphere before, during, and after eclipse. Satellite, designed to remain active in space at least one year, would also extend knowledge of electron and ion density structure found in outer radiation belt by NASA’s discoverer xvii. (Vandenberg afb pio; dpi, Phil. Sun. Bull., 10/30/66)
Gemini 9 spacecraft was mechanically mated to top of Titan II booster at ETR in preparation for May 17 launch after 48-hr. delay because of tiny leak in jet-powered maneuvering unit stored behind spacecraft. NASA officials said delay would not change launch date. (AP, Phil. Eve. Bull., 5/4/66; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/3/66, A4)
Eight photoelectric photometer-telescopes were flown from NASA Wallops Sta. on Aerobee 150A sounding rocket to 131-mi. (211-km.) altitude to measure stellar ultraviolet radiation which did not penetrate earth’s atmosphere and could not be observed from the ground. Readings on light in four spectral bands were telemetered to ground stations during the 73^-min. flight conducted for Univ. of Wisconsin’s Space Astronomy Lab. (nasa Releases 66-30, 66-123; nasa Rpt. srl)
"Love as an emotion will play a very important role in the future in the populating of outer space,” Soviet scientist Igor Zabelin wrote in Moskva. "In the future when mankind will fulfill its mission of populating outer space, men and women will be sent in spacecraft somewhere for many years.” Noting that "when a couple lives together for five to seven years, they may get sick of each other and very often there is a divorce,” Zabelin warned that such coolness could cause grave problems in outer space, (tipr, Wash. Post, 12/4/66, M7) During 1966: In 1966, NASA attempted 36 major launches with 34 successes. Of 29 NASA missions, 22 were successes, dod orbited 70 payloads in 43 launches. U.S.S.R. launched 43 payloads and France, one. Highlighting NASA space achievements were closeup photographs of the moon provided by surveyor I and lunar orbiters i and n, the soft-landing on the moon by surveyor I, and the five two-man Gemini space flights, surveyor I transmitted more than 10,000 photographs of the moon; the two lunar orbiters returned a total of 635 lunar photographs. Engineering data from these spacecraft indicated Apollo Lunar Module (Lm) could land and operate safely on the lunar surface. In Project Gemini, NASA conducted five two-man space flights, successfully concluding the project [see Nov. 15] and bringing U.S. manhours in space to 1,993 hrs. 34 min. (compared to 507 hrs. 16 min. for U.S.S.R.). Major ground and flight tests in Project Apollo accelerated preparatory to 1st three-man Apollo/Saturn spaceflight, planned for early 1967. Three Uprated Saturn I’s were launched; Saturn V stages for the 1st flight model passed their final ground test firings. Atlas-Centaur liquid-hydrogen-fueled booster completed its development testing, demonstrating restart capability in space. Applications satellites launched were nimbus ii meteorological satellite, three essa satellites inaugurating essa’s operational meteorological satellite system, and Intelsat ii-a communications satellite for Com-SatCorp. The first Applications Technology Satellite, ATS I, was launched into synchronous orbit. Scientific achievements included orbiting of OGO hi, pageos I, explorers xxxii and xxxiii satellites, and pioneer vii interplanetary spacecraft. More than 300 meteorological sounding rockets and 100 scientific sounding rockets were launched. A total of 20 flights of the X-15 research aircraft were conducted; X-15 No. 2 piloted by Maj. William J.	Knight set a new record speed of 4,233 mph (mach 6.33). nasa-usaf flight research investigating sonic booms got underway in six flights with XB-70 aircraft; research for the U.S. supersonic transport program continued. M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle made 14 unpowered flights, and HL-10 lifting body made its first flight. Among the highlights in propulsion technology was static test firing of the 260-in.-dia. solid-propellant rocket motor, producing 3.5 million lbs. of thrust. Two test series of Nerva nuclear reactors were conducted. One, in 110 min. of power operation, demonstrated stability and controllability of the hot-bleed cycle nuclear rocket engine. The other involved first successful full-power operation and a restart operation, ending the program with an accumulation of more than 105 min. of reactor operation at full or near-full power. usaf flight tested its powerful Titan III booster and used it to orbit the first seven Idcsp satellites of an eventual worldwide military comsat system. Of the 43 Soviet payloads, 34 were Cosmos satellites and five, Luna spacecraft. Notable among these were cosmos cx, orbiting two dogs for prolonged period; cosmos cxxii, apparently first Soviet weather satellite; luna ix, achieving first soft-landing on the moon; and luna x, achieving first orbit of the moon. Also orbited were two molniya i com-sats and the 12-ton proton hi unmanned spacecraft used for cosmic-ray research; Yantar I ion-engine payload was flown in suborbital spaceflight test. France orbited her first instrumented scientific satellite, diapason i, the second satellite built and launched by France, (nasa Release 66-319; Major NASA Launches; nasc; Tass; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, passim; A&A 1966, passim) During 1966: International space events were highlighted by the U.N.’s agreement on a space treaty to govern "activities of states in the exploration and use of outer space, including the moon and other celestial bodies.” The draft treaty—suggested by President Johnson May 7—was negotiatedby the Legal Subcommittee of theU.N. Committee onthePeace-ful Uses of Outer Space. On December 19 the U.N. General Assembly adopted a resolution endorsing the treaty, subject to ratification by five nations including U.S., U.S.S.R., and U.K. By the end of 1966, 72 countries had cooperated with the U.S. in space research activities. Six countries joined the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (Intelsat), bringing the total membership to 54. France and U.S.S.R. entered into agreement on cooperative space research, including experiments in astronomy and communications. (U.S. Aeron, & Space Act., 1966, passim; A&A 1966, passim)
USAF launched Areas solid-fuel rocket from Vandenberg afb to collect information on atmospheric temperature, pressure, and movement above 98,400-ft. altitude. Data collected would be used to plan glide paths of vehicles reentering earth atmosphere. (AP, Phil. Inq., 11/10/ 66)
U.S. invited NATO allies to use its military comsat system temporarily and to collaborate in joint development of new system specifically for the alliance. U.S. would make time available on its seven-satellite military network launched by usaf Titan III rocket June 17. To adapt system to NATO’s needs, it was proposed that new ground station be built in Naples to operate with one under construction in the Netherlands and another operating in West Germany. In early 1968, satellite would be launched from U.S. site into synchronous orbit at 22,300-mi. (35,903-km.) altitude for alliance’s exclusive use. It could be built by consortium of member countries. Eventually, comsat system was envisaged whose relays would permit use of ground stations small enough to be carried on a truck which could be used by military units on the move. Cost of plan was said to be some $50 million. Proposal would be on agenda of next meeting of nato’s foreign ministers, set tentatively for Dec. 15-16. (Mooney, NYT, 9/29/66, 1; Nossiter, Wash. Post, 9/29/66, A22)
Japan successfully launched four-stage Mu-1 rocket from Uchinoura Space Center, Kyushu Island, to test lst-stage fuel combustion and booster propulsion. The 70-ft.-long, solid-fueled launch vehicle was launched at 69° inclination and impacted in Pacific after 3-min. 20-sec. flight. Scientists called test "a success.” Mu was scheduled to orbit Japan’s first satellite by 1968. (AP, NYT, 11/1/66)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 159)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from wtr with Atlas-Agena D booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 150)
Boosted Areas sounding rocket was launched from deck of usns Range Recoverer near Koroni Beach, Greece, as test for flight series to obtain data on electron and ion density distribution in ionospheric D region during solar eclipse May 20. No data were obtained because 2nd stage failed to ignite, but problem was corrected to ensure successful flights during eclipse, (nasa Rpt. srl)
First seven photos transmitted by surveyor i were donated to Clark Univ. by jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering as the school broke ground for a $5-million library honoring the late rocket pioneer Dr. Robert Hutchings Goddard, (upi, NYT, 6/6/66, 42; Berman, Wash. Post, 6/5/66, A14)
NASA would negotiate two incentive-fee contracts totaling $315 million with Boeing Co. and North American Aviation, Inc., for procurement of additional Saturn V 1st (S-IC) stages and F-l rocket engines: Boeing Co. would supply five S-IC stages, costing $165 million; North American Aviation, Inc., would handle production, support, and sustaining engineering of 33 F-l engines for $150 million, (nasa Release 66-69; WSJ, 3/25/66, 10)
U.S.S.R. was developing booster with 7.5- to 10-million-lbs. thrust—enough to send a man to the moon or past Mars, unnamed sources reported. Evidence presumably had been gathered by U.S. reconnaissance satellites. (Clark, NYT, 9/13/66, 28; Simons, Wash. Post, 9/11/66, Al) After initial docking, crew executed four practice docks and spent sleep period attached to gatv. Gordon began planned 107-min. Eva on schedule at 23:58 get, but ten minutes later, after setting up movie camera, retrieving micrometeoroid experiment, and attaching Agena’s 100-ft. tether to gemini xi’s docking bar, had to rest astride gatv. When blinded in his right eye by perspiration, Gordon was ordered by Conrad at 24:02 get to cancel power-tool evaluation experiment and return to cabin. At 40:58 get, following crew’s second sleep period, mated spacecraft used gatv’s primary propulsion system (pps) to attain orbit with 851-mi. apogee—record altitude for manned space flight. After two revolutions, second pps burn restored docked configuration to approximately 185-mi.-altitude circular orbit. At 46:58 get Gordon opened hatch to begin 2 hr. 8 min. standup Eva during which several photographic experiments were conducted. Tether dynamics exercise followed: gemini xi undocked from gatv and moved to end of 100-ft. tether which was supposed to hold two spacecraft on vertical line pointing earthward, proving that two objects could fly in formation for long duration without using maneuvering fuel. When vehicles began to drift, Conrad initiated slow rotation with appropriate spacecraft maneuvers, creating slight centrifugal force which kept tether taut and spacecraft at controlled distance. After separation from Agena during sleep period, Conrad executed successful re-rendezvous—added to flight plan because of gemini xi’s favorable fuel supply. Reentry Sept. 15 in 45th revolution after 71 hrs. 17 min. of flight was first in U.S. space program to be guided automatically by computer which fed commands directly to thrusters. Splashdown of gemini xi in the Atlantic 700 mi. from Cape Kennedy—within two miles of target— and recovery operations by crew of U.S.S. Guam were carried on live television via eably bikd i comsat. usn pararescue team, dropped from helicopters, attached flotation collar to spacecraft. Astronauts were flown by helicopter to recovery ship, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-226; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/13/66, Al, A6; 9/14/66, Al, 'A14; 9/15/66, Al, A6; Reistrup, Wash. Post, 9/13/66, Al, A3; 9/14/66, Al, A3; 9/15/66, Al, A6; 9/16/66, Al, A5; Wilford, NYT, 9/13/66, 1, 28; 9/14/66, 1, 32; 9/15/66, 1, 26; 9/16/66, 1, 24) Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh and honorary RAes president, said in a centenary address that ". . . making the right selection in research programmes and development projects has become crucial to the whole of aeronautical evolution. . . .” Risks involved in the total investment necessary for success, he said, had led European nations to "the obvious answer”—international cooperation: "If it is important to see that aviation is fitted into the national economy in such a way as to enable it to function most efficiently, it is even more important to work out an international structure which will enhance and encourage the chances of success rather than frustrate and defeat them.” (Hersey, A&A, 11/66, 126-30; Text, A&A, 12/66, 32-4)
NASA awarded Honeywell, Inc., a $230,000 contract to determine alternate approaches and concepts for measuring horizon radiance characteristics over earth’s surface—knowledge essential for design of space vehicle guidance and control systems. LaRC-directed study, including investigation of factors affecting horizon radiance profiles, analysis of measurements and evaluation of possible flight techniques, would support Project Scanner rocket flight tests. (LaRC Release; NASA Release
Discovery of two powerful x-ray galaxies which might indicate existence of a whole family of celestial objects was reported by Naval Research Laboratory physicist Dr. Herbert Friedman at a news conference in Washington, D.C. The two galaxies—Cygnus A and M-87—were among the strongest of the 10,000 galaxies that emit radio signals and had been detected previously only by optical telescopes and by their radio emissions. "The startling thing about these extra-galactic sources is that their x-ray output is 10 to 100 times greater than their combined output of light and radio waves,” Dr. Friedman said, and he suggested that an x-ray satellite or a "fence-like array of 1,000 Geiger counters erected on the moon” could identify the sources. The discovery supported theory of an "exploding universe” whose evolution over billions of years, and in the future, would be characterized by violent cosmic explosions far beyond the relative calm of the Milky Way. Dr. Friedman, E. T. Byram, and T. A. Chubb obtained data from an April 1965 Aerobee sounding rocket flight. (Clark, NYT, 3/3/66, 2; Simons, Wash. Post, 3/3/66, A3)
Site at Pakachoag Hill outside of Auburn, Mass., where Dr. Robert H. Goddard launched world’s first liquid-fuel rocket flight on March 16, 1926, was approved as a national landmark by Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall. (Dept, of Interior; SBD, 11/23/66, 119)
European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) ended three-day, seven-nation Inter-ministerial Conference in Paris without reaching decisive conclusions. Issues involved were: (1) Western Europe’s independent space role competitive with U.S. and U.S.S.R.; (2) extent of collaboration to keep pace with technological advance; and (3) continuation of initial eldo project, three-stage Europa-1 rocket. Cost estimate had more than doubled to $420 million, and recent proposal to move Europa-1 into space communications would add $60 million. Another meeting was scheduled for June. (Mooney, NYT, 4/29/66, 8; upi, Wash. Post, 4/27/66, A15; NYT, 4/28/66, 24)
Summing up the effect of May 17 loss of Gemini IX mission’s Agena Target Vehicle, William Hines said in the Washington Evening Star: ". . . it is obvious that at the very least the American space effort has lost three weeks of precious time and possibly $25 million in money— the cost of the lost Hardware plus overhead. . . . "One thing should be clear from the experience of Gemini 9. "There was nothing of omission or commission that can be charged against NASA in the failure of the Agena’s Atlas launching rocket. If the hackneyed phrase 'random failure’ ever was properly used, it was in describing yesterday’s trouble. "The Atlas, as a standard space launching vehicle, has had 49 successes in 52 attempts over the last three years—a better success record than the over-all American space program has enjoyed in any year since its inception in 1957.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/18/66, A8)
Revolution in military communications "to which we are now fully committed and which we are actively pursuing,” was discussed by William Beecher in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "At this writing, the Pentagon plans a May launch of the first eight of a series of 14 to 22 repeater satellites in its Initial Defense Communications Satellite Project (Idcsp). The first eight, riding piggyback on a Titan III-C test booster, will be deposited into random orbits about 21,000 mi. up. Within 60 days thereafter, another six repeater satellites together with two gravity-gradient experimental satellites will be similarly orbited. If all 14 of the communications satellites function perfectly, sufficient coverage will be provided to obviate the need for a third shot of eight, Pentagon experts say. "Although meant primarily to perfect the technology of space communications, after a relatively short test-only period, this Idcsp would be made available for high-priority worldwide military traffic—for instance, important communications between Washington and Saigon. . . . "Then, in 1969 or 1970, the Defense Department hopes to put up a fully operational system, called the Advanced Defense Communications Satellite Project (Adcsp). As John S. Foster, Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, described it in recent Congressional testimony, 'This system will take advantage of advances in both booster and communications technology which will permit the establishment of an economical, highly reliable system capable of providing many secure, jam-resistant, long-range communications circuits to support vital security operations wherever they occur.’ ” (Beecher, A&A, 5/66, 10)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried gsfc payload to 184-mi. (296-km.) altitude for simultaneous measurements of magnetic and electric fields, low-energy electrons, and low-energy protons in a visible aurora. Secondary objectives were rocket aspect measurement and evaluation of xenon flashing light for trajectory determination, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Launch of NASA Atlas-Centaur AC-8 rocket, on mission to perform first double-ignition of a hydrogen engine in space, was aborted at ETR seconds before liftoff when a power cord failed to disconnect from the booster. Failure automatically stopped the Atlas engines from firing and countdown was halted at two seconds. No new launch date was set. (nasa Proj. Off.; AP, Balt. Sun, 3/30/66)
usaf launched unidentified satellite by Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb. (M&R, 2/7/66, 11; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 147)
Dr. C. V. Raman, 1930 Nobel Prize winner in physics, said in convocation address at Indian Institute of Technology in Madras that it was "nothing but sheer raving lunacy” to spend millions of dollars "to shoot men into space and make them walk there.” Dr. Raman said it was "mere pretence” to say these exploits were intended to find out what was happening on the moon. "It is militarism, very thinly disguised.” Dr. Raman said he thought spaceflight was the "most sinister aspect” of the progress of science in the last 60 yrs. (NYT, 8/1/66, 42) During July: Teofilo M. Tabanera, president of Argentina’s Comision Nacional de Investigaciones Espaciales (cnie), reviewed accomplishments and current plans of space program in the Air University Review. Since creation of cnie in 1960, Argentina had organized meetings to promote interest in space research and conducted experiments in aeronomy, ionospheric studies, cosmic radiation, and meteorology, launching balloons and rockets from Chamical Rocket Range. Current plans included: (1) continuation of Centaure sounding rocket launches for wind studies, using "luminous-trails” technique; (2) cooperation in inter-American experimental meteorological sounding rocket research network (exametnet) under agreement with NASA to launch boosted Darts and Areas rockets; and (3) launchings of sounding rockets to study cosmic radiation and ionospheric phenomena. {Air Univ. Review,
Agena rocket stage identical to one at KSC which NASA planned to use as target vehicle in the March Gemini VIII mission suffered an explosive start in ground firing at USAF Arnold Engineering Development Center. Failure, which followed five successful test firings, was similar to explosion which canceled Gemini VI mission Oct. 25, 1965. (upi, Wash. Post, 2/14/66)
House passed NASA authorization bill for FY 1967 (H.R. 14324) totaling $4,986,864,150 as follows: $4,248,235,000 for research and development; $94,419,000 for construction of facilities; and $644,210,150 for administrative operations. NASA had requested $5,012 billion. During debate preceding bill’s passage, Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.) offered amendments, subsequently rejected, to eliminate $41.9-million funding for Apollo Applications program and $9.1-million funding for construction of lunar sample receiving laboratory at msc; to reduce advanced missions by $5 million; and to cancel $10 million of prior authorizations for Facility Planning and Design. Rep. Fulton also offered, but later withdrew, an amendment to establish an Inspector General’s Office in NASA. Commenting on NASA’s $5,012 billion request for FY 1967, Rep. Fulton said: "[It] generally represents a tight program in terms of the allocation of resources to the programs that have been regularly approved by Congress as parts of the Nation’s effort in aeronautics and space. "At a level under $4.9 billion, I do not believe nasa can restructure its Apollo program moon landing in a form that would not cast the most serious doubt as to its ability to meet the objective of the manned lunar landing within this decade. "At $4.8 billion the moon landing objective could not be met. Below this level of the budget, it would become clear that the Nation had abandoned the concept of developing a well-rounded total space capability directed toward achieving space preeminence. . . .” Rep. John Wydler (R-N.Y.), proposing an amendment to earmark $20 million of the total h&d funds for development work on the problem of aircraft noise, suggested: ". . . it is incumbent upon us to bring this [space] program closer to the people and show them some way in which it can benefit them. We often hear there is going to be a fallout as a result of this program—some kind of fallout that will affect the civilian population beneficially. Here is an opportunity to give them some fallout directly that will be of benefit to them. . . .” Rep. Wydler’s amendment was defeated. (CR, 5/3/66, 9189-9223)
France failed to launch research satellite from Hammaguir Range because of malfunction in ignition system of three-stage Diamant booster. At T—0 in countdown, the Diamant booster remained on launching pad. (Reuters, NYT, 2/13/66, 3)
Sixteenth-century manuscript "On Rockets” by Conrad Haas (circa 1550) received at iaf Congress in Madrid. Concepts of rocket construction included multistage rockets and a design of a house-like upper stage. (Text)
NASA launched ComSatCorp’s intelsat ii-a comsat from etr by three-stage Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta booster into elliptical transfer orbit in preparation for geostationary orbit. Transfer orbit parameters: apogee, 23,382 mi. (37,646 km.); perigee, 186 mi. (299.9 km.); period, 11 hr. 9 min.; inclination, 26.4 . At ninth apogee—on Oct. 30—ComSatCorp bred the apogee motor. Apparently the apogee motor nozzle was blown off shortly after the motor ignited, and intelsat ii-a entered orbit with 23,330-mi. (37,545-km.) apogee; 2,072-mi, (3,334km.) perigee; 12 hr. 16 min. period; and 17° inclination rather than planned 22,300-mi.-altitude synchronous orbit over Pacific. ComSatCorp announced that 192-lb. satellite, nicknamed "lani bird,” could receive and transmit television and other forms of communications, but that "significance of this potential remains to be assessed.” First satellite in ComSatCorp’s two-satellite Intelsat II system to provide transatlantic and transpacific comsat coverage, intelsat ii-a had been scheduled to extend commercial service to the Pacific; assist in fulfilling Project Apollo communications requirements; and provide capability for live transpacific TV by handling TV, data transmission, or up to 240 voice channels between "first class” ground stations. Intelsat II-B was planned for launch in early 1967. intelsat i ("early bird”) had been orbited April 6, 1965. (ComSatCorp Releases; NASA Proj. Off.)
S-IC-3 booster for first Saturn V flight was shipped from nasa’s Michoud Assembly Facility aboard Poseidon to msfc for static-testing scheduled for late October, (nasa Release 66-218)
Radio astronomy experiment designed to measure average intensity of cosmic radio noise originating outside the solar system was launched from NASA Wallops Station by four-stage Javelin rocket on 20-min. ballistic flight with 570-mi. (918-km.) apogee. Measurements were made at frequencies which couid not be accurately detected by ground-based receivers. Data would aid study of galaxy’s formation. (Wallops Release 66-31)
In statement presented to the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, summarized significant 1965 mission results: "The 1965 successful Space Science and Applications missions totalled 16. Of these, eight were scientific satellites; three, applications satellites; three, deep-space probes; and two were vehicle developments. Science and applications experiments have also been carried on five manned missions. "The list of U.S. space firsts was extended during 1965. Ranger IX took the first close-up pictures of the floor of a lunar crater. For the first time, as television pictures of the lunar surface were being obtained from the Moon, they were sent on a real-time basis to home receivers. Mariner IV achieved the first successful mission to Mars. It obtained the first close-up pictures of the Martian surface, revealing the cratered character of the planet. By October 1, 1965, Mariner IV had extended the long-range communication record to 191 million miles; it has since been tracked to its maximum distance of 216 million miles. The various measurements of the Mars magnetic field, atmosphere, and ionosphere constitute significant firsts. Early Bird became the first operational commercial communication satellite. The first full global picture of the Earth’s cloud cover in a single day as it will be observed by tos was provided by tiros ix early in the year. In the Gemini program excellent pictures were obtained of the terrain and the gegenschein, a faint reflection of sunlight from materials dispersed throughout interplanetary space. It was clearly established that astronauts can perform scientific experiments in space, producing excellent usable results. "During 1965, 138 sounding rockets were launched to continue the investigation of our atmosphere, and to carry out exploratory space experiments. In support of the International Quiet Sun Year, the ship USNS Croatan launched some 77 rockets while sailing down the west coast of South America. Over 90 per cent of the sounding rocket launches and about 80 per cent of the payloads were successful, yielding data on cosmic rays, and the Earth’s atmosphere, ionosphere, and magnetic field. A Goddard Space Flight Center sounding rocket observed the planet Mars in the ultraviolet, indicating an atmosphere pressure of about five millibars at the planet’s surface, which agrees well with the Mariner IV data. Other rocket flights made ultraviolet studies of the [Ikeya-Seki] Comet of 1965, and of the Sun in ultraviolet and X-ray wavelengths.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 341-5)
USAF was awarding Thiokol Chemical Corp. $1,075,507 contract for design, fabrication, and testing of thrust vector control system for 156-in. solid rocket motor, (dod Release 897-66)
Tokyo Uniy. Space and Aeronautics Institute announced it had launched a two-stage meteorological sounding rocket, last in a series of 15, from test center in Uchinoura, Kyushu—600 mi. southwest of Tokyo. (AP, NYT, 3/21/66, 27)
FAA had submitted to aircraft manufacturers a new supersonic transport (Sst) financing plan, reported William Chapman in the Washington Post. Manufacturers, who claimed they could not afford to pay 25% of expected $l-billion cost of next building stage, would be able to contribute a lighter share of development costs than they had been paying under the 75-25% cost-sharing plan arranged by President Kennedy. (Chapman, Wash. Post, 3/31/66, H8) Australia’s Minister of Supply Denham Henty announced that U.S., U.K., and Australia would cooperate in experiments with U.S. Redstone rockets at Woomera Range to study effects of rocket reentry into the atmosphere. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 4/1/66, A20; Reuters, NYT, 4/1/66, 24) ■> Japanese Transportation Ministry announced a seven-year program to establish system of navigation satellites to be launched in 1972. A new ministry, the Satellite Navigation Research Office, would begin to develop electronic equipment, ground stations, and control systems as soon as the government’s budget for FY 1966 was approved by the current session of the Diet. R&D program would he carried out entirely by Japanese scientists. (NYT, 4/1/66, 59M)
Proposal by Dr. Herbert Friedman of the Naval Research Lab. that a scanning system be mounted in a lunar crater to report to earth the precise location of x-ray sources as they appeared over the crater’s rim because of the moon’s rotation, was discussed by Walter Sullivan in the New York Times. Recent rocket observations [see Mar. 2] had disclosed objects, some of them otherwise invisible, that strongly emitted x rays— part of the spectrum which cannot penetrate earth’s atmosphere. "A systematic survey of the sky in this wavelength,” Sullivan said, would "open an entirely new window on the universe.” (Sullivan, NYT, 3/20/66, 8E)
Breadboard version of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Apphcation) successfully ground-tested for first time at full power— 1,100 mw, corresponding to 55,000-lb. thrust in space—by nasa and aec at Nuclear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Two and one-half hours after initial ignition, engine was restarted and run for 15 min. at varying power levels, reaching a maximum at slightly less than full power. Nerva engine had operated successfully up to partial power—40 mw—Feb. 3. (aec Release J-54; Atomic Energy Programs, 1966, 186)
Funeral of Soviet space designer Sergey Korolev was held in Red Square. After eulogies by Leonid Smirnov, deputy chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers; Mstislav Keldysh, President of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences; Nikolay Yegorychev, Moscow Gorkom Secretary; and Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, the funeral procession moved to the Kremlin wall where the urn containing Korolev’s ashes was placed in a niche. Commentary in the New York Times: "Death has finally declassified the role and identity of Academician Sergei P. Korolev, the man who provided the scientific and technical leadership of the vast Soviet rocket program. The extraordinary pomp of his state funeral in Red Square contrasted sharply with the almost complete anonymity imposed on him while he was alive. In the most fruitful years of his career, the man who led the Soviet Union’s march into the cosmos from the first sputnik to Leonov’s 'walk in space’ was normally referred to in the Soviet press only as the mysterious 'chief designer.’ Korolev’s rockets were powerful enough to send men into orbit and to put cameras into position to photograph the back side of the moon. But they were too weak to break the chains of secrecy that denied him, while he lived, the world applause he deserved.” (Tass, 1/18/66; NYT, 1/20/66, 31)
essa i (Tiros OT-3), first meteorological satellite in Tiros Operational Satellite (Tos) series, was launched from etr for Environmental Science Services Administration (essa) by NASA with three-stage Thor-Delta booster into nearly polar, sun-synchronous orbit to provide cloud coverage of entire sunlit portion of the earth at least once daily. Before achieving orbit, spacecraft performed three precise "dogleg” maneuvers initiated by airborne autopilot system, injecting it into orbit: apogee, 523 mi. (842 km.); perigee, 433 mi. (697 km.); period, 100 min.; inclination, 91.9°. During first orbit, essa i was spin-stabilized at 10 rpm with spin axis in plane of orbit. Entering second orbit, spacecraft responded to ground control command to begin turning on its side into cartwheel position. Maneuver was expected to be completed 24 hrs. after launch; television cameras would be turned on 36 hrs. after launch. Cartwheel shaped, essa i contained two Vi-in. vidicon cameras mounted 180° apart on each side so they could view earth every six seconds. Camera system could send pictures directly to command and data acquisition stations at NASA Wallops Station and Gilmore Creek, Alaska, or store photos on its tape recorder for readout when satellite passed within 1,500-mi. radius of a ground station. essa I (Environmental Survey Satellite No. 1) was 11th successful Tiros (Television Infrared Observation Satellite) to be launched by NASA in 11 attempts. It was first of two Tos operational meteorological satellites planned and financed by essa to provide daily cloud-cover pictures to ground stations on a global basis, essa (at that time U.S. Weather Bureau) had also funded tiros x (OT-1), launched by NASA July 2, 1965. (nasa Proj. Off.; essa Release 66-7; upi, NYT, 2/4/66, 37)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr with Atlas-Agena D booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 150)
Tokyo Univ.’s Institute of Space and Aviation announced successful launch of 240-lb. meteorological sounding rocket from Uchinoura launching range in Kyushu, southern Japan. Single-stage rocket reached 40.8-mi. (65.7-km.) altitude in 2 min. 4 sec. Data were telemetered to ground station. (Wash. Post, 4/22/66, B2)
Sergey Pavlovich Korolev, "chief constructor of space systems for the Soviet Union,” died in Moscow during surgery, Tass reported. Korolev had been active in rocketry since the early 1930’s and had directed gathering of information from captured German rocket scientists after World War II. As head of space system design for the Soviet Union, Korolev’s responsibilities had ranged from sputnik i in 1957 to voskhod ii manned spacecraft. He also designed the Luna series of unmanned spacecraft and possibly the Zond series. (Tass, 1/15/66; upi, Wash. Post, 1/16/66, A6; NYT, 1/16/66, 82)
Dr. W. C. J. Garrard, George K. Williams, and William W. Williams, Lockheed-Georgia Co. engineers, had been named recipients of Wright Brothers Medal by Society of Automotive Engineers for group report on development of soft-field and rough-field landing gear. (Av. Wk., 9/19/66, 25) jpl engineers, uncertain of cause of malfunction, speculated it might be result of stuck valve or insufficient power to operate engine’s triggering mechanism. They said unless it was corrected, surveyor ii could not softland since all three vernier engines were needed to stabilize spacecraft during decelerating descent to lunar surface. On Sept. 22, when it became apparent the mission could not be completed, engineering experiments were performed to obtain as much data as possible on spacecraft performance. All communication with spacecraft was lost 30 sec. after main retro ignition at 5:34 a.m. edt. Probable cause was mechanical failure within telecommunications subsystem due to centrifugal forces generated by high tumbling rate. surveyor ii impacted in area of moon southeast of crater Copernicus about 11:18 p.m. edt. Spacecraft was second in series of seven flights to prove out design, develop technology of lunar soft-landing, and provide basic scientific and engineering data in support of Project Apollo; it contained survey television system and instrumentation to measure lunar surface bearing strength, temperatures, and radar reflectivity, surveyor i, identically equipped, was launched May 30, successfully softlanded on moon June 2 in region of Oceanus Procellarum, and transmitted 10,338 pictures to earth. Surveyor program was under direction of ossa’s Lunar and Planetary Div.; project management was assigned to jpl; Atlas-Centaur booster was managed by lrc; prime contractor for spacecraft development and design was Hughes Aircraft Co. (nasa Release 66-248; NASA Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 9/21/66, Al; Wilford, NYT, 9/22/66, 2; NYT, 9/23/66, 25)
NASA Atlas-Centaur AC-8 launch vehicle was launched from etb with dummy Surveyor payload. Centaur stage’s failure to achieve successful double ignition in space caused 1,730-lb. dummy Surveyor payload to remain in earth orbit with the Centaur stage rather than enter simulated lunar trajectory as programed. Orbital parameters: apogee, 208 mi. (335 km.); perigee, 113 mi. (182 km.); period, 90 min.; inclination, 31°. Eighty minutes after launch NASA officials at ksc announced that only one of booster’s two hydrogen-fueled RL-10 rocket engines had fired the second time. Both engines were to have ignited for approximate 107-sec. burn and inserted payload into lunar trajectory. Later analysis of data indicated the failure was because of a malfunction in Centaur’s attitude control system [see May 3]. Purpose of AC-8 mission was to demonstrate Centaur’s capability to restart its high-energy engines in the space environment following coast period in earth orbit. Success of this mission was vital to nasa’s first operational mission which would attempt to land Surveyor spacecraft on the moon. Centaur program was directed by NASA ossa and managed by lrc. (nasa Releases 66-58, 66-92; nasa Proj. Off.; Wash. Post, 4/8/66, A9; AP, Balt. Sun, 4/8/66)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station carried proton magnetometer and Langmuir probe to 104-mi. (167-km.) altitude in NASA-Indian National Commission for Space Research (incospar) experiment to determine intensity of ionospheric electric current system near magnetic equator. Payload had been developed by Physical Research Laboratory in Ahmedabad, India; NASA provided launcher, ground telemetry system, and rocket, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
Prince Philip of U.K. toured msc for three hours, accompanied by department heads explaining the apparatus used in spaceflight. With assistance of Astronaut James A. McDivitt, the Prince spent 30 minutes in an astronaut training craft, twice steering it into simulated orbital rendezvous with an Agena rocket. "It was all a fascinating experience,” he said later. "When you are inside, everything seems to be out of context.” Dr. Robert Gilruth, msc Director, presented Philip a British flag which had been carried aboard Gemini vii during its Dec. 4-18 space mission with the intention of presenting it to the Prince during his tour, (msc Roundup, 3/18/66, 8; Waldron, NYT, 3/12/66, 8)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966,147)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched from wsmr to 142-mi. (229-km.) altitude to measure atmospheric composition and temperature at 62- to 124-mi. (100- to 200-km.) altitude range, (nasa Rpt. srl)
National Aviation Hall of Fame announced six additions: Glenn L. Martin and William F. Boeing,, both aircraft designers; Adm. John H. Towers, commander of first attempt at trans-Atlantic flight; B/G William Mitchell, pioneer advocate of aerial bombing; Robert Hutchings Goddard, U.S. rocket pioneer; and Lincoln Beachey, early designer of dirigibles. All were deceased. (AP, NYT, 12/29/66, 14)
At msc, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., presented NASA Exceptional Service Medals to Gemini ix-a Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Eugene A. Cernan and to Richard E. Dineen (Col., usaf) who had helped solve problems in the Titan II booster that had launched the spacecraft. Referring to difficulties that occurred during the June 3-6 Gemini ix-a flight, Seamans said: "We know that if we had been a little sharper, if we had worked a little harder, that this would not have happened. ... We are . . . dissatisfied with ourselves when technical and procedural failures keep us from our goals.” He added he had requested review of plans for Gemini X, XI, and XII missions for "tightening up” of procedures. Summarizing Project Gemini’s results to date—"at the three quarter mark”—and forecasting its probable total impact on the space effort, Seamans said: "I am convinced that this program will be completed with far greater return to the nation in scientific information, technology, and operational experience than we had originally set out to accomplish when we began the program in 1961.” {Wash. Post, 6/18/66, A2; Waldron, NYT, 6/18/66, 10; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/20/66, A10)
NASA launched three Nike-Cajun sounding rockets, each carrying payload of 19 acoustic grenades, from three launch sites—Point Barrow, Alaska, Churchill Research Range; and nasa Wallops Station—to gather data on atmosphere between 20- and 60-mi. altitudes over widely spaced geographic areas. Grenades were ejected and detonated at programed altitudes, yielding information on wind directions and speeds and atmospheric densities, pressures, and temperatures. Rocket launchings were first in series of nine planned for February. Similar experiments would be conducted throughout the year to observe atmospheric conditions during different seasons. (Wallops Release 66-9)
Design requirements for second-generation, recoverable-reusable booster and spacecraft systems, outlined by nasc staff member Dr. Eugene B. Konecci at American Astronautical Society meeting in Wayne, N.J., included: new propulsion capability; materials, structures, and subsystems suitable for reuse; and system designed for "full use of the human factor capabilities in the control loop, . . . minimum (limited) ground support participation, and for easy maintenance and repair.” (Text)
NASA Nike-Apacbe sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range reached 126-mi. (202-km.) altitude in NASA-Univ. of Michigan experiment to measure ambient neutral and ion composition and density as function of altitude and compare data with those obtained on February 1965 flights. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl) .
William Hines charged in Washington Evening Star that publicity given to proposed U.S. supersonic transport (Sst) was . . part of a propaganda barrage aimed at the American taxpayer, who in the years ahead will be called upon to underwrite deficits clearly predictable in building and operating a costly fleet of airplanes capable of spanning the Atlantic in two hours. "The sst program has been publicized since the program’s inception in 1963 with the same combination of gobbledygook and public-relations hokum used so successfully in merchandising the moon program. Technological challenge, the asserted psychological-spiritual imperative, and the added spur of an international 'race’—all are cited as reasons compelling development of a 2,000-mile-an-hour super-airliner. "Actually the sst, when built and placed in operation, will be no more a free-enterprise product than the Saturn-5 moon rocket is. It will be built to government specifications, by contractors selected by the government, with development costs largely if not entirely underwritten by the government.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/19/66)
nasa’s Lunar Orbiter A spacecraft was mated to its Atlas-Agena D booster in preparation for scheduled Aug. 9 launch from ETR. {Tech. Wk., 8/8/66, 3)
usaf’s OV3-IV research satellite was launched by NASA from Wallops Station by Scout booster. Orbital parameters: 2,933 mi. (4,720 km.); perigee, 398 mi. (640 km.); period, 142 min.; inclination, 41°. The 173-lb. satellite carried plastic spheres of simulated human tissue containing linear energy transfer spectrometers to record effects of space radiation and determine how much radiation damage an astronaut’s body could undergo in similar manned flight, how long man could stay in space at one time, and how often he could safely return to space environment. Satellite would also give measurements on Van Allen radiation belts and gauge decay of residual radiation in man-made Starfish Belt. Equipment, expected to relay data for one year, was functioning normally. (Wallops Release 66-35; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 152)
Dr. Robert M. Page, retired as chief scientist and director of research at Naval Research Laboratory after nearly 40 yrs. service. One of foremost U.S. experts on radar and a pioneer in space exploration and rocket astronomy, Dr. Page warned that U.S. research was being threatened by "dangerous trends and controls. ... A complete lack of confidence is being shown in the integrity and judgement of responsible operating officials which will certainly lead to bad management of Federal programs.” (Naval Research Lab.; Kluttz, Wash. Post, 1/8/67, A2) December 31: Boeing Co. and General Electric Co. had been selected to continue development and refinement of designs for first U.S. supersonic transport (Sst), FAA announced. Decision climaxed 30 mos. of intense competition between Boeing Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for airframe design; and GE and United Aircraft Corp.’s Pratt & Whitney Div. for engine design. Boeing’s 350-passenger, 1,800-mph, variable-sweep-wing model would be powered by four 4.5-ton GE engines capable of generating 600,000 lbs. thrust. Approval for prototype construction was expected in early 1967. (faa Release; AP, Wash. Post, 1/1/67, Al; Wash. Sun. Star, 1/1/67, A10)
gemini vm’s GATV had developed a "pretty serious problem,” msc Agena systems engineer Melvin Brooks revealed. The trouble, apparently in a yaw hydraulics system, had developed when mission controllers decided to fire the rocket system by remote control to shift the orbit from 186-mi. (299.5-km.) apogee and 184-mi. (296.3-km.) perigee to circular orbit at 253-mi. (407.33-km.) altitude—leaving it as a rendezvous target for the flight of future Gemini spacecraft. Rocket reached 330-mi. (531-km.) and then 442-mi. (701.6-km.) altitudes. Brooks called these "pretty serious offheadings, serious misalignments.” Eventually, the desired orbit of 253 mi. (407.33 km.) was obtained, gatv was expected to drop gradually to orbit of about 184 mi. (296.3 km.). Gemini vm flight director John D. Hodge said short circuit that had locked a yaw thruster on the Gemini instrument module into wide-open position, forcing emergency landing of the spacecraft March 16, had not been found, (dpi, NYT, 3/25/66; WSJ, 3/25/66, 1)
Soviet rocket tests begun Aug. 25 in the Pacific had been completed six weeks ahead of schedule, Tass announced. (Tass, 9/6/66; upi, NYT, 9/7/66)
Scientists were considering "capturing an asteroid” and, through nuclear propulsion, placing it in earth orbit where it could be analyzed, reported John Wilford in the New York Times. He said "experts” believed "capture of an asteroid will be possible as soon as it is possible to send manned expeditions to the surface of Mars or Jupiter.” Astronauts would take with them a separate rocket engine which they would anchor to asteroid’s surface. Rocket would have to "produce long-duration burn but because of asteroid’s low gravity would not have to be very powerful to push the asteroid toward a new orbit.” (Wilford, NYT, 2/27/66, E7)
nasa modified existing cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts with North American Aviation, Inc., and ibm Corp. for Apollo program services with new agreements totaling $252.6 million: under $145.6 million cost-plus-incentive-fee contract extended through December 1968, naa would provide 52 additional J-2 engines for launch vehicles as well as support services; ibm would receive $107 million under multiple-incentive contract, extended through February 1970, for design, development, implementation, maintenance, and operation of msc’s Real Time Computer Complex (rtcc). (nasa Release 66-205; msfc Release 66-176)
NASA Inventions and Contributions Board granted United Aircraft Corp. a waiver of title rights in all inventions made, or to be made, under NASA contract, which involved the RL-10 rocket engine. (KB)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Scout booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 155)
S-IB stage for sixth flight Uprated Saturn I booster (S-IB-6), powered by eight Rocketdyne H-l engines, was successfully captive-fired at msfc for 145 sec., producing 1.6 million lbs. thrust, (msfc Release 66-124)
NASA’s pageos i (Pageos A Passive Geodetic Earth-Orbiting Satellite) was launched with Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena D booster from wtr into near-circular polar orbit: 2,645-mi. (4,258-km.) apogee, 2,603-mi. (4,191-km.) perigee, 182-min. period, and 87° inclination, pageos i was an aluminum-coated Mylar balloon of the echo i type. Balloon was folded and packaged inside spherical canister ejected into space as launch vehicle reached orbital velocity. Canister then separated in half by explosive device, and folded satellite automatically inflated to 100-ft.-dia. sphere, pageos i carried no instruments. By reflecting sunlight, satellite would provide orbiting point source of light to be photographed over projected five-year period to determine size and shape of earth to a degree never before possible; in orbit, satellite should be as bright as star Polaris. Simultaneous observations from 41 portable camera stations around world would be used to construct three-dimensional geodetic reference system. Resulting satellite triangulation network would make it possible to obtain distance between two surface points on earth 3.000	mi. apart to an accuracy of 32 ft. Project was managed by LaRC. (nasa Release 66-150; essa Release 66-32; NASA Proj. Off.; LaRC Researcher, 1/1/66, 1, 6; Wash. Post, 6/24/66, A5)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb with ThorAgena D booster, (upi, NYT, 11/9/66, 4; U.S Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 158)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 149)
Contact Feb. 6 with LUNA IX after its scheduled research had been completed was explained by Tass: "Since the craft still had a certain amount of power left in excess of rated level an additional 2-hr. commutation session was held. , . . "During the transmission period the station exhausted practically all its remaining supply of electric energy and further radio communications with Luna 9 will be discontinued.” Moscow television showed photos of a circular panorama of the lunar landscape obtained from ujna ix’s television system during communications period Feb. 6. Panorama showed luna ix to be resting on comparatively even area of the lunar surface close to the equator on the eastern extremity of the Oceanus Procellarum. Surface of moon around station was very uneven with many hollows and hillocks. Some stone-type formations were scattered at different places. Small cavities could be seen in different parts of the panorama, specifically at its right end. Slightly hilly area could he seen along the horizon. Parts of the spacecraft, including antennas of receivers, transmitters, and dihedral mirrors reflecting sections of the lunar surface, were visible in forefront of panorama. At the bottom, lying on the ground, was section of rocket which had been thrown aside during landing. (Grose, NY~T, 2/8/66, 1, 20; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/1/db, Al, AS)
Close of iaf Congress was dramatized when Spain launched her first sounding rocket—Carabela 4—from Arencillo base, near Huelva. British-built rocket, which cost approximately $1,700, carried 12-lb. instrumented payload to 81-km. (50-mi.) altitude and then impacted 40 mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Two NASA officials—William Hausman, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, and Clotaire Wood, NASA European Representative—observed the launch, first of six in a long-range program to study meteorology. (Wilford, NYT, 10/16/66, 78)
NASA successfully completed third rocket-launched test [see Nov. 5 and 21] of LaRC-managed parachute landing system for Voyager spacecraft. Honest John-Nike rocket launched from wsmr deployed 30-ft.-dia. disc gap band parachute at approximately 130,000-ft. altitude. Voyager program was managed by jpl. (nasa Proj. Off.)
nasa, Japanese Science and Technology Agency, and Japanese Meteorological Agency agreed to launch jointly 10 Japanese MT-135 sounding rockets beginning in March 1967 to study rocket and payload performance and gain information on diurnal cycles of wind and temperature in the stratosphere. MT-135 could boost 6.6-lb. payload to 200,000-ft. (322,000-km.) altitude, (nasa Release 66-331)
Moscow parade celebrating 49th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution included rocket which Russians claimed was immune to any antimissile defense system and could be dropped out of orbit from any direction. (AP, Wash. Eve, Star, 11/7/66, Al, A6)
U.S.S.R. pilot Aleksey Anosov had established new world’s distance record for helicopter with 1,509-km. (938-mi.) flight in MI-1 helicopter from Sumi in the Ukraine to the Orenburg region in the Urals. Previous record of 900 mi. (1,449 km.) had been set by Capt. Chester R. Radcliffe, Jr. (usaf), July 5, 1962. (Wash. Post, 9/14/66, B2) a NASA manned space flight program, the greater part of logistics is not being provided by the Department of Defense. . . . "However, the need for increasing the emphasis on logistics management for Apollo is great. . . . "The Apollo Saturn space vehicle involves 20,000 contractors and subcontractors and has more than 900,000 individual parts. The Saturn V first stage holds 56 tank cars of propellants. The second and third stages of Saturn V transported by water during the Apollo program will spend a total of 700 days at sea. Apollo program transportation by all modes will require coordination with nine Government agencies. The launch windows for the Apollo lunar mission are relatively small, malfunctions on the pad must be kept to a minimum while corrective maintenance must be extremely fast and reliable. All of these elements make the Apollo logistics program both complicated and costly. . . .” (msfc Release 66-202; Text)
Initial tests of first liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen turbopumps for nasa’s 1.5-million-lb.-thrust M-l rocket engine technology program had been successfully completed at lrc. Pumps, driven by 200,000-hp gas generator, were largest ever built for handling propellants for high-energy rocket engine, (lrc Release 66-10)
French-built instrumented scientific satellite, diapason I (D-IA), was successfully launched from Hammaguir Range with three-stage Diamant booster. Initial orbital data: apogee, 2,753.5 km. (1,710 mi.); perigee, 503.1 km. (312 mi.); period, 118.6 min.; inclination, 34.04°. Designed with a three-month lifetime, the 20-in.-dia., 49-lb. satellite would transmit information on earth’s magnetic field and test France’s tracking stations. Bretigny Tracking Center near Paris was receiving satellite’s radio transmissions normally. This was second launch of a French-made satellite by France’s Dia-mant booster. First was Nov. 26, 1965, when A-I satellite carrying radio and radar transmitter, but no scientific equipment, was orbited. (French Embassy Release; AP, Wash. Eve, Star, 2/17/66, Al; Wash: Post, 2/18/66, A13)
nasa Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr reached 94-mi. (151-km.) altitude in gsfc experiment to obtain solar x-ray photographs; rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. nasa Aerobee 150 launched 25 min. later to 109-mi. (174-km.) altitude in NASA-Naval Research Laboratory experiment photographed outer solar corona with moon near edge of field of view and sunlit particles near the rocket. Flight also obtained heliograms showing inner corona and solar disc and data on solar flux in Lyman-alpha. Rocket and instrumentation, except for a spectroheliograph, performed satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Javelin sounding rocket with new 4th stage ignition system was launched from Wallops Station to 434-mi. (698-km.) altitude. Instrumented payload measured positive ion composition of ionosphere, electron density, and temperature; and mapped distribution of Lyman-alpha radiation to determine amount of atomic hydrogen in earth’s atmosphere, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Breadboard version of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) was tested by NASA and aec at Nuclear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Control positioning error in initial ignition led to automatic flow shutdown. In 18-min, test following second, low-pressure start, reactor reached design power of 1,090 mw and exhaust temperature reached 3,630°F maximum. Test was fourth in series which began Feb. 3 and marked system’s eighth and ninth start. (Atomic Energy Programs, 1966, 186)
Aerobee 350 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station on second development flight of series. The 53-ft.-long rocket developed 60,000	lbs. thrust and reached 222-mi. (357-km.) altitude before impacting in Atlantic Ocean some 106 mi. from launch site. Preliminary examination of data indicated rocket’s performance was close to predicted. Direction of sounding rocket program was under ossa, (nasa Release 66-221; Wallops Release 66-44)
First static test firing of production version of Apollo spacecraft launchescape solid-propellant rocket motor, key component of emergency Launch Escape System (Les), was conducted at Redlands, Calif., by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. All test objectives were met, with motor producing scheduled 155,000 lbs. thrust for programed eight seconds to become first major Apollo spacecraft subsystem to complete NASA qualification tests for future manned flights. (Lockheed Release)
An explanation of white dwarf stars—based on study of spectra of four stars in constellation Orion gathered during October 1965 NASA Aerobee sounding rocket flight—appeared in report released by Dr. Donald C. Morton, head of Princeton Univ. rocket program. Results indicated that the four stars are hurling matter toward the earth at about 4 million mph. This loss of mass, extended over a long period of time, would eventually remove up to 95 per cent of the stars’ mass, according to Dr. Morton. They would then be white dwarfs. (NYT, 1/11/66, 6)
Launch crews began erecting Titan II booster on Pad 19 at etr in preparation for September launch of Gemini XI mission. (AP, Houston Post, 7/24/66)
NASA assigned lrc responsibility for development of space vehicle design criteria in the area of chemical propulsion. Howard W. Douglass, former director of lrc’s Flox Project Office, was appointed Chief of Design Criteria Office and Assistant Chief of Chemical Rocket Div. (lrc Release 66-40)
Launch of U.S.S.R/s luna x spacecraft indicated Soviet goals and techniques for reaching moon were similar to those of U.S., according to William Hines in Washington Evening Star, and raised question whether U.S.S.R. would attempt manned lunar landing in November 1967 to mark 50th anniversary of Bolshevik revolution. Lack of evidence that Russians had developed a large booster comparable to U.S.’s Saturn V suggested they would use earth orbit rendezvous method to reach moon, Hines said. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/1/66, Al)
nasa had begun study of how to keep two or more small monkeys in earth orbit for up to one year to assess long-term effects of weightlessness on primates and evaluate problems related to humans undertaking extensive work in space. Industrial firms had been asked to submit by Oct. 27 "preliminary design study” for Orbiting Primate Spacecraft capable of being carried into earth orbit during Apollo program. LaRC would manage study, (nasa Release 66-273)
Lewis Research Center awarded Aerojet-General Corp. a $10-million contract for fabrication and static test firing of 260-in.-dia. solid propellant rocket motor. An advanced version of two motors of the same diameter previously tested by Aerojet, new motor would use propellant with higher burning rate and was expected to develop 5.25 million lbs. peak thrust when test-fired for 80 sec. in June 1967. Earlier versions had produced 3.6 million lbs. thrust during 114-sec. tests, (nasa Release 66-236; lrc Release 66-52)
nasa awarded rca two-year $7,837,000 contract for logistic support of computers used to check automatically Saturn IB and V booster stages during manufacture and at launch site. Major equipment for the Saturn checkout systems would be the RCA 110A computer produced under separate contract with nasa msfc. (msfc Release 66-8; Marshall Star, 1/12/66, 1)
nasa launched 49-lb. payload with ionosphere experiment for Rice Univ. to 116-mi. (186-km.) altitude from nasa Wallops Station with Nike-Apache sounding rocket to test theory that intense electrical currents flow at high altitudes over the earth and are strongest at about 120-mi. altitude. Data from magnetometer designed to detect magnetic field caused by the currents were telemetered from the payload to ground stations at Wallops during flight. (Wallops Release 66-11; nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb, speaking at Univ. of New Mexico, urged establishment of a seminar where experts could exchange scientific and industrial knowledge to bridge "the tremendous gap between physical development and social inventions.” Mr. Webb also recommended a national rocket foundation to provide facilities for amateur rocket enthusiasts. (AP, NYT, 12/28/66, 4)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 157)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 154)
Proposal for fleet of 25 stand-by spacecraft which could be launched within three hours of a distress signal to rescue astronauts stranded in orbit was submitted to NASA by MIT aeronautics students. Each 13,000-lb., four-man Nero (Near Earth Rescue Operation) spacecraft, designed with wing-like lift similar to M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle, would be launched with Titan III-C booster to rendezvous with target; it would glide to a landing at a jet airport. Vehicles could also repair crippled satellites, resupply manned orbiting laboratories, inspect unidentified satellites, and remove orbiting debris. System could be implemented with current technology and be in operation by early 1970’s at total cost of $2 billion. (Wilford, NYT, 12/6/66, 60C)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr with Scout booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 149)
U.S.S.R. had successfully completed series of carrier rocket tests in the Pacific 16 days early, Tass reported. Nov. 20 Tass statement had said that tests would continue until Dec. 30. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/14/66, Dll)
France had requested that Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., photograph sodium vapor trail of Centaure sounding rocket during NASA’s Gemini XII mission scheduled for launch Nov. 9. Sounding rocket—to study winds up to 400 mph at high altitudes— would be launched from Hammaguir Range on signal from Gemini Mission Control at MSC. Experiment would be first by foreign government to be part of a U.S. manned space flight. {Wash. Post, 10/23/66, A10; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 10/23/66, A7)
Meteorological sounding rocket launched from Chamical, Argentina, was first in series of launches planned for NASA-Argentine Space Commission (cnie) cooperative program, cnie had scheduled 13 launches for i966 as part of Inter-American Experimental Meteorological Rocket Network (exametnet), in which Argentina, Brazil, and U.S. would cooperate to establish in the Western Hemisphere a north-south chain of stations for coordinated sounding rocket launchings to obtain experimental data on weather patterns. Brazil launched first rocket under exametnet program from Natal, Brazil, Jan. 12. (nasa Release 66-103)
Two Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launches, from Point Barrow, Alaska, and Churchill Research Range, were coordinated in gsfc experiment to obtain atmospheric data as time of summer maximum for noctilucent cloud sightings approached. Rockets and instrumentation functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Churchill Research Range in engineering test preceding series of five gsfc launches to measure intensity and energy spectra of low-energy proton, helium nuclei, and heavier nuclei during Polar Cap Absorption event. Rocket performance was near predicted; however, nose cone did not retract because of override switch heating problem, and data were poor in quality, (nasa Rpt. siu.)
Shift of management of NASA’s Apollo Telescope Mount mission from gsfc to msfc was evidence of nasa’s effort "toward inhouse development of major space projects” to ''offset threatened loss of personnel” at NASA manned space flight centers as Apollo program passed its personnel peak, Aviation Week reported. (Av. Wk., 9/12/66, 80)
Alex P. Aven, owner of an Oklahoma City, Okla., petroleum consulting firm, was sworn in by NASA Administrator James E. Webb as consultant to the Administrator on management. (NASA Release 66-112) May 10-13: NASA successfully launched 18 Areas and Hasp meteorological sounding rockets to 200,000-ft. altitudes at intervals ranging from four minutes to six hours to investigate daily cycle of wind and temperature variations in upper atmosphere, compare results of various rocket and balloon measuring systems, and study effects of radiation from the sun on meteorological instruments. Instrumented payloads descending by parachute transmitted atmospheric temperature, density, and pressure data, and ten specially instrumented high-altitude weather balloons, interspersed among rocket firings, transmitted information as they rose to 130,000 ft. Radar tracked both balloon and rocket payloads to determine speed and direction of high-altitude winds. Launches were managed by nasa Langley Research Center and sponsored by NASA, USA, usn, usaf, and essa. (nasa Release 66-118; Wallops Release 66-25) National Academy of Sciences delegate Dr. Richard W. Porter, summarizing activities of 1965 U.S. space program, said a manned lunar landing by 1970 would be a "difficult goal” but U.S. had made "substantial progress.” Dr. Porter presented an analysis of data transmitted by NASA mariner iv Mars probe which appeared to support theory that earth sometimes has comet-like tail stretching past orbit of Mars. On Feb. 5, 1965, a peculiarly timed solar eruption sent series of intense proton clouds into space, five of which were detected within 48 hrs. by mariner iv and two other U.S. satellites in near-earth orbit. Second and third clouds were reported by mariner iv three to five hours prior to their detection near earth, possibly because solar eruption had blown earth’s tail to enormous length, forcing two clouds to detour through tail in order to penetrate earth’s magnetic field. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/11/66, 16; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/12/66, A14) Chief Soviet delegate Anatoli A. Blagonravov summarized 1965 U.S.S.R. space program, and said luna x, which entered lunar orbit April 3, had recorded radiation pattern from lunar surface similar to that from basaltic part of earth’s crust. Apparently lunar surface exhibited no differentiation equivalent to granite on earth, indicating that earth and moon were created separately, luna x had found level of moon’s magnetic field barely above that of interplanetary space; small increase was attributed to moon’s passing through earth’s magnetic tail at time of measurement. Implication was that moon is cold throughout, since liquid metal core would produce large magnetic field. Report suggested that new minerals would be found on the moon because of unusual chemical reactions caused by its extreme temperature range, the impacts of micrometeorites, and rains of high-energy radiation. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/11/66, 16; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/12/66, A14) Soviet delegate A. G. Prishchep, in a joint paper with colleague V. I. Vashkov, revealed that U.S.S.R. planetary probes were assembled in clean rooms and sterilized with two-fold process involving moist heat to prevent dryness and a gas mixture, harmless to the skin, which might have important surgical applications. Gas mixture contained 50% ethylene oxide—extremely poisonous substance which is dangerously explosive when combined with oxygen—diluted with 40% methyl bromide for safety reasons. General Electric scientists H. G. Lorsch and M. G. Koesterer reported that current sterilization cycles varied from treatment at 320° for three hours to baking at 200°F for 14 days. They argued that no more than 10 billion microbes should exist within a spacecraft prior to beginning of sterilization if reasonable chance of killing virtually all of them was to be assured. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/12/66, 79; Beller, M&R, 5/16/66, 17-18) Drs. Herbert Friedman and R. W. Kreplin, Naval Research Laboratory, reported that solar radiation level would probably exceed highest ever recorded in 100 yrs. during 1969-1970—time of first projected manned lunar landing. Basing their prediction on measurements of solar x-ray emissions taken by explorer xxx (iqsy Solar Explorer) satellite, Friedman and Kreplin explained that x-rays, which could not penetrate earth’s atmosphere, warned of approaching sunspots before they could be seen. Solar activities in the form of sunspots and gaseous flares occurred in 11-12 yr. cycles, but there was also a gross cycle which reaches its greatest intensity every 80 to 100 yrs. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/13/66, 19; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/13/66, A12) Dr. Bessel Kok, Research Institute for Advanced Studies, described a small instrument which could determine the existence of life when landing on another planet. Designed on the assumption that even the simplest forms of life use water and such common chemical compounds as phosphates and nitrates, device would trace the transfer of nonradioactive isotope—Oxygen 18—from these chemicals to water. (Wash. Post, 5/13/66, A12) Reports on little-publicized efforts were presented to the meeting: (1) Italy’s platform for launching San Marco earth satellite at sea was in African port of Mombasa and would be towed shortly to site where U.S. Scout booster would launch satellite into equatorial orbit; (2) Pakistan was conducting monthly firings of rockets that injected copper chaff into stratosphere to disclose winds in that region over subtropics; (3) U.S.S.R. had fired 150 meteorological rockets—almost half from shipboard—and U.S. was firing about 120 monthly; (4) Romania had used orbital data from Washington and Cambridge, Mass., to photograph echo I and echo ii comsats in coordination with Soviet expeditionary stations in Egypt and Mali; (5) Sweden, Finland, Russia, and East Europeans had joined in observing orbital flight changes of echo i and echo II attributable to density variations in wisps of air at satellite altitude; and (6) East German scientists reported their conclusions on upper air structure derived from real-time transmissions from NASA explorer xxh satellite. It was estimated that 60 stations in various parts of the world were monitoring satellites that sent out "blind” data. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/15/66, 10E; Sullivan, NYT, 5/16/66, 88) Dr. A. I. Lebedensky, Soviet Academy of Sciences, reported that Luna ix photos revealed lunar surface was steadily eroding, at least in some places. He suggested that erosion could be caused by solar winds or impact of micrometeorites. Lebedensky pointed out two peculiar features on luna ix’s photos which supported his theory. First was series of streaks, resembling mineral veins in earth’s bedrock, on floor of crater where luna ix had landed. It had previously been assumed that moon’s surface was buried deep in debris churned up by meteorite impacts. Second was presence of rock-like objects on small pedestals similar to those on earth where soft but rock-strewn surface had been eroded. Stones, which ranged in size from one foot to less than one inch across and whose pedestals appeared as high as they were wide, "were the most unexpected and important result of the flight,” Lebedensky said. "Our conclusion is that the stone is harder than the ground around it and screens the ground underneath from the erosion effects of solar winds and micrometeorites.” Lebedensky admitted the possibility that erosion was peculiar to the crater or a particular region of the moon, but saw no obvious reason why this should be true. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/17/66, 28; Toth, Wash. Post, 5/17/66, A17) Radio occultation measurements from mariner iv’s July 14, 1965, Mars flyby indicated that regions on the surface of Mars might vary in height by three miles (five kilometers), jpl scientist Dr. Arvydas J. Kliore reported, (jpl Release) Venus was rotating clockwise only once every 243 days, but during that period it seemed to be synchronized with earth, Dr. Richard Goldstein, chief of jpl Communications Systems Research, told the meeting. Dr. Goldstein also reported that radar probes of winter 1965 when Venus was nearest earth indicated prominences with the ability to depolarize microwaves. "They may well be mountain ranges,” Dr. Goldstein said, "although large fields of boulders would also depolarize microwaves. On earth, of course, such areas usually indicate the presence of nearby mountains.” (jpl Release) Chief Soviet delegate Anatoli Blagonravov, addressing the annual cospar press conference, said France and U.S.S.R. had been negotiating —within the framework of cospar—on cooperation in space research which might extend to incorporation of French instruments in Soviet satellites "if this should be asked for.” Asked if he could imagine similar close cooperation between U.S. and U.S.S.R., Blagonravov said there was no need for it; if the situation arose, it would be better for them to cooperate in processing data obtained from their own satellites. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 5/20/66, A5)	.
msfc had purchased 22 additional Saturn IB H-l rocket engines from North American Aviation, Inc., under $7,634,742 modification to previous contract. In addition to the 205,000-lb.-thrust engines, which would complete engine requirements for Saturn IB/Apollo program, naa would provide three years of support services, (msfc Release 66-75)
nasa announced plans to begin powered flights of M-2 and HL-10 manned lifting bodies at Edwards afb in early 1967. Equipped with 8,000-lb.-thrust rocket engine, vehicles would be flown at altitudes up to 80,000 ft. and speeds of 1,000 mph in series of 8-min. test flights designed to simulate spacecraft reentry conditions, (nasa Release 66-329)
Tokyo Univ.’s Institute of Space and Aviation announced successful launch of Japan’s first television-equipped sounding rocket: 1.4-ton rocket carried 22-lb. TV camera to 200-mi. (322-km.) altitude, (upi, Wash. Post, 8/4/66)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Churchill Research Range in GSFC-Univ. of Michigan pitot-static tube experiment to observe the fine atmosphere temperature structure at noctilucent-cloud altitude. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Five successful sounding rocket launchings were conducted from the deck of usns Range Recoverer during eclipse of sun in Greece, NASA announced. Launchings of the Boosted Areas rockets, part of a cooperative project of the Greek National Committee for Space Research and NASA, were planned to investigate ionization of the upper amosphere during solar eclipse, (nasa Release 66-32; NASA Rpt. srl)
Former Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., received Great Silver Medal of Paris from Mayor Albert Chavanac for being "one of the pioneers of space, who was able to give a human aspect to the experiment he attempted so successfully.” (AP, NYT, 5/25/66, 33) AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, in luncheon address, cited three factors which could restrain full advancement of technology: "The first of these constraints is the relative silence of our opponents. A few years ago the headlines were full of Soviet threats of orbital bombs, missiles that could 'hit a fly in the sky,’ and similar weapons. Today, by contrast, the Soviets are not boasting about their new weapon developments. . . . The second constraint is the argument made in some quarters that U.S. military research and development could be 'provocative’ to our opponents. This argument overlooks the fact that our very existence as a free society is 'provocative’ to our opponents, because it contradicts their theory of history. . . . The third constraint is the immediate need for large funds to support our forces in Vietnam. . . .” To overcome these constraints, General Schriever said, "we must harness our management experience and technological knowledge to serve the national purpose,” in an effort involving every "segment of our national life. . . .” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, discussed implications of 1968 space budget decisions. He said U.S. today was "not ahead in this deadly serious competition,” and "strong and increasing effort” would be required "to prevent the Soviets from forging ahead as the unchallenged leader in space.” (Text) Nike X system had been improved so that it could not only destroy hostile satellites but also provide defensive cover for the entire Nation, reported Dr. Oswald H. Lange, chief scientist for the Nike X project office at Redstone Arsenal, Ala. He described the Nike X system as employing two interceptors—the long-range Zeus and short-range, high acceleration Sprint. (NYT, 5/26/66, 4) R. I. Mitchell, vice-president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp.’s JetStar program, said that Lockheed would produce advanced version of four-engine JetStar business aircraft capable of taking off on shorter runways and carrying more cargo and passengers than previous models. New Dash 8 JetStar, powered by Pratt & Whitney JT12A-8 engine, would reduce runway requirements from 6,425 ft. to 5,550 ft. and would have 1,000 fpm faster rate of climb. (Lockheed Release) Two space rescue systems being tested for possible use by usaf were discussed by Harold L. Bloom of General Electric Co.’s Re-Entry Systems Dept.: (1) "Emergency cocoon”—an inflatable shelter to maintain astronaut in a "livable environment” while awaiting rescue— would use thin silicone rubber membrane in dacron and Mylar skin to provide C02 and water vapor control; (2) one-man reentry vehicle for self-rescue—"Manned Orbital Operations Safety Equipment (moose)” —would consist of foldable heat shield bonded to Mylar bag. Astronaut would zip himself into moose bag, leave spacecraft, and initiate polyurethane foaming process; foam would insulate and support him during reentry oriented with small rocket in an attitude/de-orbit package. Form-fitting couch, designed to be traveling at less than 30 feet per second at the time of impact, would also double as a life raft. (Text; Wilford, NYT, 5/8/66, 66)
nasa Javelin sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station reached 404-mi. (650-km.) altitude in GSFC-Canadian Defence Research Board Telecommunications Establishment experiment to measure ion and electron density and temperature. Although rocket did not perform as expected, all instrumentation functioned normally and "excellent” data were received, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
nasa selected Bendix Corp. for negotiation of a $6.9-million msfc contract to develop and produce three pointing-control-system (Pcs) units for the Apollo Telescope Mount (Atm), (nasa Release 66-309) Week of November 28: French space officials reported partial success for first firing of an experimental Coralie rocket from Hammaguir Range. Rocket, second stage of eldo’s Europa booster, underwent nominal countdown, launch, and flight until T+62 sec., when circuit malfunction prevented monitoring to T+100 sec. as planned. (Av. Wk., 12/5/66, 30)
AFCRL launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from wsmr to 117-mi. (188-km.) altitude to collect micrometeorite particles during Leonid meteor shower, (oar Res. Rev., 1/67, 8)
nasa Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr carried GSFC-instrumented payload to 90-mi. (145-km.) altitude in experiment to measure spectral irradiance of stars Alpha Lyrae, Lambda Scorpii, Zeta Ophiuchi, and Delta Scorpii. Flight marked first successful operation above earth’s atmosphere of Star Tracking Rocket Attitude Positioning (Strap) system. The 330-lb. telescope device telemetered almost 80 sec. of ultraviolet data and was recovered undamaged about 55 mi. from launch site for reuse in fall 1966. Data would give experimenters information on star surface temperatures, gravitational field intensity, and relative ages, (nasa Rpt. srl; gsfc Release G-16-66)
eldo successfully test-fired three-stage Europa rocket from Woomera Range, Australia. Booster was blown up over Simpson Desert 6 min. 42 sec. after launch. {Tech. Wk., 11/21/66, 8)
nasa successfully launched explorer xxxii (ae-b) aeronomy satellite from ETR with three-stage Delta booster. The 2nd stage burned 8 sec. longer than planned—failing to cut off and running to propellant depletion—and boosted the satellite into a higher orbit than planned. Orbital parameters: apogee, 1,688 mi. (2,717.7 km.), as opposed to planned 750 mi.; perigee, 180 mi. (289.8 km.); period, 116 min.; inclination to equator, 65°. Launch was third time Delta 2nd stage had failed to shut down on time and sent 3rd stage and payload to higher altitudes. Built by Gsfc, and the last of the original satellites outlined by nasa when it was established in 1958, the 495-lb., 35-in.- dia. explorer xxxii was designed to investigate temperatures, composition, densities, and pressure in the upper atmosphere and their diurnal, seasonal, and annual variations on a global basis, nasa later announced that adjustment of onboard programing of spacecraft’s sensors had compensated for higher apogee and useful scientific measurements would be taken that were not planned originally. All eight experiments onboard were functioning "as expected” and spacecraft was spin stabilized at the required 30 rpm. First aeronomy satellite, explorer xvii, was launched April 3, 1S63. Results included first direct measurement of neutral helium; first in situ measurements of concentrations of neutral atmospheric constituents at satellite altitudes as a function of time and solar activity; first data revealing difference by a factor of two (approx.) in value for atmospheric density as determined from onboard sensors and from changes in satellite’s orbit; first detailed description of diurnal and latitudinal behavior of summer ionosphere near altitude of F2 maximum over eastern U.S. at time of solar maximum. Results had indicated more specialized measurements were needed to reveal basic atmospheric processes, explorer xxxii incorporated many improvements aimed at achieving this objective, (nasa Releases 66-96, 66-139; AP, Wash. Post, 5/26/66, E17; WSJ, 5/26/66, 1)	_
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried instrumented payload to estimated 104-mi. (167-km.) altitude. Experiment conducted for Univ. of Michigan measured ambient air density from 19-75-mi. (30-120-km.) altitudes by radar track of two falling Mylar spheres ejected at plus 72 sec. Flight also measured solar heating effects by comparing diurnal variations of measurements, (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa conducted first rocket-launched test of parachute landing system for Voyager spacecraft at wsmr. Honest John-Nike rocket boosted 200-lb. experimental package to 104,000-ft. altitude, but ground command transmission did not correctly trigger deployment. Successful balloon-launched test in the LaRC-managed parachute experiment series had been completed Aug. 30. Voyager project was managed by jpl. (nasa Proj. Off.)
NASA test pilot John B. McKay made successful emergency landing of X-15 No. 1 at Smith’s Ranch, Nev., after malfunction developed in aircraft’s fuel system. There was no damage to aircraft and no injury to pilot. Primary purpose of flight was photometer measurements of sharpness of earth’s horizon for use in Apollo program. (X-15 Proj. Off.; upi, Wash. Post, 9/9/66, BIO)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Titan III-B-Agena booster from wtr. (U.S, Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 159)
Final glide flight of M2-F2 lifting body vehicle before installation of XLR11 8,000-lb.-thrust rocket engine [see Dec. 30] was made at Edwards afb with Capt. Jerauld R. Gentry as pilot. Purposes of flight, 14th in unpowered series, were testing of stability and control and determination of vehicle performance characteristics, (nasa Proj. Off.)
nasa Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr reached 136-mi. (219-km.) altitude in NASA-Univ. of Minnesota experiment to measure atmospheric temperature and composition from 62- to 124-mi. (100- to 200-km.) altitude. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Eighth Uprated Saturn I booster was static-fired successfully at msfc for 145 sec. First stage performed as expected, developing 1.6 million lbs. thrust, (msfc Release 66-288) November 29-December 2: aiaa’s Third Annual Meeting and Technical Display was held in Boston. In keynote address, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh described the manned spaceflight program as the most successful technological feat ever undertaken by the Nation. Panel discussion followed on future of U.S. space program. Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Institute for Defense Analyses, predicted that man would be needed in space primarily as a "repairman” for scientific instruments. "The science . . . will be carried out on the ground where enormous facilities for computing, analysis, and discussion are available.” Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.) said emphasis on space activities should not be only on peaceful purposes but also on preservation of peace; this would inevitably require sending military men into space. With advances in technology, U.S. must convert from "throwaway” hardware concept to use of maneuverable reentry vehicles and recoverable boosters, he added. This idea was echoed by NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, who said: ". . . all of the hardware developed for future projects would reflect our concern over . . . greater cost effectiveness, through the development of reusable launch vehicles and reusable spacecraft.” Mueller said there would be manned space stations that could stay in orbit a year or longer but said there was no need for crews to stay aloft for such periods. A ferry vehicle would be used for resupply of both equipment and crew. He listed potential benefits of space technology in the next decade, describing air traffic control towers in space, direct-to-home international TV broadcasting systems, and possibilities for predicting and controlling the weather. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) said one of the problems of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics—of which he was chairman—was educating the people of the Nation to the benefits of the space program. It was a difficult task, he said, to justify space expenditures against the costs of Vietnam, foreign aid, and Great Society projects. But, he insisted, "it is the translation of space technologies into useful benefits that is the overall value of the space program.” (Texts; aiaa Daily, 11/30/66, 1, 3; Wash. Eve. Star, 11/30/66, A7) Results from NASA’s EXPLOBER xxxm had shown for first time that tail of earth’s magnetosphere "extends more than 75,000 miles beyond the orbit of the moon,” reported gsfc scientist Dr. Norman F. Ness. Findings were contrary to those of Soviet scientist Dolginov and colleagues who had reported they were unable to detect magnetospheric tail at lunar distances on basis of data obtained from luna x between April 3 and May 4, 1966. Ness suggested as reason for this that luna x data were probably obtained when spacecraft was near or within neutral sheet region of magnetosphere where very low magnetic fields would be expected, (gsfc Release 20-66) In session on Future Large Subsonic Transports, John Borger of paa said problems in air transport industry "are being created by the phenomenal growth rate of our business.” Since the growth rate showed no signs of slackening’in the coming years, continued development and extensive use of large subsonic jet aircraft were not only desirable but essential. Borger pointed out that the engine for the Boeing 747— which would carry times more passengers than present intercontinental transports—was being developed with only commercial airlines as potential customers. This was the first time in air history that a new aircraft powerplant had been undertaken on this basis. Borger noted that a major requirement for the "jumbo jets” was that they be available at least 5 to 6 yrs. ahead of the proposed Sst so that initial development and operation costs could be recovered. H.	F. Klump, general manager of cargo traffic and sales for Deutsche Lufthansa Airlines, sounded a warning about the subsonic jet aircraft’s cargo capacity: unless airports expanded their freight handling facilities enormously, they would not be able to handle volume of material "dumped on them.” W. D. Perreault, program director for Lockheed 500—a giant commercial cargo aircraft for the 1970s—discussed evolution of the 500 from C-5A transport under development for usaf. After reviewing three proposed commercial versions of the aircraft, he said one of them "will provide for the first time a cargo plane with direct operating costs of less than 2/ per ton statute mile.” (aiaa Daily, 11/30/66, 1, 31; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/29/66, A10) Commenting on the report of the aiaa Launch Vehicle and Missile Technical Committee, "The Next Generation of Launch Vehicles—• Evolution or Bold Step?” N. E. Golovin of the Office of Science and Technology said: ". . . if a family of reusable boosters is to be developed for reasons of economy then development cost per booster must be so low that economical amortization must be possible over a relatively small number of flights for each type; or, if only a single reusable booster is to be developed its use must indeed be so cheap that it would pay to employ it for payloads which are but a small fraction of its orbiting capacity. This reasoning . . . casts considerable doubt on the Committee’s suggestion that a 'bold step’ leading to the development of reusable boosters is justified at this time.” (Text) NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Edgar M. Cortright, participating in a panel discussion on "Do We Need New Propulsion Systems for Lunar and Planetary Flight?”, concluded that unmanned missions during the next ten years would probably "not require either new propulsion systems or new launch vehicle stages. They probably will require adding a modified Centaur as an upper stage on the Saturn IB or the Titan IIIC. They may require and certainly could use a 260 inch solid first stage under the S-IV-B Centaur. . . .” Cortright recommended that current launch capability be put "to effective use in exploring space and in developing practical applications of space flight.” (Text) During panel on -Space and Public Policy, "poor communications” between scientists and the general public was suggested reason for death of Project Mohole—killed by Congress because it would have cost at least three times the original estimate, nas president Frederick Seitz said such escalations in cost were "not unusual” for such scientific ventures and revealed the project would soon be renewed under a different name such as "deep ocean drilling.” "The goals of space exploration are primarily those of science, not technology,” asserted panelist Hunter Dupree, science historian and history professor at Univ. of California, Berkeley. Chairman of the President’s Science Advisory Committee’s Panel on Space Science Louis Branscomb replied that no one wanted to see the space program purely as a "spectator sport,” and that space programs should be conceived to "maximize their scientific returns.” Commenting on the same subject, NASA Deputy Administrator Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said: "We must grapple with the problem of what we will do with the moon. This is not an esoteric problem.” Concerned about the lack of aiaa advice to Congress on questions of scientific policy, Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.), member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, said the loudest critics of the space program were scientists in other disciplines eying the space money. "I call on aiaa to come to Congress with a sharpened viewpoint. You can speak with the consensus of Avco Corp. vice president Arthur Kantrowitz feared that "aiaa is not equipped” to do the suggested job because unanimity within the society could not be achieved on policy questions. And unless it could, the assignment "would induce strains within aiaa and change its complexion.” (aiaa Daily, 12/2/66, 1, 29) Four major aiaa awards were made at Honors Convocation: Dr. W. Randolph Lovelace II (posthumously), the Louis W. Hill Award "to honor his many outstanding contributions to the biomedical sciences in their applications to space and in particular his pioneering development of protective devices enabling the human body to function and operate safely in the aerospace environment”; Joe H. Engle of NASA frc, the Lawrence Sperry Award for "outstanding contribution to aeronautics as the youngest pilot to fly the X-15 in various spaceprobing research programs since June 1963”; Warren J. North of msc, the De Florez Training Award for "contribution to astronaut training and operational crew procedures development in support of the manned space flight program”; and Dr. A. K. Oppenheim, the G. Edward Pendray Award for "outstanding contributions to the field of aeronautical and astronautical literature in the area of gaseous detonation and gas wave dynamics.” (aiaa Daily, 11/29/66, 30; Av. Wk., 11/28/66, 19) November 30: NASA launched two-stage, 30-ft.-long Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Wallops Station in cosmic ray and ionospheric experiment for Univ. of New Hampshire. 120-lb. payload reached altitude of 223 mi. (359 km.) and impacted 142 mi. downrange in Atlantic Ocean. Measurements obtained were radioed back during flight and recorded at ground receiving stations. (Wallops Release 66-56; NASA Rpt. srl)
Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) reactor (NRX-A5) was successfully ground-tested by nasa and aec at Jackass Flats, Nev. Test, in which reactor was operated at design power of 1,100 mw for 15Vi min., was first in series to "obtain additional data on reactor characteristics under extended operating duration” under joint nasa-aec Rover program, (aec Release J-151)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range reached 98 mi. (157 km.) in NASA-Univ. of New Hampshire experiment to provide data on neutron intensity at different latitudes, solar x-ray fluxes, Lyman-alpha radiation, and ionospheric electron densities. Rocket performed satisfactorily and instrumentation performance was considered excellent, (nasa Rpt. srl)
All F-104G Starfighter aircraft in West Germany’s Air Force were grounded indefinitely as result of Nov. 28 air crash which killed pilot. Since 1962, 65 of Luftwaffe’s 700 Starfighters had crashed, killing 37 pilots. Aircraft was manufactured by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. (Shabecoff, NYT, 12/7/66, 15)	_ Agena D booster into elliptical transfer orbit with 22,831-mi. (36,758km.) apogee; 114-mi. (183-km.) perigee; 650-min. period; and 31° inclination. At 16:30 get, apogee motor was fired to place satellite into near-synchronous 22,300-mi.-altitude orbit. It would be allowed to drift 12 days to stationary position over the Pacific at 151° west longitude. One of the most versatile satellites ever developed, 775-lb. ATS I carried 15 communications, technology, and scientific experiments, including camera systems for cloud-cover photos; two-way vhf transponder for voice communications between ground stations and aircraft in flight; electronically despun antenna to continuously direct a radio beam toward earth; and low-thrust resistojet which produced thrust of 450 millionths of a pound. Capable of multiple-access communications, satellite would be able to transmit TV and voice communications among stations in North America, Asia, and Australia. It would also be used to send weather data from essa facility at Suitland, Md., to Automatic Picture Transmission (Apt) stations in U.S., Japan, and Australia. Mission objectives were to inject spacecraft into synchronous orbit and place it on station; operate spacecraft for at least 30 days; and conduct experiments. Ats program—a five-satellite project managed by gsfc under ossa direction—sought to investigate technology common to various spacecraft applications through flight experiments carried on spin-stabilized and gravity-gradient-stabilized spacecraft, (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-308; Marshall Star, 12/1/66, 1, 4; Wash. Post, 12/8/66, A2; upi, ATT, 12/9/66, 57; upi, Wash. Post, 12/21/66, A15)
usaf Titan III-C booster launched from etr inserted seven Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (Idcsp) repeaters and one gravity-gradient satellite into random, near-synchronous, equatorial orbit, creating nucleus of worldwide military communications system. Apogees varied from 15,911 mi. (25,617 km.) to 16,126 mi. (25,963 km.); perigees from 15,811 mi. (25,456 km.) to 15,829 mi. (25,484 km.). Average period was 22 hrs. 10 min. All seven comsats were reported performing nominally. Satellite to explore feasibility of gravity-gradient stabilization at very high altitudes had successfully deployed its 52-ft.-long booms and was performing as expected. Powered flight of Titan III-C was close to planned parameters. Transtage and payload were inserted into parking orbit, where first transtage burn made necessary course corrections. Second transtage burn—at 110 min. get—moved stage and load into transfer orbit. Third transtage burn—at 06:03:12 get—put satellite dispenser frame and its eight satellites weighing 800 lbs. total into near-synchronous orbit with 15,906-mi. (25,608.6-km.) apogee and 15,801-mi. (25,439.6km.) perigee. At 06:06:52 get, satellites were ejected one at a time over approximate 3-min. period into their preselected orbits. Within six minutes, telemetry signals were received and surface-station tracking and communications tests begun; within two hours, circuits were established through repeaters. Launch was fourth consecutive success of Titan III-C and first total success of its transtage. Fifteen additional comsats would be launched by late 1966 to ensure against failure of one or more satellites. New ground terminal would be installed in Vietnam by midsummer to provide additional command and control circuits, (upi, NYT, 6/17/66. 14; upi, Wash. Post, 6/17/66, A4; Tech. Wk., 6/27/66, 16)	'
oao i Orbiting Astronomical Observatory was launched by nasa from etr with Atlas-Agena D booster into parking orbit and then into planned circular orbit. Orbital parameters: 505.4-mi. (813.3-km.) apogee; 493.2-mi. (793.7-km.) perigee; 101-min. period; and 35° inclination. Satellite's solar panels and instrumented booms would be deployed April 10. First of four spacecraft scheduled for nasa’s Oao program, oao i— largest, heaviest, and most electronically complex unmanned spacecraft ever developed by U.S.—weighed 3,900 lbs., carried 10 telescopes, and contained 44,000 separate parts and 30 mi. of electrical wiring. It carried four scientific experiments to provide astronomers with their first sustained look at the universe from above the earth’s atmosphere, including Univ. of Wisconsin broad-band ultraviolet telescope package and detection devices to study the ultraviolet, x-ray, and gamma-ray regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. Through its complex ground-command spacecraft attitude control system, oao i would be aimed at individual objects in space with precision never before attained by an orbiting satellite. Information from experiments would be radioed back to earth in the form of digital data for analysis by experimenters. Oao program was managed by nasa Goddard Space Flight Center, (nasa Release 66-60; NYT, 4/9/66, 7; NYT, 4/10/66, 10E)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 149)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range reached 111-mi. (178-km.) altitude, gsfc experiment, first in series of three, successfully measured number and energy distribution of electrons in energy range of 1-300 kev, which produce visual aurora, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Daniel J. Haughton, president of Lockheed Aircraft Corp., suggested at American Petroleum Institute meeting in New York that aerospace and petroleum industries combine their technical strengths for joint exploration of earth’s continental shelves. He said that within 35 yrs. the world’s population would have doubled and a large segment of this population would be hungry: "The oceans represent the last great source for feeding them and providing the chemicals and minerals and water to meet all the future needs of man.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/16/66, C12) NASA Apollo Program Director M/G Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), in report on "Management Scheme for Apollo,” concluded: "There is no single approach to program management that will guarantee success. The development of and experience with various management systems, techniques and tools in the past several years have contributed extensively to a more scientific approach. The 'art’ element remains, however. The integrated implementation of those concepts and their associated procedures and disciplines is sometimes confronted with considerable resistance within an organization. This has merit, for it forces management to thoroughly screen new concepts as to validity, feasibility and salability. Once a new management system is approved, however, it deserves and requires the personal support of the program director through line channels to stimulate its overall implementation and acceptance at the grass roots level. . . (Text) DeMarquis D. Wyatt, NASA Assistant Administrator for Programming, said that NASA’s cost model had "significantly facilitated management decision making in complex on-going programs by providing an overnight computational capability of great capacity. The computer program is capable of handling the interrelated cost influences of up to 60 different hardware configurations at an unlimited number of plants and an unlimited number of production fines within each plant. It can . . . summarize program costs for as many as 24 fiscal years and can subdivide and allocate these costs to up to 8 different funding sources or users.. . .” (Text) . Franklin P. Dixon, Director, Planetary Mission Studies, NASA omsf, outlined manned Mars landing program for consideration as U.S. national space goal. Proposal called for seven-step program based principally on extension of mission-duration capability and including earth-orbital "Space Station/Mission Module,” Mars and Venus flybys, and Mars landing. Discussing long-range NASA planning, he noted: "At the present time planning for the Saturn Apollo Applications Program includes subsystem developments for long duration manned flights. . . . This provides a logical growth pattern toward manned planetary travel with the easier flyby missions within technological reach by the 1975 to 1980 time period for actual operational flights.” (Text)
Soviet rocket pioneer Vladimir Vasilyevich Razumov, presumed to have died in Stalinist purges of Leningrad during World War II, had been located and interviewed by Leningradskaya Pravda reporters. Razumov had headed the Leningrad Jet Study Group of space enthusiasts until Stalin abolished it in 1935. His residence was not disclosed, possibly because of his continued association with missile manufacture. (NYT, 1/10/66, 46C)
naa’s Rocketdyne Div. reported single J-2 rocket engine had operated continuously for 635.9 sec.—more than two minutes longer than burn time required for an Apollo lunar launch. Test firing was one of a series of 104 during which engine had accumulated a total of 12,120 sec.— more than three times engine’s specified operating life. {Tech. Wk., 7/4/66, 4)
Two gallons of fuel exploded inside drum near Saturn IB launch pad at etr, but there were no injuries and no damage to the booster or launch complex, AP reported. Saturn IB was scheduled to launch unmanned Apollo spacecraft on Feb. 22. (AP, NYT, 2/16/66, 52)
Horace Sheely of the National Survey of Historic Sites, Dept, of the Interior, inspected Pakachoag Hill, Auburn, Mass., site of first successful liquid-fuel rocket flight made by Dr. Robert H. Goddard. Accompanying Sheely were members of the Auburn Rotary and Lions Clubs joint committee to preserve the Goddard site. (Joint Comm. Ltr.)
NASA Nike-Apache launched from wsmr to 100-mi. (161-km.) altitude carried NASA-Dudley Observatory (Albany, N.Y.) experiment to collect micrometeorite particles at time of 33-yr. maximum of Leonid meteor shower and gsfc experiment to determine vehicle slant range. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, but payload was not recovered and no data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. SRL)
NASA announced transfer of project management of the RL-10—first hydrogen-fueled rocket engine—from msfc to lrc and of Headquarters program authority from NASA omsf to ossa. RL-10, which had powered Saturn I’s 2nd stage (S-IV) in six successful flights prior to conclusion of msfc’s Saturn I program July 30, 1965, also powered Centaur upper stage launch vehicle, managed by lrc. (nasa Release 66-74)
Four experimental ramjet missiles launched by France’s Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales (onera) reached speeds of nearly 4,600 fps between 40,000- and 115,000-ft. altitudes. Missiles were part of a 10-flight program code-named stataltex, to generate data applicable to eventual development of an atmospheric booster that could reach mach 5. (M&R, 5/23/66, 9)
NASA Aerobee 150A launched from NASA Wallops Station carried afcrlinstrumented payload to 136-mi. (219-km.) altitude in experiment to measure incident solar radiation. Rocket vehicle coning motion made accurate solar pointing and consequent data acquisition possible only 60 per cent of the time, (nasa Rpt. srl)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 153)
Martin Marietta Corp. was receiving $7,622,000 fixed-price contract from afsc for work on Titan III booster, (dod Release 536-66)
Nation’s most modern ship for oceanographic research, usc&gs Oceanographer, was commissioned at Washington [D.C.] Navy Yard in commemoration of Environmental Science Services Administration’s (eSSa) first anniversary. President Johnson, speaking at the ceremony, called for international cooperation in oceanographic research and invited 11 nations, including U.S.S.R., to participate in first round-the-world expedition of the new research ship. (Text; essa Release 66-41) July 14: Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 52-lb. variable frequency impedance probe to 121-mi. (195-km.) altitude in cooperative West German-U.S. experiment to measure electron density in the ionosphere, nasa furnished two radio propagation experiments and sounding rocket; West Germany furnished probe. There was no exchange of funds between cooperating agencies—nasa and West German Federal Ministry for Scientific Research. Results would be made available to world scientific community, (nasa Release 66-188; Wallops Release 66-40)
nasa Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr carried two far-ultraviolet image converters to 83-mi. (134-km.) altitude in nrl experiment to obtain stellar spectra and photographs; rocket and instrumentation did not perform as expected, and no useful data were obtained, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
Gemini VIII rendezvous and docking mission—world’s first space docking—began at etr with launch of 7,000-lb. Agena Target Vehicle (Gatv) by Adas booster at 10:00 a.m. est, followed 100 min. later by launch of Gemini viii by two-stage Titan II booster with Astronauts Neil A.	Armstrong, command pilot, and David R. Scott, pilot. Primary objectives of the mission—sixth manned flight in the Gemini series—were rendezvous and docking of gemini viii spacecraft with gatv and performance of extravehicular activity (Eva) for one orbit. gatv was injected into near-circular orbit with 186-mi. (299.5-km.) apogee and 184-mi. (296.3-km.) perigee; gemini viii entered initial orbit with 128.8-mi. (206.4-km.) apogee and 74.9-mi. (119.5-km.) perigee. Near third apogee, Armstrong fired aft thrusters, circularizing spacecraft’s orbit at 168-mi. (270-km.) altitude. Trailing gatv by 139 mi., Armstrong received intermittent lock-on between gemini viii radar and gatv’s companion transponder. After sighting gatv at 66-mi. range at 04:12 get, Armstrong fired thrusters and Scott read out computer data until 05:15 get, when they switched from catch-up to rendezvous mode. At 150 ft. from gatv, Armstrong reported he had matched velocity for brief station-keeping exercise. Conditions at that point were so favorable that Armstrong passed under gatv and came up 80 ft. in front of it, where he was able to read some data on gatv’s status display. Successful docking was confirmed at 6:33 get. Plan had been to remain docked with gatv through 7M-hr. sleep period until beginning Eva, but at approximately 7:00 get spacecraft-GATV combination began to roll and yaw violently. Unable to stabilize joined spacecraft, Armstrong fired gemini vm’s thrusters to undock and maneuvered away from the gatv. Once freed, however, gemini viii began to roll even more rapidly; roll, pitch, and yaw rates increased, approaching one revolution per min. For three minutes, the astronauts fought to control gemini viii; finally, with oams turned off, Armstrong fired his Reentry Control System (Res) rockets in final attempt to counteract violent roll. This maneuver was successful and eight minutes later, at 7:25:30 get, the spacecraft was stabilized. Within a matter of minutes, the problem was isolated to the spacecraft’s No. 8 thruster, which had fired intermittently while gemini viii was docked with gatv and stuck open until Armstrong managed to turn off oams. It was later determined that a short circuit was probable cause of thruster’s malfunction. Premature use of reentry rockets forced Gemini flight director John D. Hodge to order an emergency landing, with recovery planned in the western Pacific during seventh revolution. (Safety rules of the Gemini program required immediate landing of any spacecraft once its Res squibs were blown; if the flight were allowed to continue, danger of Res fuel depletion would jeopardize firing of Res rockets, vital to safe return of spacecraft and crew.) Spacecraft landed 500 mi. west of Okinawa in regular emergency recovery area at approximately 10:23 p.m. est—10 hrs. 42 min. after launch. Landing was only three miles from intended impact point. Within minutes usaf frogmen parachuted from usaf C-54 rescue aircraft and placed flotation collar around capsule. At 1:30 a.m. est capsule and astronauts were hoisted aboard recovery ship U.S.S. Leonard Despite early termination, gemini viii mission accomplished one of two primary objectives—rendezvous and docking. Original flight plan had specified four gemini viii-gatv dockings and two hrs. 15 min. of extravehicular activity by Astronaut Scott. Five scientific, four technological, and one medical experiment were to have been conducted. Flight had been scheduled to last 44 revolutions—approximately 73 hrs. (NASAProj. Off,; nasa Release 66-52 ;Wilford, NYT, 3/17/66,1;Waldron, NYT, 3/17/66, 20; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/17/66, 1; Simons, Wash. Post, 3/17/66, 1; Av. Wk., 3/31/66, 30-32)
First soft-landing on moon was made by U.S.S.R. when luna ix spacecraft softlanded an instrument package near Ocean of Storms west of the Reiner and Marius craters. Instrument package began relaying telemetric signals to earth immediately and Tass said "information received from the station is being processed and studied.” Landing sequence, as later described by Tass, began 8,300 km. (5,155 mi.) above moon approximately one hour before touchdown when LUNA ix was oriented vertically to the moon. At 77-km. (47-mi.) altitude, 48 sec. before touchdown, radar system aimed at lunar surface turned on the retrorocket and shock-absorbing system was prepared. Less than one second before impact, after spacecraft had been slowed to less than 10 mph, instrument capsule was ejected. Rocket crashed and 4 min. 10 sec. after instrument capsule had landed, its petal-like covering and antennas opened and radio transmissions began. Jodrell Bank Experimental Station announced luna ix had transmitted facsimile pictures of the moon from the time it landed at 1:45 p.m. est until 2:05 p.m. est, gone olf the air, and then resumed signals shortly after 9:00 p.m. est. Soviet spokesman declined to confirm report. British scientists were unable to translate signals into pictures but recorded them on magnetic tapes. U.S.S.R.’s four previous attempts to softland spacecraft on the moon had failed: luna v, launched May 9, 1965; luna vi, launched June 8, 1965; luna vii, launched Oct. 4, 1965; and luna viii, launched Dec. 3, 1965. (Tass, Pravda, 2/4/66, 1, uss-t Trans.; Simons, Wash. Post, 2/4/66, Al, A13; Grose, NYT, 2/4/66, 1, 37; AP, Wash. Eve. Star. 2/4/66, Al, A6; 2/6/66, A14)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites'with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 154)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb with Thor-Burner II booster. (Tech. Wk., 9/26/66, 15; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 156)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station reached 103-mi. (166-km.) altitude. NASA-Univ. of Maryland experiment was designed to (1) evaluate pulse and thermal equalization probes as research tools, (2) investigate electron energy distribution in normal daytime ionosphere, and (3) investigate use of wing-slope techniques with Langmuir probes. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt. srl)
Small hydrogen-oxygen engine originally developed for Saturn S-IV rocket stage was being adapted to serve as heater for expanding helium gas used in repressurizing S-IVB propellant tanks in space. Burner, providing an 800-lb. payload gain through weight reduction, would make it possible to meet pressure requirements by using supercold helium from bottles immersed in liquid hydrogen inside fuel tank, and would serve as possible source of low-thrust ullage control power during weightless flight, (msfc Release 66-92)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from wsmr reached 100-mi. (161-km.) altitude in Dudley Observatory (Albany, N.Y.) micrometeorite particle collection experiment at a time of 33-year maximum for Leonid meteor shower. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily; since radar signals were lost after 265 sec., intensive search was necessary for payload recovery. Chief objective was not accomplished because of range scheduling, and launch was used for control shot, (nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa successfully launched two companion sounding rockets five minutes apart from nasa Wallops Station for simultaneous measurements of properties of the neutral atmosphere, ionosphere, and solar radiation intensities at 120- to 380-mi. altitudes. Aerobee 150A sounding rocket with 180-lb. AFCRL-instrumented payload to measure solar ultraviolet radiation and electron temperatures as function of altitude reached 142-mi. (229-km.) altitude. While Aerobee 150A was still in flight, four-stage solid-propellant Javelin boosted instrumented payload to 380-mi. (611-km.) altitude to obtain simultaneous measurements of neutral gas densities, temperatures, and composition; ion densities and composition, and electron temperatures and densities. Data from both flights were telemetered to the ground and would be correlated to study effects of solar radiation on ionosphere and upper atmosphere. (Wallops Release 66-12; nasa Rpt. srl)
Manufacturers of rocket components, faced with possible work shortage because of nasa’s delay in formulating plans for post-Apollo missions, were making "frank pitches to the U.S. Space Agency—and presumably to the Defense Department-—for more business,” wrote Alvin B. Webb in the Washington Post. Webb noted that "Chrysler is expected to begin building the last of its Saturn 1-B boosters by the end of this year. The same applies to Douglas production of S4B upper stages for the Saturn 5. "Boeing, under the present schedule, probably will begin to run out of work on the Saturn first stage in late 1967.” (Webb, Wash. Post, 5/16/66, D9)
Lockheed Missiles and Space Co.’s first high-reliability Agena was launched from Vandenberg afb as upper stage on Atlas booster, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. High-reliability Agena had been under development for usaf Space Systems Div. for over three years in conjunction with Midas infrared early warning system under Program 461. (Av. Wk., 6/20/66, 31)
usaf launched three satellites with a single Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr—one unidentified satellite, ers xvi satellite to test metal-to-metal adhesion of space propulsion materials, and USA’s SECOR vi geodetic satellite. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 152)
usaf space launch crews were being familiarized with new low-cost Burner II upper-stage booster developed by Boeing to inject payloads into orbit and then orient the payload accurately. Small, guided, solid-fuel stage, scheduled for operation in late 1966, would "economically bridge the payload gap between the dod-nasa Scout launch vehicle and the Delta and Agena upper stages.” (Boeing Release)
Gemini IX mission was scrubbed when Atlas booster failed to place Gemini Agena Target Vehicle (Gatv) in planned 185-mi. (298-km.) circular orbit. Launch of Gemini 9 with Command Pilot Thomas Stafford and Pilot Eugene Cernan was to have followed 99 min. after Atlas-Agena launch; Gemini spacecraft was to rendezvous and dock with Gatv to evaluate extravehicular life support and maneuvering equipment and procedures. Simultaneous countdown of the Gemini Launch Vehicle/Spacecraft and the Atlas-Agena had progressed smoothly and the Atlas launch was normal until 121 sec. after liftoff. Then, said the Flight Safety Review Board: "The Atlas No. 2 booster engine swiveled to an extreme hardover position about 10 sec. before booster engine cutoff. The other booster engine and the sustainer engine, acting under auto pilot control, continued to work to counter the asymmetrical thrust. "After booster separation, the vehicle continued the flight under sustained thrust but at a down angle. It had also rolled to a position where ground guidance could not lock on or reacquire. Signals to shut down the sustainer engine and inhibit ignition of the Agena engine were sent <nd acted upon by the vehicle. Agena separated on schedule and both vehicles plunged into the sea.” Gemini IX-A mission was scheduled for May 31—and later rescheduled for June 1—using Augmented Target Docking Adapter (Atda) as target vehicle, (nasa Releases 66-97, 66-124; msc Roundup, 5/27/66, 1; Wash. Eve. Star, 5/17/66, Al, A6; Lewis, Wash. Post, 5/18/66, Al, A6; NYT, 5/18/66, 1, 26)
Series of power tests for breadboard version of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) was completed by NASA and AEC at Nuclear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Final 16-min. test studied duration capability at approximately design power and temperature—1,130 mw and 3,715°F. Engine system had been started 10 times during series [see Feb. 3, 11, March 3, and 16] and had operated for 110 min., including 29 min. at nominal full power. (Atomic Energy Programs, 1966, 186)
Test-firings of XE nuclear rocket engine—last major step before developing hardware for flight-rated nuclear engine—would begin in latter half of 1968, Milton Klein, Deputy Manager, nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, told Atomic Industrial Forum in Pittsburgh. Klein also disclosed that his office had begun preliminary design of new facilities with two test positions, each capable of testing a 200,000-lb.-thrust engine or an entire propulsion module under simulated altitude conditions. (Text)
Sociological repercussions of the space age might be most important to historians, suggested Robert Toth in the Washington Post: "In just nine years since the first man-made moon went aloft, the fact that man can escape his Earth has become so accepted Americans are almost blase about new manned flights. "It is too early for anyone to guess how such developments may affect the deeper thoughts of self and one’s place in the world and in the universe. But it is not too much to say that, even before man reaches the moon, he has begun to get a new perspective of himself and his place in the universe from the space adventure.” (Toth, Wash. Post, 11/10/ 66, P6) A total of 211 medium- and high-resolution photos of 13 potential Apollo landing sites were taken during mission’s photo acquisition phase. Readout would be completed Dec. 13. Among photos transmitted, described as "consistently high in quality,” was a picture of the crater Copernicus taken from an angle inaccessible to earth cameras. Dr. Martin J. Swetnick, NASA Hq., describing the closeup as "one of the great pictures of the century,” said: "It provides new information, which certainly will lead to better understanding of the processes and structures on the moon.” (nasa Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 11/16/66, A18; Sullivan, NYT, 12/1/66, 1, 36) Docking of spacecraft with gatv was in 2.3 revolutions—4:14 get. After plans to use gatv propulsion system to place gemini xii into higher orbit had to be abandoned because of gatv malfunction, gemini xii rendezvoused with Nov. 12 total solar eclipse over South America and made motion and still pictures of eclipse through spacecraft windows. Aldrin then began first of two standup Evas: hatch opening was at 19:29:01 get with closure 2 hrs. 29 min. later. Nov. 13’s activities revolved around Aldrin’s umbilical Eva: hatch opening was at 42:46 get with closing 2 hrs. 8 min. later. While on 30-ft. umbilical, Aldrin performed measured work tasks at Agena docking adapter and at work station in spacecraft adapter section. He also attached 100-ft. tether stowed in Agena adapter to Gemini docking bar in preparation for tethered operations, gemini xii backed out of Agena docking collar about 47:37 get and gravity gradient appeared to be established by one revolution later. Tether exercise lasted 4 hrs. 17 min. After failing twice to sight sodium vapor clouds released in upper atmosphere by French sounding rocket launched from Hammaguir Range and performing experiments with a space sextant, crew began experiencing problems with maneuvering thrusters on spacecraft. In second standup Eva, Aldrin jettisoned unused equipment and conducted additional experiments and photography. Hatch-open time was 66:04 get for 51-min. duration. Total Eva time for gemini xii mission was 5 hrs. 28 min. Retrofire took place Nov. 15 at 94:00:01 get; reentry in 59th revolution after 94 hrs. 34 min. in space was normal. Splashdown in the Atlantic was at 94:34:31 get. gemini xii landed about three miles from recovery ship U.S.S. Wasp and about four miles from aiming point. Astronauts were picked up hy helicopter within 20 min. Naucmher 10-30: Two historic lunar photographs returned by NASA's lunar ohbiter if. one, the first close-up photograph of the crater Copernicus, taken Nov. 23, is an oblique view from 28-mi. altitude; the other, the first detailed view of lunar domes, taken Nov, 25, confirms the moon's long history of volcanic activity. The domes range from 2 to 10 mi. in diameter and from 1,000 to 1,500 ft. high; they are best seen to the south and west of the crater Marius (upper right). White House announced promotion of Aldrin from usaf major to lieutenant colonel. Lovell had been promoted to usn captain after cemini vn mission. A Presidential statement read by Press Secretary Bill Moyers said the flight was "the culmination of a great team effort, stretching back to 1961, and directly involving more than 25,000 people in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Department of Defense, and other Government agencies; in the universities and other research centers; and in American industry.” (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-272; Msc Roundup, 11/25/66, 1, 2; Wilford, NYT, 11/12/66, 1, 14; 11/13/66, 1, 34; 11/14/66, 1, 2; 11/15/66, 1, 17; 11/16/66,1,30; O’Toole, {Fash. Post, 11/12/66, Al, A4; 11/13/66, Al, A4; 11/14/66, Al; 11/15/66, Al, A10; Pres. Doc., 11/21/66, 1701-2) November 12: Total solar eclipse which moved across South America at 2,000	mph for 2 hrs. 42 min. received extraordinary scientific scrutiny: 800 scientists from 12 nations utilized $90 million of equipment, nasa’s activities were conducted in cooperation with Argentine and Brazilian scientists as part of an international program. Eclipse formed 55-mi. strip of total blackout beginning in Pacific Ocean west of Peru, crossing southern Peru, Bolivia, northern Argentina, southern tip of Brazil, and extending into South Atlantic. NASA-Ames Convair 990A jet aircraft "Galileo,” a flying research laboratory carrying 26 scientists, successfully rendezvoused with four other instrument-equipped aircraft and raced the eclipse at 575 mph as it moved out over the South Atlantic. Other NASA activities included: five NASA Nike-Apache sounding rockets launched within two hours from Cassino, Brazil, in Univ. of Illinois-GCA Corp. experiment to measure D and E region electron densities and temperatures, absorption profiles 1216 A and 1450 A, and collision frequencies. First rocket ejected trimethyl-aluminum (tma) cloud for comparison of electron density profile with wind profile; however, no photographs of vapor cloud were obtained. Third rocket carried Brazilian experiment to study extreme ultraviolet. All rockets and instrumentation, except for mass spectrometer on third flight, performed satisfactorily. Specially constructed launch and tracking site was manned and operated by personnel of Wallops Station and the Brazilian Space Commission. Photographs were taken by nimbus ii meteorological satellite and by Astronauts James Lovell, Jr., and Edwin Aldrin, Jr., orbiting in Gemini xii spacecraft. AFCRL launched three Nike-Hydac sounding rockets from a site near Rio Grande, Brazil. Instrumented payloads, which reached 71-mi. (115-km.) altitudes, measured positive-ion mass composition, solar radiation, electron density and temperature, and positive-ion density. Data were telemetered to ground receivers. Scientists from Argentina, Brazil, Peru, Uruguay, Japan, the Netherlands, U.K., New Zealand, and France participated in observations which would increase knowledge of the solar forces and their effects on earth’s atmosphere and provide data for use in space travel, radio communications, and weather prediction, (nasa Release 66-285; Wallops Release 66-55; De Onis, NYT, 11/13/66, 35; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/13/66, A16; AP, Wash. Post, 11/12/66, A16; oar Res. Rev., 1/67, 8; nasa Rpt. srl)
The late Dr. Robert Hutchings Goddard launched the first liquid-fueled rocket from Auburn, Mass., 40 yrs. ago. Annually on the anniversary of the first flight, Goddard is honored by the National Space Club at a memorial banquet in Washington, D.C. In 1962, Vice President Johnson predicted that within 25 yrs. there would be a permanent base on the moon. Vice President Hubert Humphrey, delivering the 1966 address, emphasized that the space budget must be tightly planned: "I feel the necessity for cost consciousness. This is the need, to put it another way, of getting the most space for the tax dollar. These are times when we must exert high discipline in public expenditure and our space program cannot be exempt from that discipline.” Humphrey said he could foresee "dramatic achievements ahead” in space exploration, notably: (1) exploration of the lurain and possible establishment of one or more permanent bases there; (2) development of "a whole family of earth-orbiting stations, supplied by regular ferry services”; (3) development of "recoverable and reusable launch vehicles” and maneuverable spacecraft; (4) building of spaceports around the country; (5) improvement of propulsion methods so that planetary trips could be made in a week or less; (6) "launching of unmanned probes to every part of the solar system—and perhaps manned planetary expeditions as well.” (Text; CR, 5/4/66) National Space Club Press Award "in recognition of his exceptional photographic documentation of the manned space flight program” went to nasa photographer William P. Taub; Astronautics Engineer Award was given to Gemini program manager Charles W. Mathews "for his contribution to the nation’s manned space flight program as a key engineering pioneer to investigate the feasibility of manned space flight, culminating in Project Mercury... and in the successful Gemini program, as well as in the establishment and refinement of the Apollo configuration”; Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award for "making a major advance in the state of the art of space systems” was presented jointly to msc, usaf Space Systems Div., McDonnell Aircraft Corp., Martin Co., Aerojet-General Corp., General Electric Co., IBM Corp., and Westinghouse Electric Corp.; Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award was made to Airman 2/C Frank H. Winter for "Danish Rocketry in the 19th Century”; Robert H. Goddard Scholarship ($1,500 to university of recipient’s choice) "in recognition of the need for higher scientific education of American youth of exceptional merit” was awarded Benjamin N. Early, a senior at Howard Univ., Washington, D.C. (Text; Program)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 50-lb. instrumented payload to 115-mi. (185-km.) altitude. Conducted by nasa for Univ. of Illinois and GCA Corp., experiment was designed to measure electron density in ionospheric D region. (Wallops Release 66-36)
Dr. Hugh Odishaw was appointed executive secretary of the nrc Div. of Physical Sciences. Space Science Board, Geophysics Research Board, and Committee on Polar Research—groups with which Dr. Odishaw had heen closely associated—would be shifted into NRC as joint responsibility of Div. of Earth Sciences and Div. of Physical Sciences. They previously had been among 12 NAS groups that functioned outside the formal nrc divisional structure, (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 11/66, 1) November 1: Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by afcrl from wsmr reached 150 mi. (241 km.) in experiment to measure extreme ultraviolet solar radiation, (oar Res. Rev., 1/67, 8)
usaf successfully launched the OV1-IV and OV1-V scientific satellites into circular orbits from Vandenberg afb with Atlas-Agena D booster. OV1-IV satellite bore photosynthetic organisms to determine effects of zero-g and four types of thermal control coating samples to test durability and resistance to heat and radiation. Each of two thermally insulated sample holders on satellite carried two control surfaces and four circular samples, slightly less than an inch in diameter. Protected during launch, coatings would be exposed to space environment and thermistor measurements of erosion, corrosion, and changes in color telemetered during anticipated year in orbit. OV1-V measured optical radiation of earth, background, and space, (afsc, RTD Release 37.66; M&R, 4/4/66, 8; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 149)
U.S.S.R.’s luna xi that entered orbit around the moon Aug. 27 was described as containing "an entire orchestra of rocket engines.” Vladimir Orlov, writing in Pravda, said the spacecraft contained in addition to its main power system a braking engine installation and "four directing engines with comparatively small thrust.” (AP, NYT, 9/1/66, 2) .	.	...
nasa’s first manned Apollo flight might be made in 1966 instead of 1967, as originally scheduled, predicted Dr. Joseph F. Shea, manager of NASA Apollo Spacecraft Office at msc, in a speech at naa’s plant in Downey, Calif., to press group touring manufacturing and test sites for Apollo spacecraft and Saturn boosters. "The Apollo program is about on schedule in time, cost and performance. We have found the performance of the hardware some better than we had expected, on the basis of tests. All testing for the first manned flight probably will be completed by the end of June. "I hope we can make the first manned flight this year, although it is not scheduled until next year. I think that the first lunar excursion module will be sent up next year. "I am sure personally that our first lunar landing will be done comfortably before the end of the decade.” C. R. Able, group vice president of Douglas Aircraft Co.’s Missile and Space Systems Div., outlined to the group plan for converting empty hydrogen tank from Saturn V’s 3rd stage into manned space capsule. For conversion, series of metal balloons containing liquid oxygen would be added to original orbited payload, to serve later for breathing and for combination with hydrogen to operate fuel cells for producing electricity. An Apollo or Gemini spacecraft would dock with empty 3rd stage, and astronauts would emerge to remove end cover plate in end of the tank, after purging it of any hydrogen remaining from launch. An airlock, carried aloft as part of original payload or launched later, would be attached to opening left by removal of cover plate and tank would be repressurized with oxygen from metal balloons to provide astronauts with "shirtsleeve environment.” Tank walls would have about 100 shallow threaded holes for mounting work benches, furniture, or other convenient items, presumably launched separately. Able emphasized that purpose of stage conversion—to offer astronauts relief from cramped quarters and extended weightlessness—did not duplicate function of USAf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol). Douglas Aircraft Co., McDonnell Aircraft Corp., and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. each had $50,000 NASA contracts to study use of booster cases. (Wallin, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 5/5/66; upi, Miami Her., 5/6/66)
U.S. Bureau of Standards chemists had developed an advanced rocket fuel which might be used in spaceflights to the moon and other planets. A mixture of liquid and solid hydrogen called "slush hydrogen,” the fuel involved a freeze-thaw process which could be used to produce large quantities for storage, (nana, Boston Sunday Globe, 1/9/66)
Boosted Areas 2 rocket was successfully launched for first time from wsmr. Equipped with new Marc 42A1 1st stage, rocket carried 16-lb. payload to 90-mi. (145-km.) altitude. (Tech. Wk., 8/1/66, 10)
Nike-Cajun meteorological sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried 19-grenade payload in gsfc experiment coordinated with launch from Point Barrow, Alaska, to study atmospheric parameters of wind, temperature, pressure, and density as summer progressed toward time of maximum noctilucent cloud sightings. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr with Thor-Agena D booster. {U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 149)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk launched from Churchill Research Range reached 151-mi. (243-km.) altitude in last of four NASA-Univ. of California, Berkeley, experiments [see Sept. 1, 6]. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, and measurements of flux, energy spectrum, pitch angle distribution, and time variations of mirroring and precipitating charged particles were obtained, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Javelin rocket launched from Wallops Station releases barium cloud visible over much of eastern United States. were feasible and that "development of a land-landing capability must be vigorously pursued.” NASA test pilot Milton 0. Thompson was awarded SETp’s 1966 Iven C.	Kincheloe Award, presented annually to the outstanding experimental test pilot of the year, "in recognition of outstanding professional accomplishment in the flight testing” of M2-F2 wingless lifting-body vehicle, (nasa Release 66-252; frc Release 18-66; Wash. Eve. Star, 9/24/66, A2)
Missiles and Rockets reported prediction of Japanese rocket engineer Dr. Hideo Itokawa that Japan might launch 60-lb. probes to Mars and Venus after orbiting its first satellite in 1968. Itokawa said the Mu series launch vehicle, under development by Univ. of Tokyo Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science, would produce enough thrust— 400,000	lbs.—to launch interplanetary probes. (M&R, 1/3/66, 7)
msfc awarded North American Aviation, Inc., a $141-million, costplusincentive-fee contract to provide 30 F-l rocket engines, beginning in November 1967, and varied support services. (NASA Release 66-297)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried grazing incidence telescopes and bandpass filters to estimated 107-mi. (172-km.) altitude in gsfc experiment to obtain solar x-ray photographs. Another GSFC-instrumented Aerobee 150 was launched from wsmr eight hours later to 121-mi. (195-km.) altitude to obtain solar spectral data from 2-60 A. Both rockets and their experiments performed satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt. srl)
"Space Maintenance and Extravehicular Activities” meeting sponsored by usaf Aero Propulsion Laboratory and Martin Co. was held in Orlando. Goodyear Aerospace Corp. engineer Charles Brownell, together with three usaf space engineers, told the meeting that construction in space would cost approximately $100,000 per hour, but added: "These costs will be reduced drastically in the next few years.” Brownell said that because space labor would be so expensive, efforts were being made to automate as much repair work as possible. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/1/66, A4) Man must learn how to rescue orbiting astronauts stranded in a disabled spacecraft because "it is a problem we all know will one day confront us,” Col. Emil G. Beaudry, vice commander of usaf Air Rescue Service, told the conference. He said one expert had concluded there was a 62 per cent probability of at least seven emergency situations in space involving 22 men in the next 20 yrs., and a 58 per cent probability of two or three emergencies within 10 yrs. Beaudry continued: "There is no reason today-—or certainly in the near future—why an operational rescue spacecraft could not be ready and standing by in the event of distress or tragedy during manned flights. "For example, a launch vehicle such as the Titan 3 with its great weight-lifting capability and mission versatility could easily carry a rescue crew, medical facilities, and technicians aloft to assist in any way required.. . .” (AP, New Haven Register, 3/7/66) NASA engineer David F. Thomas reported on his "jet shoes” to aid astronauts during extravehicular activity: "This device may be thought of as a pair of shoes with jets attached to the shoe soles in such a manner as to produce a thrust vector along the subject’s leg when the jets are activated.” Projecting from the front of each shoe would be hinged toe-plate which astronaut could depress or release at will to operate an electrical switch which controlled gas jets. Thomas said shoes, which would be slipped on over space boots, had been tested successfully on counterbalanced harness device at LaRC. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/2/66, A18) Douglas Aircraft Co. engineers Thorne L. Runyan and John M. Dick reported that intensity of sunlight and blackness of shadows would cause astronauts working in space to "confuse spheres with points of light, cones with wedges, and pipes with strange shapes that appear and disappear.” To counteract these distortions, they recommended a bracket of strong lights "looking over the shoulder” of a working astronaut to fill in shadows and lessen contrast with sunlight. (Wash. Eve. Star, 3/3/66, A5) Bell Aerosystems Co. test pilot Robert F. Courter reported that Bell had developed a rocket propellant "flying pogo stick” for transporting men and equipment on earth or over the surface of the moon. Pogo stick would be powered by hydrogen peroxide jets and its two rocket nozzles would be controlled directly by pilot’s hand, arm, and shoulder movements, (upi, Miami Her., 3/3/66) The space tool kit to be used by Astronaut David R. Scott during Gemini VIII mission was exhibited for the first time. Developed by Martin Co. and Black & Decker Tool Co. at a cost of $124,000, kit’s power tool used impact instead of torque as its motive principle because man in space, with neither friction nor gravity to give him a firm footing, would be sent spinning counterclockwise by the action of a handheld tool that rotated clockwise. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/3/66, Al) In a luncheon address, Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, nasc staff, warned that U.S.S.R. might soon recapture the lead in manned spaceflight: "They don’t lead now in manned spaceflight. They may again in the near future, but they don’t now.” Konecci said space experts expected Russia to launch a "major manned program in the near future,” possibly a manned laboratory, (upi, Miami Her., 3/3/66)
A space rescue service, "preferably under cooperative auspices of the United States and the Soviet Union,” was urged in a New York Times editorial: "Its function would be to send space craft, on very short notice, to aid a space vessel marooned in orbit and incapable of returning to earth under its own power. In some cases the need might be for additional rocket fuel or replacement parts; in others the primary function might be to save lives by taking aboard the crew of a disabled capsule. . . with relatively little development, tow-trucks of the cosmos may be a regular part of the safety arrangements for each new step on the road to the moon.” (NYT, 3/21/66, 30M)
USAF Agena D rocket launched from Vandenberg afb with Atlas booster Feb. 15 exploded into at least 40 pieces which fell from orbit during seven-day period, UPI reported. There was no indication that the payload itself was damaged: "It is no longer in orbit, but it may have been a reconnaissance satellite which was brought down and recovered,” UPI explained. Explosive gas in the otherwise empty Agena apparently was detonated accidentally after booster had fired, (upi, Chic. Trib., 3/11/66)
usaf launched OV3-III satellite with Scout booster from wtr to measure charged particle hazards to space payloads. Orbital parameters: apogee, 2,781 mi. (4,475 km.); perigee, 223 mi. (358 km.); period, 136.9 min.; inclination, 81°. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 154)
NASA Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried scientific payload to estimated 83-mi. (134-km.) altitude in gsfc experiment designed to measure spectral irradiance of the stars Sirius and Rigel. Control system, star tracker, and ultraviolet stellar spectrometer performed satisfactorily. Brief data periods, caused by failure of fine jet pressure regulator on control system gas supply resulting in high thrust, had possibly aided establishment of flux values at discrete wavelength intervals. (Wallops Release 66-4; NASA Rpt. srl)
nas Space Science Board issued the first in series of three reports entitled Space Research: Directions for the Future. Report, prepared at NASA’s request, outlined research objectives for planetary and lunar exploration in 1970-1985. Compiled by working group led by Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald of the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics at ucla, Part I repeated nas’ 1964 recommendation that top priority in post-Apollo program be assigned to unmanned exploration of Mars. Report suggested secondary importance be divided equally between detailed investigation of lurain and unmanned exploration of Venus, and completed priority list with other major planets, comets and asteroids, Mercury, Pluto, and interplanetary dust. Major recommendations were: launching an orbiting planetary observatory, delivering a drop sonde to resolve question of high Venusian surface temperature, developing fine-pointing control, accurate to 10 sec. of arc, for rocket guidance, and considering enlargement of NASA deep-space communication capabilities beyond present plans. To support outlined scientific program, report recommended: (1) increasing manpower and facilities available to lunar and planetary science programs; (2) development by NASA of substantial program for observation of planets through ground-based telescopes; (3) early opportunities for experienced observational scientists to explore the lurain; (4) joint study by NASA ossa and omsf of early use of Saturn V for planetary exploration, with special emphasis on a Martian capsule landing in the early 1970’s; (5) increased attention by NASA to development of research and educational capabilities in theoretical sciences related to study of the solar system. Regarding funding of space research, the report said:	. . since we believe that the exploration of the solar system bears so directly on the major central scientific questions of our time, we anticipate that unmanned experiments will probably provide the most significant contribution to the program of planetary exploration ... we recommend that the percentage of support of lunar and planetary exploration be maintained over the 1965-1985 time period and be devoted predominantly to scientific objectives and that programs whose objectives are other than scientific be started only as additional resources become available.” It said there should be a gradual shift in emphasis from the moon to the planets, progressing toward nearly equivalent expenditures for lunar and planetary exploration in the 19701985 period. (Text; nas-nrc Release)
Changes in Apollo nomenclature were announced by Julian Scheer, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, in memorandum from Project Designation Committee: (1) Lunar Excursion Module would be known as "Lunar Module”; (2) Saturn IB booster would be "Uprated Saturn I”; and (3) Saturn V stages (S-II, S-IC, and S-IVB) would be "first, second, and third stages.” Technical designations for Saturn V stages, Scheer said, were confusing to the public and would be dropped gradually, except in NASA’s internal and technical documentation. (Text)
150-mi. (242-km.) altitude in first of a series of four NASA-Univ. of California, Berkeley, experiments to obtain proton and electron measurements over energy range of 1-300 kev. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily [see Sept. 6, 16]. (nasa Rpt. skl)
usaf successfully launched OV1-IX and OV1-X research satellites pickaback from Vandenberg afb with Atlas D booster. Each 220-lb. spacecraft carried 12 radiation-measuring experiments. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/12/66, Al; Tech. Wk., 12/19/66, 13)
Breadboard of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) was tested by NASA and aec at Nuclear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Initial fixed-drum start tested control drum response; maximum power reached was 230 mw, compared with reactor’s 1,100-mw design power. Test duration was nine minutes, and maximum exhaust temperature was 1,540°F. After a second low-pressure start was aborted, system was given normal start; in 22-min. test it reached 350-mw maximum power and 2,130°F maximum temperature. Nerva engine had been successfully started twice on Feb. 3. (Atomic Energy Programs, 1966, 186)
Two series of coordinated nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rockets were launched from NASA Wallops Station, Churchill Research Range, Point Barrow, Alaska, and Natal, Brazil, in gsfc experiment to gather data—by means of exploding grenade technique—on atmospheric wind, temperature, pressure, and density as summer maximum of noctilucent cloud sightings approached. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, except one rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station did not achieve predicted altitude, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Four-stage Javelin sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station ejected multicolored barium clouds over eastern U.S. at 310-mi. (499-km.) and 570-mi. (917-km.) altitudes. Cooperative NASA-German Ministry of Scientific Research (bmwf) experiment measured electric fields and wind motion in upper atmosphere by photographing and tracking ionized clouds; secondary objective was observation of interaction between cloud and solar wind. Launch was followed by reported sightings of "brilliant” Ufo’s. (nasa Release 66-245; Wallops Releases 66-46, 66-48; AP, Wash. Post, 9/25/66, A23; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/25/66, A3; nasa Rpt. srl)
First Europa 1 booster for European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) was successfully launched from Woomera Range although malfunction in an impact indicator at a downrange radar station led to early reentry. Booster, composed of British Blue Streak first stage and dummy French and German second and third stages, was programed for 143-sec. flight. Range safety officer cut flight short by eight seconds when radar indicated Europa 1 was heading off course to the left. There was no malfunction in the rocket itself. Reduction of data later showed booster had been on a correct course at 30.3-mi. (48.8-km.) altitude. Hawker Siddeley Dynamics officials estimated test was 90% successful, and that "objectives were achieved.” Europa 1 was sponsored by U.K., France, Australia, Italy, West Germany, the Netherlands, and Belgium, (upi, Wash. Post, 5/24/66, A12; NYT, 5/25/66, 22; Av. Wk., 5/30/66, 32)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried jpl 100-kw. radar to 102-mi. (164-km.) altitude in experiment designed to gather data on behavior of radar echoes as a function of altitude for use in developing planetary terrain sounding technique. GSFC-managed flight marked first successful functioning of high-powered radar in space. Similar radar had been flown successfully on NASA Convair 990 April 27. (jpl Release, 6/26/66; jpl, Lab-Oratory, 6/66, 10)
Paramount objective of NASA’s Apollo program was not to land man on the moon before U.S.S.R. but to make "U.S. first in space by the end of this decade, and to make this pre-eminence unmistakably clear to all the world,” NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told ieee Aerospace Systems Conference in Seattle, Wash. Apollo program was a means of acquiring the ability to operate in space on a variety of missions, Dr. Seamans explained: ". . . we are building much more than a rocket and a spaceship. We are developing, in government, in industry, in our universities, one of the most remarkable teams that has ever been assembled. There are more than 400,000 men and women, 20,000	industrial companies, and more than 150 universities actively engaged in the nasa program. More than 90 percent of NASA’s five-billion-dollar-a-year budget goes to contractors.” He warned against failing to look beyond the near-term goal of manned lunar exploration and said: "Programs of the future must be determined within the total context of national need and the availability of resources. The Nation’s interest in space projects, and the level of support accorded them must in the long run be related to tangible benefits that can be derived from the emerging technical and operational capabilities.” (Text)
Memorandum of understanding for cooperative meteorological sounding rocket experiments was signed by the Spanish Comision Nacional de Investigacion del Espacio (conie) and nasa. Purpose of project would be to obtain synoptic information on wind, temperature, and pressure at altitudes between 18 and 36 mi. Sixteen Boosted-Dart and Areas sounding rockets carrying chaff (tuned dipoles) or instrumented payloads would be launched from a range in Spain to be operated by the Instituto Nacional de Tecnica Aeroespacial (inta). conie would procure an Areas launcher, sounding rockets, payloads, and other equipment. NASA would provide, on a loan basis, an Mps-19 radar, van, Boosted-Dart launcher and additional equipment. NASA also would train Spanish personnel in equipment operations and maintenance. Scientific results of project would be made available to world scientific community, (nasa Release 66-20)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station reached 187-mi. (301-km.) altitude in GSFC-Univ, of Michigan experiment coordinated with Aug. 26 and 27 flights. Simultaneous measurement of N2 and electron density and temperature, measurements of atmospheric ion and neutral composition, and comparative data from two mass spectrometers and other experiments were obtained; rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Coordinated NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket series was launched from NASA Wallops Station, Churchill Research Range, Point Barrow, Alaska, and Natal, Brazil, in GSFC experiment to study atmospheric parameters of wind, temperature, pressure, and density as
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range reached 130-mi. (209-km.) altitude in second of three gsfc experiments to measure number and energy distribution of auroral-producing electrons in energy range of 1-300 kev. Satisfactory data were recovered despite malfunction of one detector, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Reported that usaf Titan II launch vehicle, which launched 12 out of 12 missions in the Gemini series, was expected to win a usaf incentive fee of over $2 million for Martin Co,, the prime contractor for two-stage booster. (Av. Wk, 11/21/66, 28)
NASA Javelin sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station reached 631-mi. (1,015-km.) altitude in Univ. of Pittsburgh-Syracuse Univ. experiment to observe ionization levels of exospheric helium. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory, with 18-min. telemetry signal. Unanticipated high-energy electron particles were measured, and data were under study to determine their source, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallqps Station ejected mixture of barium and copper oxide at about 125-mi. (201-km.) altitude during ascent and at 160-mi. (258-km.) altitude during both ascent and descent. Three distinct clouds, visible for hundreds of miles, were photographed and tracked in second NASA-German Ministry of Scientific Research cooperative launch to measure electric fields and wind motions in upper atmosphere [see Sept. 24]. (nasa Release 66-248; Wallops Releases 66-46, 66-49; nasa Rpt. srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range was third and last flight [see Feb. 9 and 16] in series of GSFC experiments to measure number and distribution of electrons in energy range of 1-300 kev, which produce visual aurora. Although radar lost track early in flight and peak altitude was not available, rocket performance was near predicted and series was considered completely successful, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
nasa announced Atlas-Centaur booster would replace Atlas-Agena for launching Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (Oao) satellites and Applications Technology Satellites (Ats) D and E. Launches were scheduled to begin in 1968. Centaur stage—first to use liquid hydrogen as a fuel—was capable of boosting about 40 per cent greater payload than the Agena into near-earth orbit and about three times the payload on lunar trajectory, (nasa Release 66-328)
ComSatCorp’s third annual report revealed that early eird i, operating since June 28, 1965, as the first commercial communications satellite, had earned $2,138,577 as of Dec. 31,1965. Report omitted any corporate earnings statement, explaining that "with Comsat’s singular structure— and its newness—we are not yet able to present the corporate financial statements in a conventional mode.” With fcc approval, "the Corporation has adopted the accounting practice of deferring all revenues and expenditures until the commencement of full operations.” Financial statement showed, however, that $9,677,000 had been spent for "the construction of the Early Bird satellites, the cost of the launch in April [6,] 1965 and expenditures for satellite system equipment.” By the end of 1965, 75 of early bird i’s 240 two-way voice channels had been leased—64 by at&t, nine by Candian Overseas Telecommunication Corp., and one each by itt and rca. Corporation also earned $8,083,745 in income from temporary investments, compared with $4,312,714 in 1964. Report noted that membership of International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (Intelsat) had grown from 20 to 48 countries during 1965, and cited plans to launch two improved satellites in late summer of 1966 "to provide communications support” for nasa’s Apollo program. (Text) During week of April 1: Pulsed laser beam communications system which could penetrate cloud of plasma or charged gases surrounding spacecraft during reentry and avoid communications blackout was patented by General Electric Co. engineers Dr. Kiyo Timiyasu and James R. Whitten. Principal use of invention would he in line-of-sight communications between earth stations and spacecraft, but two land stations not in line of sight also could exchange information by using cloud reflections. (Jones, NYT, 4/2/66, 32)
$500-million XB-70 No. 2 experimental bomber and its F-104 chase plane collided and burned near Barstow, Calif., destroying both aircraft and killing F-104 pilot Joseph A. Walker and XB-70 co-pilot Maj. Carl S. Cross (usaf). Walker, NASA test pilot, held world’s records for his 4,104-mph and 354,200-ft.-altitude flights in X-15 rocket research aircraft. XB-70 pilot A1 White ejected in seat capsule and parachuted to ground, suffering arm.and back injuries. On basis of preliminary usaf reports that F-104 apparently hit two vertical stabilizers on XB-70 at 25,000-ft. altitude during "routine” flight, President Johnson praised pilots who gave "their lives to advancing science and technology” and added "immeasurably to the progress this nation is making in the effort” to advance supersonic flight, usaf later revealed that aircraft were flying in formation as close as 10 ft. with T-38, F-4B, and F-5 aircraft "to allow photographic coverage of aircraft powered by General Electric engines” for publicity purposes. Disclosure prompted AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard Schriever to establish two usaf accident boards and Congress to designate House Appropriations Committee to investigate the disaster. (Edwards afb Release; Pres. Doc., 6/13/66, 748; Wash. Post, 6/14/66, A3)
Ground-test version of S-II, North American Aviation, Inc.-huilt 2nd stage of NASA’s Saturn V booster, was static-fired at Santa Susana Field Laboratory for 354 sec. in successful test of its engine-gimballing and liquid-oxygen-cutoff systems. S-II, which developed 1-million-lbs. thrust from five Rocketdyne J-2 engines, had been previously ground-tested for 18 sec. on Dec. 29, 1965. Firing was monitored by msfc engineers. (msfc Release 66-17)
West Germany’s first satellite would be launched in 1968 with U.S. Scout booster to study inner radiation belts and aurora borealis, Science Ministry in Bonn announced. Orbit would have 2,898-km. (1,800-mi.) apogee and 258-km. (160-mi.) perigee. Nine West German firms were participating in joint NASA-West Germany Science Ministry project. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 5/13/66, A23; Reuters, NYT, 5/13/66, 12)
W. Cameron Roberts, Jr., director of Atlantic Research Corp.’s Production Div., died of a kidney ailment. Roberts, an expert on solid-propellant and meteorological rocketry, had conducted extensive research for U.S. upper-air and space programs, and was co-inventor of Areas—one of world’s most widely used meteorological rocket systems. (Wash. Post, 3/27/66, B10)
Surveyor soft-landing retrorocket system was successfully tested by Hughes Aircraft Co. and JPL at Holloman afb. After test vehicle was released from balloon at 1,450-ft. altitude, three throttlable liquid engines operated by terminal descent guidance system’s radar and autopilot control slowed vehicle to simulated landing 500 ft. above ground, partially demonstrating performance required to softland on the moon. Three engines were then shut down and parachute system deployed to lower vehicle to ground. In actual mission, Surveyor would cut off its engines 13 ft. above moon’s surface and free-fall remainder of distance to avoid unsettling lunar dust with rocket engines’ exhaust. Test was second successful operation of the three liquid-fueled engines under radar control, (nasa Release 66-24; Marshall Star, 2/9/66, 9)
NASA successfully launched explorer xxxiii (Imp-D) Anchored Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (Aimp) from etr using Thrust-Augmented Delta booster with FW-4S 3rd stage to study interplanetary radiation and magnetic fields. Because tracking data indicated at 3:30 GET spacecraft was in excess-energy orbit, alternate mission plan was put into effect at 4:30 get: retrorocket was fired, injecting explorer xxxiii into elliptical earth orbit with 278,990-mi. (449,174-km.) apogee; 18,975-mi. (30,550-km.) perigee; 13.5-day period; 28.9° inclination. Planned parameters: 4,000-mi. (6,440-km.) apolune; 800-mi. (1,288km.) perilune; 10-hr. period; 175° inclination. NASA later revealed booster’s 2nd stage had produced 70-80 fps over-velocity which would have caused spacecraft to reach moon’s vicinity too early to achieve lunar capture. Despite explorer xxxiii’s failure to achieve lunar orbit, all active experiments were operative and high scientific yield was expected. Fourth of seven Interplanetary Explorers planned by NASA and first to attempt lunar orbit, 206-lb. explorer xxxiii carried six scientific experiments and one engineering experiment—a solar cell damage study. Primary mission objectives were to study at lunar distances the earth’s magnetic tail and magnetosphere in interplanetary space twice a month by means of lunar anchored spacecraft; and to measure interplanetary magnetic fields, solar plasma, and energetic particles in cislunar space. Program was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Space Science and Applications (ossa), (nasa Proj. Off.; NASA Release 66-162; upi, NYT, 7/2/66, 5; Strothman, Wash. Post, 7/2/66, A2)
nasa’s pioneer vii (Pioneer B), second in new Pioneer series, was successfully launched from etr’s Launch Complex 17A by Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta booster into orbit around the sun where it would chart magnetic fields emanating from the sun; measure the quantity, energy levels, and direction of the solar wind; and differentiate between solar and galactic cosmic rays. The 140-lb,, drum-shaped satellite had perihelion of 1.01 astronomical units (au), or 93.93 million mi. (151 million km.); aphelion of 1.125 au, or 104.625 million mi. (168.45 million km.); period of 402.95 days; inclination of 0.0946°. All systems were reported turned on and operating satisfactorily. Two days following launch, pioneer vii successfully completed maneuver which locked its high gain antenna on earth and stabilized its orbital path. First of five flights in current Pioneer program—managed by arc— was pioneer vi, launched Dec. 16, 1965. Overall program objective was to provide continuing measurements over the solar cycle at widely separated points in interplanetary space. (NASA Release 66-211; NASA Proj. Off.; AP, Wash. Post, 8/18/66, LI; Wilford, NYT, 8/18/66, 15; upi, Wash. Post, 8/20/66, A9)
Japan’s first attempt to orbit satellite failed when Lambda 4S-1 rocket went off course after ignition of 4th stage. The 8.48-ton, 55-ft. booster was launched from Uchinoura Range, Kyushu Island, and carried 57.2-lb. instrument package designed to radio back scientific information on the ionosphere. Scientists from the Univ. of Tokyo had scheduled second launch attempt—using 39-ton Mu rocket—for December. (NYT, 9/27/66, 16; Tech. Wk., 10/3/66, 13)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 147)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 51-lb. payload to 115-mi. (185-km.) altitude and impact 88 mi. downrange in the Atlantic. Payload instrumentation failed to function properly, however, and desired results were not obtained. Flight was last in a series of seven similar experiments conducted by nasa for Univ. of Illinois to measure seasonal charges and other effects in the D- and E-regions of the ionosphere. Previous six launches had ^been conducted successfully from Wallops Station in April, July, and November 1964; and June, September, and December 1965. (Wallops Release 66-1; nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA successfully conducted second rocket-launched test [see Nov. 5] of a Mars entry parachute as part of an advanced technology effort to investigate possible parachute landing systems for Voyager program. Two-stage Honest John-Nike rocket launched from wsmr ejected parachute at 120,000-ft. altitude. Parachute descended to earth 40 min. later carrying 200-lb. payload with instrumentation for measuring shock of parachute opening and its oscillation characteristics. Experiment series was managed by LaRC. (nasa Release 66-298)
State Dept, disclosed that "a very small amount” of radioactivity had leaked into the atmosphere from aec’s Sept. 12 underground nuclear test, but the incident did not violate limited nuclear test ban treaty because no radioactive debris had circulated outside U.S. Disclosure was in response to a Soviet inquiry, (upi, Wash. Post, 11/10/66, A2) November 10: NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range reached 120-mi. (193-km.) altitude in flight to evaluate experiments for NASA-West German cooperative satellite program. Premature ejection of payload cylinder doors caused overheating and malfunction of an electron detector, but all other instruments performed satisfactorily. Rocket performance, though slightly in excess of predicted, was within normal tolerance range, (nasa Rpt. srl)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr with Thor-Agena D booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 150)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr with Scout booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 147)
NASA launched from Wallops Station an Argentine-designed and -produced single-stage solid-fuel Orion II sounding rocket with Iiayload for upper atmosphere research. Reaching altitude of 51 mi., pay-oad was captured by helicopter as it descended by parachute to 2,500 ft., marking Wallops’ first such mid-air recovery. Test was second successful Orion II flight in three-flight series which began Nov. 4; Nov. 7 launch failed. Six Argentine engineers and technicians from Aeronautical and Space Research Institute (iiae) assisted Wallops personnel with launch operations. Arrangements were made by NASA and Argentine Space Commission (cnie). (nasa Release 66-291; Wallops Release 66-53)
Fourth flight Saturn IB booster (S-IB-4) left NASA msfc for Michoud Assembly Facility aboard the NASA barge Palaemon for post-captive-firing checkout, (msfc Release 66-27)
Commenting on national space goals in the post-Apollo period, Henry Simmons said in Astronautics & Aeronautics: "NASA over the past year quietly shifted its emphasis from an aap exploiting already financed Apollo hardware for alternate missions to a much vaster aap involving outlays on the scale of the Apollo lunar effort itself to support an intensive follow-on effort extending perhaps to 1975. Some NASA Centers engaged in the Apollo program, and particularly the Marshall Space Flight Center, are already confronted with the prospect of unemployment among their most skilled and valuable design personnel. 'We are right now in the position where over the next six months the engineers who did the original design on the Saturn and probably a year from now those who did it on the Apollo will be out of work,’ NASA Administrator James Webb told the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during its hearings last August on post-Apollo goals. . . .” (A&A, 2/66, 5)	...
NASA Nike-Cajun meteorological sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried 19-grenade payload to 78-mi. (125-km.) altitude. gsfc experiment obtained temperature, wind, density, and pressure data during auroral condition at altitudes to 56 mi. (90 km.) by recording sound arrivals of explosions of all 19 grenades, (nasa Rpt. srl)
usaf launched USA’s Secor viii geodetic satellite and unidentified satellite with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. {U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 156)
Praising June 16 flight of Titan III-C booster which injected eight satellites into orbit, Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown told Pentagon news conference that program cost included $33 million for satellites, $45 million for ground stations, and $10 to $20 million for other system elements. Launch costs were excluded since they were covered by Titan III-C development funding. Satellites were resistant to jamming or interference, but "anyone who puts up an antenna” of the right kind could listen in. What they would hear "may or may not be comprehensible to them” since traffic would be coded. Asked if U.S.S.R, could use satellite system, Dr. Brown replied affirmatively. However, dod Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering Dr. Thomas F. Rogers stated: "We have arranged so that it would be very difficult for them to have assured use of it.” (Transcript)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr reached 96-mi. (154-km.) altitude in Johns Hopkins Univ. experiment designed to observe ultraviolet emissions from Venus. Scattered light produced by solar illumination of itt startracker optics prevented acquisition and lock-on of target Venus, hut good data were obtained on Lyman-alpha. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Eighth Uprated Saturn I booster successfully underwent short-duration—35-sec.—static firing at msfc. (msfc Release 66-288)
nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller said in a speech at the 51st annual meeting of the National Dairy Council in Washington, D.C.: "We in nasa do not feel that the planning of our space programs is the prerogative of nasa alone. . . . The participants should include men from all walks of life—national, political, and intellectual leaders, the business and agricultural communities, and all informed citizens—not just scientists and engineers nor those who are presently engaged in the space program.” Describing the launch vehicles and spacecraft in the Apollo program, Dr. Mueller said: "The uprated Saturn I launch vehicle [formerly Saturn IB] ... is capable of placing 40,000	pounds in orbit.... The Saturn V launch vehicle ... provides the power to place in orbit loads weighing 280,000 pounds. . . . The Apollo spacecraft itself consists of three major systems or modules. The Command Module . . . houses the astronauts during most of their journey. The Propulsion Module [formerly Service Module] has rocket engines and abundant fuel for mid-course maneuvering, for braking into lunar orbit, and for the thrust to return to earth. The Lunar Module [formerly Lunar Excursion Module] is for descent to and return from the lunar surface. . . . We have the ability to fly this equipment at an annual rate of six Saturn I launch vehicles, six Saturn V launch vehicles and eight Apollo spacecraft.” (Text)
U.S.S.R. began series of carrier rocket tests in two areas of the Pacific west and northwest of Midway Island. (AP, NYT, 7/5/(56, 28) April 25; Third molniya i satellite was orbited by U.S.S.R. to assist "development and further improvement of a satellite radio and TV communication system (sovcomsat),” Tass announced. Orbital data: apogee, 39,500 km. (24,545 mi.); perigee, 499 km. (310 mi.); period, 11 hrs. 50 min.; inclination, 64.5°. Equipment included broadcasting system "as well as instruments of a command-measuring set, an orientation system, orbital correction devices, and power supply” for "further development of onboard systems, satellite equipment, and onground tracking facilities.” (Tass, Pravda, 4/26/66, 6, uss-T Trans.)
usaf’s OV1-VIIIT satellite was launched with Atlas D booster from Vandenberg afb into near-circular retrograde orbit: apogee, 627 mi. (1,009 km.); perigee, 619 mi. (996 km.); period, 105 min.; inclination, 144°. Balloon-shaped satellite—made of soft aluminum wire mesh covered with a plastic "skin” which disintegrated after inflation—would act as a passive comsat to reflect signals transmitted to it between earth stations, determine whether wire would be rigid enough to maintain spherical shape, and test theory that "open-mesh” structure would reduce drag and solar pressure in space environment, (afsc Release 140.66)
France’s Dragon sounding rocket was successfully launched from Norwegian range on Andoeya Island by Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes). (Tech. Wk., 10/31/66, 13)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket with 300-lb. Princeton Univ. payload was launched from wsmr to 108-mi. (175-km.) altitude to measure ultraviolet radiation from the star Alpha Virginis, popularly known as Spica. Although rocket performed satisfactorily and payload was recovered, no stellar spectra were obtained because of arcs in the guidance voltage system which may have prevented acquisition of the star, (nasa Rpt. srl)
usaf awarded Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. $12,916,000 contract for Agena rocket launch services from April 1966 to September 1967. Work would be at Vandenberg afb. (dod Release 462-66)
First of uprated J-2 rocket engines designed to power upper stages of Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles had been delivered to msfc for static firing, naa’s Rocketdyne Div. had increased engine’s maximum thrust to 230,000 lbs. by strengthening turbine wheels of turbopumps and modifying engine control system, (msfc Release 66-91)
JPL 100-kw. radar was flown successfully on nasa Convair 990 at 3-6-mi. (5—10-km.) altitude in preliminary test for rocket flight [see May 9]. (jpl Release, 6/26/66)
Heat shields on the unmanned Apollo spacecraft that underwent reentry test Feb. 26 had developed three "hot spots,” nasa announced. Problem would be corrected with improved insulating compound. No delay in Apollo program was anticipated. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/23/66, A29)
nasa’s second Project Scanner instrument package was successfully launched by three-stage solid propellant Trailblazer booster from nasa Wallops Station on suborhital trajectory to gather information on earth’s horizon. Two-channel radiometers measured infrared energy emitted from earth’s horizon by carbon dioxide and water vapor; star-mapper telescope provided data on attitude of spin-stabilized spacecraft. Project Scanner was a phase of horizon definition research conducted by LaRC. (Wallops Release 66-58)
Redeye, usa’s shoulder-fired antiaircraft missile system designed for forward-area defense against low-flying aircraft, had successfully completed Arctic phase of service testing at Ft. Greely, Alaska.. (Gen. Dyn. Corp. Release) Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of msfc Research Projects Laboratory, told the conference that "all technologies are sufficiently developed to make flight [to Mars] in 1986 appear possible.” Five Saturn V launch vehicles would carry the components of electrically powered Mars spacecraft and of Nerva II-powered nuclear earth-escape stage into 300-mi.-altitude earth orbit. After assembly and checkout, nuclear stage would accelerate electrically powered spacecraft to escape velocity. Flight time to Mars on a direct transfer trajectory would be 145 days; 280 days would be required to return to earth. Spacecraft would enter high earth orbit outside Van Allen radiation belt and astronauts would be brought back to earth by commuter rocket. Dr. Stuhlinger said: "Of the key developments still necessary, the electrical power system undoubtedly requires the major technological and funding effort.” Coauthors contributing to the paper presented by Stuhlinger were Joseph C. King and Dr. Russell D. Shelton of msfc Research Projects Laboratory and Gordon R. Woodcock, msfc Advanced Systems Office, (msfc Release 66-67) LRC scientist J. Reece Roth described an electric rocket life-support system that would supply interplanetary crews with meals which, when metabolized, would serve as fuel for spacecraft’s engine. According to Roth’s concept, some or all of the propellant, in the form of food, water, and oxygen, would be metabolized by crew to carbon dioxide, water, and solid wastes. C02 and water could then be used as propellant for an electric engine while solid residues would be small enough to be stored or discarded. Propellant reserve could be used for food, navigational corrections, and radiation shielding—enhancing safety of the crew. Weight savings from integrated propulsion and life-support system would be so great, Roth said, that a somewhat less efficient thruster could be used with no overall loss in performance, (lrc Release 66-12) Human experience most similar to one-to-three year space flight was life on submarine, according to Dr. S. B. Sells, Director, Institute of Behavioral Research, Texas Christian Univ. Dr. Sells presented results of NASA-sponsored study designed to formulate problems of "group organization, structure, and interpersonal interaction of crew members in the environmental circumstances of a typical space mission.” Fifty-six social system characteristics of extended space flight—such as motivation, status, background, training, and command structure of crew, as well as conditions of confinement, isolation, and environmental hazards—were compared with those of 11 other social systems. (Text) nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Edgar M. Cortright said: "Thousands of dedicated people have laboriously laid . .. stepping stones to Mars. This nation is ready and able to step up the exploration of Mars, Venus, and the rest of the solar system. Just when such a program will get a go ahead depends on many factors. This coming year will be a crucial one for the decision makers. "Of one thing I am absolutely certain: comprehensive exploration of the planets is inevitable. Who will be leading this exploration seems less certain; but we can if we choose.” (Text)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Sonmiani, Pakistan, carried sodium payload to 124-mi. (200-km.) altitude in experiment conducted for Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Committee to measure wind direction and speed at 50- to 124-mi. (80- to 200-km.) altitudes. No photography was possible since sodium flash, observed at +60 sec., was not followed by sodium cloud release, (nasa Rpt. srl)
Editorial comment on May 17 scrubbing of Gemini IX mission: New York Times: "For the third time in the past few months, a space experiment involving the Atlas-Agena rocket Has run into trouble. Late last year a sequence of events similar to yesterday’s led to a postponement of the original Gemini rendezvous experiment, while in March of this year, Gemini 8 nearly met catastrophe when it was docked with an Agena target vehicle. There may well be no connection between these three separate incidents; but since the Atlas-Agena has been a highly reliable and successful instrument in other aspects of the nation’s space program, its emergence as the weak link in the Gemini series poses something of a mystery. The setback caused by last year’s failure to orbit an Agena target vehicle was made up for by the brilliant improvisation that permitted Geminis 6 and 7 to rendezvous last December. Warned by that earlier experience, space officials were better prepared for this latest setback. The substitute target rocket they have on hand may permit much of the originally planned Gemini 9 experiment to take place early next month. But for the moment at least, a shadow has again been thrown over this country’s lunar program.” (NYT, 5/18/66) Washington Post: "We shall do well to prepare for many more disappointments before man reaches the moon, including the possibility of serious accident. What remains essential in the competition is that considerations of human safety not be sacrificed to too feverish a schedule.” (Wash. Post, 5/18/66) Washington Evening Star: "The simple fact is that the United States has been incredibly lucky that no catastrophic accident has yet taken place during a manned space flight. The further fact is that the nation cannot logically expect this luck to last forever. Progress in space, as with nearly all human progress, will come at the cost of men’s lives. And the nation should be prepared for the day when our luck runs out; prepared to accept tragedy as the inevitable concomitant of so ambitious a voyage of discovery.” (Wash. Eve. Star, 5/18/66, A18)
dod would use Titan III booster to launch 23 comsats in three launch groups to form a global communications system, M/G Ben I. Funk, Cmdr., afsc’s Space Systems Div., told National Assn, of Manufacturers in New York. Orbiting about 18,20CT mi. above earth, satellites would form system "of high reliability and reasonably long life, secure against interference, and with sufficient capacity to handle a high volume of unique and vital military traffic,” Funk said. He also revealed that USAF was seeking solutions to problems of reusable boosters, maneuvering reentry, lighter-weight materials, and higher performance fuels. (Text, Av. Daily, 2/15/66)
U.S.S.R. began rocket test series in the Pacific Ocean. (Tass, 9/6/66) August 26: nasa officials revealed at Hq. news briefing that data accumulated thus far from lunar orbiter i indicated the moon’s shape departed from that of a perfect sphere with a bulge of about Vi mi. at its north pole, a depression of about Vs mi. around the Northern Hemisphere, a 3^-mi. bulge around the Southern Hemisphere, and a depression of about Yi mi. at the South Pole. Conclusions were based on assumption moon’s density was uniform. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/27/66, A3; Av. Wk., 8/29/66, 18)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried gsfcinstrumented payload to 128-mi, (206-km.) altitude to obtain dayglow measurements. Rocket and instrumentation performed well, (nasa Rpt. srl)
France planned to continue work on large space boosters, either alone or with other interested European nations, despite British decision to withdraw from eldo’s Europa rocket program, Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. French officials, open in their bitterness at the British decision, viewed the withdrawal as further proof that U.K. made "a poor European partner.” {Av. Wk., 6/13/66, 38)
Lack of major manned spaceflight goal beyond Apollo Applications (Aa) program was causing NASA to delay Saturn booster development for at least two years, reported George Alexander in Aviation Week. Major Saturn contractors, facing end of current production contracts, wondered which derivatives would be chosen for development and when development and production would begin. Although current inventory of Uprated Saturn I (Saturn IB) and Saturn V vehicles was sufficient for programs through Aa, future missions might require a "super booster” with 280,000-lb. payload capacity or an intermediate vehicle with 40,000-lb. payload capacity. (Alexander, Av. Wk., 8/8/66, 59-78)
NASA Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr reached 93-mi. (149-km.) altitude in third ARC-managed Project Luster experiment to collect meteoric debris during peak of Orionid meteor shower. Luster micrometeoroid sampling instrument deployed successfully during flight; debris was vacuum sealed at recovery. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. SRl)
Testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology Dr. Mac C. Adams said: "During 1965 we flew the three X-15 airplanes 32 times, setting a new activity record. These aircraft comprise a unique research facility capable of providing data during actual hypersonic flight. . . . "At the end of 1965, the three X-15 airplanes had been flown 156 times. . . .” Referring to rocket reactor tests, Adams said: "The kiwi-nerva-Phoebus operations during 1965 demonstrated an altitude equivalent specific impulse of over 750 lb-sec./lb., equivalent thrust of over 50,000 lbs., and total duration of 4200 seconds, or over an hour. The experiments have shown that rapid starts and restarts can be made and that operation is stable over a wide range of conditions. "On February 3, 1966, we made the first power run with a complete nuclear rocket engine system. Although the major components were spread out and connected in a 'breadboard’ fashion, the system started and operated as a unit with no external power. On February 11, the system was operated again. We feel that these runs are very significant milestones in the nuclear rocket programs.” (NASA Autk. Hearings, 50, 57)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station reached 134-mi. (216-km.) altitude in gsfc experiment to evaluate the method of the double floating probe as a tool for monitoring ionospheric electric fields. Rocket performance was excellent, and data obtained by one of two independent antenna systems was in quantitative agreement with the double floating probe theory. Other antenna system failed to deploy properly, (nasa Rpt. srl)
25th anniversary of Reaction Motors, Inc. Formed to develop James H. Wyld’s liquid-fueled rocket, corporation became in 1958 Reaction Motors Div. of Thiokol Chemical Corp. (Thiokol, Aerospace Facts, 11-12/66, 2)
nasa had awarded Lockheed Propulsion Co. $96,000 contract to evaluate solid-propellant motor which could stop and restart spacecraft propulsion units on command. Current solid-propellant rocket motors did not have this capability. On future space missions concept could be applied to midcourse correction, probe separation, and orbit and space-probe injection. Lockheed, under contract to jpl, would conduct 18 test firings. (nasa Release 66-56)
U, S. and Brazil would cooperate in sounding rocket program to study total solar eclipse in South America Nov. 12. Nineteen sounding rockets would be launched to altitudes as high as 175 mi. (280 km.) from Rio Grande launch site located near path of total eclipse. Program was based on July 1965 agreement between NASA and Brazilian Space Commission (cnae). (Wallops Release 66-51)
NASA Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr to 102-mi. (164-km.) altitude carried gsfc experiment to obtain ultraviolet spectral scans of bright stars from 1110 A to 4000 A. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt. srl)
Unidentified usaf satellite was launched from Vandenberg Afb by a Scout booster. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 150)
NASA’s first Saturn IB booster launches unmanned Apollo spacecraft down the Eastern Test Range.
U.S.S.R. began carrier rocket tests in the Pacific, to last until Oct. 25. Tass said center of area with 74-km. (46-mi.) radius had coordinates of 37°14' north latitude and 172°49' east latitude. Ships and aircraft were requested not to enter this area daily between noon and midnight local time. (Tass, Pravda, 9/25/66, 2)
Supersonic transport and rocket flights in the next few decades could raise the average surface temperature of the earth by almost half a degree by spewing tons of chemical pollutants into the atmosphere, said Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, ucla planetary and space physicist, in an interview with the Los Angeles Times. Heavy burning of coal, oil, and gas introduced by the industrial revolution in the 19th century and the automotive revolution in the 20th had increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere by about 15 per cent, MacDonald estimated. The carbon dioxide created a layer of gas that allowed heat from the sun to reach the earth but stopped it from escaping when it was re-radiated back from the earth. This was the "greenhouse effect,” which raised the temperature below the layer and lowered the temperature above the layer. "Four hundred supersonic aircraft flying four flights a day on intercontinental routes, would affect surface temperatures as much as the whole industrial and automotive revolutions have to date,” MacDonald said. (Getze, L.A. Times, 4/18/66)
NASA nimbus ii (Nimbus C) meteorological satellite was launched from wtr with Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena B booster into near-polar orbit with 730-mi. (1,175-km.) apogee, 678-mi. (1,091-km.) perigee, 108-min. period, and 80° inclination. Flight plan had called for 600-mi.-altitude orbit. nimbus ii, three-axis earth-stabilized r&d weather satellite, would flight-test basic technology essential to meteorological satellites and instrumentation necessary to study atmospheric structure. It would also extend meteorological observation to region of electromagnetic spectrum not previously covered. Satellite carried Advanced Vidicon Camera System (Avcs) and Automatic Picture Transmission System (Apt), both of which operate during daylight portion of each orbit; Medium Resolution Infrared Radiometer (Mrir) to store global medium resolution data on earth’s heat balance; and High Resolution Infrared Radiometer (Hrir) to provide high-resolution nighttime cloud-cover photos and cloud-top temperatures. Addition of Hrir data to Apt system was initial demonstration of stored and direct readout day-night cloud coverage capability. 3,000 weather photos would be taken daily by 912-lb. satellite and transmitted to any of 150 Apt stations around the world—eight of which had been modified to obtain nighttime cloud cover. Second in nasa’s Nimbus series of meteorological satellites, nimbus ii was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA ossa, (nasa Proj. Off.; O’Toole, NYT, 5/16/66, 10)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried instrumented payload to estimated 180-mi. (290-km.) altitude, gsfc experiment measured magnetic and electric fields and low-energy electrons and protons in a visible aurora. Rocket aspect measurement and evaluation of a xenon flashing light for trajectory determination were secondary objectives, (nasa Rpt. srl)
NASA launched 210-lb. Reentry E payload by Scout booster from NASA Wallops Station to evaluate char integrity of low-density phenolic nylon heat-shield material and test its effectiveness in withstanding actual reentry conditions. In addition to four stages of Scout launch vehicle, 17-in. spherical rocket was attached to instrumented payload as velocity package, First two Scout stages lofted payload to 54-mi. (87km.) altitude. Remainder of vehicle coasted upward to 110-mi. (177-km.) altitude and at peak of trajectory, during 3rd-stage burn, guidance system began positioning vehicle for desired reentry angle. Fourth stage fired during descent, and then velocity package motor ignited, driving reentry payload to a velocity of more than 18,000 mph through earth’s atmos-sphere. Payload impacted 1,150 mi. downrange in the Atlantic; recovery was not attempted. Throughout flight, continuous telemetry channel furnished data before and after the one-minute communications blackout caused by reentry, and aircraft photographed visible portion of reentry. Delayed telemetry system, used successfully on previous flights to transmit during blackout period, failed to operate because of a transmitter malfunction, but data furnished by continuous channel on post-blackout conditions would permit evaluation of total performance and correlation with previous ground tests. Flight, fifth in series of experiments in Scout Reentry Heating Project designed to investigate heating environment of a body reentering earth’s atmosphere at 18,400 mph, was directed by LaRC. (nasa Proj. Off.; nasa Release 66-18; Wallops Release 66-8)
Optimistic assessment of prospects for exploring Mars during the next decade and finding some form of life there was presented by scientists at the AAS-sponsored symposium on "The Search for Extraterrestrial Life” in Anaheim, Calif. Carlos De Moraes, director of planetary program studies for Martin Co., visualized a series of space flights from 1969 to 1979 and culminating in the landing of two 3,500-lb. "space buses.” First flight, in 1969, would be of an 850-lb. spacecraft that would provide televised mapping of the Mars surface and take measurements of the atmosphere. After a series of intermediary flights, the space buses would land in 1979 and release both automated biological laboratories and roving vehicles that would explore and gather samples at points away from the immediate landing area. Dr. Norman H. Horowitz of jpl noted that "any form of life, however primitive, found on Mars would be of immense scientific value.” He said that no matter how bleak the picture, the possibilities of life on Mars should be explored to the fullest because that planet appeared to be the likeliest site for life beyond the earth. GE engineers P. G. Thome and Ernest J. Merz described giant clamshell under development that would be part of a system launched by a Saturn V booster in 1973. The thick disc-shaped object would open like a giant mollusk when landed on Mars, releasing devices that would start gathering information on atmosphere, weather, soil, and life. Information would be telemetered back to earth. Disc could be powered by radioisotope-fueled generator that could keep it in operation for up to six months. (Texts) Speculating about meetings with intelligent beings from or on another planet, Harold D. Lasswell, Yale Univ. professor of law and political science, asked: "Would earthlings unite or wage interstellar war? Would we have to kow-tow to a more advanced civilization, or dominate an inferior one? Suppose they had no more, or even less, feelings of love and responsibility? Might meeting with an advanced society push man further toward creating a culture of frantic fun?” (AP, Balt. Sun, 5/26/66)
Javelin sounding rocket was successfully launched by usaf Cambridge Research Lab. from Churchill Research Range, with payload designed to measure total and component magnetic field values and primary electron and proton fluxes during a magnetic-absorption event. (M&R, 5/16/66, iO)
Gemini VIII launch would be delayed at least 24 hrs. because of a leak in a unit of the spacecraft’s environmental control system and an overflowing fuel tank in the Atlas booster, nasa announced. Launch was reset, nasa announced March 15, for March 16. (Wilford, NYT, 3/15/66, 17; Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 3/15/66; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/14/66, 1)
NASA and ComSatCorp had signed agreement for satellite communications services to support Apollo program. ComSatCorp would provide voice/ data channels and teletype channels in synchronous satellites to be positioned over Pacific and Atlantic oceans by NASA. Draft tariff filed by ComSatCorp with fcc estimated that cost of services would be $8.95 million annually, (nasa Release 66-178; ComSatCorp Release)
Three earth-orbiting objects not identified "with any launching or country of origin” were reported by gsfc Satellite Situation Report. Two had inclination of 85° and the third, 35°. (gsfc SSR, 9/30/66; Clark, NYT, 11/1/66,19) September 30-October 2: Series of Nike-Cajun and one Nike-Apache sounding rocket were launched from nasa Wallops Station and Natal, Brazil, in gsfc experiment to obtain temperature, wind, pressure, and density data at intervals throughout 24-hr. periods near fall equinox. Using exploding grenade technique, experiment investigated thermally driven diurnal tide theory of upper atmosphere. Wind motion was studied by photographically tracking smoke puffs from upper grenade using Apache rocket motor. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl) During September: Vice President Hubert Humphrey, in an interview with Technology Week, predicted that U.S. would land men on the moon in 1969—probably before U.S.S.R. He said the Johnson Administration had definite plans for "very active post-Apollo schedule,” but refused to "put a time schedule on what comes next.” Post-Apollo activities would include exploring the moon, increasing our knowledge of the planets, expanding earth-orbiting capability, both manned and unmanned, and developing maneuverable, reusable spacecraft. The Vice President foresaw no possibility of merging usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program with any of NASA’s manned projects. (Tech. Wk., 9/5/66, 12, 13) During September: U.S. and U.S.S.R. were exchanging daily six to eight weather satellite photographs with nephanalyses. First U.S. transmittal began Sept. 6 with pictures from essa i meteorological satellite, launched Feb. 3. On Sept. 11, U.S.S.R. began sending pictures from cosmos cxxii, launched June 25. Regions photographed—primarily Atlantic Ocean and Western Europe-—had been matched so operations of satellite systems could be compared. Joint effort to improve transmission quality had been proposed since transmission seemed to degrade photographs: U.S. scientists found Soviet photos "poor” in quality; Soviet scientists described U.S. photos as "usable.” Receipt of photos from cosmos cxxii had enabled U.S. to analyze satellite’s instrumentation: cosmos cxxii carried pair of 48° TV cameras canted 16.5° to each side of orbital plane to provide coverage of about 690 mi. of earth. Cameras overlapped field of coverage by 1°; frames transmitted so far had 10 per cent overlap. (Av. Wk., 9/26/66, 26-7; Schmeck, NYT, 9/27/66, 15)
NASA’s lunar ORBITER I (Lunar Orbiter A) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from etr in first U.S. attempt to orbit the moon and photograph possible landing sites for Apollo astronauts [see Aug. 14-31]. Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb. spacecraft into 100-mi. (161km.) altitude parking orbit, reignited after 28-min. coast period, injecting spacecraft into 90-hr. translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule, lunar orbiter i deployed its four solar panels and two antennas and locked its five solar sensors on the sun. Only difficulty occurred when spacecraft’s startracker failed to lock on Canopus and flight engineers were forced to lock it on the moon—-a weaker navigational reference point. Assistant Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., of LaRC was "still quite confident” about achieving lunar orbit, but noted it might be more difficult to obtain desired precision and exact positions required for optimum photos of lunar surface. At approximately 00:28 GMT Aug. 11 planned midcourse maneuver was successfully executed, and JPL scientists predicted spacecraft would miss original aiming point by only 50 mi. Primary objectives of NASA’s lunar orbiter i mission, first in series of five, were (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into lunar orbit; and (2) obtain high-resolution photos of various types of lunar surface to assess their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor spacecraft and improve knowledge of the moon. Photos would cover 3,000mi. strip along moon’s equator, concentrating on nine potential landing areas. Spacecraft would also attempt to photograph surveyor i landing sites; provide precision trajectory information; and monitor meteoroids and radiation intensity in lunar environment. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science and Applications. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of jPL-operated Deep Space Network, (nasa Release 66-195; Wilford, NYT, 8/8/66, 3; 8/11/66, 1, 12; 8/12/66, 51; O’Toole, Wash. Post, 8/11/66, Al; 8/12/66, Al; 8/13/66, Al; 8/14/66, Al, A6; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 8/11/66, A3)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 160)
First full-scale checkout version of 365-ft. Saturn V rocket had been assembled at KSC to aid installation of electrical and plumbing connections on three mobile launching towers. (Marshall Star, 4/6/66, 1)
Successful launching of Boosted-Dart sounding rockets carrying chaff payloads from Natal, Brazil, and NASA Wallops Station marked first meteorological sounding rocket launchings conducted from North and South America the same day under coordinated NASA-Comissao Nacional de Atividades Espaciais (cnae) experimental program. Natal launch was first of a series of 32 launches planned by cnae for 1966 as part of InterAmerican Experimental Meteorological Sounding Rocket Network (exametnet). Brazil, Argentina, and U.S., cooperating in exametnet, were planning a north-south chain of stations through the Western Hemisphere to conduct coordinated sounding rocket launchings to obtain experimental data on hemispheric weather patterns, (nasa Release 66-12)
In address to U.N. General Assembly in New York, U.S. Ambassador Arthur J. Goldberg said U.S. would provide "tracking coverage from United States territory” for Soviet rocket launchings if a "mutually beneficial agreement” could be made. Stressing that tracking facilities were a matter for "bilateral negotiation and agreement,” he said the treaty to govern activities in outer space was "too urgent and too important to be delayed. ... It is all the more urgent because of man’s rapid strides toward landing on the moon.” Impasse had been reached in discussions in Geneva because U.S.S.R. had insisted pact guarantee that states granting tracking facilities to any country provide same facilities to other countries. (Text; NYT, 9/23/66, 12)
esro launched British Skylark sounding rocket from Salto di Quirra Range, to study photochemical processes in comets under meteorological research program which began in 1964 and would include 400 sounding rocket launches by 1972. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 7/13/66, A21)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Thor-Agena D rocket from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 153)
President Johnson’s message to Congress on the FY 1967 budget said in part: "Just over 60 years ago man entered the age of controlled flight. Today, men orbit the earth at speeds measured in thousands of miles an hour. In 1967, less than 6 years after this Nation set the goal of a manned landing on the moon within the present decade, we will begin unmanned test flights of the giant Saturn V rocket and the Apollo spacecraft—the complete space vehicle required for achieving that goal. Later on in the 1960’s, we will undertake the manned lunar mission itself. "Our many space achievements—both manned and unmanned—have dramatically advanced our scientific understanding and technological capabilities. They have also demonstrated our remarkable progress in the peaceful exploration of space. In 1967, our large space projects will be progressing from the more expensive development phase into operational status, and new projects of equivalent cost will not be started. Accordingly, expenditures of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration are estimated to decline by $300 million in 1967 [as opposed to the new authorization requested in the FY 1967-budget]. This level will sustain our progress in space exploration and continue the advancement of science and technology.” (Text, CR, 1/24/66, 861; Pres. Doc., 1/31/66, 88-9)
essa iii (Tos-A), third meteorological satellite in Tiros Operational Satellite (Tos) series and first to include Advanced Vidicon Camera System (Avcs), was successfully launched for essa by NASA from wtr using three-stage Thor-Delta booster on mission to provide daily global cloud-cover photos. Satellite achieved nearly polar, sun-synchronous orbit with 922-mi. (1,486-km.) apogee; 858-mi. (1,381km.) perigee; 114.5-min. period; and 101° inclination. It was expected to transmit first photos to Gilmore Creek, Alaska, receiving station Oct. 3. An advanced version of the cartwheel configuration, 325-lb. essa iii carried two Avcs systems to provide cloud coverage and an infrared sensor (Ir) to measure earth’s heat balance. Launch was first for Thor-Delta booster from wtr. essa financed, managed, and operated the Tos system; gsfc was responsible for procurement, launch, and initial checkout of spacecraft in orbit. First two satellites in system—essa i and essa ii—were launched Feb. 3 and Feb. 28, respectively, (nasa Proj. Off.; AP, NYT, 10/3/66, 11; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/3/66, A12)
First fully successful launch and air-snatch recovery of the Air-Launched Air-Recoverable Rocket (Alarr) was made over wsmr. A modified MB-1 Genie carrying instrumented payload for upper atmosphere research, Alarr was launched from F-4C Phantom II jet fighter at 44,000-ft. altitude. Rocket reached 150,000-ft. altitude and 180-lb. payload immediately separated. C-130B transport operating from Edwards afb made successful mid-air recovery of payload at 5,000 ft. in second pass at target. Test, conducted for Kirtland AFB, was to develop new technique for high-altitude space probes: launch aircraft’s speed would serve as first stage of a rocket—eliminating need for a launch pad; descending payload would be recovered to prevent damage or loss. (AP, Balt. Sun, 3/29/66; M&R, 4/4/66, 8)
nasa named L/Col. Robert A. Rush worth (usaf) to receive Exceptional Service Medal for his "outstanding contributions” to U.S. aeronautical research programs "both as a pilot and as an engineer” on X-15 rocket aircraft. Col. Rushworth, who would leave X-15 program in summer 1966 to attend Armed Forces Staff College, would be presented medal at NASA awards ceremony in October, (nasa Release 66-159)
Question whether "superrockets” for the Apollo manned space program should have liquid or solid stages was no longer debatable, said William Hines in the Washington Evening Star; the solids had been "forced through studied neglect to default.” He continued: "This is not to suggest, however, that the whole liquid-solid debate is moot. "Between Saturn I-B’s 35,000-pound orbital capability and Saturn V’s 250,000 pounds is a huge gap; between Atlas-Centaur’s 2,300-pound escape capability and Saturn Y’s 95,000 pounds is a gap that is even greater, proportionately. "A wide variety of scientific and manned payloads can be envisioned as fitting within these gaps. A flexible booster system based on large solid rockets of varying lengths and flight characteristics could fill the gaps quickly and at reasonable cost; liquid systems could not.” (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/17/66, A6)
NASA announced plans to launch two ion engines into polar orbit in late 1968	satellite mission to advance development of ion engines as propulsion units for future long-duration space missions. Second part of lrc’s Space Electric Rocket Test (Sert) program, mission would evaluate inflight performance of electron-bombardment ion engines for six months or more and analyze effects of thrusters and their electric fields on other satellite components, lrc conducted first successful operation of ion engine in space July 20, 1964, in 50-min. Sert I ballistic flight from nasa Wallops Station, (nasa Release 66-262)
Five leading European aerospace companies announced formation of consortium to seek European space contracts. Called the European Satellite Team, group’s major goal was $18-million design and construction contract for Esho’s 800-lb. TD-1 and TD-2 research satellites scheduled for launch by NASA in 1969 and 1970. Consortium was composed of Elliott-Automation, U.K.; Compagnie Francaise Thomson-Houston, France; Fokker, Netherlands; Allmanna Svenska Elektriska, A.B., Sweden; and Fabbrica Italiana Apparecchi Radio, Italy. General Electric Co.’s Missile and Space Div. would serve as consultant. (Wil-ford, NYT, 7/13/66; Chic. Trib., 7/13/66) July 12-13; NASA launched five Nike-Apache sounding rockets from NASA Wallops Station between 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. edt. Each rocket was programed to eject a vapor cloud of reddish or bluish color as its altitude increased from 50 to 125 mi. Experiments were to measure wind velocities and directions at various altitudes; motion of the trails was photographed from five camera sites within a 100-mi. radius of Wallops. Launches were conducted for gca Corp., under contract to GSFC. (NASA Release 66-181; Wallops Release 66-38)
Colonization of ocean floor would be more useful to man than colonization of the moon, said B. G. Anderson, senior research psychologist for General Dynamics Corp.’s Electric Boat Div. at joint aiaa-usn Marine Systems Conference in Los Angeles. The food and minerals available to man in and under the oceans were more important natural resources— and more easily retrieved—than any likely to be found on the moon or elsewhere in the solar system. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 8/18/66, H4) August 19: usaf launched usa’s secor vii geodetic satellite, ers-xv satellite, and an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb, using Atlas-Agena D booster. (17.5. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 155)
Japan’s second attempt to orbit a satellite failed when 4th stage of Lambda 4S-2 booster failed to ignite. First failure was Sept. 26. Both launches were conducted from Uchinoura Range, Kyushu Island. {Wash. Post, 12/20/66, A13; upi, Wash. Post, 12/21/66, A2, A24)
Breadboard version of Nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) was successfully tested for the first time by NASA and aec at Nuclear Rocket Development Station, Jackass Flats, Nev. Four hours after initial ignition, engine restarted itself under test conditions simulating lower temperatures of space, thereby demonstrating its capability to start using only self-contained energy. Engine system was tested below peak power and temperature levels: exhaust temperature was 2,000°F compared with 3,500°F design temperature; reactor power was 440 mw compared with 1,100-mw design power. Test was first of a series scheduled by nasa-aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office as part of the Rover program to develop nuclear propulsion for space exploration, (aec Release J-35; Atomic Energy Programs, 1966)
usaf launched three unidentified satellites with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr. (U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 148)
esro successfully launched France’s Centaure rocket from range at Paksuniemi, Sweden, to study the aurora borealis. (Reuters, Wash. Post, 11/21/66, A14)
Sounding rocket launched by Spain from Arencillo base fell to earth within a hundred yards of launching site. Officials blamed failure in guidance system. Launch was part of series begun Oct. 15 to collect meteorological data from region at 30- to 60-mi. (48- to 97-km.) altitude. (Chic. Trib., 10/21/66)
usaf OV3-I satellite carrying AFCRL-instrumented 152-lb. payload was launched into polar orbit from Vandenberg afb with Scout booster (slv-IA). Reported orbital parameters were: apogee, 3,557 mi. (5,724 km.); perigee, 219 mi. (352 km.); period, 152 min.; inclination, 82°. Objectives were measurement of charged particle distribution in earth’s magnetic field and acquisition of radiation intensity data for comparison with afcrl satellite measurements in 1960-1963. Previously scheduled for April 19, launch had been postponed after detection of malfunction in launch vehicle’s ground support system, (oar Release; U.S. Aeron. & Space Act., 1966, 150)
Japan scheduled launch of her first earth satellite for March 26 with four-stage, 8.6-ton Lambda booster. Planned orbit would have 723-km. (480-mi.) apogee and 290-km. (180-mi.) perigee. If successful, Japan would become fourth nation to orbit spacecraft. (NYT, 2/27/66, 33; upi, Wash. Post, 2/27/66)
Two NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched 7 hrs. 23 min. apart from NASA Wallops Station reached estimated 81-mi. (131-km.) and 95-mi. (152-km.) altitudes. Experiment, conducted for Univ. of Michigan, measured ambient air density from 19-75 mi. (30-120 km.) by radar track of two falling Mylar spheres ejected from each rocket at +72 sec. Spheres ejected as programed in first launch, but radar was unable to track first sphere until +14 min. Preliminary indications were that it did not inflate properly. Radar tracked second sphere for 18 min. During second launch, both spheres ejected and inflated properly, and radar tracking was continuous for 20 min. Diurnal variations of the measurements were compared to measure solar heating effects, (nasa Rpt. srl)
