First Saturn V booster was moved to its launch pad on a crawler-transporter from ksc’s Vehicle Assembly Building. Three and one half mile trip took about 10 hrs. The 364-ft tall booster would undergo at least six weeks of additional testing at the pad before being used to launch unmanned Apollo 4 mission, tentatively scheduled for October. Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) told newsmen at KSC that the movement of the Saturn V was an important milestone in the Apollo program. He predicted that, barring any maj or problems, U.S. could still achieve its goal of landing a man on the moon in 1969. He warned, however, that “it’s a long way to the moon and we have a maj or j ob ahead. Dangers go with this business. We’ve done everything we can to improve the equipment. But, remember, we’re treading on new ground and it’s a risky business. We feel we can overcome the risk and make it work.” (NASA Release 67-219; AP, W Star, 8/27/67, A3; NYT, 8/27/67,1,29; W Post, 8/27/67,1)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched from wsmr to 114-mi (184-km) altitude in gsfc experiment to obtain x-ray and euv photos of the sun and to flight test scat solar pointing system. Flight, first for scat, proved to hold pointing to within a few arc sec. Rocket and other instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Two Aerobee 150 sounding rockets carrying instrumented payloqds were successfully launched by NASA from wsmr. First rocket carried an ultraviolet stellar spectrometer and input telescope to 97.5-mi (156.8km) altitude to measure spectral irradiance of five early stars in 1,100 to 4,000 A wavelength. Second, carrying detectors to observe sky in the infrared, reached 98.5-mi (158-km) altitude. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
North American Aviation, Inc., President J. Leland Atwood assured the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that naa was making numerous technical, inspection, and management changes that would enable U.S. to “effectively accomplish the lunar mission in this decade.” He accepted naa’s share of responsibility for Jan. 27 Apollo fire but urged the Committee to view the deficiencies cited by Apollo 204 Review Board [see April 9] in the perspective of the standards involved. “... it must be recognized that in space work the standards are and must be extremely high. Literally perfection is the goal.” Noting that many of the problems in naa’s management of the Apollo program had resulted from “a rapid build-up in manpower . . . encountered in almost all large, complex developmental programs,” Atwood explained that the survey of naa workmanship summarized in the Phillips Report [see April 18] had been conducted during time when these problems were reaching their peak. Thus the report did not truly represent overall naa performance “but reflected the fact that the [Apollo] mission criteria had been evolving towards their final form.” Atwood stressed, however, that General Phillips’ recommendations had been accepted and corrected to NASA’s “general satisfaction” by April 1966. To further improve Apollo program progress, Atwood said, he and NASA Administrator James E. Webb had reviewed “the overall working relationship” between naa and NASA. As a result of this review efforts would be made to (1) improve coordination of management effectiveness and program control; (2) establish clearer and more specific objectives and measurement techniques for program performance; (3) conduct more periodic surveys and audits of program progress and performance; and (4) include sharper incentives and penalties in contract relationships. Only major changes in Apollo spacecraft would be incorporation of a quick-opening hatch and installation of additional insulation for interior wiring and tubing. (Hines, W Star, 5/4/67, 2; Wilford, NYT, 5/5/67,19; SBD, 5/5/67, 33^)
Detector to measure cosmic dust influx into earth’s atmosphere and meteoroid registration would be tested in NASA/German Ministry for Scientific Research (bmwf) cooperative project, part of continuing program first started July 19, 1967. Influx of cosmic dust would be measured by charge emission in detectors (developed by Max Planck Institute of Nuclear Physics, Heidelberg, Germany), which would be launched on NASA-supplied Nike-Apache sounding rockets from ESRo’s range in Kiruna, Sweden, May or June 1968. NASA would supply rocket launcher and train Germans in rocket preparation and launching, bmwf would provide two payload packages and ground support equipment, (nasa Release 67-288)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of New Hampshire experiment to provide data on the neutron intensity at different altitudes using a neutron detector, solar x-ray fluxes using an x-ray counter, and 2-10 A Lyman-alpha radiation using a photoionization chamber. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched from Churchill Research Range, Canada, in experiment on vertical and horizontal variation of auroral light emissions. Peak altitude was not obtained because of heavy fog effect on radar tracking. Rocket and experiment performance was satisfactory, (nasa Rpt srl)
msc awarded SI million in six-month study contracts to General Dynamics, Boeing Co., and McDonnell Co. for space station facilities that could be assembled in orbit early in the 1970s. General Dynamics would study engine room module, a separately launched unit to furnish electrical power and life-support equipment for space station. Boeing would study space station design to include a 38-in optical telescope that would be launched with the space station by a Saturn V booster. McDonnell would study logistics/ferry spacecraft to provide ground landing capability for astronauts. (Tech Wk, 3/27/67, 23-4)
NASA, in cooperation with West Germany’s Ministry for Scientific Research (bmwf) and Brazilian Space Activities Commission (cnae), successfully launched an Argo D-4 (Javelin) sounding rocket from Barreira do Inferno range near Natal, Brazil, on ballistic trajectory through Van Allen radiation belts to 650-mi (1,000-km) altitude. Purpose of mission was to flight-test instruments being developed for West German research satellite, scheduled for launch in 1969 to investigate earth’s radiation belts. Several German organizations provided scientific experiments; CNAE provided range and launching services; NASA provided sounding rocket, downrange telemetry, and radar. (WS Release 67-23)
USAF launched two unidentified satellites from WTR on single Thor-Agena D booster; one of two satellites reentered Dec. 2. (Pres Rep 1967)
U.S. tourist vacationing on beach at Harbour Island in the Bahamas had found a 10-ft-long piece of metal bearing words “United” and “destruct mechanism here,” San Diego Union reported. Assuming metal to be part of a rocket, the tourist had notified Ksc officials, who retrieved the part and determined that it was an insulation panel from the upper stage of an Atlas-Centaur used Oct. 26, 1966, to launch a Surveyor model on a test flight. (AP, SD Union, 7/14/67) Launched by the last direct-ascent (single-burn) Centaur vehicle in Surveyor program, 2,290-lb Surveyor IV performed all required sequences on schedule, including a midcourse maneuver which narrowed estimated target miss from 124 mi to 2.4 mi. Landing sequence began as planned when spacecraft shifted its normal cruising attitude to position main retrorocket downward toward moon. Radio contact was lost two seconds before retrorocket ended its planned 42-sec burn to slow spacecraft’s speed from 5,900 mph to 350 mph. Repeated attempts to reestablish radio contact with spacecraft failed. Surveyor IV carried photographic equipment, a surface sampler, and a magnetic device on one of its footpads to test for magnetic materials in the lunar soil. Primary mission objectives: (1) to softland on the moon in the Sinus Medii and (2) to obtain TV photos of the lunar surface. Secondary objectives: (1) to conduct a vernier engine experiment; (2)	to manipulate lunar surface with surface sampler in view of TV camera; (3) to obtain touchdown dynamics data; and (4) to obtain thermal and radar reflectivity data on lunar surface. Target zone in the Sinus Medii was almost in the exact center of moon’s visible hemisphere and was rougher than the Ocean of Storms where Surveyor I and Surveyor III had landed. Benjamin Milwitzky, NASA Surveyor Program Manager, said the site was so rugged that spacecraft had only a 50-50 chance of landing intact. “But this region is extremely important to Apollo and that’s why we’re going there.” Surveyor IV was fourth in series of seven spacecraft in NASA’s Surveyor program: Surveyor I (launched May 30, 1966) and Surveyor III (launched April 17, 1967) both softlanded successfully and transmitted photos to earth; Surveyor II (launched Sept. 20, 1966) did not soft-land because of ignition failure in one of its three vernier engines. Program was directed by OSSA Lunar and Planetary Programs Div.; program management was assigned to JPL. (NASA Release 67-172; NASA Proj Off; upi, NYT, 7/15/67, 22; AP, NYT, 7/17/67, 16; Reistrup, W Post, 7/15/67, B4; 7/16/67, A5; 7/17/67, 1; upi, W Star, 7/14/67, Al; 7/15/67, A2; 7/16/67, B5; 7/17/67, Al)	.
usaf Titan III—C booster launched from etr successfully orbited five unmanned satellites: two Vela nuclear detection satellites and three scientific satellites, Ers—XVIII, Ers—XX, and Ers—XXVII. The 508-lb Velas—improved versions of six Vela payloads previously launched— entered initial elliptical orbits with 69,000-mi (96,642-km) apogee and 5,400-mi (8,690-km) perigee. On April 29, orbit of one Vela was circularized at 69,000-mi (96,642-km) altitude; orbit of second would be circularized May 1. Designed to operate at least 18 mo in orbit, Vela satellites were part of dod’s Vela program to monitor space for violations of nuclear test ban treaty. The 14- and 20-lb scientific satellites contained scientific and engineering experiments to (1) investigate effects of vacuum on characteristics of 16 metals, (2) monitor radiation of Van Allen belts, and (3) measure solar radiation. (NYT, 4/29/67, 17; W Post, 4/29/67, A4; Pres Rpt 1967)
X—24A (formerly SV-5P), Nation’s newest manned lifting-body vehicle, was publicly displayed and officially turned over to usaf in ceremonies at Martin Marietta Corp.’s Baltimore plant. The 5,000-lb wingless vehicle, constructed by Martin Marietta Corp. under afsc contract, would be air-launched from B-52 aircraft at afftc and would be driven by Thiokol rocket engines to higher altitudes and supersonic speeds before gliding to controlled landing. Flight tests would be conducted by five usaf and nasa pilots in late 1967 under joint nasa/usaf lifting-body program, (afsc Release 59.67; Clark, NYT, 7/12/67, 1)
Javelin sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range, Canada, reached 496-mi (798-km) altitude in Southwest Center for Advanced Studies/Defence Research Telecommunications Establishment experiment to determine in conjunction with an overpass of an Isis satellite: vertical distribution of flux and energy spectra of soft electrons during a mild ionospheric disturbance; vertical distribution of thermal ion and electron densities and temperature of various species of ions; and flight qualification of a soft-electron spectrometer to be flown on isis—A spacecraft. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
Development of a laser system for detecting small variations in moon’s motion, and for measuring earth-moon distances to within two meters was reported by afcrl. A laser beam would be directed at a reflector placed on lunar surface; reflected light would be detected. (OAR Res Rev, 12/67, 5) During 1967: In 1967, U.S. orbited 87 spacecraft; U.S.S.R., 67; France, 2; Italy, 1; Australia, 1; and U.S.-U.K., 1. U.S. total included 30 launches with 61 payloads for dod and 20 successful nasa missions in 22 attempts—highest percentage of successes in one year to date. NASA had one satellite as a secondary payload. Highlighting NASA space achievements were closeup photographs of the moon provided by Surveyor and Lunar Orbiter spacecraft; soft-landing on the moon by Surveyor III, V, and VI; successful Venus flyby by Mariner V; and preparation of a uv chart of sun’s surface temperature from Oso IV photos of the sun. Surveyor III, V, and VI radioed more than 50,000 closeup photos of the moon and conducted on-site chemical analyses of the lunar soil, confirming its being similar to basaltic rock on earth. First launch from lunar surface was accomplished when Surveyor Vi’s retrorockets were fired, lifting spacecraft and translating it to another site eight feet away. NASA launched Lunar Orbiter III, IV, and V, successfully completing the five-mission program and obtaining detailed photos of entire lunar surface—with 100 times the detail possible with earth-based telescopes—including eight prospective Apollo manned landing sites. Mariner V passed within 2,600 mi of Venus and radioed data on Venusian atmosphere and effects of solar wind. Ground tests in Project Apollo were continued in preparation for three-man Apollo/Satum space flight planned for 1969. Following flash fire in which three astronauts died Jan. 27 during ground test at ksc, intensive studies were Conducted to devise new safety measures. Nearly all combustible materials were removed from the spacecraft, and the hatch was redesigned for fast escape. Apollo program climaxed Nov. 9 with successful maiden flight of Saturn V which orbited unmanned Apollo 4 spacecraft. Applications satellites launched included three Intelsat comsats for ComSatCorp and three essa meteorological satellites for essa. Ats II provided first continuous high-quality photos of earth from geostationary orbit, and Biosatellite II provided new knowledge on effects of radiation and weightlessness on life forms. Scientific achievements included orbiting of Oso III and IV, Ogo IV, Explorer XXXIV and XXXV satellites, and Pioneer VIII interplanetary spacecraft. Some 180 meteorological sounding rockets and 105 scientific sounding rockets were launched, and RAM C—1 spacecraft was launched on suborhital mission to measure effectiveness of water-injection concept in maintaining communications during reentry. Some 12 flights of X—15 rocket research aircraft were conducted, including record-setting 4,534 mph (mach 6.72) flight by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf). Following crash Nov. 15 in which first fatality in 191 X-15 tests occurred, flights were suspended pending a review of the accident. NASA—USAF flight research continued with 14 flights of XB-70 supersonic aircraft. President Johnson authorized faa to proceed with SST prototype construction, contracts were signed with Boeing Co. and General Electric Co., and construction was begun. Research programs were initiated for wing-structure designs for hypersonic aircraft which could make sustained flights at 5,300 mph (mach 8), and studies were undertaken to reduce aircraft noise. M2-F2 lifting-body vehicle crashed May 10, during its second flight of the year. dod program included orbiting of two Vela nuclear-detection satellites and 11 idcsp comsats; static test-firing of Titan HIM 1st stage; and beginning of construction of MOL launch complex at Yandenberg AFB. Among the highlights in propulsion technology was the third and final test firing of the 260-in-dia solid-propellant rocket motor, producing 5.8 million lbs of thrust. One test of NERVA nuclear reactor was conducted in which NRX—A6 was operated at full design power for 60 .min, achieving major goal of one-hour-duration operation. Phoebus IB was operated at 1,500 mw for 30 min, and Phoebus 2C-F underwent series of systems tests with conventional fuel. Tracking, communications, and data acquisition reached greatest volume in 1967 with a large number of unmanned satellites and space probes, msfn stations conducted tracking operations with Lunar Orbiter spacecraft as targets after completion of missions’ photo-acquisition phases, and new Apollo Manned Space Flight Network was completely checked out using Tts I, launched as secondary payload with Pioneer VIII. At end of 1967, NASA’s Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition was simultaneously supporting 50 flight programs for NASA; six in cooperative international programs; and 12 for dod. U.S.S.R. launched 67 payloads, including 61 Cosmos satellites, one Venus probe, one Soyuz spacecraft, and three Molniya I comsats. Venus IV landed on the Venusian surface and transmitted atmospheric data; Soyuz I, after 25-hr manned flight, crashed on landing, killing the pilot; and Cosmos CLXXXVI and Cosmos CLXXXVIII unmanned spacecraft achieved world’s first automatic docking in space. (NASA Release 67—301 ; Space Flight Record 1958—1967; NASA Proj Off)
Impact of Jan. 27 Apollo accident on Apollo program schedule was discussed by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics: “We will include in our schedules the time necessary to conduct a thorough program of reverification and requalification of changes . . . based on what we have learned from the AS-204 accident. . . . Our policy of full qualification prior to manned flight will remain unchanged. “I do believe we still have a reasonable possibility of meeting the major milestones for the Apollo program which were established in 1963. In particular, although the probability is lowered, I believe we will be able to land men on the moon and return them safely to earth before 1970.” Asked about a manned lunar landing in 1968, nasa Administrator James E. Webb, who accompanied Dr. Mueller, replied that it was “not impossible, but almost impossible.” (Testimony; Transcript, 286)
U.S.S.R. announced successful completion of rocket tests in the Pacific northeast of Midway Island to test equipment for spacecraft landings at sea. Series, which began Sept. 2, was first to last as long as scheduled. (upi, NYT, 10/31/67,44; M/S Daily, 10/31/67)
nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell stressed importance of rocketsonde in speech at aiaa Sounding Rocket Vehicle Technology Specialist Conference in Williamsburg, Va. “There is still a lot of important research to be done between the maximum heights of balloons and the minimum heights of satellites. The sounding rocket gives us the means for carrying out such investigations. [It] is valuable for checking out equipment, testing the design 324-801 O—69----5 of an experiment, conducting an exploratory survey, probing for early discoveries, and in general providing an inexpensive means to lay the groundwork for more expensive satellite and space probe experiments to follow.” Important uses for sounding rockets included: detection of x-ray sources; generation of artificial plasma clouds in space; solar observations; investigation of eclipses; study of atmospheric and ionospheric phenomena; and collection of micrometeoroids. Dr. Newell concluded: “We at NASA regard the sounding rocket program as a vital part of our total national space effort. It will continue to receive our strong support.” (Text)
Thiokol Chemical Corp. presented to Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum historic liquid-propellant rocket engines made during World War II. Gifts included primitive rocket test stand known as ars Test Stand No. 2, used by members of original American Rocket Society (now aiaa) , on Dec. 10, 1938, to test first U.S. successful, fully regeneratively cooled rocket engine. Other Thiokol gifts included World War II liquid-propellant jet assist takeoff (jato) units for aircraft, and engines for Lark surface-to-air missile, usaf MX-774 missile, and Viking research rocket. (Smithsonian Institution Release)
U.S. officials praised successful flight of Apollo 4 (AS-501). President Johnson said that “the whole world could see the awesome sight of the first launch of what is now the largest rocket ever flown. This launching symbolizes the power this Nation is harnessing for the peaceful exploration of space. The successful completion of today’s flight has shown that we can launch and bring back safely to earth the space ship that will take men to the moon.” nasc’s Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh said the Nation’s people “should be proud of this historic landmark in propulsion and precision, and particularly in the boost given our national space program.” Looking toward the future, NASA Administrator James E.	Webb praised this “successful demonstration of the devotion and high quality workmanship of over 300,000 men and women in thousands of industrial plants, laboratories, test facilities, universities and government installations [and this] success [which] will permit us to move more rapidly on to a second launch.” Dr. Wernher von Braun said, “No single event since the formation of the Marshall Center in 1960 equals today’s launch in significance [and] I regard this happy day as one of the three or four highlights of, my professional life—to be surpassed only by the manned lunar landing.” {PD, 11/13/67, 1541; Text; UPl, NYT, 11/10/ 67,32C; Marshall Star, 11/15/67,1-10)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 96-lb payload with joint U.S.-India ionosphere experiment to 88-mi (142-km) altitude before impacting 100 mi downrange in the Atlantic. Purpose of flight was to prove out instrumentation and test new antenna design. Experiment, which measured electron and ion densities and Lyman-alpha flux in lower ionosphere with a riometer—cosmic radio noise absorption device—and a Langmuir probe, was being developed for series of cooperative nasa-incospar launches from Thumba range, India, (nasa Release 67-61; WS Release 67-8)
Several Latin American nations, including Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico, were interested in making extensive use of Kourou space research base, French Guiana, according to Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes) sources. New equatorial range would be fully operational in 1969, with first segment handling sounding rocket firings early in 1968. Initial plans for Kourou facility had included three launch pads, but cnes was already making plans to expand the facility. One new pad would handle Scout and Thor-Able vehicles, subject to agreement with U.S. (Space Pro, 12/18/67,150)
Apollo spacecraft 017 was mechanically mated to Saturn V booster at ksc in preparation for AS-501 unmanned mission scheduled for launch in third quarter of 1967. ksc officials said no major problems had been discovered in additional inspection of Saturn V’s 2nd stage [see May 24]. (Marshall Star, 6/21/67, 1)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched from Puerto Rico in Univ. of Illinois experiment to probe lower regions of ionosphere up to about 125 mi (200 km), achieved satisfactory results. In first of three such rocket flights, measurements were made simultaneously with those of Arecibo Ionospheric Ohservatory’s giant radar-radio telescope, 30 mi from Vega Baja Airport launch site. World’s largest radar-radio telescope took ionospheric readings, using its 1,000-ft-dia wire mesh reflector. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 67-230; WS Release 67—28)
Tokyo Univ.’s Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science would receive $11 million of Japan’s $17.5-million space budget for FY 1967 (April 1967—March 1968), Technology Week reported. The Institute would launch 88 vehicles, including a 150-lb scientific satellite; a Mu 4S rocket; and three Lambda 4S vehicles. Remaining funds would go to the Transport Ministry, Meteorological Agency, and Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications. (Tech Wk, 3/20/67, 13)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Univ. of Minnesota experiment to 131-mi (210-km) altitude to measure composition and determine temperature of atmosphere in altitude range 62-124 mi (100-200 km). Experiment used three mass spectrometers and a yoyo despin system. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr achieved 180-mi (289-km) altitude in flight to measure: (1) vertical profiles of neutral and ion composition and electron densities; and (2) dissociation of molecular oxygen and atomic nitrogen density using mass spectrometers designed for the pogo satellite. Preliminary data indicated that the rocket and all experiments had performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
The J-2 liquid rocket engine was restarted twice in simulated altitude tests conducted by msfc at aedc. Shut down after an initial 30 sec burn, the engine was restarted and run for 5 sec, then started and stopped again. Total burn time was 70 sec. (Tech Wk, 3/27/67, 24)
nasa’s Oso IV (oso-d) Orbiting Solar Observatory was successfully launched from etr with three-stage Thor-Delta booster to study the sun and its influence on earth’s atmosphere. Orbital parameters: apogee, 358.8 mi (577 km); perigee, 336.7 mi (542km); period, 95.8 min; and inclination, 32.9°. Fourth of eight spacecraft in NASA’s oso program to provide direct observation of the sun during most of an 11-yr solar cycle, Oso IV weighed 599 lbs, carried nine experiments, was designed for a six-month lifetime, and had two main sections: the wheel (lower) section provided stability by gyroscopic spinning and housed the telemetry-command equipment, batteries, electronic controls, gas spin-control arms, and six experiment packages; the sail (upper) section was oriented toward the sun and contained solar cells and three solar pointing experiments. Primary purpose of Oso IV was to obtain high-resolution spectral data within the range lA-1350A from pointed solar experiments in the spacecraft during major portion of one solar rotation and adequate operational support of spacecraft subsystems including raster scan of solar disk to carry out acquisition of these scientific data. Secondary objective was to obtain useful data from nonpointed experiments and from pointed experiments during more than one solar rotation. Experiments, designed to continue and extend work of Oso I (launched March 7, 1962), Oso II (launched Feb. 3, 1965), and Oso III (launched March 8,1967) by collecting data on solar x-rays, gamma rays, ultraviolet radiation, and other solar activity, were provided by two American and two British universities, one U.S. Government agency, and one private company. Oso IV was first in series to carry foreign experiments and second (Oso II was the first) capable of scanning entire solar surface by means of a Solar Ultraviolet Scanning Spectrometer which could record a “picture” (digital number) of the sun and transmit it to receiving stations. Spacecraft also had an improved ground-control system whichjpermitted it to receive up to 140 different commands—compared to 10 for Oso /, 70 for Oso II, and 94 for Oso III. Project officials at GSFC reported that satellite spin rate, power level, charge rate, and temperatures were normal and that both tape recorders were operating; all experiments were fully operational by Oct. 25. oso program was managed by GSFC under ossa direction, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67—262)
In related experiments, Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, to obtain wind profiles by release of chemical and photograph of chemical cloud at 96-mi (154-km) altitude; another Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched from Ft. Churchill to study shortterm variation of density, pressure, and temperature during 12-hr period to 80-mi (127-km) altitude; Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, to determine shortterm variations in upper atmosphere temperatures with payload of standard grenades. All rockets and payloads performed well, (nasa Proj Off)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr reached 93-mi (130-km) altitude in flight to measure the radiation from celestial objects in the spectral region, 2,800-1,200 A, 40-50 A, and 2-8 A. Experiments performed satisfactorily, but parachute did not deploy and payload crashed because of faulty wiring. Recovery was not required to obtain scientific data. (NASA Rpt SRL)
nasa Nike Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried instrumented payload to 149.5-mi (237-km) altitude in a Univ. of Maryland-Geophysics Corp. of America experiment to evaluate capabilities and accuracies of pulse and thermal equalization probes, investigate electron energy distribution in a normal daytime ionosphere, and investigate the use of wing-slope techniques with Langmuir probes. One door covering gca antennas prematurely ejected causing a complete loss of experimental data and a rocket apogee 4 mi lower than predicted. (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station ejected barium vapor at 75-, 115-, and 140-mi altitudes, forming three distinct green and purple clouds visible for hundreds of miles. Experiment was conducted for afcrl to (1) measure electric fields and wind motion in upper atmosphere by photographing and tracking movement of ionized barium clouds, and (2) measure attenuation on passage of radio signals through ionized barium plasmas. (WS Release 67-32; upi, W Star, 10/4/67, D2)
nasa’s Apollo program was “back on the track” six months after the Jan. 27 fire at ICSC, Washington Evening Star columnist William Hines concluded after a tour of NASA centers. “Half a year after that unforgettable night of Jan. 27 the process of trauma, shock, and recuperation has run its course. Much remains to be done, of course—and it will be another nine or 10 months before astronauts fly again—but things are moving once more. “At Downey . . . where Apollo spacecraft are built, at Houston, where flights will be controlled, and at Cape Kennedy, where they will begin, there is a noticeable air of confidence (but not over-confidence) mingled with caution (but not over-caution). “A sadder but wiser Apollo team has emerged from the disaster at pad 34 with the realization that ‘pretty good’ simply is not good enough. . . .” (Hines, W Star, 7/27/67, Al)
Life magazine disputed critics who advocated cutting back NASA’s Apollo program: “We do not share the attitude that it doesn’t matter who gets to the moon first, we or the Russians. It does matter. . . . Remember the astonishment, the embarrassment, the apprehension, the loss of prestige we all felt so keenly when Sputnik I went up on Oct. 4, 1957? The prestige we then sought to regain was not mere prestige, an empty abstract symbol of superiority. The superiority at stake was real, not symbolic. . . . “NASA is now engaged in its customary annual defense of its budget requests. We recommend that its expenditures be kept at the $5 to $6 billion level for now. As we continue to compare NASA’s budget with other pressing needs, we must be aware of the challenges and opportunities that arise in space. . . .” {Life, 3/24/67)
nasa Areas sounding rocket launched from Point Mugu, Calif., carried Naval Ordnance Test Station experiment to 33-mi (52-km) altitude to flight-test internally modified version of standard ROCOZ payload, designed to measure ozone distribution for support data on Ogo IV satellite. No experimental results were obtained because of loss of telemetry. There was evidence of payload malfunction near time of experiment ejection. (NASARptSRL)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from WTR using Titan III—B booster; satellite reentered Mar. 6. (Pres Rep 1967; gsfc SSR, 3/ 15/67)
Australia launched her first satellite, Wresat I (Weapons Research Establishment Satellite), from Woomera Rocket Range, becoming seventh nation to place a satellite in space. Satellite—107-lb, 5-ft-long cone 2Y2 ft in dia at its base—went into elliptical orbit with 1,249-km (776-mi) apogee, 170-km (106-mi) perigee, 98.9-min period, and 83.3° inclination. U.S. had provided three-stage Redstone launch vehicle. First attempt, on previous day, had aborted because failure of air conditioner to eject had prevented ignition. Wresat I, joint project of Australia’s Adelaide Univ. Physics Dept, and the Dept, of Weapons Research at Salisbury, was sending back data on interaction of solar radiation, particularly x-rays and ultraviolet, with earth’s outer atmosphere, nasa provided satellite acquisition and data reception. (SBD, 11/30/67,149; gsfc SSR, 11/30/67; gsfc Historian; Aero Tech, 12/4/67,17; Interavia, 12/67,1842)
nasa’s Lunar Orbiter V (Lunar Orbiter E) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from etr on mission to photograph the lunar surface [see Aug. 5-27]. Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 860-lb spacecraft into parking orbit of 100-mi (161-km) altitude, reignited after 30-min coast period to inject spacecraft on 89-hr translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule, Lunar Orbiter V deployed its four solar panels and two antennas and locked its five sensors on the sun. On Aug. 2 the star tracker encountered slight difficulty in locating Canopus because of “glint” from the sun and “earthshine,” but obtained a fix at 18:34 get, before midcourse maneuver. At 06:00 on Aug. 3 midcourse maneuver with 26-sec engine burn was successfully conducted to slow spacecraft’s speed and alter its aiming point slightly. Primary objectives of NASA’s Lunar Orbiter V mission were: (1) to place three-axis-stabilized spacecraft into high-inclination lunar orbit; and (2) to obtain photography of selected scientifically interesting areas on lunar surface and supplemental photography of candidate Apollo lunar landing sites. Photos would cover five Apollo sites, 36 scientific sites, and areas of the moon’s hidden side previously unphotographed. Spacecraft would also provide precision trajectory information to refine definition of lunar gravitational field, monitor micrometeoroids and radiation intensity in lunar environment, and serve as a target for tracking operations by Manned Space Flight Network stations. Last in series of five spacecraft designed to improve knowledge of the moon, Lunar Orbiter V differed from four earlier missions because it would concentrate on targets of primary interest to science. Lunar Orbiter I (launched Aug. 10, 1966), Lunar Orbiter II (launched Nov. 6, 1966)	, and Lunar Orbiter III (launched Feb. 4, 1967) were in direct support of Apollo and Surveyor programs, identifying at least eight areas suitable for manned landings. Lunar Orbiter IV (launched May 4, 1967)	completed broad photographic survey of 99% of moon’s front face with 10 times finer resolution than best existing telescopic views. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under ossa direction. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of jPL-operated Deep Space Network, (nasa Proj OS; nasa Release 67—192)
NASA Javelin sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried a Rice Univ.-instrumented payload to 493-mi (794-km) to determine spatial and temporal variations and transit times of auroral particle fluxes and perform pitch angle studies including backscattered particles. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt. srl)
A minimum of four manned space flights would precede the first U.S. attempt to land men on the moon, Astronauts Joe H. Engle and Alfred M. Worden, recently returned from a geology survey in Iceland, told NASA Hq. press conference. Three of the four missions would involve rendezvous with another spacecraft in earth orbit. Astronauts also said that they and their colleagues had even more confidence in the Apollo program now than they had before the Jan. 27 fire. (B Sun, 7/19/67; W Post, 7/19/67)
NASA’s Oso III (oso e) Orbiting Solar Observatory was successfully launched from etr with three-stage Thor-Delta booster to study the sun and its influence on earth’s atmosphere. Orbital parameters: apogee, 354 mi (570 km); perigee, 336 mi (540 km); period, 96 min; and inclination, 33°. Third of eight spacecraft in NASA’s oso program to provide direct observation of the sun, Oso III weighed 627 lbs, carried nine experiments, and had two main sections: the wheel (lower) section provided stability by gyroscopic spinning and housed the telemetry-command equipment, batteries, electronic controls, gas spin-control arms, and seven experiment packages; the sail (upper) section was oriented toward the sun and contained solar cells and two solar pointing experiments. Primary purpose of Oso III was to obtain high-resolution spectral data in the range 8A-1300A from pointed solar experiments during major portion of one solar rotation and adequate operational support of spacecraft subsystems to carry out acquisition of these scientific data. Spacecraft’s experiments were designed to continue and extend work of Oso I (launched March 7, 1963) and Oso II (launched Feb. 3, 1965) spacecraft by collecting data on solar x-rays, gamma rays, ultraviolet radiation, and other solar activity. Project management officials at gsfc tested or turned on all nine experiments and reported that satellite spin rate, power level, charge rate, and temperatures were normal. Both tape recorders were operating. Last experiment, the high-voltage portion of gsfc’s x-ray spectrometer, was successfully turned on March 14. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 67-32,67—52)
U.S.S.R. announced successful completion of rocket tests in second Pacific area near Midway Island to test equipment for spacecraft landings at sea. Tests in other areas had been completed Dec. 13. Series, which began Nov. 28, had been scheduled to last until Dec. 30. (upi, NYT, 12/14/67, 16; SBD,12/18/67,246)
Letter to editor of Space Business Daily by unidentified leader in U.S. space program attacked nasa’s use of pure oxygen in life-support systems: “. . . most engineering people in industry, most reputable bio-engineering people in usaf and NASA felt two gas was the way to go. In addition, there has never been an overwhelming engineering reason for a pure oxygen system. . . . The argument of reliability and complexity is ludicrous when you examine the complexity of other systems in the spacecraft and booster. Now it is even more ironic in that, if pure oxygen is kept, all sorts of complicating compensations must be made. The truth is that a few key people in NASA flew in the face of strong industry technical advice against pure oxygen. To add to the problem, Gemini made them cocky and they forgot completely the sleeping monster they had created. Take anyone, regardless of skill and training, show him a fire in pure oxygen, and ask him if he’d agree to live in pure oxygen with that danger in the complex environment of a spacecraft. The answer is painfully obvious. Now we’ll make a bad situation worse by jury rigging a system to avoid pure oxygen on the pad—but—we’ll stiff have it in space. “nasa and everyone must face it. It was a bad decision compounded by complacency, for example, the hatch design. If the atmosphere were two gas, chances are, survival would have occurred. Let’s get guts, fix the basic deficiency and take the delay. That is the only answer and sooner or later it must be faced.” (SBD, 4/19/67, 282)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried gsfcinstrumented payload to 98-mi (159-km) altitude to measure spectral irradiance of Venus. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, but telescope and camera separated from recovery body during reentry and were damaged at impact, (nasa Rpt SRL)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites with a Thor-Agena D booster from WTR; one satellite reentered July 20. (AP, KC Times, 6/17/67; Pres Rep 1967)
AIAA Board of Directors endorsed hobbyists who built model rockets from paper, plastic, and balsa wood, but warned against the hazards of amateurs mixing their own fuels and experimenting with homemade metal rockets. Action preceded the National Model Rocket Championship contest scheduled to open in Mankato, Minn., Aug. 15. AIAA, which had for many years withheld endorsement of any type of nonprofessional rocket experiments, recommended that model rocketry be conducted only with adult supervision. (Wilford, NYT, 8/14/67, 37)
Seventh attempt to launch eldo’s Europa I rocket from Woomera, Australia, failed when mechanical fault developed in release system of the French Coralie 2nd stage. (Reuters, C Trib, 7/31/67)
NERVA (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) reactor (NRX-A6) was successfully ground-tested by NASA and AEC at Jackass Flats, Nev., achieving major goal of one-hour duration for nuclear rocket technology program and demonstrating that rocket reactors could be operated for periods longer than those required for most space missions. Test, in which reactor operated for 60 min at 1,100-mw design power, was sixth in series to obtain additional data on reactor characteristics under extended operation duration in joint NASA—aec Rover program, (aec Release K-285; Aero Tech, 1/1/68, 13)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N.Mex.), on behalf of himself and Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.), introduced to Senate new $5.1-billion FT 1968 NASA authorization bill (S. 1296) to reflect President Johnson’s Feb. 28 request for funds to develop nuclear rocket technology. Original NASA authorization bill for $5.05 billion (S. 781) had been introduced Jan. 31. (CR, 3/15/67, S3781)
NASA announced establishment of Apollo Lunar Exploration Office within omsf to increase effectiveness of directing Apollo lunar exploration and planning for post-Apollo lunar exploration. New office, headed by former Lunar Orbiter Manager Lee R. Scherer under general direction of Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), would consist of Flight Systems Development and Lunar Science Divisions. It would be responsible to OSSA for scientific aspects of Apollo lunar exploration; ossa would review operating plans, science SR&T tasks, mission objectives and plans, and scientific payloads and principal investigators for specific missions. (NASA Ann, 12/19/67)
NASA successfully conducted fifth test of a rocket-launched parachute as part of an advanced technology effort to investigate possible parachute landing systems for Voyager program. Two-stage Honest John-Nike rocket launched from wsmr ejected ringsail parachute at 130,000-ft altitude, where earth atmosphere resembles that of Mars. Parachute descended to earth with 200-lb payload carrying camera and instruments to record deployment of parachute and its characteristics in flight. Test was part of LaRc’s planetary entry parachute program. (NASA Release 67-120)
NASA successfully launched three artificial cloud experiments from NASA Wallops Station. In first experiment Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket ejected multicolored barium vapor clouds over eastern U.S. at altitudes of 142 and 200 mi (246 and 322 km) to measure electric fields and wind motions in the upper atmosphere by photographing and tracking ionized clouds. Experiment had been scheduled for March 28 but was postponed because of overcast skies. In second and third experiments Nike-Apache sounding rockets carried separate triethylborane (Teb) experiments to 100-mi (161-km) altitude to investigate distribution of, and radiation from, atomic oxygen. Teb, a new test material, for measuring upper atmosphere wind profiles, was ejected at 90- to 50-mi (145- to 81-km) altitudes and photographed by special photometer as it dispersed. Launches were followed by reported sighting of bright ufo’s. (nasa Release 67—74; WS Release 67-12; AP, W Star, 3/31/67, All)
NASA announced that 2nd stage of the first Saturn V booster would be dismantled at ksc to check for any “hairline” cracks. Decision was made after similar cracks had been found in an identical stage of the vehicle at North American Aviation, Inc.’s Seal Beach, Calif., plant. Additional checks were not expected to delay first Saturn V flight—an unmanned mission scheduled for mid-August—by “more than a week or so.” (NASA Release 67—132)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried Princeton Univ. payload to 109-mi (176-km) altitude on flight to determine uv spectrum of extremely hot atmosphere and interstellar matter in direction of 05 star Tau Puppis—hottest of bright stars in sky. Excellent film exposure was obtained from the spectrograph; attitude control system stabilized properly, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Aerobee 150, Mod I sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. payload to 99.6-mi (160.3-km) altitude to obtain quantitative measurements of spectrum and intensity of solar x-ray flux in the 2-30 kev interval and to look for x rays from recurrent nova T Pyxides. This was first flight of new Aerobee configuration Mod I. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 190-lb payload with AFCRL solar radiation experiment to 128-mi (206-km) altitude and impacted 60 mi downrange in the Atlantic. Protective nose cone was ejected during ascent, but payload did not separate from rocket. NASA later reported that desired results were not fully achieved because of partial failure in the spectrometer. Prime mission objective was simultaneous measurement of solar extreme ultraviolet radiation (euv) in upper atmosphere with Aerobee’s photoelectric spectrometer and similar instrument on NASA’s Oso III Orbiting Solar Observatory, launched from ETR March 8. Data from two would be correlated to verify satisfactory operation of Oso IIPs instrument. Secondary experiment on Aerobee 150A involved measurements of ion and electron concentrations and changes in radiation along rocket’s trajectory, (nasa Release 67—56; WS Release 67—7)
Venus IV's launch site and launch vehicle had been prepared with assistance from military rocket experts, Deputy Commander Col. Gen. Vladimir Tolubko of Soviet strategic rocket forces reported in U.S.S.R.’s trade-union newspaper Trud. Emphasizing role of military specialists in the June 12 launching, Tolubko said they provided guidance during “first 10 minutes of the rocket’s flight,” and relinquished control to “the command measuring complex.” This complex, he wrote, had been controlling, for a decade, “various space apparatuses,” presumably both military and scientific vehicles, according to Baltimore Sun. “[Complex] receives measuring information and telemetry data from stations in Moscow, Siberia, the Far East as well as from special ships in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans,” Tolubko stated. Baltimore Sun reported: “Some Western observers believe all of the country’s massive lifting rockets fall technically under military control because of their potential as intercontinental missiles. Further command reverts to civilian hands if the rocket is on a scientific mission.” (B Sun, 11/17/67, All)
USAF launched two unidentified satellites from WTR using Long Tank Thrust-Augmented-Thor-Agena D booster as first stage. One satellite reentered July 13. (Pres Rep 1967)
nasa successfully launched Essa VI (tos-d), sixth meteorological satellite in essa’s Tiros Operational Satellite (tos) system, from Wtr using three-stage Thrust-Augmented Thor-Delta booster. Primary mission objective was to provide global cloud coverage on a regular, daily basis with six-month-nominal and three-month-minimum spacecraft lifetime. Satellite achieved near-polar, sun-synchronous orbit with 920-mi (1,482-km) apogee, 872-mi (1,402-km) perigee, 114.8-min period, and 102.1° inclination. Wheel orientation maneuver was scheduled for completion during 18th orbit at which time first photos would be programmed and NASA would check out spacecraft before turning its operation over to essa. An advanced version of the cartwheel configuration, 286-lb Essa VI carried two Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) camera systems modified with improved magnetic shielding to prevent slight banding visible in previous essa apt photos. Cameras would photograph earth’s cloud cover and immediately transmit pictures to local apt stations. Essa VI would supplement Essa II and Essa IV, replacing them when they became inoperable. essa financed, managed, and operated tos system; gsfc was responsible for procurement, launch, and initial checkout of spacecraft in orbit. Essa I was launched Feb. 3, 1966; Essa II, Feb. 28, 1966; Essa III, Oct. 2, 1966; Essa IV, Jan. 26, 1967; and Essa V, April 20, 1967. All five satellites were still operating, (nasa Proj Off; essa Release 67-82)
British government would launch an all-British satellite within 2% yrs, Reuters reported. According to a Daily Mail article, a 200-lb satellite would be launched from Woomera Rocket Range with new Black Arrow rocket. (Reuters, NYT, 1/4/67,40)
NASA successfully conducted sixth of 10 planned rocket-launched flight experiments to investigate possible parachute landing systems for Voyager program. Two-stage Honest John-Nike rocket launched from wsmr ejected 40-ft cross-type parachute, one of three designs being studied, at 130,000-ft altitude where earth atmosphere resembles that of Mars. Parachute descended to earth carrying 200-lb payload. Test was part of LaRC’s Planetary Entry Parachute Program, (nasa Release 67-162)
President Johnson’s Science Advisory Committee’s (psac) report, The Space Program in the Post-Apollo Period [see Feb. 11], was criticized by Dr. Philip H. Abelson in Science. Report did not fully discuss the comparative value of space and nonspace activities and “quickly ducked” the difficult problem of priorities, Dr. Abelson said. Nowhere was there an evaluation of the chances of finding extraterrestrial life. “Another deficiency is the lack of a full discussion of the role of man in deep space exploration. To date, manned missions have contributed little scientifically. The unmanned missions have had a cost effectiveness for scientific achievement perhaps 100 times that of the manned flights. Nevertheless, the report implicitly calls for a major role for man in the post Apollo program. . . .” (Abelson, Science, 5/17/67)
Charles W. McGuire, formerly an aerospace engineer in the test directorate of NASA’s Gemini program, became Director of Safety for the Apollo Program. He would be on the headquarters staff of and report directly to the Apollo Program Director while being administratively assigned to the Safety Office, omsf. (nasa Ann, 8/7/67)
European aerospace industry assn., Eurospace, was urging formation -of an optional regional communications satellite system to provide TV and telephone coverage for Europe, Donald E. Fink reported in Aviation Week. An expanded version was also being studied to link the continent with the entire Mediterranean basin, the Middle East, and major portions of Africa. Designated Eurosat, system would consist of one 375-lb comsat launched into stationary orbit by an eldo Europa II booster and at least 18 ground stations in Europe and North Africa. Fabrication of satellite and ground stations would be restricted to European aerospace companies. Initial cost estimate for satellite system was $100 million. (Fink, Av Wk, 8/28/67,29)
Canadian government should establish a national space agency and develop an extensive space program to avoid losing its control over domestic communications to U.S., report to new Science Council of Canada by a four-man panel of scientists and engineers concluded. Report asserted satellite communications were best means of binding Canada’s five time zones and bringing advances to isolated northern communities. It advocated that Canada “make or buy” her own satellite launching facilities; centralize her fragmented space program for coordinated planning; renegotiate cooperative agreement for sounding rocket launches with U.S. so that Canada could gradually assume complete control of project; and set up a nationwide comsat system within five years. (Walz, NYT, 3/8/67,21)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from WTR using Scout booster. (Pres Rep 1967)
MSC had awarded Bell Aerosystems Co. a nine-month, $5.9-million fixedprice contract to provide three Lunar Landing Training Vehicles (lltv) for astronauts to practice simulated lunar landings. Capable of simulating % gravity environment of the moon, lltv would be towed to about 4,000-ft altitude and released; pilot could damp out % of gravity force on vehicle using jet engines; remaining % gravity would be supported by rocket motors simulating lunar landing conditions, (nasa Release 67-58)
NASA Argo D^t (Javelin) sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried Syracuse Univ. Research Corp. payload containing vacuum-ion chamber to 625-mi (1,006-km) altitude on flight to measure ion densities in the upper atmosphere. Telemetry signal was received for 18 min. (NASA Rpt srl)
Two-stage Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Natal, Brazil, failed when rocket strayed from planned trajectory. Failure was first in Brazil’s space program which opened Dec. 15, 1965, with the launch of a Nike-Apache sounding rocket. (Reuters, W Post, 8/23/67)
Rep. James G. Fulton (R-Pa.), ranking minority member of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, during debate on NASA appropriations bill on floor of House, said: “China is now proceeding with the development of a rocket with nuclear propulsion. The Chinese nuclear rocket program is based upon a nuclear reactor through which passes liquid hydrogen that is stored in the rocket. This same fuel . •. . is also used as a coolant for the nozzle of the rocket.” He also said Communist Chinese “are proceeding with the development of a sounding rocket called Caditi . . . [and] telecommunications satellites.” He explained that Communist Chinese believe, “to operate successfully in space, big booster power, high energy fuels, and nuclear propulsion are necessary. The University of Nanking ... is conducting training courses in various applications of rocket programs. The Chinese space research center of Sinkiang now has programs in the study of materials necessary for space experiments. In addition, it should be seriously considered that the Chinese rocket institute— Balon Roditi—is interested in the development of rockets ‘for all purposes.’ This, of course, includes military as well as peaceful uses. Peking is not a signatory to the recent peace treaty for the peaceful uses of outer space. . . . “The nations of the West, including Russia, should not underestimate Chinese competence in these matters and the pace of their research and development programs. The U.S. Government and the American people must be alerted to the swift progress of the Red Chinese nation in space research and development, high energy propulsion, and large boosters . . . [and they] must realize the tremendous advances being made in the Red Chinese nuclear research field. ... It is my belief and prediction that the [Communist] Chinese will orbit . . . [their] first . . . satellite by January 1968. . . .” {CR, 10/23/67, H13785-93)
Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham toured McDonnell Douglas Test Facility near Sacramento to inspect 3rd stage of the Saturn V booster which would be used to launch them on first manned Apollo mission in 1968. Schirra told newsmen that NASA would not be “pressed by the press” into flying the mission on a specific date. Asked if he believed pressure from the press was in any way responsible for the Jan. 27 fire, Schirra replied: “. . . I found that whenever we . . . get together with the members of the press that you’re right away asking us, ‘Well, now when are yon going to fly?’ That’s almost the first question, and it’s not a very unique question. ... It seems you want that answer that may be hard news, but when we give you that answer then if we don’t make that date, for some reason or another it appears that we’re failing our goal. While the goal is to have a successful flight at a reasonable time rather than an early failure. . . .” (Transcript)
Jerald Kubat, formerly Special Assistant to the Apollo Program Director, omsf, had been appointed Director, Apollo Program Control. He would have overall responsibility for program planning, configuration management, logistics, resources control, and procurement operations to ensure the attainment of Apollo goals, (nasa Ann, 7/17/67)
President Johnson sent $149.8-million FY 1968 budget amendment to Congress which included $91 million for development of Rover nuclear-powered rocket engine. In his message, the President stated: “Government scientists and engineers have now concluded that a much more powerful nuclear engine would have distinct advantages over rockets now in use. I am recommending that . . . [U.S.] move ahead with the development of a nuclear engine having a potential of 200,000 to 250,000 pounds of thrust. “Such an engine could be used for a new and much more powerful third stage for our Saturn V launch vehicle. Because of its high efficiency, it could: [1] permit us almost to double the weight of the present payload of the Saturn V vehicle, [2] increase our ability to maneuver spacecraft, and [3] be used in future manned landings and explorations of far distant planets. . . .” (PD, 3/6/67, 334-5)
Fabrication of five S—IIs (Saturn V’s 2nd stage) would be accomplished under a contract modification awarded by NASA to North American Aviation, Inc. Purchase of the five stages would complete the S-II requirement for the 15 Saturn V launch vehicles currently approved for development as a part of the Apollo program. The first of the stages would be delivered to nasa in Feb. 1969. The Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Ala., managed the Saturn program, (nasa Release 67-244)
usaf launched OVIII-6 research satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Scout booster into orbit with 275-mi (439-km) apogee, 254-mi (408km) perigee, 93-min period, and 90.6° inclination. The 219-lb satellite, designed for 256-day lifetime, carried two main experiments: mass spectrometers and ion density gauges to measure density, temperature, and composition of the upper atmosphere and its variation with latitude. (Pres Rep 1967; gsfc SSR, 12/15/67; SBD, 12/5/67, 176)
An advanced concept in solid rocketry was demonstrated when Lockheed Propulsion Co. static-fired large-scale motor with two interconnected combustion chambers for 7.5 min. Firing—longest ever achieved by high-performance solid-propellant gas generator—was 80% successful. Lockheed Vice President Kenneth H. Jacobs commented: “The firing demonstrates the feasibility of a large-scale, all-solid rocket propulsion system for spacecraft attitude control and trajectory adjustment.” (Marshall Star, 2/1/67, 5)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carried Southwest Center for Advanced Studies experiment to 85-mi (136-km) altitude to: provide test of instrumentation; prove out feasibility of payload recovery and reuse; and provide geophysical observations of auroral zone under either quiet or disturbed conditions. All experimental objectives were met except payload recovery. (NASA Rpt SRL)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried GSFC-instrumented payload to 71.1-mi (114.4-km) altitude to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 35 to 95 km at the transition from wintertime westerly to summertime easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl; Tech Wk, 4/10/67,15)
Charges that nasa’s Apollo program had serious deficiencies were reviewed by William Hines in series of articles in Washington Evening Star. A 55-page report submitted to nasa three days before Jan. 27 flash fire by Thomas R. Baron, former North American Aviation, Inc., inspector at ksc Apollo warehouse, charged that improper parts had been installed in Apollo I spacecraft. Careless and unorthodox warehousing practices had caused many parts and materials intended for spacecraft use to lose their identity, Baron told Hines in an interview. “As a result there was probably a bundle of stuff [in Apollo] that they don’t have any idea what ... it is at all.” Baron also charged that on at least one occasion, naa had installed a substandard part with deliberate subterfuge, without the knowledge of nasa. Truth about the part could easily be concealed because nasa had no quality-control men of its own in receiving warehouse, Baron said. He was particularly critical of deviation from test procedures: “When you deviate on your small components, and you deviate on all of them, and you put these in one system and you run a systems test and you deviate again, you’ve ended up with a system that really isn’t worthwhile.” James Parker, former nasa quality control inspector at ksc, told Hines that nasa quality control supervision on Apollo contractors’ work was “spotty” and said he had periodically cited instances of waste and improper expenditures in reports to his ksc superiors. (Hines, W Star, 3/15/67, Al, A6; 3/19/67, A7; 3/23/67,1, A6; 3/26/67, A3)
Soviet references to low-altitude nuclear weapon that would drop on target before completing full orbit of earth appeared to confirm Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s analysis of dod intelligence reports that U.S.S.R. had a nuclear-warhead missile capable of sudden attack from relatively low altitude. Commemorating U.S.S.R. Rocket and Artillery Forces Day, Strategic Rocket Forces Commander-In-Chief Marshal Nikolai I. Krylov and Col. Gen. Nikolai V. Yegorov described missiles that could deliver “nuclear warheads . . . along ballistic and orbital trajectories.” (Anderson, NYT, 11/19/67,15)
msc Apollo Program Manager Dr. Joseph F. Shea briefed major Apollo contractors and subcontractors at msc about Jan. 27 flash fire, John Wil-ford reported in New York Times, msc made no announcement of the meeting. (Wilford, NYT, 2/4/67, 15)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket, launched from NASA Wallops Station to 134-mi (216-km) altitude, in afcrl experiment to measure incident solar radiation in upper atmosphere from 1,206 to 284 A with monochromator while similar instrument was in operation in Oso III satellite. Monochromator operated successfully; data were somewhat degraded by partial instrument failure, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., testifying on NASA’s FY 1968 authorization bill (H.R. 6470) before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, urged congressional approval for funding to begin program to develop Nerva II nuclear rocket engine. Estimated cost over 10 yrs would be $2 billion: $500 million would be needed to develop nuclear stage and $1 billion for ground testing. NASA’s decision to develop Nerva II was based primarily on “our own national objectives in space; what do we do in the future; now looking ahead to the late ’70s and ’80s, as a requirement for booster capability in this country. . . . However, we also must consider our capability in the world arena and, of course, specifically today we have to be cognizant the best that we can of the Russian capability and the Russian plans.” Dr. Seamans noted that Soviet Proton booster could launch 50,000 lbs into earth orbit, cornpared to 40,000-41,000-lb capability of Uprated Saturn I. “We have every reason to believe that in the [Soviet] program they recognized the same kind of needs that we recognized for our program and that they are moving on a broad front, including the development of very large boosters,” (Transcript, 1131-4)
Dr. Harvey H. Nininger, leading authority on meteorites and tektites, was honored at Meteoritical Society’s 30th annual meeting at arc by publication of special issue of the Journal of the Geochemical Society and by presentation of Society’s annual Leonard Medal. First to propose, in 1940, that tektites came from moon, Dr. Nininger later proved that coesite—a quartz-like material created by very high pressures—could be found in meteoroid craters. Presence of coesite was currently being used to determine whether a crater was formed by meteorite impact (arc Release 67—21) Qctober 27: NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr reached 99-mi (160-km) altitude in flight to measure, with moderate and high resolution, spectral irradiance of Venus (1,000 to 3,000 A), and star B Oriones (Rigel). No data were acquired from Venus because tracker was ineffective; Rigel was acquired and five-second exposure sequence was completed. (NASARptSRL)
NASA had successfully completed series of ground tests to qualify improved graphite nozzle insert in FW-4<S solid rocket motor which had malfunctioned during launch of Scout booster in January. Malfunction had caused postponement of Feb. 15 launch of ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II-C, because FW-4 was 3rd stage of its booster, Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta, (nasa Release 67-60)
usaf launched experimental reentry vehicle on Atlas-F booster from Vandenberg Afb in Advanced Ballistic Re-Entry Systems (abres) program. (P Inq, 10/15/67, 7)
Former Vice President and current leader for Republican Presidential nomination, Richard M. Nixon, on TV said it was “very likely . .. some of those appropriations [for the space program] are excessive.” Referring to the space program as “a sacred cow,” he called for the President to be “a balance wheel” in evening off the pressure from “vested interests.” He defended a congressman’s right when representing an area with important space business to fight for more funds. (SBD, 11/29/67,140) Coupling a plea for constructive realism with a denunciation of U.S.S.R.’s mere lip service toward international space cooperation, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin discussed ways for understanding “international space cooperation.” No Russian attended the conference, two speakers and one cosmonaut declined invitations. Frutkin explained that cooperation meant “joint projects, jointly undertaken, jointly carried out, and jointly profitable.” Realistic projects practicing space cooperation on an international scale were cited by Frutkin to be: nasa’s program; esro/eldo complex for combining “ten European nations in spacecraft development and seven nations in large vehicle development;” and Intelsat satellite telecommunications consortium, including “some sixty nations in day-to-day operational space communications traffic.” He included in U.S. benefits from the NASA cooperative program “gold flow [for] foreign purchase of space hardware and services,” Canadian ionospheric investigations, West German barium cloud technique, Italian atmospheric density measurements, and French global wind circulation studies. Frutkin referred to esro’s program as “a true pooling of resources [which] goes well beyond the NASA cooperative program. In esro, “common facilities have been planned, financed and operated on an international basis by an international governmental agency.” MSC Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth discussed manned space flight “from Mercury to Apollo.” He said Mercury defined man’s survivability in space, Gemini defined man’s operational capability, and Apollo would be first in utilizing space for manned exploration. “To progress in ten short years from exploring survivability to utilization on the most difficult exploration mission ever undertaken implies a rate of change in technical capability which has no real parallel in history,” he said. Deep space and lunar operations would be faced as “two new major dimensions to our space capabilities.” Space explorers would be coping with the need for huge amounts of energy, extremely precise navigation to hit target and reentry corridor, and radiation protection that could include the intensities generated by solar flares. Lunar explorers would require a vehicle designed to operate entirely outside earth’s atmosphere, descend to and ascend from lunar surface, and propel reliably while exhibiting “relative sophistication of a throttleable engine.” Man returning from first lunar exploration trip would have accomplished “an age-old dream [of visiting] his nearest neighbor in space [and found] a key to the riddle of Earth’s relation to its nearest neighbor [and] a chance of understanding the creative forces that formed his own home—Earth.” “For the first time he will have soared beyond the confines of Earth’s gravity and felt the pull of a foreign planet [and] personally viewed our whole planet as a small bluish ball only four times the span of the lunar disk. These experiences may well produce profound changes in man’s attitude towards himself and his world comparable to those wrought by Galileo’s dramatic demonstration of the Copemican theory, changes which should tend to inspire man to place the affairs of his very small house in order.” (Text) NASA’s Apollo Applications Program (aap) Director Charles W. Mathews listed basic objectives for aap: long-duration space flights of men and systems based on unique capabilities of man, habitability, biomedical and behavioral considerations, and systems development; scientific investigations in earth orbit based on solar astronomy, earth observations, and stellar astronomy; applications in earth orbit based on meteorology, earth resources, and communications; and extended lunar exploration. “The activities involved in [aap] represent major steps in the utilization of our space capability. The results , . . can serve to establish the direction of future space exploration and applications. In particular, increased knowledge on the effective integration of men into the total system should accomplish much in determining the character, systems configurations and operational approach in future programs. The ability to capitalize on the large investments already made in the Apollo Program affords the opportunity to carry on this work in [aap] in an efficient and economical manner.” (Text)
In testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, North American Aviation President J. Leland Atwood denied that pressures to meet 1970 lunar-landing goal had prompted naa engineers to take shortcuts in Apollo program. Terming the Apollo 204 Review Board’s study “a good and penetrating report,” Atwood conceded that deficiencies existed in the Apollo capsule, but disputed Board’s charge that “deficiencies existed in Command Module design, workmanship, and quality control. . . .” naa’s Director of Research and Engineering Dr. John F. McCarthy said that although an electrical arc “probably” caused the fire, there were “various other possibilities”—such as Astronaut Gus Grissom accidentally kicking loose a wire that could have later initiated the blaze. Under stern questioning by subcommittee members, however, Dr. McCarthy admitted that this theory was pure speculation. In response to charge by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) that prevailing attitude prior to fire was not “just a feeling of over-confidence” but “real negligence” by naa and NASA, Atwood reasserted that the most serious error made by naa and NASA was classification of the AS-204 test as “non-hazardous.” Questioned about the reasoning behind designing to minimize fire hazard, Dr. McCarthy pointed out that naa had concentrated on eliminating possible ignition sources while it turned out that the amount and placement of flammable materials was crucial. He characterized this as a “grave error in judgment.” Atwood assured the Subcommittee that naa and NASA had “placed great stress” on the importance of quality and workmanship: “The procedures followed and the depth of inspection which have been employed far surpass those . . . used on any other program. The fact of the accident itself makes it obvious that we must do more than we have done, that we must—guided by the finding of the board—redouble our efforts to approach perfection. Already we have gone over every other design feature of the spacecraft to identify any other area of possible failures . . . [and] we have found none.” (ATT, 4/12/67, 34; W Star, 4/12/67, A6)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried GSFCinstrumented payload to 112-mi (181-km) altitude to observe solar spectrum from 3 A to 400 A in conjunction with Oso III spectrometer instrument [see Mar. 8]. Rocket and instrumentation performance were satisfactory. (NASARptsRL)
French scientists were teaching monkeys that pressure on one out of five buttons produced a gum drop, in preparation for series of space flights with Vesta sounding rocket from Hammaguir Range, AP reported. Researchers hoped to determine effects of weightlessness on animals’ behavior patterns. (AP, W Star, 1/7/67, A2)
Decision to use 100% oxygen atmosphere in U.S. spacecraft had not been made as a shortcut to compensate for U.S.S.R.’s superior booster capability, nasc Executive Secretary Dr. Edward C. Welsh told Interavia Air Letter. “There were other factors involved,” including weight and efficient use of oxygen-consuming fuel cells. Dr. Welsh emphasized there was “. . . no basis at all for a change in [Apollo program] policy” because of Jan. 27 tragedy at ksc and predicted U.S. still had 50-50 chance to land first man on the moon, (upi, W Star, 2/5/67, A8)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Atlas-Agena D booster from wtr; satellite reentered June 12. (upi, NYT, 6/6/67; Pres Rep 1967)
NASA had been concerned about oxygen fire danger prior to Jan. 27 flash fire and had taken steps to curb the danger, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller told the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. NASA felt it “had control of the sources of ignition . . . [but] underestimated badly .. . the course such a fire would take. If more thorough testing of flammable materials used in the cockpit had been conducted, the accident might not have happened.” He denied emphatically April 11 suggestion by naa Director of Research and Engineering Dr. John F. McCarthy that Astronaut Gus Grissom could have triggered the fire by kicking loose a wire, and said he generally agreed with the Apollo 204 Review Board’s criticisms of deficiencies in project operations, conceding: “We were wrong in the standards we applied to the selection of materials for the spacecraft.” Efforts were currently being directed toward eliminating flammable cockpit materials such as nylon and replacing them with glass fiber cloth and Teflon plastic. Although a study was also under way to assess the relative merits of pure oxygen and two-gas life-support systems, Dr. Mueller doubted that present system would be abandoned. In answer to specific questions concerning escape and rescue, Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at msc, testified that the astronauts had died from asphyxia before the spacecraft hatch was opened and that their bums alone would not have caused death. Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips told the Committee that his concern “about the load of work on naa” had prompted an inspection by a NASA team of naa’s Downey, Calif., plant. He had reported to naa President J. Leland Atwood Dec. 19,1965, “some of things that if done differently would contribute to the progress of the program,” and on April 22, 1966, noted that progress was satisfactory: naa was “completely responsive to the programs we described ... and a very aggressive effort___was applied to these problems.” He declined to discuss specifics as requested by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.) but indicated that NASA would consider releasing his report to the subcommittee [see April 18]. (Wilford, NYT, 4/13/67, 52; Reistrup, W Post, 4/13/67, A2)
NASA successfully launched Essa V (tos-c), fifth meteorological satellite in ESSA’s Tiros Operational Satellite (tos) system, from WTR using Thrust-Augmented Thor-Delta booster. Satellite achieved nearly-polar, sun-synchronous orbit with 883-mi (1,421-km) apogee; 840-mi (1,352-km) perigee; 113.5-min period; and 101.9° inclination. Wheel orientation maneuver would be completed during 18th orbit [see April 24], at which time first photos would be programmed and NASA would check out spacecraft before turning its operation over to essa. An advanced version of the cartwheel configuration, 325-lb Essa V carried two Advanced Vidicon Camera System (avcs) cameras which would provide 24-hr global weather coverage. Photos would be stored on magnetic tape until readout by essa’s Command and Data Acquisition (cda) stations at Fairbanks, Alaska, and Wallops Island, Va., to supplement Essa III—expected to become almost completely inoperable by early June. essa financed, managed, and operated tos system; GSFC was responsible for procurement, launch, and initial checkout of spacecraft in orbit. Essa I was launched Feb. 3, 1966; Essa II, Feb. 28, 1966; Essa III, Oct. 2, 1966; and Essa IV, Jan. 26, 1967. (nasa Proj Off; essa Release 67-39)
Three sets of experiments were continued at Ft. Churchill, Canada, and Point Barrow, Alaska [see January 31]. Last five of a series of six Nike-Apache sounding rockets were successfully launched from Ft. Churchill to obtain wind profiles of upper atmosphere to 96-mi (154km) altitude. Last five of a series of six Nike-Apache sounding rockets were launched from Ft. Churchill to study short-term variation of density, pressure, and temperature during 12-hr period where altitudes ranged from 94 mi (152 km) to 102 mi (164 km). In first launch, Nike booster malfunction resulted in payload malfunction; for other four launches, rocket and payload performance were satisfactory. Last five of a series of six Nike-Cajun sounding rockets were successfully launched from Point Barrow at two-hour' intervals to determine short period variations in • upper atmosphere temperatures, (nasa Rpt srl)
Harry N. Atwood, an associate of the Wright Brothers, died at age 83. On July 1, 1911, during 17-hr 12-min flight from Boston to Washington, D.C., Atwood became first man to fly over New York City. The following month he successfully flew his biplane, the “Baby Wright,” 1,265 mi from St. Louis to New York City in 28 hrs 58 min, setting a new air distance record and winning a $10,000 prize. In 1927 Atwood announced the development of a motor that would “develop power without the use of a propeller, by exhausting exploding gases into the atmosphere or water, thus driving itself forward much as a rocket does.” In 1935 he developed strong, lightweight plywood for aircraft bodies. (AP, NYT, 7/16/67, 65)
Confidential report submitted to NASA by General Electric Co. cited numerous serious workmanship flaws in Apollo spacecraft No. 17, scheduled to be launched by Saturn V booster on an unmanned mission no earlier than August, New York Times reported. Flaws included damaged parts, corroded valves, leaky pipes, three small holes in heat shield that “could have catastrophic implications” during reentry, and more than 1,300 “discrepancies” in the 20 mi of electrical wiring. Report was prepared by GE’s Apollo Support Dept, under terms of a 1962 contract with NASA to conduct computer-assisted checks of all systems in Apollo spacecraft prior to launch. George C. White, Jr., NASA Director of Reliability and Quality, omsf, told New York Times reporter John Wilford in a telephone interview that report was “a working document that, in effect, summarizes known problems” for KSC supervisors and should not be taken as “an alert of really big problems.” NASA officials said many of the flaws cited in the report had already been corrected; others had yet to be changed. (Wilford, NYT, 5/3/67, 1, 2)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb employing a Thor-Agena D booster, (upi, W Post, 3/31/67, A3)
Apollo Program Manager m/g Samuel C. Phillips, commented on countdown operations for Satum/Apollo (AS-501): “. . . I was tremendously impressed with the smooth teamwork that this combined government/multi-industry team put together [and] you could almost feel the will with which it was being carried out. I think that’s important to the progress of Apollo . . . perhaps even more so than some of the technical returns we’ll get from this mission. . . . Apollo is on the way to the moon.” (Text)
Sounding rocket launched by esro from northern Sweden to study aurora borealis reached 116-km (72-mi) altitude. (Reuters, NYT, 2/6/67,3)
Undulating, banana-shaped barium cloud, released from a Nike-Iroquois sounding rocket launched from Eglin AFB in USAF experiment on air currents, touched off dozens of reports of UFO’s throughout southeastern U.S. (upi, NYT, 1/18/67, 48)
eldo’s Europa I rocket was launched from Woomera Rocket Range but was automatically destroyed in mid-air after French Coralie 2nd stage failed to ignite. U.K.’s Blue Streak 1st stage performed satisfactorily. Purpose of suborbital flight test was to evaluate performance of the Coralie and separation of the three stages. (AP, NYT, 12/6/67,16; SBD, 12/7/67,189)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from wtr on one Atlas booster. Satellites were later identified as OV 1—12 and OV 1-86. (Pres Rep 1967)
esro’s Kiruna rocket range—esrange—had been officially opened in March, Space Flight reported. The Kiruna facility was situated 30 mi north of Kiruna (north of Arctic Circle in Swedish Lapland) and occupied about 300 sq mi of virgin forest and tundra; Kiruna range would be firing base for atmospheric sounding rockets [see Mar. 15]. (S/F, 4/67,114—6)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Dudley Observatory instrumented payload to 93-mi (150-km) altitude to test modified parachute recovery system and evaluate performance of Dudley Observatory micrometeoroid collection payload before flight during meteor shower. Malfunction of recovery system resulted in hard impact of scientific payload and loss of collection material. Flights using modified recovery system were discontinued until cause of malfunction was determined, (nasa Rpt srl)
Five of the 11 scientist-astronauts selected for NASA’s Apollo program were announced in the Nation’s press. NASA released complete and official list Aug. 4. (AP, NYT, 8/3/67, 8; upi, W Post, 8/3/67, Al)
Existence of a secret three-station system which would have enabled sac to broadcast final messages to its surviving bomber and missile forces in event of a general nuclear attack on U.S. was revealed by Howard Silber in the Omaha World-Herald. System, operational since July 1963, had completed its mission and was being superseded by newer devices. Located near West Point, Wisner, and Tekamah, Neb., each constantly manned station had consisted of a guard house and three trailer-vehicles housing launch control equipment, electronics equipment, and a Blue Scout Junior rocket. The three-stage rockets were to have been launched in sequence so their messages could be sounded at specific prearranged intervals at altitudes of more than 100 mi. (Omaha W-H, 12/21/67, 1; AP, NYT, 12/22/67,31)
U.S.S.R. launched two Cosmos satellites. Cosmos CLXXXVIII entered orbit with 276-km (171-mi) apogee, 200-km (124-mi) perigee, 89-min period, and 52° inclination. At 4:20 am, edt, spacecraft was automatically docked with Cosmos CLXXXVI (launched Oct. 27). Tass later announced: “. . . both satellites, equipped with special approach and docking units, carried out a number of complicated maneuvers in space, automatically finding each other, drawing closer, berthing and docking rigidly.” It was history’s first automatic docking in space and was filmed by TV cameras onboard both satellites. U.S. had successfully accomplished first manned docking March 16, 1966, with Gemini VII and Gemini Agena Target Vehicle (gatv) ; in this docking experiment, astronauts controlled the maneuver. After automatic docking, the two satellites continued in orbit with altitude ranging from 124-171 mi. At 7:50 am, edt, after completing 2% orbits, spacecraft were undocked on command from the ground, and placed into different orbits by restarting rocket engines. Cosmos CLXXXVI, larger of the two spacecraft, softlanded Oct. 31 after 65 orbits. Cosmos CLXXXVIII reentered Nov. 2. Cosmos CLXXXIX was launched into orbit with 600-km (373-mi) apogee, 535-km (332-mi) perigee, 95.7-min period, and 74° inclination. (Shub, W Post, 10/31/67, 1; Kamm, NYT, 10/31/67, 1; AP, W Star, 10/31/67, A3; Winters, B Sun, 11/1/67; gsfc SSR, 11/15/67)
Honeysuckle Creek Tracking Station near Canberra, Australia— newest member of NASA’s 16-station network to support manned Apollo missions—was dedicated in ceremonies attended by Australian Prime Minister Henry E. Holt, NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Edmond C. Buckley, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition. Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey cabled congratulations to Prime Minister Holt: “The establishment of this tracking station is another link in the long chain of cooperative efforts in space between . . . Australia and the United States. “In its support of the Apollo program, this new station will play a vital role in communications with our astronauts in preparation for their landing on the Moon and return to Earth. . . .” (nasa Release 67-65)
NASA Areas sounding rocket launched from Point Mugu, Calif., carried Naval Ordnance Test Station experiment to 33-mi (53-km) altitude to flight-test internally modified version of standard Rocoz payload, designed to measure ozone distribution for support data on Ogo IV satellite. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Scientific data were usable. (NASA Rpt SRl)
Dr. Jack E. Froehlich, 46-year-old scientist and rocket pioneer, was drowned with his nine-year-old son, Mark, in a boating accident. He had been president of National Engineering Science Co. and, during 1959, had been at jpl as a project manager for Explorer I. (Pasadena Star-News, 11/27/67)
U.K.’s Royal Artillery Institution donated two 19th-century rockets to the astronautics collection of Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. One rocket was made by Sir William Congreve in 1815 and used on the Woolwich Ranges; the other, William Hale’s 24-lb rotary rocket, was constructed in 1863. Congreve rockets were used in the U.S. in 1814 while Hale rockets were used in the Mexican War in 1846 and the Civil War. (Smithsonian Release)
usaf launched an experimental reentry vehicle by Atlas-F booster from Vandenberg afb as part of Advanced Ballistic Re-Entry Systems (abres) program. (Tech Wk, 6/19/67,15)
Soviet newspapers revealed that two cities devoted entirely to scientific research were being constructed near Moscow, Theodore Shabad reported in the New York Times. The first, Pushchino, would be devoted entirely to research in biology and related fields; the second, Krasnaya Pakhra, would specialize in earth sciences. (Shabad, NYT, 1/23/67,1, 8) Cal Tech’s Dr. Maarten Schmidt told conference of a new quasar, pks 0237-23, that appeared to be farther from earth than any other reported to date, pks 0237-23, receding at 80% the speed of light, was most remarkable, however, because it displayed two “red shifts”—displacement toward red end of the light spectrum as objects speed away. If both shifts were indicators of velocity,, it would mean that part of the quasar was receding from earth 17,000 mps more slowly than the rest. Dr. Riccardo Giacconi of American Science and Engineering, Inc., and Dr. Sandage reported that second starlike source of intense x rays had been discovered by Oct. 11 sounding rocket and later telescopic observation. Of 30 known x-ray sources, only one had previously been linked to a starlike object. Finding of second source, located in Constellation Cygnus, persuaded a number of astronomers that such visible objects represented a new type of celestial phenomenon, perhaps related to the manner in which stars are formed. Princeton Univ. physicist Dr. Robert H. Dicke revealed an observation that might invalidate Einstein’s general theory of relativity. Dr. Dicke told the conference that his experiments showed the sun to he flattened at the poles and that the oblateness was sufficient to explain a significant portion of Mercury’s orbital behavior, without recourse to relativity. It was the precise conformity of Mercury’s orbit to Dr. Einstein’s predictions that was the chief pillar of his theory. “It wouldn’t surprise me if general relativity is just plain wrong,” Dr. Dicke commented. {NYT, 1/24/67,22; 1/26/67,18; 1/28/67,1,12; 1/29/67,621
msfc had successfully completed 11-mo dynamic test program of Saturn V booster and Apollo spacecraft, which qualified the Saturn V configuration as dynamically and structurally sound. Conducted by Boeing Co., program included dynamic tests of Saturn V’s 1st, 2nd, and 3rd stages, Instrument Unit (iu), and Apollo spacecraft, (msfc Release 67-161)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to 78-mi (126-km) altitude to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22—59 mi (3595 km) at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket was planned as companion shot with Nike-Cajun launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, April 10. Weather conditions at Wallops Station prevented launch on same day. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
First Indian-developed rocket, Rohini-75, designed to carry meteorological experiments, was successfully launched from Thumba Equatorial Launching Station (terls). (Reuters, NYT, 11/21/67, 5)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched from Fort Churchill, Canada, in experiment from Univ. of California at Berkeley to study charged particles in the auroral zone, 1-300 kev electrons, and 1—100 kev protons. Peak altitude was unknown because of loss of telemetry and radar signal. Payload malfunction accounted for failure to obtain complete data. (NASARptSRL)
NASA’s 815-lb Ats II (ats-a) (Applications Technology Satellite) was launched from ETR by Atlas-Agena D booster on mission to evaluate gravity-gradient system for spacecraft stabilization in 6,900-mi-altitude orbit and to obtain useful data from experiments during first 30 days in orbit. Spacecraft successfully entered elliptical transfer orbit with 6,878-mi (11,069-km) apogee; 120-mi (192.7-km) perigee; 218.3-min period; and 28.4° inclination. Agena engines, which were to have reignited to inject spacecraft into 6,900-mi (11,103-km) -altitude circular orbit, failed to ignite for the second burn; spacecraft separated and, tumbling uncontrollably, remained in transfer orbit. By April 7, all but one of the scientific experiments had been turned on and operated successfully, but usefulness of data could not be determined because spacecraft’s sensors were not compatible with its orbit. Last experiment was turned on April 15. Although it was apparent that mission could not be successfully completed, scientists continued to operate experiments to obtain as much data as possible on spacecraft performance, and ground stations received occasional TV pictures and meteorological photos. Gravity-gradient configuration functions would not be exercised until spacecraft’s attitude behavior could be better defined. Ats II was second in series of five satellites designed to improve spacecraft technology; develop long-life control systems; advance spacecraft communications; and improve long-range weather predictions. Record size—252 ft long with 123-ft booms extended from opposite sides— Ats II was first U.S. gravity-gradient satellite to carry meteorological cameras and first with sufficient instrumentation to verify three-axis gravity control system in conjunction with detailed computer program. In addition to gravity-gradient experiment, satellite also carried communications equipment, two Advanced Vidicon Camera System (avcs) cameras, and eight scientific experiments to measure orbital environment. Ats I was successfully launched Dec. 6, 1966, into a 22,300-mi-altitude near-synchronous orbit over the Pacific and was still operating flawlessly, ats program was managed by GSFC under ossa direction. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 67-71; AP, NYT, 3/31/67, 12)
House/Senate Conference Committee agreed on $4.86-billion NASA authorization bill—$234.2 million less than NASA had requested for FY 1968. It included $42 million for Voyager program, $347.7 million for aa program, $73 million for nuclear rocket program, and $157.7 million for launch vehicle procurement. Bill, which required Senate and House approval, was passed by the Senate Aug. 2. (nasa lar VI/83; Committee Release; Clark, NYT, 8/1/67, 13)
Initial reaction by the press to Jan. 27 flash fire in which three Apollo astronauts died: Business Week: “After 16 space flights, in which 19 astronauts returned from their missions safely, many had forgotten the inescapable peril of exploration. No previous frontier has ever been crossed without the loss of life; it was not to be expected that space—the most perilous frontier of them all—could be conquered without sacrifice. None of this lessens the grief that every man in NASA feels for fallen comrades. But it is the nature of test pilots ... to accept disaster not as defeat but as a call for intensified effort and dedication.” (Bus Wk, 2/4/67) Washington Evening Star: “Now that the initial shock ... is beginning to wear off, the second guessers are . . . wondering whether we should be going to the moon at all. . . . From any rational point of view, the only thing to do is to carry on. The Apollo program necessarily will mark time until the true cause of the spacecraft disaster is located and corrected. It is conceivable that the delay could cause the Dec. 31, 1969, deadline to be missed. It is entirely possible that the Russians may get to the moon ahead of us. But so what? The world will not end nor the United States vanish, if the Russians beat us to the moon. ... It would be senseless to stop now. Fortunately, it probably would also be impossible.” (Hines, WStar, 2/2/67) Editor & Publisher:	“The recent disaster at Cape Kennedy indicates we are no less reluctant to face up to disaster than anyone else. Not only were our reporters not prepared for it-—none of them were there for the simulated flight test—but neither were our space officials . . . [because] the full import of the tragedy was fed out piecemeal. . . . The lessons for NASA officials and for newsmen are obvious. Space travel is fraught with dangers in every test, every maneuver, every piece of equipment, but we became complacent about them because of our successes. NASA’s record of dealing with the press up to now has been pretty good and if it hasn’t already developed a ‘disaster plan’ for such accidents it soon will. News media have learned that nothing in the space program should be considered ‘routine’ and that front row seat should never be left unoccupied at any time.” (Editor & Publisher, 2/11/67) Some press reaction to the accident later became increasingly critical of NASA: Washington Evening Star: “The implication of the NASA story was that no fire extinguishing apparatus or quick escape mechanism— neither of which was present on the Apollo 1—could have saved the men. The implication of the truth is that if the spacecraft had been equipped with a means of blowing open the hatch, Grissom, White and Chaffee might have had a chance. NASA’s motive in attempting to distort the truth may have been to protect the families of the astronauts from undue mental anguish. But it also served the function of protecting NASA by heading off criticism of the agency ... by deliberately misleading the press, Congress and the public.” (W Star, 2/9/67) New York Times: “The most basic issue ... is not, as NASA has tended to emphasize, the source of the spark that started the fire. It is rather the question of why so much was permitted to hinge on the assumption that there would be no fire. . . . “The answer is only secondarily, as a NASA official has suggested, that ‘alertness . . . had become dulled’ by previous successes. . . . More fundamental was the willingness to gamble for the sake of winning the race to the moon.” (NYT, 2/28/67,34)
msc awarded Rocket Research Corp. a $405,000 contract to deliver by
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 35 to 95 km at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRl) 324-801 O—69
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket, launched from wsmr, reached 89-mi (144-km) altitude in American Science & Engineering, Inc., experiment to collect data on celestial x-ray sources for location of sources and flux levels in 1—20 kev range. One strong x-ray source did not appear in data, possibly because of door malfunction. All other data were satisfactory. (nasa Rpt srl)
Unless U.S. space program moves much faster than now seems likely, U.S. consumption of helium this year . . . may be down as much as . . . 25%,” Chemical and Engineering News reported. Since Jan. 27 Apollo fire and resulting “slowdown” in space program, use of helium to pressurize rocket fuels—which accounted for 45% of helium consumption—had dropped to about half of its former level. Despite the 1967 recession, however, helium industry was optimistic that trend would be reversed when manned space flights were resumed in 1968. (C&E News, 7/3/67, 18-9)
NASA announced it was conducting series of conferences with Apollo prime contractors and “a number of other companies that may have resources which could be utilized to effect the most rapid feasible recovery from the setback to the Apollo program caused by the Apollo 204 accident.” Contractors with whom discussions were being held included: Aerojet-General Corp., Boeing Co., General Electric Co., Lockheed Aircraft Corp., Martin Co., McDonnell Douglas Corp., and North American Aviation, Inc. (nasa Release 67-105)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Univ. of Minnesota experiment to 131-mi (210-km) altitude to measure composition of atmosphere and determine temperature in altitude range 62—124 mi (100-200 km) using three mass spectrometers. Two of three spectrometers did not function properly; however, data obtained appeared satisfactory, (nasa Rpt srl)
Initial flight test of usaf’s Scramjet (supersonic combustion ramjet)—forerunner of hypersonic aircraft—was partially successful. Launched by Scout booster from Vandenberg afb, vehicle accomplished primary goal by demonstrating it could separate properly from booster, but failed to perform some secondary missions. (AP, NYT, 1/14/67, 4; Tech Wk, 1/23/67,3)
afcrl successfully launched 65-lb payload by Trailblazer II booster from Wallops Station in experiment to study reentry communications problems by carefully measuring plasma sheath properties and their effects. Booster’s 3rd and 4th stage engines fired at 187-mi altitude to propel nosecone downward; at 60-mi altitude rocket achieved a velocity of 18,000	fps creating an envelope of plasma identical to the envelopes which block radio and microwave communications with reentering spacecraft. Since a pure plasma was essential to the success of the experiment, reentry vehicle had no ablative coating and burned up completely in the atmosphere, afcrl would use results of measurements to develop techniques for predicting exact behavior of a radiating system during reentry, (oar Release 67—9)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from WTR using Titan III—B booster; satellite reentered Aug. 28. (Pres Rep 1967)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried instruimented payload to 26-mi (42-km) altitude to gather micrometeoroid particles during a quiet period immediately before the Zeta Perseid/An-etid meteor shower. No scientific data were obtained because “burn-through” near the igniter headcap caused an explosion, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA and Boeing Co. signed a $20-miUion letter contract extending the scope of Boeing’s work with NASA to include integration of Apollo spacecraft’s three modules with Saturn V launch vehicle [see May 9]. Boeing would: (1) assist and support NASA and its three manned spaceflight centers—MSC, msfc, and KSC—in performance of certain technical tasks for Apollo missions AS-501 through AS-515; and (2) be responsible for supporting Apollo Program Office in integrating Saturn V booster with Apollo Command Module (cm), Service Module (sm), and Lunar Module (lm). Work would be performed under overall direction of OMSF Apollo Program Office. Boeing Co.’s currently contracted Saturn work included engineering, construction, and testing of Saturn V 1st stage; support of assembly and system integration of Saturn V 2nd and 3rd stages with the 1st; and design engineering support of certain ground support equipment at KSC. (nasa Release 67-161)
Two Boosted Areas I sounding rockets launched from Resolute Bay, Canada, without tracking facilities carried gsfc experiment to obtain D region ionospheric data in vicinity of magnetic north pole. First rocket lost telemetry at seven seconds; recovery search would be attempted if arctic conditions permitted. Second rocket had 255-sec burn (300 + sec planned), so altitude was probably insufficient. Both.experiments used ground-based transmission of rf energy to rocketborne receivers (Fara-day-rotation experiment). These were first U.S. rocket launchings from this facility, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA’s Ogo IV (ogo-d) Orbiting Geophysical Observatory was successfully launched by a Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena booster from WTR into polar orbit with 564-mi (908-km) apogee, 256-mi (412-km) perigee, 97.9-min period, and 86° inclination. Primary mission objective was “to acquire data for studies of latitude-dependent atmospheric phenomena, from an attitude stabilized platform, during the period of perigee rotation from the Northern Hemisphere across the Arctic pole into the Southern Hemisphere.” Secondary objective was to conduct “detailed correlative investigations in atmospheric physics, energetic particle physics and polar region physics with known spacecraft attitude for the greater part of one diurnal cycle.” Carrying 20 experiments, 1,240-lb satellite was fourth of six spacecraft in nasa’s Orbiting Geophysical Observatory (ogo) program. Ogo I was launched Sept. 4,1964; Ogo II, Oct. 14,1965; and Ogo III, June 7, 1966. To date these missions had provided over 450,000 experiment hours of data on earth’s environment and had resulted in over 100 scientific papers and published reports. OGO program was managed by GSFC under ossa direction, (nasa Release 67-187; nasa Proj Off; AP, NYT, 7/29/67, 7)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced U.S.S.R.’s possible development of a Fractional Orbital Bombardment System [see Oct. 16]. While ICBm’s followed a ballistic trajectory from launch to impact and had an apogee of 800 mi, fobs, he said, was fired into a very low orbit, and before first orbit was completed, rocket engine would slow down payload and cause it to drop out of orbit—payload then following a reentry path like reentry of ICBM. He said that “we suspect [they] are pursuing the R&D of a FOBS . . . [and] it is conceivable that they could achieve an initial operational capability during 1968. Because of the low altitude of their orbits, some trajectories of a fobs would avoid detection by some early warning radars . . . [and] impact point cannot be determined until ignition of the rocket engine [deboosting payload]— roughly three minutes and 500 miles from the target. And the flight time can be as much as 10 minutes shorter than an icbm.” Accuracy of fobs would be significantly less than that of icbm and payload a fraction of that of icbm, according to McNamara, fobs’ disadvantages had compelled dod to decide that FOBS “would not improve our strategic offensive posture . . . while development of [fobs] could be initiated at any time for relatively rapid deployment.. . .” Anticipating that early warning radars (including bmews) could not detect fobs “because of the low altitude cf [fobs] orbits,” McNamara said: “. . . already we are beginning to use operationally over-the-horizon radars which possess a greater capability of detecting fobs than does bmews. These will give us more warning time against a full-scale attack using fobs missiles than bmews gives against a heavy icbm launch.” (Text; DOD Release 1060-67) Communist-Chinese-oriented abm system—deployment approved by DOD Sept. 18—was named the Sentinel System, according to Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s announcement, l/g Alfred D. Star-bird (usa) was named Army’s System Manager for new system; currently Director, dca, Starbird would assume new position Nov. 15,1967, and would be responsible for development and timely deployment in a three-pronged organization: Sentinel System Office, Washington, D.C., to be an element of C/Staff’s Office, USA; Sentinel System Command, Huntsville, Ala., to develop, procure, and install new system; and Sentinel System Evaluation Agency (ssea) at wsmr to provide independent evaluation, review, and testing. Existing Nike-X organization, under command of l/g Austin W. Betts (usa) , Chief of r&d, would continue (separately from Sentinel System) to perform: r&d, design of equipment to be used for tests of the penetration capabilities of U.S. offensive missiles, and mission of protecting U.S. against large-scale attacks, (dod Release 1059-67)
jpl had selected Avco Space Systems Div. for negotiations on a six-month, $240,000 contract to study feasibility of launching a flyby spacecraft and atmospheric entry capsule to Venus in 1972. NASA had approved selection of the firm, which would head a team effort with Northrop Systems Lab oratories. Study, expected to begin in May, would investigate all aspects of launching by an Atlas-Centaur booster a Mariner-class spacecraft weighing about 1,200 lbs. Near Venus, 100-lb capsule system would separate from flyby portion of spacecraft and enter Venusian atmosphere to take direct measurements during descent to surface. Capsule would not be designed to survive impact on Venus, (nasa Release 67-72)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried nrlinstrumented payload to 120-mi (193-km) to obtain spectra from a stellar ultraviolet image converter spectrograph and stellar photometric data from two ultraviolet photon counters. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
JPL issued RFp’s to industry on contracts for preliminary design and definition studies of an unmanned Voyager landing capsule. Two identical Voyager spacecraft would be launched by a single Saturn V booster in 1973 and 1975 to conduct scientific studies of Mars and search for extraterrestrial life. From the industrial proposals, due in March, two to four contractors would be chosen. (NASA Release 67-15) * U.S.S.R. was definitely trying to achieve the first manned lunar landing, concluded a 920-page report on the Soviet space program prepared by Library of Congress Legislative Reference Service for Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences:	. . materials gathered from Soviet sources on future lunar missions reveal this pattern of complete unanimity: the lunar mission is desirable and necessary; it must be a manned mission; it is certain to succeed. . . Report characterized Soviet space program as “well-planned, orderly, and vigorously pursued with concentration on specific, limited objectives, each achieving a marked advance beyond the one preceding.” There was said to be no evidence “of either Soviet disenchantment with the program or a desire ... to cut it back. On the contrary, space specialists have underscored the durability of the Soviet commitment to space exploration. . . .” Report was entitled: Soviet Space Programs, 1962-65; Goals and Purposes, Achievements, Plans, and International Implications. (Text)
nasa’s Surveyor VI (Surveyor-F) was successfully launched from etr by Atlas-Centaur (AC-14) booster on 64-hr lunar intercept trajectory. Primary mission for the 2,223-lb (at launch) spacecraft was to perform a soft-landing on moon and obtain post-landing TV pictures of the lunar surface. As secondary mission spacecraft would determine relative abundance of chemical elements in lunar soil with alpha scattering instrument; obtain touchdown-dynamics, thermal, and radar-reflectivity data; and conduct vernier engine erosion experiment, nasa’s Explorer XXXIV, in orbit since May 24, would serve as a “solar watchdog,” furnishing information on solar radiation for correct interpretation of Surveyor VPs soil analyses. At 00:04:06 get Surveyor VI with two-burn Centaur separated from Atlas and ignited to reach 100-mi-altitude circular parking orbit where it coasted for 12 min; Centaur then reignited to escape earth orbit and boost spacecraft toward moon. Spacecraft separated from Centaur, deployed its solar panels, and locked on the sun and the star Canopus. Based on a 56-mi target miss estimate, a 1.2-m midcourse maneuver was conducted at 00:18:41 get to assure precise landing on target in Sinus Medii in center of moon’s front face. Surveyor VI was sixth in series of seven spacecraft designed to prove out design, develop technology of lunar soft-landing, obtain post-landing TV pictures of lunar surface, and provide basic scientific and engineering data in support of Project Apollo. Surveyor program was directed by OSSA Lunar and Planetary Programs Div.; project management was assigned to JPL; Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle was managed to LeRC; and prime contractor for spacecraft development and design was Hughes Aircraft Co. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Releases 67-278, 67-287)
NASA Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 300-lb payload containing two white rats to 85-mi (137-km) altitude in first of four experiments to study behavior in an artificial gravity field and determine minimum level of gravity needed by biological organisms during space flight. Two arms of payload were extended after rocket burnout, producing a centrifuge with artificial gravity levels between 0.35 and 1.65 g. During five minutes of free fall, rats selected their own gravity levels by walking along tunnel runway. Data on their movement and position were telemetered to ground stations. Payload impacted 70 mi downrange in the Atlantic; no recovery was attempted. (WS Release 67-36; NASA Release 67-290; NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried GSFCinstrumented payload to 109-mi (176-km) altitude to study special uv radiation of star Zeta Ophiuchi. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory; no spectra were obtained because a thin film of oil-like substance covered grating and mirrors. Source of substance was under investigation, (nasa Rpt srl)
A report expressing confidence in NASA’s management of the Apollo program was released by House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. Report was prepared before Jan. 27 Apollo fire, but Subcommittee Chairman Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) said the findings of the study were “essentially unchanged. . . . The public may look with confidence to the management, engineers, scientists and technicians of NASA and industry as the Apollo program progresses.” Report praised the ability of the NASA-industry team to identify and solve the administrative, technical, and engineering problems “inherent in performing a program contributing major technological progress. . . .” It identified the major Apollo pacing items as the Saturn V 2nd stage, the Lunar Module (lm) for the Saturn I and V, and the Command and Service Module (csm) for the Saturn I and V. “Any significant delays in attainment of flight capability of these items could affect both program shcedule and cost adversely.” Report said that an additional $300 million in NASA’s FY 1967 budget would have provided: “(1) increased confidence in meeting unforeseen development problems when encountered; (2) broader latitude in providing system alternatives when engineering difficulties are identified; and (3) an increased assurance of meeting the national goal of a lunar landing in this decade.” (Text; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 3/20/67)
Responsibilities of the Defense Communications Agency were described by its director, l/g Alfred Starbird (usa) . General Starbird said that dod’s Communications Satellite Program had been divided into three phases: . (1) use of existing syncom satellites, (2) installation of Initial Defense Communications Satellite System, and (3) investigation of Advanced Defense Communications Satellite Project for later implementation. General Starbird outlined progress in implementing these steps and in meeting the “special operational requirements” for communication support of NASA’s Apollo program and for increased circuits to Southeast Asia. (Data, 1/67, 5-9)
NASA’s Lunar Orbiter IV (Lunar Orb iter D) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from ETR on mission to photograph lunar surface [see May 8-June 1]. Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb spacecraft into 100-mi (161km) -altitude parking orbit, reignited after 21-min coast period, injecting spacecraft on 89-hr translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule Lunar Orbiter IV deployed its four solar panels and two antennas, locked its five sensors on the sun, and fixed its star tracker on Canopus. At 16:45 GMT midcourse maneuver with 53.8-sec engine burn was successfully conducted to slow spacecraft’s speed and alter its aim point slightly. Primary objectives of NASA’s Lunar Orbiter IV mission, fourth in series of five, were (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into high-inclination lunar orbit; (2) to obtain broad systematic photographic survey of lunar surface; (3) to improve knowledge of the moon; and (4) to provide basis for selecting sites for more detailed scientific study by subsequent orbital and landing missions. Full photographic flight plan would require more than 200 camera-pointing maneuvers, compared to 50 for Lunar Orbiter III. Photos would cover more than 80% of the moon’s front face and more than 90% of the hidden side. Spacecraft would also monitor micrometeoroids and radiation intensity in the lunar environment, refine definition of moon’s gravitational field, and serve as a target for tracking operations by Manned Space Flight Network stations. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under OSSA direction. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of jPL-operated Deep Space Network, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-101)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried nrl payload to 107-mi (173-km) altitude on flight to measure, with Euv heliograph and coronagraph, micrometeoritic particles close to rocket and to take pictures of solar disc. Excellent results were obtained; coronagraph package yielded more than 50 photographs of white-light solar corona from three to 10 solar radii, (nasa Rpt srl)
afcrl launched five Nike-Iroquois sounding rockets from Vega Baja, Puerto Rico, so that simultaneous observations of the ionosphere might he made using rocket instruments and the Arecibo radiotelescope. Rockets were designed to reach a peak altitude of 112 mi (180 km). Measurements of temperature, energy distribution, and density of ions and electrons provided basis for calibration and interpretation of ionospheric data acquired by Arecibo radiotelescope. (OAR Research Review, 12/67, 6-7) During October-November: Lunar Orbiter IV, launched May 4, was presumed to have crashed on lunar surface; contact with spacecraft had been lost July 17. (nasa Proj Off)
NASA’s previous approach to preventing spacecraft fires by “preventing their ignition” had been inadequate, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified at open hearing held by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences on Jan. 27 Apollo tragedy. Also present were NASA Administrator James E. Webb, nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., and Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations. NASA’s future approach would seek to: (1) minimize possibility of ignition, recognizing “that this possibility will always exist”; (2) limit chance of fire’s propagating once it has started; and (3) minimize consequences of fire to crew. Dr. Mueller outlined an extensive program of testing, redesign, and procedural changes, which included escape hatch for Apollo spacecraft that could be opened in two seconds; search for new, less flammable materials for cabin interior and spacesuits; and revised emergency procedures. All improvements and changes would be incorporated into an advanced version—Block II—of Apollo spacecraft. No more Block I spacecraft like Apollo 204 would be used for manned space flights. Dr. Mueller said no estimate of fire’s eventual cost in time or money would be made until completion of Apollo 204 Review Board’s investigation, but he indicated that it would be at least 8 to 10 months before next manned Apollo flight. Dr. Mueller testified that launch rehearsal during which fire had occurred had not been classified as “hazardous” because seven years of experience with Mercury and Gemini programs had never indicated such tests were particularly dangerous. Even if the test had been categorized as hazardous., he said, it would have still taken 90 sec for crew to open the double hatch and complete their egress. Crew died within 20 sec after detection of fire. Webb added that the handle for equalizing pressure, necessary precondition to opening hatch, had not been actuated. Dr. Berry said carbon monoxide had asphyxiated astronauts. He confirmed that bodies had had “some thermal bums of second and third degree” but “not of sufficient magnitude to cause death.” Dr. Berry warned that “we are never going to be able to completely eliminate the risk of fire as long as oxygen is available.” Dr. Mueller said “an atmosphere which will support life will also support combustion. Therefore the first answer . . . must be fire prevention in terms of strict control of both potential ignition sources and combustible materials.” During the questioning session, Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) inquired about a 1965 report by Apollo Program Manager m/g Samuel Phillips (usaf). Dr. Mueller said that he did “not recall such a report,” and when asked to supply a copy, Webb said NASA would try and identify the specific report and would make it available to the Comptroller General “under any request that the Committee . .. would make to him.” (Testimony; Transcript, 3-4, 24, 41-2, 61, 70, Apollo Accident, Part 2, 65-66, 75, 86, 97, 108, 115, 125 ff., and 130 ff.)
NASA Argo D^4 (Javelin) sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried 120-lb payload containing an ionosphere experiment prepared by gsfc and Southwest Center for Advanced Studies to 493-mi (793-km) altitude. Flight was coordinated with the overpasses of Alouette II, the Canadian satellite, and Explorer XXXI, the U.S. satellite, launched pickaback by nasa Nov. 28, 1965. Primary purpose of mission was to measure properties of the ionosphere and to correlate results with simultaneous measurements made by the two Isis satellites. (WS Release 67—24)
Static launch from motionless rocket sled of F—111 aircraft’s crew escape module at Air Force Missile Development Center (afmdc) was successful. Under severe conditions pilot might encounter in emergency before takeoff, module would allow crew to escape. (Av Wk, 10/16/67, 19)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr reached 118-mi (182-km) altitude in flight to observe profile of solar hydrogen Lyman-alpha line and to measure radiation in relation to earth’s planetary hydrogen. Experiments performed satisfactorily, but range schedule delay caused loss of coordination with Mariner V experiment, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Areas sounding rocket was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 35-mi (56-km) altitude as second in nots series to measure incident solar ultraviolet irradiance in support of Ogo IV’s mission. Rocket and payload performed satisfactorily, and achieved all experimental objectives, (nasa Rpt srl)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from WTR using an Atlas-Agena D booster; satellite reentered Feb. 12. (Tech Wk, 2/13/67, 10; Pres Rep 1967; gsfc SSR, 2/15/67)
Third U.S. Redstone rocket in the “Project Sparta” antimissile-missile research program was fired from Woomera Rocket Range near Canberra, Australia, Supply Minister Denham Henty announced. (AP, C Sun-Times, 4/21/67)
Vesta rocket launched by France from Hammaguir Range carried macaque monkey Martine to 233-km (145-mi) altitude in experiment to measure effects of extreme altitude and weightlessness on reactions of the monkey, who had been trained to push a button in response to a red light, for possible application to problems of manned space flight. Monkey was successfully recovered when she landed by parachute 98 mi from launch site after 21-min flight and was reported to be in good health. (NYT, 3/8/67,24; W Star, 3/7/67)
France’s Sahara Missile Proving Grounds at Hammaguir Range closed after 20 yrs, signaling end of operational use of Daimant 1 booster which had launched four French- satellites from Hammaguir since Nov. 26, 1965. Next French satellite, 200-lb D-2, would be launched from French Guiana in 1969 with Super Diamant booster. (NYT, 2/11/67; Av Wk, 3/27/67,50)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried Univ. of Illinois-GCA Corp. experiment to 88-mi (141-km) altitude to determine electron density in lower ionosphere (during period of nonblanketing Sporadic-E), electron collision frequency, electron temperature, and positive ion densities of species in the 8- to 60-a.m.u. range. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, and excellent results were anticipated. (NASA Rpt SRl)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried GSFC-instrumented grenade experiment to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22—59 mi (35—95 km) at the transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched from Churchill Research Range, Canada, and carried GSFC-instrumented payload to 141mi (227-km) altitude to obtain data on charged particle (luxes and investigate distribution of electric fields in ionosphere during auroral displays. Rocket performance was satisfactory, but only partial data were received from electric field experiment. {NASA Rpt SRl)
Delegates from U.S.S.R. and Communist-bloc countries, who met in Moscow April 3-15, had drafted a “joint satellite and rocket launching program” and had agreed to set up a satellite communications program “open to all countries willing to join,” Tass announced. No further details were released, (upi, NYT, 4/17/67, 10)
usaf launched unidentified satellite with Titan III—B booster from wtr; satellite reentered Jun. 30. (Tech Wk, 6/26/67. 15; Pres Rep 1967)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from WTR using Thor-Agena D booster. {Pres Rep 1967)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to 72-mi (115-km) altitude to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22-59 mi (35-95 km) at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASARptSRL)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket with grenade payload was launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data between 22-59 mi (35-95 km) at transition from winter-time westerly circulation to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed well, (nasa Rpt srl)
Dr. Ludwig Roth, 58, McDonnell Douglas director of Saturn-Apollo extension program died in Redondo Beach, Calif. Bom in Gross-Gerau, Germany, he had been an associate of Dr. Wernher von Braun in pioneering rocket engineering and space sciences, He had served as Assistant Director of Army Ballistic Missile Agency. (AP, NYT, 11/3/67, 43; World Space Directory, Fall 1967, 155) During October: jpl Director Dr. William H. Pickering stressed importance of unmanned space exploration in Astronautics and Aeronautics: “During the past decade of space exploration, unmanned spacecraft have demonstrated a remarkable versatility in performing a wide variety of scientific tasks. The success of these robots is due largely to the ingenuity of the designers in building complex but reliable automated devices, capable of withstanding the constraints imposed by the hostile spaceflight environment. “It is clearly evident that many difficult engineering and scientific problems remain to be solved. The experience of the past decade demonstrates, however, that within the next decade unmanned spacecraft can initiate a detailed surface exploration of our neighboring planets. “The unmanned exploration of the solar system is technically and scientifically possible. It presents a unique opportunity to step boldly forward into new areas of both technology and science.” (Pickering, A&A, 10/67,80-4)	.
LaRC would negotiate with Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc. (ltv), for 24-mo, $ 10-million, firm-fixed-price contract to provide 15 Scout launch vehicles, NASA announced. Deliveries would begin about the 10th month at a rate of one vehicle a month. Scout was a multistage booster which could launch a 320-lb satellite into 300-mi orbit or a 50-lb satellite into an 11,000-mi orbit, (nasa Release 67-201)
Advanced solid rocket motor capable of being fired or pulsed on command had been developed at the Air Force Rocket Propulsion Laboratory (afrpl) by Lockheed Propulsion Co. under two-year, $2-miflion r&d program. Motor had been selected to power usaf’s short-range attack missile (sram). (afrpl Release)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried GSFC payload containing pitot-static probe to measure atmospheric density, pressure, and temperature in observing diurnal variation in the fine structure of the region from 15 to 110 km. Probe was launched in conjunction with thermosphere probe experiments. The 2nd stage of the sounding rocket did not ignite because of low current application. (nasa Rpt srl)
Astronaut Frank Borman told Cleveland Engineering Society that he and other astronauts hoped U.S. would immediately revitalize the Apollo program: “We’d like to see the crews regrouped and the program under way as soon as possible.” (AP, W Post, 4/6/67, G2)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched from Sonmiani, Pakistan, carried payload to peak altitude of 175 km (109 mi) to obtain atmospheric wind and temperature data up to 135 km (84 mi). Grenade and chemical cloud techniques were used by experimenters, Dr. D. Rees, London, England, and Mr. M. Rahmatullah, Karachi, Pakistan. Rocket performed satisfactorily; grenade-explosion timing sequence was late. (NASA Rpt srl)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from wtr with Thor-Agena D booster; satellite reentered Feb. 2. (upi, NYT, 1/16/67, 18; Pres Rep 1967; gsfc SSR, 2/15/67)
Last NASA Areas sounding rocket in series of seven was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 36-mi (59-km) altitude, in nots experiment to measure incident solar uv irradiance in support of Ogo IVs mission. All experimental objectives were obtained. Rocket and payload performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA’s broad program of lunar exploration included, according to Space/ Aeronautics, “quickening conversion of data and designs into hardware and techniques for . . . planting a coordinated set of instruments on the lunar surface for remote, year-long readout; bringing back those lunar samples for exhaustive, quarantine-flavored analysis in custom labs; going back with wheels, rocket pogos, and sophisticated drills for more extensive exploration; [and] exploiting, eventually, the moon’s capacities as a base for astronomy, or as a source for fuel.” (S/A, 5/67,68)
U.S.S.R. had developed a device that enabled jet aircraft to take off almost straight up, reaching the stratosphere “in a matter of minutes,” Komsomolskaya Pravda reported. Article did not include detailed description of device but indicated it consisted of rocket engines that provided sudden thrust of tremendous force. (AP, NYT, 1/7/67, 10)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried Naval Research Laboratory payload containing two coronagraphs to 113-mi (180.8-km) altitude. Primary purpose of flight was to launch externally occulted coronagraphs during period when moon was very close to the sun. Rocket also carried a photographic spectroheliograph, a photographic extreme ultraviolet heliograph, and an ion chamber to measure total solar flux at Lyman-alpha. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell, testifying before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, said the scientific community saw a need to develop a spacecraft to make measurements at low altitudes—about 80 mi—to investigate transition between the meteorology of the lower atmosphere and the aeronomy of the upper. In the lower atmosphere the constituents are thoroughly mixed; in the upper, they tend to separate by gravity with the heaviest below and the lightest above. “The importance of this transition region has been revealed by the [sounding] rocket program, but only satellites can provide the global measurements needed to establish the lower boundary conditions for the upper atmosphere as a whole,” Newell said. “Such a mission would require the development of a spacecraft with a restartable engine in order to achieve an adequate lifetime.” (Testimony)
eldo Technical Director Dr. W. H. Stephens announced that eldo would develop Europa III following development of Europa II. Europa III booster would have Europa I 1st stage (Blue Streak) and liquid hydrogen-oxygen 2nd stage with two 14,000-lb-thrust rocket engines. Configuration would be able to boost 6,000-lb payload into low earth orbit. Using high-energy 3rd stage, new launch vehicle would be able to place 1,200	lbs into synchronous orbit; adding two strap-on solid rocket motors rated at 420,000 lbs thrust each, launch vehicle could place 4,000 lbs into synchronous orbit. Low-thrust, very-high-specific-impulse systems were being considered, Stephens said, for use in transferring payloads from low to high orbits, and for accelerating to escape speeds. Using Dragon reactor technology, a small reactor could also be employed in such a system. (S/P, 12/18/67, 150)	.
The Vatican had authorized the Roman Catholic apostolic delegate in U.K. to sign the International Treaty on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, AP reported. Unanimously approved by the U.N. General Assembly Dec. 8, 1966, treaty was signed simultaneously by representatives of 62 nations Jan. 27 in Washington, D.C., London, and Moscow, and was kept open for additional signatures in those capitals. (AP, P Inq, 3/12/67) March 12: Apollo program was six months behind schedule because of Jan. 27 accident, but time could be made up later, msfc Director Dr. Wemher von Braun told Stuttgart, West Germany, audience. In Stuttgart to receive gold Boelsche medal for scientific achievement, Dr. von Braun said: “We have in no way lost our chance to fulfill the mission given to us: the landing of a man on the moon in this decade. I admit that the time has become tight. If further snags develop, this decade may run out . . . [but] we are firmly resolved not to take any undue risks.” (AP, B Sun, 3/13/67; upi, C Trib, 3/13/67)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr using Thor-Agena D booster; satellite reentered Sept. 1. (Pres Rep 1967)
Esro II, first satellite designed, developed, and constructed by ESro under July 8, 1964, nasa—esro agreement, was launched from wtr by four-stage Scout booster but did not achieve planned polar orbit. NASA officials were studying telemetry in an attempt to determine cause of Scout’s failure. Primary NASA mission objectives were to place Esro II in planned orbit and to provide tracking and telemetry support. 153-lb satellite carried seven experiments for solar astronomy and cosmic ray studies representing six different organizations from U.K., France, and the Netherlands. ESRO was responsible for delivery of satellite to launch site, for equipment and personnel necessary to mate spacecraft to launch vehicle, and for testing spacecraft, (nasa Proj Off; UPi, NYT, 5/31/67, 1)
An electric rocket engine capable of operating off low solar cell voltage, which could be used for satellite station-keeping or attitude control, had been successfully tested for more than 400 hrs at lrc. (lrc Release 67-11)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried ARC-instrumented payload to 88-mi (141-km) altitude to collect for analysis meteoritic debris during the peak of meteor shower. Three deployable module support arms held four module trays each, to entrap meteoritic debris. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASARptSRL)
U.K. was considering halting its activities at Woomera Rocket Range because of large expense due to distance between England and the Australian range and because only a few of its missile projects required such an extensive facility, Space Business Daily reported. (SBD, 12/ 6/67, 181)
American Astronautical Society’s (aas) 13th Annual Convention, “Commercial Utilization of Space,” was held in Dallas. msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun stressed the importance of space exploration to man’s general welfare: “The space program is providing us with new and valuable scientific information about our environment in this universe. The space budget cannot be justified, however, solely on the basis of expanding scientific knowledge, even though the discoveries may be regarded priceless by one segment of society. Space technology must continue and expand its contributions to the satisfaction of the needs and desires of society in general if it is to become a permanent outlet for man’s creativity and energies.” Dr. von Braun later suggested to the press that the lunar module (lm) might not be ready for the Apollo lunar mission as soon as the other launch vehicle and spacecraft elements. In that event, he said, NASA might decide to “fly the lunar mission [as a manned circumlunar flight], but just not activate one phase of it.” (Text; Av Wk, 5/8/67, 17) Future potentials of navigation satellites were outlined by Eugene Ehrlich, Navigation and Traffic Control Program Chief, OSSA. Navigation satellites could provide: (1) high-accuracy position determination service to craft, people, and shore stations; (2) communications service to pilots, traffic controllers, and passengers; (3) air traffic control and maritime coordination; (4) sst radiation warning; (5) search and rescue aid during emergencies; (6) weather routing for aircraft and ships; (7) iceberg warning; and (8) data on migratory habits of marine, land, and sea life. (Text) George S. Trimble, Director of Advanced Planning, omsf, called for increased industry responsibility in space exploration. NASA builds “the roads into space. It is beholden on . . . industry to make certain that we build the proper ones for . . . future use. ... As we look forward to missions of ever-increasing complexity, it is important that we continue to insure the most effective accomplishment of the most worthwhile experiments that this country can devise.” (Text) Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), describing industry’s attempts to capitalize on non-Govemment space business opportunities as “substantially insufficient,” urged industry to submit imaginative proposals for commercial development of space and to solicit Congress’ support for the effort. (AvWk, 5/15/67,67) A more realistic basis for determining space transportation costs should be devised to reflect actual use of the object in space, ksc Director Dr. Kurt H. Debus suggested. Although cost reductions were being studied, prospective commercial users of space should expect to spend about 10% of their overall program costs for launch operations, he said. He emphasized that more substantial savings could be realized in other areas such as reusable boosters and payload; increased life cycle of payload; reserviceable payload; and booster and spacecraft propulsion. (Text; Av Wk, 5/15/67,69) NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin noted that space program had to defend itself continuously to enlist international support: “In ten years of space development, no nation has been harmed in any way. We must point to this record constantly in order to improve the atmosphere and wisdom of international consideration . . . [and] emphasize the expansion of benefits rather than restrictions upon progress. The record makes clear that we can address the more complicated questions of international organization on an evolutionary basis with the advantage of growing experience. The needs of the developing world and the magnificent record of space applications so far combine to show that the issues of international organization are secondary to the task of accelerating benefits for the world.” (Text) mit Head of Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics Dr, Raymond L. Bisplinghoff and NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology John L. Sloop discussed selection of technology and optimum conditions for its development. They pointed out how such development “. . . triggered vast areas of accomplishment in [its] wake [and] produced a sustained and long-term stimulus to education [and provided] influence [that is] one of spirit rather than power. . . .” Turning to discussion of impact of space program on engineering practices, they cited a major stimulus which was produced by “. . . the extreme environment of outer space combined with the requirements for low weight, small size, and exceptional reliability.” They pointed to the new stimulus to “imagination and creativity” among engineers. Among important reasons for having a space program they listed satisfaction of society’s needs; developing technology should serve as “. . . a solution to an existing or foreseeable social problem.” Calling attention to the international arena of technological development, the speakers urged “a balance of technologies in our favor [which] will . . . require wisdom in the selection of new tech324-801 0—69 nologies ... so vital to our national well-being and survival that [we] must, to the greatest extent of our ability, use imagination, good judgment, and energy in their planning and execution.” (Text) TRW Systems Group President Dr. Ruben F. Mettler suggested that space environmental characteristics could be useful and, in some ways, unique for certain manufacturing operations. He stated: “An environment so widely different from that to which we are accustomed suggests we [determine] whether the new features can be used for making conventional products of improved quality or performance or at lower cost, whether they can support new processes previously considered impractical, or if they can lead to new products of such characteristics that they create new and currently unidentified markets.” Mettler suggested these environmental characteristics for space operations which would be of interest to “possible specialized manufacturing operations”: low temperatures, approaching absolute zero with use of space cryostat; high temperatures with use of solar concentrator; near-perfect vacuum of infinite extent; weightlessness in orbit; low gravitational forces on moon; and radiation environment. (Text) Awards for achievement in 1966 presented at convention included: (1) aas Space Flight Award to msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth for “distinguished contributions to aeronautical and space research . . . direction of continuing investigation of man’s capabilities in space, and . . . active participation in the scientific community for the public good”; (2) aas Flight Achievement Award to Astronauts Charles Conrad and Richard F. Gordon for “their new space flight altitude record and the world’s first one-orbit rendezvous on Gemini XI”; (3) Melbourne Boynton Award to Col. William K. Douglas (usaf), Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff, Bioastronautics and Medicine, afsc, for exceptional accomplishments as the first flight surgeon in charge of astronaut medical operations; (4) W. Randolph Lovelace II Award to Dr. Robert M. Page, former Director of Research, Naval Research Laboratory, for pioneering work in rocket astronomy and contributions to radar development; and (5) aas Fellowships to msc Director of Medical Research and Operations Dr. Charles A. Berry “for providing exceptional medical support for the NASA manned spacecraft programs,” and to msc Director of Engineering and Development Maxime A. Faget for “contributions to the basic conceptual design of the Mercury spacecraft and . . . subsequent engineering efforts” on Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo Projects, (msc Release 67-15)
Prototype of West Germany’s research satellite Azur had been tested in space simulator at Porz-Wahn, near Cologne. Satellite would explore nature of earth’s inner radiation belt, observe polar light zone, and measure spectrum change in solar particles during periods of intense sun-spot activity. Two-phase program would see scientific payloads proved on Nike-Apache and Javelin sounding rockets and satellite launched by Scout booster in NASA-West German cooperative satellite program. (Interavia, 11/17/67, 5)
msfc used aedc facilities to investigate preparation of spent rocket stage for human occupancy in space by dumping. 840 gal of super-cold liquid nitroeen through “dead” or inactive J-2 rocket engine. Simulating 100,000-ft altitude, dumping experiment would pave way for astronauts to move inside orbiting stage and use tanks as living quarters for space station, (msfc Release 67-203)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to 67-mi (108-km) altitude to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22—59 mi (35-95 km) at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performance were only partly successful due to low apogee of rocket, which placed the highest grenade burst at only 42-mi altitude, (nasa Rpt srl)
Lunar Orbiter III press briefing was held at nasa Hq. Dr. Leonard Reiffel, Apollo Program, omsf, said nasa had selected eight “candidate” locations along the moon’s equator as the smoothest and safest possible sites for first Apollo manned landings. Selection had been made after careful screening of photos taken by three Lunar Orbiters and Surveyor I. Detailed analysis of photos indicated that safest area might be a broad plain in the southeast part of the Sea of Tranquility—just east of Maskelyne D crater—where the surface was flat and there were few dangerous boulders and no deep craters. NASA officials emphasized, however, that no single site would be selected: each mission would have three possible sites along the equator-—one in the east, one in the center, and one in the west—to allow for launch delays. Harold Masursky, U.S. Geological Survey, described evidence of “seismic erosion” as “one of the major processes on the moon’s surface that Lunar Orbiter has given us information about.” Several photos showed dunes of soil-like material that appeared to be debris from moon-quakes filling old craters. Some of the smoother plains on the moon might be caused in part by this process, Masursky suggested. (Wilford, NYT, 4/7/67, 1, 14)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr using Titan III—B booster; satellite reentered Sept. 30. (Pres Rep 1967)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket, launched from wsmr to verify launch compatibility of rocket and modified Nike-Ajax military rail launcher, failed on premature staging at 150 ft; launch verification was successful. (NASA Proj Off)
msfc awarded two contracts: (1) a $2.4-million, two-month contract extension to Chrysler Corp. for procurement of long-lead time items for additional Uprated Saturn 11st stages. Extension would enable Chrysler to continue procurements necessary to maintain capability to assemble four Uprated Saturn I boosters annually; (2) a $14,811,540 fixed-price-incentive-fee contract to naa for 60 additional H-l rocket engines for use on 1st stages of Uprated Saturn I boosters. Order increased total number of engines purchased to 322. Delivery would continue through September 1968. (msfc Releases 67-136, 67-138)
President Lyndon B. Johnson presents the 1967 Harmon International Aviation Trophy to two NASA astronauts and a veteran test pilot in the White House Rose Garden. From the left are. North .American Aviation XB^70 test pilot Alvin S. White, Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., and the President. {Nov, 11—15, 1966) during which Aldrin spent 5 hrs 28 min outside spacecraft. White was cited for mach 3 XB-70 flights, British aviatrix Sheila Scott, scheduled to receive award for her record-setting solo flight around the world in a single engine aircraft, was unable to attend ceremony. {PD, 10/16/67, 1436-7; AP, NYT, 10/14/67, 7) *	Nasa Areas sounding rocket was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 37-mi (59-km) altitude, fourth in nots series to measure incident polar UV irradiance in direct support of Ogo IV’s mission. Excellent data were obtained. Rocket and payload performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Karl Harr, president of Aerospace Industries Assn., spoke before Metropolitan Baltimore Chamber of Commerce on impact of U.S. space effort and risk that it would be weighed and evaluated in “oversimplified terms.” A huge and complex effort should not be judged by superficial aspects alone, forgetting that concentration of “our best industrial, economic, scientific and intellectual resources, organized to an unprecedented degree . . ., has an impact on every aspect of our national life.” Harr noted the strangeness of the unknown medium of space, “for which our ultimate capabilities are yet to be determined.” “Today we find ourselves both in midstream in our national space effort and at a crossroads as to future efforts. ... It is essential that we delay no longer in sorting out that which is valid and enduring, in terms of your total interest and mine, from that which is superficial or transitory.” (Text) Cause of X-15 No. 3 crash was unknown. The pilot, Maj. Michael J. Adams, had difficulty with control booster system; X—15 failed to recover from a dive from extremely high altitude, the pilot losing control above 200,000	ft and regaining it briefly at about 80,000 ft. Setting unofficial world speed and altitude records, the three X-15s had flown 191 times; No. 3 having had 65 flights. The aircraft were built by North American Rockwell (formerly naa) under a cooperative program by usaf, usn, and NASA. (NASA Proj Off)
usaf successfully launched an Advanced Ballistic Re-Entry System (abres) module from Vandenberg afb by Atlas-D booster, (upi, W Post, 11/8/67, A21)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried 180-lb Univ. of Maryland payload to 158-mi (254-km) altitude in mission that was coordinated with the overpass of Canadian satellite Alouette II. Payload impacted 143 mi downrange in the Atlantic. Primary objective of flight was to evaluate techniques for studying the ionosphere. (WS Release 67-14)
Most probable cause of Jan. 27 flash fire in which Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White II, and Roger B. Chaffee died was a sparking short circuit in worn, defective, or poorly insulated wire, Apollo 204 Review Board concluded in its final report. Copies of report were distributed simultaneously to NASA Administrator James E. Webb, congressional committees, and the press. Board was unable to pinpoint exact ignition source, but identified conditions which led to the disaster: (1) a sealed cabin, pressurized with an oxygen atmosphere; (2) an extensive distribution of combustible materials in the cabin; (3) vulnerable wiring carrying spacecraft power; (4) inadequate provisions for the crew to escape; and (5) inadequate provisions for rescue or medical assistance. Having identified these conditions, the Board addressed itself to the question of “how these conditions came to exist. Careful consideration of this question . . . leads ... to the conclusion that in its devotion to the many difficult problems of space travel, the Apollo team failed to give adequate attention to certain mundane but equally vital questions of crew safety. “The board’s investigation revealed many deficiencies in design and engineering, manufacture and quality control. When these deficiencies are corrected the over-all reliability of the Apollo program will be increased greatly.” Board offered a total of 21 recommendations, including: (1) an “indepth” review of the entire Apollo life-support system; (2) an investigation of effective ways to control and extinguish spacecraft fires; (3) severe restriction and control of amount and location of combustible materials inside spacecraft; (4) reduction of time required for crew to egress and simplification of escape operations; (5) continuous monitoring of safety of all test operations to assure adequacy of emergency protections; (6) improved ground communications system; (7) continued studies of two-gas cabin atmosphere; and (8) full-scale mockup tests to establish fire safety of reconfigured command module. Board emphasized that its report was not intended as a criticism of NASA’s entire manned program: “The board is very concerned that its description of the defects in the Apollo program . . .will be interpreted as an indictment of the entire manned space flight program and a castigation of the many people associated with the program. Nothing is further from the board’s mind.” (Text; NYT, 4/10/67, 1, 28-9; W Star, 4/ 10/67, Al, A6-7; W Post, 4/10/67, Al, A8) .
NASA successfully launched first of five Nike-Apache sounding rockets from NASA Wallops Station but canceled remaining four in the dusk-to-dawn series of launches because of unfavorable weather. Rocket ejected a trimethylaluminujn (tma) vapor trail of bluish color between 50- and 125-mi altitudes in experiment to measure wind velocities and directions at various altitudes in the upper atmosphere. Launchings were conducted for GCA Corp., under contract to GSFC. ossa had overall program responsibility. (nasa Release 67-179; WS Release 67—25; W Post, 7/23/67, A3)
NASA Areas sounding rocket was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 36-mi (59-km) altitude, sixth in nots series of seven to measure incident solar uv irradiance in support of Ogo IV’s mission. Excellent data were obtained. Rocket and payload performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRl)
usaf Titan III—C booster launched from etr successfully inserted six satellites—three Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp) comsats, one Lincoln Experimental Satellite Les V, one DOD Gravity Experiment (dodge) satellite, and one Despun Antenna Test Satellite (dats)—into circular, near-synchronous orbits. Powered flight of Titan III—C was close to planned parameters. Tran-stage and payload were inserted into parking orbit with 103-mi (166-km) apogee and 89-mi (143-km) perigee. First transtage burn made necessary course corrections; second transtage bum moved stage and payload into transfer orbit with 20,920-mi (33,666-km) apogee and 111-mi (179-km) perigee. Third burn put satellite dispenser frame and six satellites into final orbit with 20,809-mi (33,488-km) apogee and 20,453-mi (32,915-km) perigee. Between 3:21 and 3.23 pm est satellites were ejected separately into slightly different orbital paths. Three idcsp comsats, combined with 15 others launched June 16,1966, and Jan. 18, 1967, completed Pacific link of dod’s idcsp system designed to provide reliable, full-time radio communications between Washington, D.C., and U.S. troops in Vietnam and other distant outposts. Les V, first all solid-state uhf band comsat, would transmit radio signals and test communications to front-line troops, dodge satellite would extend 10 metal booms to test satellite’s stability, determine whether it could keep one side always facing earth, and transmit first color TV pictures of earth taken'from orbit with a 22° camera, dats, advanced version of idcsp comsats, carried new antenna designed to transmit 75% of radio signal strength—rather than current 15%—back to earth, usaf officials reported all satellites were functioning properly. (dod Proj Off; upi, NYT, 7/2/67, 20; W Post, 7/2/67, A4; Av Wk, 7/10/67,39; Aero Tech, 1/11/67,20)
Cone-shaped RAM C-l spacecraft was successfully launched from NASA Wallops Station by four-stage Scout booster at 1:33 pm, edt. On termination of eight-minute ballistic flight, impact occurred 725 mi down-range about 150 nm northeast of Bermuda. Spacecraft, 15 in long and 26 in in dia with 12-in-di^ hemisphere nose, plunged hack into earth’s atmosphere at 17,000 rnph in flight test to study methods for preventing loss of radio .signals from reentering spacecraft. No recovery was attempted. NASA’s Project RAM (Radio Attenuation Measurement) was to measure effectiveness of water addition concept in maintaining communications during reentry. Additional experiments were also included to evaluate X-band telemetry system as a means of overcoming blackout: study plasma and ablation effects on antenna performance; measure attenuation as a function of signal frequency; and obtain measurements of ion densities in the flow field of the spacecraft in the presence of ablation and water injection. Water was injected at three points on spacecraft—on nose cap and on each side—with nitrogen gas as pressurizing agent. Ion density changes, due to varying amounts of water injection, were measured. X-band frequency experiment showed blackout period of communications was reduced by 6 sec, using water-injection method. Series of Arcasonde meteorological rockets were launched from Bermuda before and after RAM C-l experiment to collect upper atmosphere density, temperature, and wind data, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67261; WS Releases 67-33,67-34)
LeRC awarded four contracts totaling over $5 million for major systems of the sert n (Space Electric Rocket Test) spacecraft: (1) $2,462,678 to Fairchild Hiller Corp. for system definition selection and qualification of components for spacecraft support unit; (2) $1,308,065 to Hugh es Aircraft Co. to develop prime power conditioning and control system for ion thrusters; $1,055,757 to Westinghouse Electric Corp. to develop backup power conditioning and control system; and (4) $290,987 to Cutler-Hammer Corp. to develop a radio frequency interference experiment to measure interference with radio communications generated by the ion engines. sert n was an orbital mission scheduled for late 1968 to advance the development of ion engines as propulsion units for future long-duration space missions, (nasa Release 67-188)
Dr. Herbert Friedman, Naval Research Laboratory Superintendent of Atmosphere and Astrophysics Div., received 1967 Rockefeller Public Service Award ($10,000) from Princeton Univ. President Robert F, Goheen. Award was given in the field of science, technology, and engineering. Scientist had specialized in astrophysics from first experiments in rocket astronomy (revealing strength and pattern of uv and x-rays 50 mi above atmosphere) down to present service, which also included post of Chief Scientist of Hulburt Center for Space Research. (Lobsenz Public Relations Co. Release, 11/13/67; Science, 12/29/67, 1655)
First two of series of 20 Japanese and U.S. sounding rockets were launched from nasa Wallops Station as part of Japanese-U.S. meteorological rocket project to conduct comparative meteorological research between 12-mi (20-km) and 37-mi (60-km) altitudes. Japanese rocket was an MT—135; U.S. rocket was an Areas. Payloads were ejected at programmed altitudes and descended on parachutes: wind measurements were obtained from radar tracking data; temperature measurements were radioed to ground receiving stations. Objectives of the mission were to compare and cross-calibrate data from various payloads; verify flight and operating characteristics; obtain new information on operation of each rocket system as a whole; and obtain additional data on diurnal cycles of wind and temperature in the stratosphere. Flights were conducted under a Dec. 26, 1966, agreement between nasa, Japanese Science and Technology Agency, and Japanese Meteorological Agency. Results of experiments would be made available to world scientific community, (nasa Release 67-73)
involvement in current Middle East crisis. (NASA Ann, 6/20/67; net Proj Off) During week of June 25: Ceremonies at NASA’s Rocket Engine Test Site at Edwards AFB marked delivery of the millionth ton of cryogenic rocket propellants and pressurants. Eluids were used by North American Aviation, Inc.’s Rocketdyne Div. to test fire F-l engines prior to shipping them to msfc for use in Saturn V 1st stages, (msfc Release 67-139) June 26: NASA’s Mariner V spacecraft successfully completed two scheduled functions in preparation for Oct. 19 Venus flyby mission by switching its amplifiers to increase radio transmitting power and, 30 min later, turning off its battery charger on commands from Goldstone, Calif., Deep Space Network station. All systems onboard spacecraft, launched from ETR June 14, were continuing to operate satisfactorily. (NASA Release 67-165)
nasa Javelin sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill carried Rice Univ.-instrumented payload to 467-mi (752-km) altitude to measure ratio of fluxes of auroral zone precipitated protons, and alpha particles, fluxes and spectra of low-energy protons and electrons, and energy spectrum of protons with energies of 100 to 500 kev. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Rep. Joseph E. Karth (D-Minn.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Manned Space Flight Subcommittee, on floor of House praised NASA’s Surveyor program: “It successfully demonstrated the technique of soft-landing [and] . . . with the successfully concluded Lunar Orbiter program, it found and certified manned landing sites....” He said the program had supplied scientists with the first real information on the chemical composition of the lunar surface. In the eastern Sea of Tranquility, for example, Surveyor V determined that the surface was made up of the same elements common to the surface of the earth; namely, oxygen, silicon, and aluminum. He concluded: “Since both Surveyor and its Centaur booster encountered enormous problems in the early stages of development, the eventual success of the program demonstrated the skill, perseverance, and determination of the NASA-industry-university team.” (CR, 11/20/67, H15619)
France would launch 330-lb Saros comsat—138 lbs heavier than ComSatCorp’s intelsat II comsats—in 1970 from new French Guiana launch site using eldo’s Europa booster, Reuters reported. Saros would provide direct telephone, radio, and television communications between France and French-speaking countries. (Reuters, W Post, 2/23/67, A3)
Communist China charged that U.S.S.R. had betrayed Vietnamese people by signing space law treaty with U.S. and other nations Jan. 27. (Reuters, NYT, 1/29/67,9) Washington Evening Star: “There is bitter irony in the fact that the first disaster in our space program came during a simulated launch, a checkout in preparation for the real thing. From the beginning, it has been feared that some fatal mishap was inevitable. But most people had expected it during an actual launch, in space, during re-entry or in landing—hardly during a routine test with the rocket still on its pad....” (W Star, 1/28/67, A6) New York Times: “By chance, Grissom, White and Chaffee died on the day the space treaty was formally signed in Washington, London, and Moscow. Behind the unprecedented international cooperation represented by that treaty’s conclusion was the knowledge that space holds more than enough risks for men without adding the horrors arising from strife among nations. The tragedy at Cape Kennedy underlines that somber reality.” (NYT, 1/29/67,10E) Baltimore Sun: “They were brave men. When a man finally does put a foot on the surface of the moon, Grissom and White and Chaffee will be notable among those who assisted him in getting there.” (B Sun, 1/29/67,30)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb toward polar orbit using Titan III-Agena D booster, (upi, W Post, 12/6/67, A24)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22-59 mi (35-95 km) at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA launches Apollo 4 into orbit from Complex 39A of Kennedy Space Center in successful first flight test of Apollo/Satum V space vehicle. gency Detection System (eds) in an open-loop configuration; and demonstrate mission support facilities and operations required for launch, mission conduct, and CM recovery. Saturn V was the most powerful space vehicle developed in U.S. space program; in launch configuration with Apollo 4, height was 363 ft, and weight, fully fueled, was 6,220,025 lbs. Saturn V’s 1st stage engines produced 7,610,000 lbs of thrust at liftoff, and the launch vehicle placed 278,699 lbs in earth orbit. This launch vehicle could place 96,000 lbs on the moon. Kerosene (RP-1) was the fuel used in the five 1st stage (S—1C) engines, while 2nd stage (S-II) engines used liquid hydrogen. The five S-II stage J-2 engines, developing total thrust of 1,000,000 lbs, were rated for operations to 117-mi altitude and to 935-mi distance down-range. Third stage (S-IVB) J-2 engine, using liquid hydrogen fuel, developed about 200,000 lbs of thrust. High-quality pictures of the earth were obtained from about one hour before to one hour after apogee on Command Module apogee camera film processed at MSC. Success for Apollo 4 (AS-501), according to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller, had been achieved in terms of “pre-set primary objectives.” Heat shield design, S-IVB restart, structural/thermal integrity, compatibility of launch vehicle and spacecraft, and ground support had been proven. Direction of Apollo Program had been the responsibility of OMSF; development of Apollo spacecraft, flight crew training, and mission control the responsibility of msc ; development of Saturn launch vehicles the responsibility of MSFC; and Apollo/Saturn launch operations the responsibility of KSC. Under overall direction of OTDA, msfn had been managed by gsfc. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Release 67-275; msfc Release 67-226)
France launched Diademe 11 (D-1D) geodetic satellite from Hammaguir Range with three-stage Diamant booster into orbit of 1,897km (1,179-mi) apogee, 592-km (368-mi) perigee, 110.4-min period, and 39.9° inclination. Planned apogee was 1,500 km (932 mi), with 635-km (395-mi) perigee. Companion to Diademe I (D—1C), launched Feb. 8, satellite was last to be orbited from Hammaguir Range, which would be shut down March 31. All future launches would be from new bases near Bordeaux and in French Guiana. Scientific mission of Diademe series was geodesy by three different means for cross-checks: Doppler effect experiment, laser experiment measuring distance to satellite from three ground stations, and photography of satellites against star background for direction-finding. (W News, 2/16/67; Av Wk, 2/20/67,25; Wetmore, Av Wk, 3/27/67,50-58)
Edward R. Mathews, chief of ksc Saturn systems office, was named acting Apollo Program Manager at icsc, replacing m/g John G. Shinkle (usa, Ret.), who resigned May 18. (AP, NYT, 5/30/67, 44)
Prof. G. A. Tokaty of The City University, London, speaking to Royal Aeronautical Society’s Astronautics and Guided Flight Section meeting, in London, said: “. . . the Soviets have been (from about 1962) . . . working on a rocket system of 7 to 9 million lb thrust. Evidence of a general nature suggests that they are making good progress and have now reached an advanced stage in achieving a payload-carrying capability of the order of 400,000 to 550,000 lb. . . .” He added: “In the USSR, space science and technology have become an impressive source of new ideas, theories, industrial methods, especially in electro-radio-electronic instrument design [and] all these revolutionised the Soviet precision industry and accelerated the development of the national economy as a whole.” (Text)
Astrobee 1500 sounding rocket was launched from Wallops Island with radiometer payload to obtain spectral observations in high frequency within the near-earth (up to 2,500 km) environment. Some of the hardware would be for eventual use on proposed Pilgrim satellite. Peak altitude was 1,475 mi (2,380 km). Rocket performance was satisfactory. Improper antenna deployment probably caused loss of most scientific data, (nasa Rpt srl)
Continuing Brazil/U.S. space cooperation, experiment to measure airglow would be carried out by National Space Commission (cnae) of Brazil and NASA, an Aerobee 150 to be launched from Brazil’s Barreiro do Inferno range this fall [see Oct. 14—15]. A monochromator would measure day airglow in equatorial regions at altitude of about 130 mi in the range of 2,000A. One of two kinds of upper atmosphere’s visible radiation (aurora being other), airglow existed when sunlight interacted with upper atmosphere to create visible radiation. CNAE would be responsible for preparation and operation of launching range and associated facilities, and for providing personnel for training. nasa would provide Aerobee rocket, payload, and mobile launch facility currently located in Brazil, (nasa Release 67-277)
William C. Schneider, formerly Mission Director for NASA’s Apollo Applications (aa) program, was named Apollo Mission Director and Apollo Program Deputy Director for Missions, omsf. Schneider would be responsible for management, direction, and coordination of mission and flight plans, schedules, and associated activities, (nasa Release 67-206) During July: Editorial comment on proposed NASA FY 1968 authorization bills [see June 28]: Science: “The political atmosphere surrounding the U.S. space program is today murkier and less hospitable than at any time since 1961 when President Kennedy'decided to send men to the moon. This does not necessarily mean that nasa is in any danger of falling off its $5-billion-a-year budgetary plateau . . . [but] it is clear that, where Congress is concerned, the agency has lost much of its innocence and therefore its plans are to be reviewed with caution and skepticism. “Some members of Congress are remarkably frank in indicating that their principal interest in the space program lies in the economic benefits it brings their districts. . . . Indeed, one might be justified in predicting that the major budgetary struggles of the future will be less concerned with how much money nasa gets than with how NASA spends the money it does get.” (Carter, Science, 7/14/67, 170-3) Washington Evening Star: “If continuity and momentum are to be maintained in the space program . . . the [congressional] conferees must act with special wisdom this year. “Two . . . items in the House bill should be embodied in one final version. . . . One would establish an independent safety panel in nasa, and the other would require . . . [nasa] to keep Congress ‘fully and currently informed’ of problem areas in the space effort. “Both proposals were strongly opposed by administration spokesmen on grounds that seem shallow and legalistic. It would be well to embody both in the final 1968 authorization bill, if only to put NASA on firm notice that it is time to shape up.” (W Star, 7/7/67, A16) New York Times: “To read the record of the Congressional debate on NASA’s budget is a melancholy experience. . . . Behind the rhetoric it was easy to see the pressure of the many corporations and communities now sharing in nasa’s largeness and fearful of the impact of any maj or cut in this flow of golden manna. . . . “A rational 1968 space budget would have been substantially lower than either the House or Senate version, and would have cut particularly severely at the Apollo project. ... It would have changed the present emphasis ... to lay greater stress on the exploration of the cosmos with relatively cheap, unmanned rockets. Instead, the enormously expensive manned lunar landing effort is left virtually intact, while the highly promising program for sending unmanned Voyagers to Mars and other planets could be entirely eliminated. “The lobbyists can rejoice, but the nation’s real interests have been dealt a severe setback.” (NYT, 7/3/67,10)
Sensors aboard two Vela nuclear detection satellites, launched April 28 by usaf Titan III-C booster, were turned on, and large amounts of data were being received. Satellites were part of dod’s Vela program to monitor space for violations of nuclear test ban treaty. (AP, NYT, 5/U/67)
First SV-5D lifting body vehicle ever recovered from a suborbital space flight was displayed by usaf at Pentagon press briefing. Seven feet long and weighing 860 lbs, it was heat-blackened and slightly charred on its outer surface from 3,000° F reentry heat. Col. Curtis L. Scoville, afsc, said vehicle, launched April 19 by an Atlas booster, had achieved an orbital speed of 17,000 mph and reentered in a maneuvering descent that took it “hundreds of miles” off its straight-line trajectory. A USAF aircraft recovered it in mid-air during final parachute descent. Mission was third successful flight in usaf’s Precision Recovery Including Maneuvering Entry (prime) program; first two vehicles were not recovered, but program was considered so successful that planned fourth flight had been canceled. (Schmeck, NYT, 5/24/67, 50)
usaf Titan III—C booster launched from etr successfully inserted eight Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp) comsats into random equatorial orbits. Powered flight of Titan III-C was close to planned parameters. Tran-stage and payload were inserted into parking orbit with 113-mi (182km) apogee and 106-mi (171-km) perigee where first transtage burn made necessary course corrections. Second transtage burn 66 min later moved stage and load into transfer orbit with 21,000-mi (33,810-km) apogee and 120-mi (193-km) perigee. Third burn put satellite dispenser frame and eight satellites into near-synchronous, 21,000-mi-altitude orbit. At 6 hours 11 min GET, the 100-lb satellites were ejected separately into slightly different orbital paths, usaf officials reported all satellites were functioning properly. Eight new satellites, combined with seven others launched by usaf June 16, 1966, would reinforce DOD’s worldwide communications system and provide reliable, full-time radio link between Washington, D.C., and U.S. troops in Vietnam and other distant outposts, (upi, NYT, 1/19/67, 7; AP, B Sun, 1/19/67, 1; Av Wk, 1/23/67, 32)
usaf launched unidentified satellite WTR using Thor-Agena D booster; satellite reentered Mar. 11. (Pres Rep 1967; GSFC SSR, 3/15/67)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried GSFC-instrumented payload to 44-mi (68-km) altitude to develop experimental atmospheric composition profiles in mesospheric region and to measure ozone distribution in regions of 12—40 mi (20-65 km). Because of malfunction in parachute system only two minutes of ozone data were acquired. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried instrumented payload to 86.5-mi (139.2-km) altitude; it measured spectral irradiance of two early-type stars in wave length intervals 1100 A to 4000 A. The other two target stars were pointed at but could not be observed through opacity of fuel and oxidizer released through control jets. (NASARptSRL)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications (Engineering) George Hage was named Deputy Director (Engineering) of the Apollo Program, omsf. (nasa Ann, 10/13/67) Inquiry into economic impact of building sst was made by Dael Wolfle in Science editorial. Congressional arguments on whether to build sst “illustrate why members of Congress want to increase congressional competence to assess the consequences of technological developments and proposals. . . . What Congress needs in deciding about the sst or other technological matters is essentially what it needs in deciding about taxes, military affairs, education, or other matters with which it deals: ability to ask the right questions and ability to evaluate critically the information it receives from advocates and opponents of proposed actions.” (Wolfle, Science, 10/13/67)
Japan launched three-stage Lambda 3H rocket from Uchinoura Space Center, Kyushu Island, to 1,337-mi (2,142-km) altitude—record altitude for Japanese rocket. The 9.5-ton vehicle carried instruments to obtain nine types of scientific data on the Van Allen belts and the ionosphere; all equipment functioned normally except electronic thermometer. The 29-min flight ended when rocket’s 3rd stage impacted 1,400 mi down-range in the Pacific. (AP, NYT, 2/7/67,27)
The “Phillips Report”—report by NASA’s Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips which “found insufficient competence in key management and technical positions” at North American Aviation, Inc., 16 mo before Apollo accident—was being suppressed by nasa, Rep. William F.	Ryan (D-N.Y.) charged in an AP interview. Representative Ryan said he would ask Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.) to demand NASA’s submission of the full report for examination by the subcommittee. (AP, W Star, 4/19/67, A6)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. experiment to 76-mi (125-km) altitude to determine x-ray spectra in the 0.3- to 3-kev energy range of several previously discovered cosmic sources and to search for variation with galactic latitude of diffuse x-ray background. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket carrying 55-Ib payload to obtain electron density profile was launched from nasa Wallops Station to 121-mi (193-km) altitude. Minutes later, Nike-Cajun grenade experiment was launched over the Atlantic for atmosphere temperature support data at 50- to 56-mi (80- to 90-km) altitudes. Launchings, first two in series of three to study relation of high absorption radio waves in ionosphere to seasonal temperature variations in upper atmosphere, were conducted by nasa for Univ. of Illinois, gca Corp., and gsfc. Rockets and equipment functioned satisfactorily. (Wallops Release 67-4)
Italian scientific satellite San Marco U lifts off from platform at sea off coast of Kenya, Africa, on four-stage Scout booster supplied by mas A. into equatorial orbit with 748-km (465-mi) apogee; 219-km (136-mi) perigee; 94-min period; and 2.9° inclination. The 285-lb satellite— first to be launched from a platform at sea—would measure air density by monitoring spacecraft’s drag forces and investigate ionospheric characteristics which interfered with long-range radio transmissions. San Marco II was second Italian satellite to be launched under May 31, 1962, cooperative agreement between NASA and Italian Space Commission (isc). First satellite, San Marco I, was successfully launched from NASA Wallops Station Dec. 15, 1964. San Marco was a mutual program of NASA and isc with no exchange of funds. NASA supplied launch vehicle and provided personnel training and tracking and data acquisition services, isc was responsible for design, fabrication, and testing of payloads and for launching of satellite built by Centro Ricerche Aerospaziali (cra) of the Univ. of Rome, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-93; WS Release 67—17)
Princeton Univ. astronomers were studying photos of ultraviolet spectra of Venus and Jupiter taken by a rocket-borne telescope launched from WSMR May 5 in an effort to provide additional data on Venusian atmosphere, New York Times reported. Photos, taken at 118-mi altitude, provided “50 times more detail than ever obtained before,” Dr. Donald C. Morton, director of Princeton’s rocket astronomy program, explained. Princeton astronomers would continue analyzing spectrograms to determine composition of planets’ gaseous atmospheres, and would compare findings with data transmitted by U.S.’s Mariner V and U.S.S.R.’s Venus IV spacecraft—both expected to reach Venus by late October. (NYT, 1/2/61, 21)
NASA’s Lunar Orbiter III (Lunar Orbiter C) unmanned spacecraft was successfully launched by Atlas-Agena D booster from etr in mission to photograph possible lunar landing sites for Apollo astronauts (see Feb. 8-28). Agena 2nd stage fired to boost 850-lb spacecraft into 100-mi (161km) altitude parking orbit, reignited after 15-min coast period, injecting spacecraft on 92-hr translunar trajectory, and separated. On schedule Lunar Orbiter III deployed its four solar panels and two antennas, locked its five solar sensors on the sun, and fixed its star-tracker on Canopus. Primary objectives of NASA’s Lunar Orbiter III mission, third in series of five, were (1) to place three-axis stabilized spacecraft into lunar orbit; (2) to obtain high-resolution pictures of previously photographed lunar surface areas to confirm their suitability as landing sites for Apollo and Surveyor spacecraft; and (3) to improve knowledge of the moon. Photos would cover 12 primary target sites located within the Apollo zone of interest on the moon’s front face. Spacecraft would also monitor micrometeoroids and radiation intensity in the lunar environment, refine definition of moon’s gravitational field, and serve as a target for tracking operations by Manned Space Flight Network stations. Lunar Orbiter program was managed by LaRC under ossa direction. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of JPL-oper-ated Deep Space Network, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67—12; AP, W Post, 2/5/67, A6; AP, W Star, 2/5/67, A8; AP, NYT, 2/6/67, 12)
Astrobee 1500 sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station in third flight test carried 110-lb instrument package to 1,495-mi (3,007-km) altitude before impacting 690 mi downrange in the Atlantic. No recovery was attempted. The 11,600-lb solid-fueled rocket—most powerful sounding rocket in U.S.—transmitted 30 min of data on flight characteristics. From preliminary examination of data test appeared successful, but scientific data on cosmic noise effects were lost because rocket’s spin rate was too high for proper deployment of experimental antennas. Astrobee 1500 was being developed by NASA “to provide a research rocket capable of carrying heavy scientific payloads to high altitudes, with a relative ease-of-handling. . . .” First launch attempt (April 8, 1963) failed 16 sec after launch because of a nosefairing failure; second attempt (Oct. 21, 1964) was successful. (WS Release 67-5)
Dr. Edward U. Condon, Director, University of Colorado’s study of Unidentified Flying Objects (ufos) , said that “such studies ought to be discontinued unless someone comes up with a new idea on how to approach the problem.” Condon said “it’s been extremely difficult to gather information on this subject” and asked anyone with any “hard information to speak now—or forever hold your peace.” He stated: “We have approached the problem in an unprejudiced way, seeking to find whatever there is to find by objective scientific means with no scientific results so far. Some of the difficulties associated with belief in visitors from outer space are well set forth in an article by Prof. William Markowitz in Science for Sept. 15 and should be studied by all who wish to be informed on the subject,” he added. (Harkins, Boulder Camera, 9/27/67; AP, LA Times, 9/28/67) September 27-October 2: nasa launched for ComSatCorp the fourth of Intelsat ii series of commercial communications satellites (Intelsat II—D)-— designated Pacific II—and second of them in the Pacific. Launch was from etr by Thrust-Augmented Delta (DSV-3E) launch vehicle. Satellite went into transfer orbit over Pacific at approximately 176° east with 29,056-mi (37,105-km) apogee, 186-mi (299-km) perigee, 658.8-min period, and 26.4° inclination. Satellite would supplement services of and replace current Pacific satellite, Intelsat II-B (174°E), in event of its failure, nasa support nominally would terminate after about three days, subsequent to providing backup transfer orbit data and calculations. Final orbit and spin axis orientation would be made by ComSatCorp with onboard hydrogen peroxide system. Approximately 15 days after launch, satellite would be available for commercial use. Satellites could handle TV data transmissions, or up to 240 voice channels (480 circuits) between “first class” ground stations such as Andover. Part of satellite capacity would support ncs/nascom for Apollo program. It would serve as backup against interruption of satellite communications service and would add communications capability across the Pacific. On Sept. 30, apogee motor was ignited at 7:45 pm edt, on command from ComSatCorp-operated earth station at Paumalu, Hawaii, and kicked new satellite from its elliptical transfer orbit into a planned, near-synchronous orbit over Pacific. Reorientation and velocity correction maneuvers were carried out Oct. 1 and 2 to place spin axis in orbit plane and to improve circularity with predicted orbit (resulting from these maneuvers) of apogee, 22,531 mi (36,260 km), perigee, 21,805 mi (35,091 km), period, 1,430.5 min. drift rate, 1° east per day. As Intelsat II—D approached Intelsat II—B, launched Jan. 11, now located between 174° and 175°, drift rate would be reduced and intersatellite interference tests would be conducted to determine minimum angular separation which could be employed without mutual interference (nasa cooperating with ComSatCorp in planning tests). The Intelsat satellite system, in addition to this new Pacific II satellite, included the Pacific I satellite and two satellites serving the Atlantic area, Early Bird I, launched Apr. 6, 1965, and Atlantic II, launched Mar. 22, 1967. (nasa Proj Off; ComSatCorp Releases 67-45 and 67-48)
nasa had awarded naa’s Rocketdyne Div. a $1.4-million contract for continued technological investigation of the advanced aerospike rocket engine. Studied by oart for 1% yrs, the engine utilizes a doughnutshaped combustion chamber which discharges exhaust gases against the surface of a short center cone. In conventional rocket engines, gases are expanded inside long bell-shaped nozzles. Current concept specified an engine 8 ft in diameter and 4% ft high—about 50% shorter than conventional bell nozzle engines. A new “aerodynamically compensating nozzle” would permit use of the engine at sea level or high altitude, making it potentially suitable for both lower and upper stages of launch vehicles. Contract completion date was May 31, '1968. (nasa Release 67-221)
NASA launched ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II-C (nicknamed “Atlantic II”) comsat from etr by three-stage Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta booster into elliptical transfer orbit in preparation for geostationary orbit. Transfer orbit had 22,115-mi (37,200-km) apogee, 183-mi 294-km) perigee, 660.56-min period, and 27° inclination. On March 25, ComSatCorp fired apogee motor transferring satellite into geostationary orbit over the Atlantic. Scheduled to enter commercial service April 6, Intelsat II-C would join Early Bird I, world’s first commercial comsat, in providing service across the Atlantic and in fulfilling Project Apollo communications requirements. It was third satellite in ComSatCorp’s Intelsat II program to place two comsats in synchronous orbit—one over the Pacific, one over the Atlantic. First satellite—Intelsat II—A—was launched by NASA Oct. 27, 1966, but failed to achieve synchronous orbit because apogee motor malfunctioned; second—Intelsat II—B was launched Jan. 11, achieved synchronous orbit over the Pacific, and entered commercial service Jan. 27. Intelsat II comsats, larger and improved versions of Early Bird I (Intelsat I) satellite, were capable of handling television and data transmissions of up to 240 voice channels. (ComSatCorp pio; ComSatCorp Release)
Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics George P. Miller (D-Calif.), in a Letter to the Editor of the Washington Evening Star, commented on William Hines’ May 25 column criticizing Committee member Joseph E. Karth’s (D-Minn.) speech before the National Space Club May 17. “The article unfairly alleged that Rep. Joseph E. Karth ... by speaking out . . . was the ‘tool’ chosen by the administration to do a public relations job for NASA and the space program. . . . “What Mr. Hines failed to say was that Congressman Karth has led a number of hard-hitting congressional space investigations over the years for me. Both NASA and the contractors involved were ‘taken to the woodshed.’ The Apollo program is no exception. Mr. Karth has been critical—and made it clear that the accident responsibility falls squarely on NASA and the contractor. “Very simply, Mr. Karth said that perhaps the Congress, the administration and the press could do a better job of giving the public objective information on the space program. The wide swings from ‘everything is great’ to ‘everything is wrong’ must be confusing. . . .” (W Star, 6/6/67, A12)
GAO had begun “detailed examinations into certain specific areas of the Apollo program,” Assistant Comptroller General Frank H. Weitzel wrote in a letter to Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), who had inquired about GAO reviews of NASA-NAA contracts. Examinations were begun “on the basis of information developed during” a preliminary review, started in October 1966, which had covered NASA Hq., “several NASA centers,” and plants of NAA and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. (Hines, W Star, 6/1/67, C16)
usaf successfully launched an Advanced Ballistic Re-Entry System (abres) vehicle from Vandenberg afb with Atlas-D booster. (Aero Tech, 7/17/67,13)
In informal remarks at Kennedy Space Center, NASA Administrator James E. Webb predicted that congressional cuts in the space budget would slow up the launch rate and lead to the phasing out of Apollo equipment after man landed on the moon. Webb said that only nine of the 15 Saturn V launch vehicles could be launched before 1970, instead of 13 planned launchings. “I don’t think there’s any doubt that to absorb this cut for $500 million, after already having absorbed a $600 million cut back in 1964, means that we will have to slow up the launch rate,” he stated. The cut had also knocked out any new planetary missions before 1975. Space budget cuts would likely mean die elimination of the Saturn IB from the middle-term space program, Webb explained in a brief press conference. NASA was committed to the purchase of 16 Saturn IB launch vehicles. Three had been flown; the next one would propel the first manned Apollo into earth orbit in mid-1968. NASA planned to switch manned flights to the three-stage Saturn V as soon as possible. The first Saturn V flight, an unmanned test, was scheduled for Oct. 19. The Saturn IB had been planned for continued use on flights not requiring the huge power of the Saturn V, but Webb said that emphasis instead would switch to the Air Force’s Titan HIM launch vehicle, being developed for the military Manned Orbiting Laboratory. Webb listed several future checkpoints: (1) fewer orders for new Apollo spacecraft equipment after the moon landing, in such programs as Apollo Applications; (2) definition of the next system after Apollo, which could be a 100,000-lb space station, or something bigger, launched with Saturn V, or a new launch vehicle; (3) development of new and better concepts since planetary missions have been knocked out until 1975; and (4) massive reorganizational changes a possibility for NASA. Webb and West Germany Minister for Scientific Research Dr. Gerhard Stoltenberg, at the press conference, stated jointly: five West German scientists would participate in studying Apollo program results, and two research satellites and a solar probe would be launched in West German-U.S. cooperative program. Stoltenberg also said that West German industry would be main contractor for an ESRO satellite for 1969 launching, the “first German satellite.” Webb said Associate Administrator Dr. Homer E. Newell had been asked to examine question “How do we . . . decide whether a mission should use man or not use man?” (Text; upi, W Star, 9/21/67; Hill, H Chron, 9/22/67)
nasa’s Surveyor III (Surveyor C) was successfully launched from etr by Atlas-Centaur (AC-12) booster on 65-hr lunar intercept trajectory. Primary mission for the 2,283-lb spacecraft was to perform a soft-landing east of the Surveyor I landing site within the Apollo zone and to obtain post-landing TV pictures of the lunar surface. As secondary mission spacecraft would obtain data on lunar surface bearing strength, radar reflectivity, and thermal properties and photograph use of a surface sampler to manipulate the lunar surface [see April 19]. At 34:53 GET Surveyor III with two-bum Centaur—being used for the first time on a Surveyor mission—separated from Atlas and ignited to reach 100-mi-altitude circular parking orbit where it coasted for 22 min; Centaur then reignited to escape earth orbit and boost spacecraft toward the moon. Surveyor III separated from Centaur, deployed its solar panels, and locked on the sun and the star Canopus. Based on a 248-mi target miss estimate, a 4.2-mi midcourse maneuver was conducted shortly after midnight April 18 to assure precise landing on target in the Ocean of Storms. Surveyor III was third in series of seven spacecraft designed to prove out design, develop technology of lunar soft-landing, obtain post-landing TV pictures of lunar surface, and provide basic scientific and engineering data in support of Project Apollo. Surveyor program was directed by ossa Lunar and Planetary Programs Div.; project management was assigned to JPL; Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle was managed by Lewis Research Center; and prime contractor for spacecraft development and design was Hughes Aircraft Co. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-85)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, launched from Point Barrow, Alaska, carried GSFC-instrumented grenade payload to obtain data on temperature, pressure, density, and wind between 22-59 mi (35—95 km) at transition from winter-time westerly to summer-time easterly circulation. Rocket and instrumentation performed well, (nasa Rpt srl)
msfc had awarded Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. a $334,031 contract to study methods of increasing the number of astronauts that could be delivered to the moon with the Saturn V booster and to determine the most promising concepts for efficient delivery of logistic payloads. For the purposes of the study, Lockheed would consider: (1) a hypothetical 1975 mission involving two “product improved” Saturn V boosters— one to launch a modified Apollo spacecraft and one to launch a cargo payload; and (2) a hypothetical 1980-82 mission in which two Uprated Saturn V boosters would launch a six-man spacecraft direcdy to the moon, (msfc Release 67-123)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket, launched from wsmr, reached 107-mi (172-km) altitude in nrl experiment to obtain stellar spectra in 1,230-1,800 A far uv wavelength range and photometric data on stellar fluxes in 1,050-1,180 and 1,230-1,350 A bands. Attitude-control system programming error-pointed instrument 60° from desired targets; only limited data were obtained, (nasa Rpt SRI.)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB employing a Thor-Burner II booster, (upi, P EB, 10/11/67, 2; Pres Rep 1967)
usaf SV—5D lifting body was successfully launched from wtr by Atlas booster on reentry mission and telemetered “excellent” performance data to earth before losing its flotation gear and sinking in the Pacific. Released by Adas booster at desired orbital altitude, the 900-1]) vehicle became first spacecraft to perform preprogrammed cross-range maneuvers when it glided away from a straight line and then returnee] to original flight path. Purpose of flight—second of four in usaf’s Precision Recovery Including Maneuvering Entry (Prime) program— was to further test theory that a vehicle could be designed to operate like an orbital spacecraft and be maneuvered like an aircraft when it reentered and traveled through the atmosphere. First SV—5D vehicle, launched Dec. 21, 1966, performed successfully but was lost when parachute malfunctioned, (afssd Release 77.67; Av Wk, 3/13/67, 23; Miles, LA Times, 3/6/67)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried GSFCinstrumented payload to 111.5-mi (179-km) altitude to measure and record spectra of Spica and Zeta Ophiuchi in extreme ultraviolet range. Rocket and instrumentation performed well. (NASA Rpt SRL)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried GSFC payload to 131-mi (210-km) altitude in experiment to measure spectral irradiance of Gamma Velora and Zeta Puppis with a UV stellar spectograph, star tracker, and modified attitude-control system (strap). Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
eldo’s Europa I rocket, launched from Woomera Rocket Range after 10 postponements, crash-landed when French Coralie 2nd stage failed to ignite. Malfunction was traced to equipment associated with the release system designed to separate the Coralie from U.K.’s Blue Streak 1st stage. Rocket, which should have flown 4,828 km (3,000 mi) into the Pacific, landed 965 km (600 mi) north of Woomera in the Simpson desert. (Reuters, NYT, 8/5/67, 7)
usaf launched 8 satellites by Thor-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb. This solar-cell-powered, 85-lb, satellite experiment, designed for developing satellite navigation technique as easy to use as celestial navigation and more accurate, would assist pilot or navigator of ship or aircraft who could make direct, simultaneous measurements. Signal measurement from two or more satellites with known positions to determine location of ship or aircraft would make use of signal transmission times and standard navigation techniques. Experiment had been built by Naval Research Laboratory as one to be compatible with Doppler equipment for low-altitude satellites. Naval Air Systems Command had been project sponsor, (upi, W Post, 6/1/67, C4; nrl News 5/31/67)
NASA Areas sounding rocket was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 38-mi (60-km) altitude in nots experiment to measure incident solar ultraviolet irradiance in support of Ogo I Vs mission. First of a series of seven, rocket failed to attain experimental results because of parachute malfunction. (NASARptSRL)
nasa successfully launched Explorer XXXIV Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (imp-f) from wtr by three-stage Thrust-Augmented Improved Delta booster into near-perfect polar orbit. Orbital parameters: apogee, 133,131 mi (214,348 km); perigee, 150 mi (241 km); period, 106 hrs; inclination, 67.2°. Preliminary data indicated that all spacecraft systems and the 10 of its 11 experiments which had been turned on were operating normally. Final experiment would be turned on by ground command June 1. Explorer XXXIV would make measurements of solar and galactic cosmic rays within and at the boundary of earth’s atmosphere and interplanetary space during period of maximum solar activity. Primary mission objectives were to: (1) place spacecraft into orbit with an apogee of approximately 92,000 mi, or greater, to investigate the region between the magnetosheath and the shock front; and (2) to obtain scientific data on the cislunar environment from a number of its experiments. Explorer XXXIV was ten times more complex than any of four previous satellites launched in NASA’s Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (imp) series, two of which—Explorer XXVIII (launched May 29, 1965)	and Explorer XXXIII (launched July 1, 1966)—were still operating and providing scientific data, imp series was managed by Gsrc under ossa direction. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Release 67-21; UPl, NYT, 5/26/67,9; WSJ, 5/25/67,1)
Apollo Command Mod ole at Launch Complex 34, Kennedy Space Center, is a silent, grim reminder of the dash fire that took the lives of the three-man crew when it swept through the spacecraft during launch rehearsal. 204) died, apparently instantly, when flash fire swept through their Apollo I spacecraft mated to an Uprated Saturn I booster 218 ft above the ground. Crew was Virgil I. Grissom, one of seven original Mercury astronauts; Edward H. White II, first American to walk in space; and Roger B. Chaffee, preparing for his first space flight. Accident, worst in the history of the U.S. space program, occurred at 6:31 p.m. est at ksc’s Launch Complex 34 during first major rehearsal for scheduled Feb. 21 . mission. Immediately after tragedy, msc Director Dr. Robert Gilruth, Chairman of the Board of North American Aviation, Inc., Lee Atwood, and NASA’s Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips flew to Ksc from Washington, D.C. General Phillips described the accident at a press conference Jan. 28: “The facts briefly are: at 6:31 p.m. (est) the observers heard a report which originated from one of the crewmen that there was a fire aboard the spacecraft . . .” At T-10 and holding in the countdown, observers saw a “flash fire” break out inside the spacecraft, penetrate its shell, and surround its exterior with smoke. Rescue workers rushed to the pad area but could not open the hatch for five minutes. Phillips said astronauts’ only hope of escape would have to open hatch manually with a crank tool. He refused to speculate on how long accident would delay the Apollo program or on source of the fire but admitted that “if there is an ignition source ... in pure oxygen this, of course, has flash-fire potential.” His statement that spacecraft was operating on internal power when fire broke out was corrected Feb. 3 by NASA Deputy Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans: “The fuel cells in the service module were not in use, and the so-called internal power was being supplied by batteries having the same characteristics as the fuel cells but located external to the spacecraft.” NASA immediately appointed a board of inquiry (see Jan. 28) and announced that all data had been impounded pending its formal investigation. Unmanned Apollo flights would proceed on schedule, but manned flights were postponed until board’s inquiry was completed. Apollo I backup crew—Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham—were expected to be named prime crew for rescheduled mission, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 67-16; NYT, 1/28/67, 1, 18; 1/29/67, 1, 48, El; W Post, 1/28/67, Al, A7; 1/29/67, Al, A18; WStar, 1/28/67, A1,A4; 1/29/67, Al, A6)
usaf launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb Using a Thor-Agena D booster. (Aero Tech, 12/18/67,10)
NASA would use AS-204 booster—an Uprated Saturn I—to launch first Apollo Lunar Module (lm) on unmanned flight in summer 1967 because it was last booster equipped with full research and development instrumentation. Original plans had been to use AS-206 booster. Undamaged during Jan. 27 fire, AS-204 launch vehicle would be moved from Launch Complex 34 to Launch Complex 37, which was equipped for unmanned launches of the LM. AS-206 booster would be stored for use in a subsequent mission. Purpose of first LM mission was to obtain data on ascent and descent propulsion systems, including a restart of the descent system; verify lm structure; and evaluate staging, (nasa Release 67-67)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried MIT x-ray experiment to 88-mi (142-km) altitude to search for undiscovered x-ray sources and to obtain data on celestial locations and energy spectra of “discrete celestial X-ray sources” in three regions. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
New York Times editorial on U.S.’s and U.S.S.R.’s competitive programs to land men on moon: “We fail to see that it makes any difference who reaches the moon first or whether the landing takes place in the 1960’s or the mid-1970’s. Moreover, we see large, unsatisfied needs here on earth—in this country and elsewhere—that could very usefully employ some of the vast resources now being devoted to the Apollo program and its Soviet analogue. A cutback in those resources and their diversion to more pressing needs would make more sense. “The moon is not going away, and it can wait a little longer for visitors.” (NYT, 3/27/67)
NASA Areas sounding rocket, launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 33-mi (53-km) altitude, third in nots series to measure incident solar ultraviolet irradiance in support of Ogo IV’s mission, achieved excellent results. Rocket and payload performed properly, (nasa Rpt srl)
Nation’s most powerful 260-in solid-propellant rocket motor, SL-3, developed 5.7 million lbs thrust and burned 1.6 million lbs of propellant in 80-sec test-firing conducted for NASA by Aerojet General at Homestead, Fla. Only flaw was explosion of a portion of the exhaust nozzle at the end of the test. Purpose of firing, third in NASA’s Large Solid Rocket Technology Program, was to test “a large, submerged-type, ablative nozzle; the use of inert slivers to control the burn-out of propellant; elements of a motor failure warning system; and a higher burning rate propellant.” First two 260-in motors, SL-1 (fired Sept. 25, 1965) and SL-2 (fired Feb. 23, 1966), both operated about two minutes and produced 3.5 million lbs thrust in tests to check strength of the maraging steel motor case, structural integrity of the case propellant, insulation and ablative nozzle, and the repeated performance of test hardware. Managed by LeRC under OART direction, program was designed to demonstrate feasibility of building and operating solid motors of greater size than those in current use for multistage launch vehicle systems carrying heavy payloads into space, (nasa Release 67151; Lewis News, 6/9/67, 1; Reistrup, W Post, 6/18/67, A2; NYT, 6/18/67,6; Marshall Star, 6/21/67,10)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from WTR using Thor-Agena D booster; satellite reentered Oct 4. (Pres Rep 1967)
The time had to come to end the “belabored post-mortems of the Apollo fire” and to restore confidence in the Apollo program, William Coughlin suggested in Technology Week, “nasa certainly has its faults, particularly in the quality control area. But we believe that the overall record of the Apollo 204 probe offers some inspiration for confidence in NASA management. It takes a great deal of integrity to give an accident review board full freedom and support when the outcome can only be critical of those setting up the board—and NASA provided that freedom and support. It then takes courage to stand up and disagree with some of the findings of the board—and NASA did that The Phillips report, damaging as it was, also was testimony that NASA had been on top of the problems at North American and was making progress in solving them. . . . ‘^Confidence in Apollo must be restored and the program allowed to move ahead, without undue restriction, on its new lunar schedule. “Anything less will diminish the sacrifice made by three brave men.” (Coughlin, Tech Wk, 5/22/67,58)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from Ft. Churchill, Canada, carried seven experiments to 100-mi (160-km) altitude measuring: spectral emission line intensity during an aurora as function of altitude; visible emission features of an aurora; and primary and secondary electron streams. Except for high voltage arcing, instrument performance was satisfactory; rocket performance was good, (nasa Rpt SRl)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr using Scout booster. (Pres Rep 1967)
A restructuring of the Nation’s space program was outlined by NASA Administrator James E. Webb in testimony on proposed nasa FY 1968 operating plan, before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Decisions had reflected fiscal, resources, and time factors. The national fiscal situation required minimum expenditures on space for the next two years. Primary emphasis on completion of Apollo program and other financially important ongoing efforts would be carried out to avoid major losses. Decisions on nasa’s space posture for the 1970s would be postponed until “fiscal year 1969 budget or later.” According to Webb’s planning, “Our allocation of resources in fiscal year 1968 must hold open for later decision the most promising future aeronautical and space options which our past large investments will support.” FY 1968 operating plan figures, presented by Webb, showed nasa’s
Displeasure with NASA’s administrative officials was voiced by Rep. William F. Ryan (D-N.Y.), member, House Committee on Science and Astronautics, on floor of the House, “nasa continues to evade the serious responsibility of candor,” said Rep. Ryan while inserting a series of documents in Congressional Record, including Feb. 15 letter from msfc Director Wernher von Braun to S. K. Hoffman, naa Rocketdyne Div. president, on “. . . hardware failure, most . . . traceable to human error, inadequate manufacturing, quality control, or test procedures.” NASA Hq. news conference, called at 5:00 pm same day by NASA Administrator James E. Webb, accompanied by key NASA and industry officials, responded to Rep. Ryan’s charges and explained that letter to Hoffman had been a case of normal Government-contractor business. Webb pointed out that subcommittees of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics were kept informed each month so that emergency matters could be brought to their attention. Dr. von Braun explained how inspection and quality control procedures were continued as rocket engines were processed at contractor’s plant and at Government test sites. He stated that NASA-Rocketdyne coordination on inspection continuity and quality control were applied to both the rocket engine as an entity and the rocket engine/launch-vehicle-stage complex. As trend of news conference discussion turned from quality control to Saturn/Apollo weight problems, m/g Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo Program Director, said the heavier Lunar Module resulted from fire-hazard-type design changes. He stated that lm was now 31,500 lb against a 32,000-lb control weight. Referring to weight-lifting capability of Saturn V, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said lunar payload had increased from 90,000 to 100,000 lb by increasing engine efficiency. Similar improvement was expected in lm’s propulsion, which would ease the weight problem. (CR, 10/5/67, H13046-8; Transcript)
NASA Aerobee 150A sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried afcrl solar radiation experiment to 142-mi (229-km) altitude in test to complement March 14 mission which was hot entirely successful. Primary objective was simultaneous measurement of solar extreme ultraviolet radiation (euv) in upper atmosphere with Aerobee’s photoelectric spectrometer and similar instrument on NASA’s Oso III Orbiting Solar Observatory, launched March 8. (WS Release 67-11)
Phoebus IB reactor was operated for 45 min—30 min at 1,500-mw design power—in test conducted by aec—nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office at nrds, Jackass Flats, Nev. Primary purpose of test, part of Rover program, was to study high-power-operation effects on reactor— including test conditions to be found in 5,000-mw Phoebus 2, slated for test late this year. Phoebus series would provide advanced technology for solid-core graphite rocket reactors, eventually providing 200,000250,000	lbs of thrust. (Joint aec-nasa Release K—46)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from wtr using Titan III-B booster; satellite reentered Nov. 5. (Pres Rep 1967)
usaf launched an experimental reentry vehicle by Atlas-F booster from Vandenberg afb as part of Advanced Ballistic Reentry Systems (abres) program. {Aero Tech, 1/1/68, 13)
NASA’s Pioneer VIII (Pioneer C), third in series of five spacecraft designed to provide continuing measurements over the solar cycle at widely separated points in interplanetary space, was successfully launched from etr by Thrust-Augmented Thor-Delta booster into orbit around the sun. Orbital parameters: aphelion, 1.0080 astronomical units (au) or 101.2 million mi (162.8 million km); perihelion, 0.9892 au or 91.5 million mi (147.2 million km) ; period, 386.6 days; and inclination, 0.057°. Primary mission objective of the 145-lb, drum-shaped satellite was to collect scientific data on interplanetary phenomena, including magnetic field, plasma, and cosmic ray measurements for two or more passages of solar activity. As secondary mission Pioneer VIII would: (1) investigate continuously characteristics of the magnetosheath, investigate the geomagnetospheric tail, and acquire data when a highly significant solar event occurred; (2) refine primary determinations of earth and moon masses, the astronomical unit, and osculating elements of earth’s orbit; (3) provide synoptic study of solar-interplanetary relations; and (4) provide target for checkout and training of msfn equipment and operations personnel by launching a Test and Training Satellite (tts) as secondary payload. The 40-lb Tts I, carried pickaback on 2nd stage, was successfully ejected after 3rd-stage burnout, and entered orbit with 303-mi (488-km) apogee, 187-mi (301-km) perigee, 92-min period, and 33° inclination. Pioneer VIII separation, boom deployment, and initial solar orientation occurred as planned; all seven experiments— including an interplanetary dust detector and a radio propagation experiment—functioned satisfactorily; and on Dec. 15 spacecraft successfully completed maneuver which orientated the spin axis perpendicular to ecliptic plane. Pioneer VI (launched Dec. 16,1965) and Pioneer VII (launched Aug. 17,1966) were currently 144 million mi and 68 million mi, respectively, from earth and were still returning excellent data. Pioneer program was managed by ARC under ossa direction. (NASA Releases 67—293, 67—310; nasa Proj Off; W Post, 12/14/67, A17; AP, B Sun, 12/14/67,1)
Rep. Chet Holifield (D-Calif.) challenged President Johnson’s budget priorities and attacked Administration plans to develop a nuclear rocket system for interplanetary space exploration. He told newsmen that it would be a much greater tragedy to limit school aid than to have a Russian cosmonaut welcome U.S. astronauts to Mars. “. . . We can’t be like the Roman Empire. They gave their people circuses when they needed bread. And that empire disappeared.” (upi, W Post, 3/4/67, A2)
Press briefing on future ossa programs was held at nasa Hq. Edgar M. Cortright, Deputy Administrator for Space Science and Applications, served as moderator. Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell stressed the importance of basic research to all national scientific programs. “. . . the results of basic research are vital to the realization of practical applications. When we began the NASA program, we had the sounding rocket, we had the capability of putting together small satellite launchers and to apply those techniques, and we built the best program on those techniques that we could. Now we have manned flight capabilities; we have large boosters, the ability to get out further into the solar system than ever before. . . . Now is the time to profit by those capabilities, to continue the basic research.” Sunblazer probe that could be launched into orbit around the sun and transmit radio signals back to earth was discussed by Jesse L. Mitchell, Director of Physics and Astronomy Programs. Spacecraft would determine electron density in solar atmosphere by measuring time it took signals to travel from spacecraft back to earth. NASA was also considering a plan to launch a satellite toward Jupiter, then use Jupiter’s magnetic field to push the spacecraft toward other planets and eventually hurl it into space 1-10 trillion miles away. Oran W. Nicks, Director of Lunar and Planetary Programs, outlined plans for unmanned missions to Mars and Venus, beginning with a small instrumented probe scheduled for launch in June 1967. In the 1971 Mars and 1972 Venus missions, teams of two spacecraft would be launched by a modified Saturn V booster. One spacecraft would penetrate planet’s atmosphere; take measurements as it sped toward planet’s surface; and flash data to the second spacecraft— programed to fly past the planet—before crashlanding. Data would be transmitted to earth by the flyby spacecraft. Missions would pave the way for later spacecraft with improved equipment—possibly including TV cameras—to softland on the planets. Thumb-sized desert mice fitted with tiny radio transmitters and telemetry equipment which could broadcast mouse’s temperature up to six months were being conditioned for future space flight, Dr. Orr E. Reynolds, Director of Bioscience Programs, disclosed. “Astromouse”—which ate only sunflower seeds and never drank water—might be orbited with three astronauts in Apollo spacecraft. Others might be launched into interplanetary space in a Pioneer study of biological specimens outside earth’s gravitational field. Plans for a multi-purpose satellite that would combine the functions of many unmanned spacecraft currently in orbit were revealed by Dr. Morris Tepper, Deputy Director of Space Applications and Director of Meteorology. Developed under unified space applications program, satellite would carry equipment to observe weather conditions; relay communications to distant earth stations; provide navigation traffic control for ships and aircraft; and compile data on earth’s natural resources. No mention of unmanned scientific lunar probes was made during the briefing. When asked later in an interview whether he thought interest in unmanned exploration of the moon would diminish after astronauts landed, Dr. Newell replied: “Not at all.” Although astronauts would dominate lunar exploration, unmanned Surveyor spacecraft would probably land in unsafe areas, and Lunar Orbiter photography missions would continue for mapping. Discussion of unmanned lunar missions had been omitted because “we wanted to tell about the newer of new things in our thinking.” (Transcript; Hines, W Star, 1/8/67, A16)
GAO, responding to March 14 request by Sen. Margaret Chase Smith (R-Me.), member of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, had reviewed NASA’s Apollo contract with North American Aviation, Inc. (naa), and published a “Summarization of National Aeronautics and Space Administration Management Review of North American Aviation, Inc., Activities” based on the Phillips Report. According to gao, the Phillips Report “stated that, at the start of the csm and S—II programs, key milestones were agreed upon, performance requirements were established and cost plans were developed . . . [but] as the program progressed, there were slippages in key milestone accomplishments, degradation in hardware performance, and increasing costs.” In evaluating the probability of naa’s ability to “meet future commitments, the report stated that, for both the S-II and the csm, significant technical problems still remained which had to be resolved. The review team did not find significant indication of actions underway, for the S—II, to ‘build confidence that future progress will be better than past performance.’ While some progress was indicated to improve the outlook for the csm, the report stated that ‘there is little confidence that NAA will meet its schedule and performance commitments within the funds available for this portion of the Apollo program. . . .’ ” (Text)
United States exhibits spacecraft at Expo ’67 in Montreal: Lunar Orbiter (top left). Surveyor (center), and Apollo Command Module suspended from parachutes (right). G.	Shinkle (usa, Ret.), Apollo Program Manager at ksc, resigned for “personal reasons.” Dr. Kurt H. Debus, KSC Director, commented: “I deeply regret the decision of General Shinkle to leave the program. Throughout his association here, his experience has been of major assistance in our contribution to the Apollo program.” (nasa Releases 67— 128, 67-129; AP, NYT, 5/20/67, 2) * NASA announced it would negotiate three-month $500,000 fixed-price contracts with Martin Marietta Corp. and McDonnell Aircraft Astronautics Co. for preliminary design studies (Phase B) of planetary entry capsules for the Voyager program. Phase B contractor efforts were the responsibility of jpl in conjunction with LaRC. Responsibility for system design and hardware development subsequent to Phase B would be divided between jpl and LaRC with jpl responsible for surface laboratory and LaRC responsible for capsule bus system, which included entry and landing equipment. (NASA Release 67—126)
AFSC was conducting five-month study of ways to convert excess Minuteman I ICBm’s to launch vehicles, thereby saving millions of dollars. Results of study, to be completed by May, would determine feasibility of flight-test program in which two converted Minuteman boosters would launch instrumented payloads into circular orbits from etr. Preliminary studies had already shown that converted Minuteman booster could place large payloads into 575-mi circular orbit, or smaller payloads into an elliptical orbit 172 mi by 57,500 mi. (afsc Release 20-67)
usaf SV-5D lifting body vehicle was successfully launched from WTR by Adas booster on reentry mission and telemetered excellent performance data. Vehicle—third of four in usaf’s Precision Recovery Including Maneuvering Entry (Prime) program—was second to perform preprogrammed cross-range maneuvers and first to be successfully recovered. First SV—5D vehicle was launched Dec. 21, 1966, and lost when parachute malfunctioned during reentry; second, launched March 5, sank in Pacific after losing its flotation gear. (Tech Wk, 4/24/67,13; Av Wk, 4/24/67,35)
Increased appropriations for riot-torn cities should take precedence over NASA’s request for funds to finance unmanned exploration of the planets, Washington Daily News suggested in an editorial. “James E. Webb . . . is concerned over cuts in the agency’s $5 billion budget including reduction in money for unmanned exploration of Venus and Mars. Russia, he says, is about to send up the biggest . . . rocket you ever saw. In the present state of domestic affairs, we’d say let ’em! “From all appearances our scientists already have more and more exact information about conditions on Venus and Mars than our police and war-on-poverty experts have on Los Angeles and Cleveland-----” (W News, 7/28/67, 16)
Japan’s third attempt to orbit a satellite was unsuccessful when 3rd stage of Lambda 4S—3 failed to ignite at Uchinoura Range. In first attempt, Sept. 26, 1966, rocket went off course and missed orbital trajectory. Second attempt, Dec. 21, 1966, was unsuccessful because of 4th-stage ignition failure. (W Post, 4/13/67, A17; SBD, 4/14/67, 264)
Two NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets, launched from Andoeya, Norway, carried gsfc electric field experiments. Four barium clouds released by the first were photographed from all sites for analysis of electric fields from motions of neutral and ionized barium clouds during aurora condition. The second rocket was launched to correlate electric field measurements with measurements of magnetic fields, flux, and energy spectra of low-energy particles, but failed on loss of radiofrequency signals, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Areas sounding rocket was launched from Barking Sands, Hawaii, to 36-mi (58-km) altitude, fifth in NOTS series of seven to measure incident solar uv irradiance in support of Ogo IV’s mission. Excellent data were obtained. Rocket and payload performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched from nasa Wallops Station, reached 102-mi (167-km) altitude in Univ. of Maryland experiment to evaluate capabilities and accuracies of pulse and thermal equalization probes as research tools. Experiment also investigated electron energy distribution in normal daytime ionosphere and use of wing-slope techniques with Langmuir probes. Experiment was successful. (NASA Rpt srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried ARC-instrumented payload to 86-mi (137-km) altitude to collect meteor-itic debris during peak of meteor shower. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. Further examination of the 12 collection modules would be required to determine if micrometeoroid particles were collected, (nasa Rpt srl)
Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, in its report to House Committee on Science and Astronautics, recommended that $46.8 million be cut from $3.4 billion requested by nasa for FY 1968 manned space flight program. Recommendation, which included $25-million reduction in Apollo program, was approved by full committee May 16. (W Post, 5/12/67, A13)
Soviet Union announced a new series of rocket tests believed designed to perfect a sea-landing system for Russian astronauts in preparation for a resumption of manned space flights. Soviet news agency, Tass, said the test of “carrier rockets” would begin Sept. 3. It warned all ships and planes to stay clear of two 80-mile-wide “bulls’ eyes” in the Pacific Ocean, one about 900 miles northeast and one 300 miles northeast of Midway Island, from noon until midnight every day through Oct. 30. (Reuters, W Post, 9/S/61, A16)
Rocket engine for Apollo service module’s propulsion system had been undergoing tests at Arnold Engineering Development Center during past 3Y2 years. Initially, engine performance was unknown; it would use an ablatively cooled thrust chamber and a high expansion ratio nozzle of thin metal and would operate at relatively low combustion chamber pressures. Initial tests were on configuration of engine’s fragile nozzles. Follow-on tests, for prequalification of engine combined with heavy duty replica of propellant tankage, had checked ballistic performance. Simulated high-altitude testing would lead to eventual man-rating of propulsion system, (aedc Release 67-212)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried GSFC-instrumented payload to 128-mi (209-km) altitude to gather data on charged particle fluxes and to investigate distribution of electric fields in the ionosphere during auroral displays. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory, but vehicle spin rate was excessive. Most scientific data were lost because nose cone failed to eject properly and antennas failed to deploy, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Wallops Station carried American Science and Engineering experiment to 112-mi (179km) altitude to measure neutron flux in vicinity of earth using directional neutron detector. Once proven, detector was planned for use in OGO-E program. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt srl)
A. O. Tischler, director of oart’s Chemical Propulsion Div., received aiaa’s 1967 Wyld Propulsion Award for leadership and management of rocket programs. He was cited for his “outstanding contributions to the research and development of Liquid Rocket Propulsion Systems and overall management of the nasa Liquid Rocket Propulsion Program.” (nasa Release 67-186)
Third French satellite, Diademe I (D-1C), was launched from Hammaguir Range with three-stage Diamant booster. Orbital parameters were 1,341-km (833-mi) apogee, 418 km (260-mi) lower than nominal; 584-km (363-mi) perigee; 104-min period; and 40° inclination. Reason for low apogee had not yet been determined. Designed to reflect laser beams fired simultaneously from ground stations in France, Greece, and Algeria, 50-lb satellite would make geodetic measurements. It also carried ultrastable oscillator for Doppler effect experiment. First French satellite, A—1, was launched from Hammaguir Range Nov. 26,1965; second, Diapason! (D-lA), was launched Feb. 17,1966. Fourth and last satellite in Diamant series was scheduled for launch Feb. 19. (Hess, NYT, 2/9/67, 15; SBD, 2/9/67, 218; Av Wk, 2/13/67, 41)
Two sounding rockets were launched from NASA Wallops Station. NikeApache carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to 60-mi (96.4-km) altitude to obtain a vertical profile of the density of nitric oxide in region at 47—75-mi (75-120-km) altitude with a scanning uv monochromator. Payload was first to utilize Tomahawk clamshell nose cone. Instruments performed satisfactorily, but late ignition of rocket’s 2nd stage caused 12-mi (20-km) loss in apogee. Nike-Cajun carrying GSFC-instrumented payload used grenade-explosion technique to measure temperature, pressure, density, and wind in region 22—59-mi (35-95-km) altitude in coordination with nitric oxide experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily, reaching 68-mi (109.6-km) altitude. The near-simultaneous launches were intended to permit analysis of theory relating nitric oxide concentration to temperature and absorption of radio energy, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk launched from Barreira de Inferno Range, near Natal, Brazil, carried Univ. of New Hampshire-instrumented experiment to obtain data on neutron intensity at different latitudes, solar x-ray fluxes, Lyman-alpha radiation, and ionospheric electron densities. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRL; Tech Wk, 4/10/67, 15)
NASA successfully launched Essa IV, fourth meteorological satellite in essa’s Tiros Operational Satellite (tos) system, from WTH using three-stage Thor-Delta booster. Satellite achieved nearly-polar, sun-synchronous orbit with 888-mi	(1,429-km) apogee; 822-mi (1,323-km) perigee; 113-min period; and 102° inclination. Wheel orientation maneuver was scheduled for completion during 18th orbit, at which time first photos would be programed and two-week spacecraft checkout and evaluation program would begin. / An advanced version of the cartwheel configuration, 290-lb Essa IV carried two Automatic Picture Transmission (apt) camera systems which would photograph earth’s cloudcover and immediately transmit pictures to local apt ground stations. Essa IV was replacing Essa II in the tos system because orbital drift limited Essa II’s usefulness. essa financed, managed, and operated tos system; gsfc was responsible for procurement, launch, and initial checkout of spacecraft in orbit. Essa I was launched Feb. 3, 1966; Essa II, Feb. 28, 1966; and Essa III, Oct. 2, 1966. (nasa Proj Off; essa Release 67-17)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from WTR using Thor-Burner II booster. {Pres Rep 1967)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried 14-in telescope with new strap iii stellar pointing control to 96.8-mi (155-km) altitude in Johns Hopkins Univ. experiment to measure vacuum spectral emission lines from atmospheres of Venus, Jupiter, and Regulus. strap iii (used for first time) rocket and other instruments performed satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR, carrying arc payload to 99.2-mi (159.5-km) altitude to verify performance of sparcs (Solar Pointing Aerobee Rocket Control System) and map the flight path magnetic field. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA engineers maneuvered Lunar Orbiter III, launched Feb. 4, by firing spacecraft’s velocity control engine 125.5 sec, with intent to simulate planned orbit for manned Apollo. Planned 100-mi circular orbit for Apollo was approximated in 196-mi apolune and 89-mi perilune achieved by maneuver from Lunar Orbiter Ill’s prior 1,133-mi apolune and 87-mi perilune. Data on lunar gravity fields would be obtained for Apollo program. Lunar Orbiter series of four spacecraft orbiting around moon was providing valuable tracking target activity for NASA’s Manned Space Flight Network (msfn) . (nasa Release 67-233)
Orbit of second Vela nuclear detection satellite, launched April 28 by usaf Titan III—C booster, was circularized at 69,000-mi altitude. First Vela’s orbit had been circularized April 29. Satellites were part of DOD’s Vela program to monitor space for violations of nuclear test ban treaty. (AP,NYT, 5/2/67,16)
U.K.’s Ariel III (uk—e) scientific satellite was successfully launched from WTR by nasa four-stage Scout booster into orbit with 373-mi (600-km) apogee, 306-mi (492-km) perigee, 95.6-min period, and 80° inclination. The 198-lb satellite, which had a one-year design lifetime, carried five experiments for the investigation of earth’s atmosphere; four were operating at liftoff and the fifth was turned on after third orbit. All five were functioning normally. Third in a series of U.S.-U.K. cooperative space projects, Ariel III was designed to supplement and extend atmospheric and ionospheric investigations conducted by Ariel I (launched April 26, 1962) and Ariel II (launched March 27, 1964). Primary nasa mission objectives were to place satellite into planned orbit and provide tracking and telemetry support. NASA supplied Scout booster, conducted launch, and provided tracking and data acquisition services with stadan facilities, under overall management of GSFC. Mai or portion of the technical effort on Ariel III, including design and fabrication of spacecraft and five experiments, was accomplished in U.K. under management of Science Research Council’s Space Research Management Unit (srmu). (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 67—96, 67—115)
Spanish scientists had submitted to the Spanish government a five-year, $10,000,000 space research program, the Chicago Tribune reported. According to Comision Nacional de Investigacion del Espacio (conie) President Gen. Rafael Calvo Rodes, primary program objectives would be to gather scientific data and gain practical experience in designing and launching rockets. During separate, $1,500,000 preparatory program which was completed in December 1966, Spain launched her first rocket, collected data, conducted preliminary experiments, trained technical personnel, and prepared permanent launching sites; during next phase, Spain would build her own Skua rockets. (Darrah, C Trib, 1/3/67)
Prime and. backup crews for NASA’s first manned Apollo mission [see May 9] told a news conference at North American Aviation, Inc.’s Downey, Calif., plant that they were “very impressed” with the design changes being made in the Apollo spacecraft as a result of the Jan. 27 flash fire. Major changes included: (1) a new hinged hatch that could be opened outward in about two seconds by activating a springed lever; (2) replacement of many highly flammable materials such as nylon netting; (3) sheathing of open wiring with hard panels; and (4) flame-resistant spacesuits. In addition, spacecraft would be pressurized with nitrogen rather than oxygen on launching, and in orbit—where oxygen is indispensable—pressure would be reduced one third to 5 psi. Questioned about his attitudes toward the program since the Jan. 27 Apollo accident, Command Pilot Walter M. Schirra replied:	. . we went through a very agonizing self-appraisal; we suffered through three months of recrimination; we’ve culminated these three months with some very firm ideas.” These ideas, Schirra said, were being phased into an orderly program that “will continue—with orderly haste . . . [and] we are not going to run rampant on schedules.” The crews anticipated that Apollo 101 spacecraft would be delivered to ksc in December and that first manned mission would be flown in first quarter of 1968. Primary mission objective would be to “exercise the vehicle in earth orbit,” Schirra said. Asked if the April 24 death of Soviet Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov had had any adverse effects on plans for earth landings in the Apollo program, Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford replied: “The earth landing system that consists of the three main parachutes and the two drogue chutes- had been qualified completely. . . . We still have some earth landing drops to be made. But right now as far as the crew is concerned, either the parachutes in this vehicle are qualified or we don’t fly.” (Transcript; Newsweek, 5/22/67, 94; Hill, NYT, 5/11/67,27)
