Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried arc luster sampling instrument with collection modules, camera, and electronics package to 71.3-mi (114.7-km) altitude to sample material from noctilucent clouds as luster instrument passed through them. Sampling instrument was successfully flown and recovered. Instrument malfunction caused loss of four modules, but remaining eight were recovered in excellent condition. Experiment was considered highly successful, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from ,WSMR carried Cornell Univ. experiment to 106-mi (170.6-km) altitude to study far infrared in spectral range from five to several hundred microns, using mercury-, copper- and gallium-doped germanium and antimonide detectors. Nikon F camera monitored instantaneous rocket aspect. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt srl)
In statement to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Milton Klein, Manager of nasa—aec Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, summarized progress of nuclear rocket program. Major milestone has been achieved with “operation in late 1967 of a single reactor for 60 minutes at its design power of 1,100 megawatts, a duration capability adequate for most missions.” Technology phase of nerva program was nearing completion and next step was to develop engine to flight capability, funds for which were included in FY 1969 budget request, he said. No action deferring this step could be taken without losing a major portion of capability in this field. Nuclear rocket was “a focal point for pushing forward frontiers of technology . . . [and] only major advanced propulsion program in the Nation.” High performance of nuclear rockets had been demonstrated in nine consecutive power reactor tests. Solid base of data and underrating had been built for development of flight-rated NERVA engine. “Development of the nerva engine at this time,” Klein stressed, “would capitalize on this investment and provide a major fundamental advance in propulsion capability. Its high specific impulse will provide a broad mission versatility for the high-payload, high-energy missions . . . inevitably included in a viable space program.” (Testimony)
Explaining decision to develop flight-rated nerva engine at 75,000-lb rather than 200,000-lb thrust level, NASA Manager of Space Nuclear Propulsion Milton Klein told House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee that lower level would be suitable for most missions in which nuclear rocket was significantly advantageous. It was “substantially off-optimum for manned planetary landing missions,” but with manned exploration delayed, “less emphasis is now properly placed upon that mission, and the 75,000-pound-thrust nerva class is appropriate. . . . The 75,000-pound-thrust nerva gives somewhat better payload performance for orbital operations missions which start from low Earth orbit and involve a single Saturn V launch,” but its use for manned planetary missions “entails a significant performance penalty.” Further development might be required “to extend operating time and to accommodate more extensive clustering and staging if such a mission were to be undertaken.” (Testimony)
Eugen Sanger Medal of German Society of Aeronautics and Astronautics was awarded to U.S. X—15 research aircraft team in Bonn, West Germany, for X—15 program’s contribution to advancement of space flight. Medal honored German rocketry leader, Dr. Eugen Sanger, first to define potential of hypersonic rocket aircraft, who died in 1964. John V. Becker of LaRC accepted award on behalf of NASA—USN—USAF team, (nasa Release 68—206)
U.K. successfully launched Skylark sounding rocket from Adelaide, Australia, to altitude of 149 mi (239.8 km) after initial delays caused by weather. (Reuters, NYT, 6/2/68, 55)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by nasa from WSMR carried Naval Research Laboratory experiment to 109.2-mi (174.7-km) altitude to obtain stellar spectra in Scorpius in 1,000—1,600 A far UV range and photometric data on stellar fluxes. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Scientific objectives were not achieved because attitude control system (acs) malfunctioned and vehicle failed to capture and point at desired targets. Experiment performed as expected, but because of ACS malfunction no film was advanced by spectrograph or aspect camera. Some photometric data were obtained by Geiger tube photometers. (NASARptSRL)
nasa issued summary of combined findings of Accident Board and Review Board appointed to investigate May 6 accident which destroyed Lunar Landing Research Vehicle (llrv) at Ellington afb. Pilot, Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, had to eject few seconds after loss of helium pressure in propellant tanks caused premature shutdown of attitude control rocket system. Helium had been inadvertently depleted earlier than usual in flight. Armstrong incurred minor injuries. Review Board, appointed by then nasa Deputy Administrator Dr. Thomas 0. Paine to study accident’s possible impact on Apollo program, discovered no unfavorable effects on lunar landing project, particularly lunar module. It agreed with Accident Investigation Board in calling for improvements in design and operating practices in LLRV and urged more stringent control over such flying programs and greater attention to all NASA lunar landing simulators, (nasa Release 68—182)
William E. Stoney, Jr., former Chief of msc’s Advanced Spacecraft Technology Div., became NASA Deputy Director (Engineering) of Apollo program, (nasa Release 68—151)
NASA’s Surveyor VII (Surveyor G), last spacecraft in NASA’s Surveyor Program to analyze lunar surface, was successfully launched from ETR by Atlas-Centaur (AC—15) booster on 67-hr lunar intercept trajectory. Primary mission for 2,293-lb (at launch) spacecraft was to softland on the moon and obtain postlanding TV pictures of lunar surface. As secondary mission spacecraft would determine relative abundance of chemical elements in lunar soil with alpha-scattering instrument; manipulate lunar material with surface sampler in view of TV camera; and obtain touchdown dynamics, thermal, and radar reflectivity data [see Jan. 9—22]. Surveyor VII—which also carried magnets attached to landing pads, mirrors for viewing beneath spacecraft and for stereo photography, and seven special dust-detection mirrors—was first in Surveyor series to carry both alpha-scattering instrument and surface sampler. Launch sequence for Surveyor VII was flawless, and spacecraft performed nominally. First of two scheduled midcourse maneuvers was so precise that second correction was not necessary; maneuver directed spacecraft toward a point 1.6 mi from center of target area. Surveyor VII was seventh in series of seven spacecraft designed to prove out design, develop technology of lunar softlanding, obtain postlanding TV pictures of lunar surface, and provide basic scientific and engineering data in support of Project Apollo. Surveyor program was directed by ossa Lunar and Planetary Programs Div.; project management was assigned to JPL; Atlas-Centaur launch vehicle was managed by LeRC; and prime contractor for spacecraft development and design was Hughes Aircraft Co. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-316K; AP, NYT, 1/8/68,14; upi, W Star, 1/8/68,1; AP, B Sun, 1/8/68, A3)
In major organizational changes at Marshall Space Flight Center, Dr. W. R. Lucas, Director of Propulsion and Vehicle Engineering Laboratory, was named Director for Program Development, effective Dec. 16; Dave Newby was named Director of Center Operations; and Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, Director of Space Sciences Laboratory, was named Associate Director for Science. All were new positions, msfc Research and Development Operations would become Science and Engineering, with Hermann K. Weidner remaining Director; Industrial Operations would become Program Management under same director, E. F. O’Connor. Dr. Wemher von Braun, msfc Director, said major function of new Program Development organization would be to “harden” complete package plans for new programs, such as space station. Director for Program Development would “help chart the course for this Center in the post-Apollo period, keeping in mind our Apollo program requirements and aap obligations.” (msfc Release 68—276; Marshall Star, 12/11/68,1)
At awards dinner of National Institute of Social Sciences in New York, Charles A. Lindbergh said, “My hope that aviation would cause better relationships between our earth’s peoples gave way to realization that the airplane’s primary significance lay in its power of destruction. . . . My fascination with the rocket as a space-exploring vehicle has been replaced by my alarm at its ability to wipe out our civilization overnight.” Lindbergh and his wife, Anne Morrow, received gold medals for “distinguished service to humanity” for their work in conservation. (upi, W Star, 11/22/68, A2)
NASA Marc 42A2 Areas booster launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 4.8-mi (7.8-km) altitude in ballistic performance evaluation test. Booster and instruments performed satisfactorily; ballistic parameters agreed closely with predictions, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA released transcript of Jan. 27 background briefing on NASA FY 1969	budget, in which Administrator James E. Webb explained how Apollo program had been kept close to schedule in spite of severe budget cuts. Although budget had been reduced $600-million in 1964, NASA had been given great deal of flexibility to reprogram funds. “This in effect permitted the driving forward of the program even though there were substantial reductions in the plan. I think if you examine all of the very large systems development in the country, you will not find a one that has kept more on schedule, given more for the money, and more nearly realized its goals on time than the Apollo, in spite of the fire, in spite of the reductions. The kind of rolling readjustment that we have had to make . . . has involved very large problems. And the projections we made as to our capability to meet problems of that kind have pretty well been borne out. . . . The fact is within this short period of time the Saturn V has flown. The heat shield on the Apollo has been improved. Service module has been tested. LM has been tested. And we have I think moved about as rapidly as any program—certainly more rapidly than any program of a comparable complexity.” Webb said NASA and dod were studying closer cooperation “in the area of orbiting laboratories,” such as mol and Saturn V Workshop. He envisioned production of “a basic capability of a rather primitive sort, something like an Antarctic base flown on the Saturn V which could be used for any national purpose.” (Transcript)
Taccomsat 1, world’s largest synchronous orbit satellite, was scheduled for launch by usaf Titan III—C booster in February 1969, Aerospace Daily reported. Spacecraft would be six times as powerful as any other comsat. Initial command and control of satellite, to be positioned near Galapagos Islands for undetermined checkout period, would be accomplished by Air Force Satellite Control Facility (afscf). Taccomsat 1 would have 6 kw of effective radiated power. Intelsat II satellites had 50 w. Its 1 kw of raw dc solar power was 10 times that available in Intelsat II. While Intelsat II communications bandwidth was 125 mhz, Taccomsat 1 would have down-link bandwidth of 10 mhz at X-band and 500 khz at uhf frequencies. (Aero Daily, 8/14/68)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by nasa from wsmr carried Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. experiment to 96.6-mi (155-km) altitude to obtain quantitative measurements of spectrum and intensity of solar x-ray flux in 2- to 30-kev range, determine distribution on sun, and observe galactic x-ray sources. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. All detection systems on payload acquired useful data. Communications, maintained with both satellite xray monitor and ground-based optical observer, indicated sun was in nonflaring state with increasing activity on west limb, (nasa Rpt SRL)
NASA announced “interim operating plan” for FY 1969 designed to achieve $3.85-billion budget. Agency would reduce staff by 1,600 and contract employees by 2,000. Purchase or construction of four Saturn boosters had been canceled [see Aug. 2], plans for 1973 instrument payloads on Mars had been substantially reduced, lunar exploration programs had been halted, and development of nerva nuclear rocket engine would be put back until next fiscal year, at least. Apollo Applications program would be reduced $300 million from budget request of $440 million and would include only two spacecraft—Saturn I Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount—with boosters and backup equipment. “Work toward post-Apollo lunar exploration and toward Saturn V Workshop will be limited to studies.” (nasa Release 68—141)
nasa Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Cornell Univ. experiment to 100.3-mi (161.3-km) altitude to examine sky in far infrared (5 micron to 1,600 microns) using copper-doped-germanium, two gallium-doped-germanium, and indium-anti-mo nide detectors in conjunction with telescope. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Preliminary results indicated detectors functioned properly, (nasa Rpt srl)
Aurorae (Esro /) satellite, designed, developed, and constructed by European Space Research Organization under July 8, 1964, NASA— ESRO agreement, was successfully launched by NASA from WTR by four-stage Scout booster. Orbital parameters: apogee, 952.1 mi (1,532.2 km) ; perigee, 158.9 mi (255.8 km); period, 102.8 min; and inclination, 93.8°. Primary NASA mission objectives were to place Aurorae into planned orbit and provide tracking and telemetry support. The 185-lb cylindrical satellite carried eight experiments to study aurora borealis (Northern Lights) and other related phenomena of polar ionosphere, representing six different organizations from U.K., Denmark, Sweden, and Norway. All experiments were operating as planned, and their scientific objectives were being achieved. Aurorae was second successful ESRO satellite launched by NASA. Iris I, launched May 16 to replace esro II—A which had failed to achieve orbit May 29, 1967, had entered planned orbit and conducted solar-astronomy and cosmic-ray studies, esro was responsible for experiment instrumentation, delivery of spacecraft to launch site, equipment and personnel necessary to mate spacecraft to launch vehicle, and spacecraft testing. NASA provided Scout launch vehicle, conducted launch operations, and supplied data and tracking acquisition support, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 68-158; AP, W Star, 10/4/68; gsfc SSR, 10/15/68)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried National Center for Atmospheric Research experiment to 77-mi (124-km) altitude to retrieve high-intensity air sample from 26.7- to 40.4-mi (43- to 65-km) altitude, using low-temperature condenser. All cryogenic heat exchange and sampler functions performed satisfactorily; recovery parachute deployed and payload survived impact. Sample of eight moles of air was recovered between 26.8-mi (43.2-km) and 38.9-mi (62.8-km) altitudes, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 A sounding rocket successfully launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 300-lb payload containing two white rats to 101-mi (162.5-km) altitude in third of four experiments to study rats’ behavior in artificial gravity field and determine minimum level of gravity needed by biological organisms during space flight. During five - minutes of free fall, rats selected artificial gravity levels created through centrifugal action by walking along tunnel runway in extended arms of payload. Data on their position and movement were telemetered to ground stations. Payload impacted 69 mi downrange in the Atlantic, (ws Release 68—21)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried Dudley Observatory experiment to 95.8-mi (154.3-km) altitude to determine micrometeoroid flux in absence of an active meteoroid shower from comparison with data from Aug. 12 launch during meteoroid shower. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. Payload was recovered undamaged, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried Rice Univ. payload to 121.6-mi (195.6-km) altitude to measure vector magnetic field in region between 90 and 130 km during electron current flow with sufficient continuity and signal strength to deduce altitude profile and absolute strength of current layer. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Clear magnetometer data were received during payload ascent and descent, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc experiment to study auroral activity as it developed and dissipated for comparison with data from similar Nike-Apache launch. Flight was unsuccessful because of undetermined failure related to pitch/roll couple. Radar and loss of telemetry indicated payload breakup, (nasa Rpt srl) *	Sixty-day simulated earth-orbited mission, using Douglas Missile & Space Systems Div.’s 12-ft-dia, 40-ft-long space cabin simulator, had begun for four California college students—Jack G. Angaran, Dennis Giroux, Guy H. King, and Robert B. Zeuschner. NASA OART had awarded $200,000 contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. to conduct what was believed first test in which crew would subsist in space cabin on “closed water and oxygen loop” for lengthy period. Students would use reclaimed water and oxygen from human waste. Additional missions to evaluation of integrated life support system were evaluation of waste management; crew’s ability to maintain, service and repair life support system; and crew’s physiological and psychological reactions. Life support system resembled that needed for three-year spacecraft mission. Crew’s contact with outside world would be by radio, (dac Release 67—172; St. Louis G—D, 2/21/68)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried payload to 65-mi (104.4-km) altitude to obtain vertical profile of atmosphere parameters between 22- and 59-mi (35- and 95km) altitudes with exploding-grenade and falling-sphere techniques. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily except for one of the two spheres; other sphere was tracked for 23 min. Globe Exploration Corp. and Superior Engineering Co. experiments were correlated with firings from Kiruna, Sweden; Fort Churchill, Canada; and Point Barrow, Alaska, (nasa Rpt srl)
Free world’s largest experimental comsat was being built by Hughes Aircraft Co. under usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization management. The 1,600-lb satellite—designed to provide testing for tactical communications between military units in the field, ships at sea, and aircraft—was scheduled for late 1968 delivery. It would be launched by Titan III—C booster into 22,300-mi-altitude orbit and would be equipped with three antenna systems. During orbital tests, standard military uhf band would be used for air-ground communications and super-high-frequency portion of X band for military satellite communications. (afsc Release 64.68)
New observations from U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station indicated distance estimates to pulsars had been 30 times too short. Observations from Australia’s Molonglo Radio Observatory had identified pulsar PSR 1749—28, believed to be three times more distant than 10 others observed to date. Despite great distance, its pulses were more powerful than those of all but one other. From these observations, Jodrell’s Dr. Graham Smith believed pulsars lay in distant halo, not in Milky Way. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/13/68, 74) Dr. Welsh said: “I would place high on the list of benefits those which flow from increased international cooperation in the field of space. . . . stimulated by the universal desire for knowledge [it] has brought somewhat closer together the peoples of the world. ... as the practical applications of space become more evident in the form of weather predictions, communications, and increased knowledge of the world’s limited natural resources, additional strength is added to the foundation for peace.” (Text) Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award of $1,000, made annually by International Academy of Astronautics in recognition of outstanding contribution to progress of space research and exploration over five-year period, was presented Oct. 18 at iaf Congress banquet to Dr. Zdenek Svestaka of Astronomical Institute of Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences. He was Chairman of Commission on Solar Activity of the International Astronomical Union, (iaf iaa Release 34; aiaa Release 10/13/68)	, Soviet scientist Prof. Leonid I. Sedov in news conference said U.S.S.R. was not in race to moon with U.S. “The question of sending astronauts to the moon at this time is not an item on our agenda. The exploration of the moon is possible, but it is not a priority.” Prof. Sedov said Soviet timetable for manned expeditions would depend on next series of flight tests using Zond rocket. Zond V was successful, he said, “because the capsule returned safely, which was the purpose of the flight.” Regarding U.S.—U.S.S.R. scientific cooperation, “its successful implementation is very much dependent on international relations.” At present, he said, close relations did not exist. (NYT, 10/15/68, 48) Informal meeting of international space scientists, organized by Northwestern Univ. ufo expert, Dr. J. Allen Hynek, in conjunction with iaf Congress, discussed advisability of world cooperation on UFOs. Several speakers urged international cooperation such as uniform ufo report forms, but it was agreed that no action should be taken until after appearance of Univ. of Colorado report expected later in year. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/16/68,12)	_ Dr. Harold Masursky, U.S. Geological Survey astrogeologist, reported to iaf analysis of data from spacecraft that had orbited and crashed into or landed intact on moon had shown side facing earth was largely a basin similar to that of Pacific Ocean. It seemed more like earth than had been previously believed. Lunar interior had been molten. Deep cracks in its crust were lined with craters where molten material had erupted from below. Study of remains of giant crater in western Texas had shown features analogous to lunar craters with mountain in center. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/19/68,19)
Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey spent five hours in briefings at ksc, ascending to spacecraft level of Apollo 8 moon rocket, performing simulated rendezvous and formation flying inside mock spacecraft, and lunching with NASA officials and Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders. During visit, he said: “The space program has contributed greatly to the structure of our nation. ... I have felt it has been underfunded at times and we will pay the price. I feel it is a wise investment on the part of Congress and the public. I’ll do what I can as a private citizen and a former chairman of the space council to see it is funded.” (ksc Release ksc—496—68; AP, W Star, 11/20/68, A8; AP, W Post, 11/20/68, Cl; Today, 11/20/68, 1) _
President’s authorization request for NASA’s FY 1969 budget was presented by nasa Administrator James E. Webb to House Committee on Science and Astronautics. At $4.37 billion, authorization request was $700 million below FY 1968 request, almost $500 million less than FY 1968 authorization, and $200 million below FY 1968 appropriation. Webb stated: “nasa’s expenditures for FY 1969 will be down $230 million from this year, $850 million below last year, and $1.3 billion less than in FY 1966. The nasa program has been cut. I hope you will decide it has been cut enough and will approve the full amount recommended by the President. “The FY 1969 request does not meet at all our Nation’s needs in aeronautics and space. It is a compromise—one which I fully support— between needed work toward advances in aeronautics and space which we can and should make, and other overriding requirements. . . . During this period when we are reducing our effort by one-third the U.S.S.R. is still increasing its effort. ... In terms of scientific advance and in applications of immediate economic use, such as meteorological and communications systems, our program has contributed more than theirs. But in terms of the use of large launch vehicles and in the rate of which future greater capabilities are being developed they are and will remain ahead, at our 1969 budget level. The hard fact we now face is that just as we have begun to catch up in large-scale booster operations ... we are cutting back our program while they continue to advance.” He listed guidelines within “necessary fiscal constraints,” which determined decisions on FY 1969 program and budget estimates. NASA would continue 1968 operating plan for Apollo program while using all-up test concept for Saturn V and Apollo. Complete success in all remaining eight Saturn V flights would be needed for manned lunar landing by “end of 1969.” nasa would reduce numbers of Saturn IB and V and work out with dod future requirements for large launch vehicles under “sharply limited” launch program. Launch of Saturn I Workshop in 1970 would be interim step toward Saturn V Workshop and would be coordinated with later launch of Apollo Telescope Mount. “Practically all” programs had been stretched out, and a number of projects would be phased out. Scope of new starts would be reduced, with nerva i replacing larger nerva n and “less costly Mariner class spacecraft” replacing Voyager mission. Urgent activities would be expanded in aeronautics and in space applications; for example, noise reduction, vtol and stol, aircraft for remote measurement of earth resources, and Nimbus D for charting atmosphere parameters. nasa Centers would be reorganized “to retain . . . after reductions [in work force] are made, a limited but strong and well-balanced team of scientists, engineers, program and project managers.” Webb responded to questions: “There are no signs that the Soviets are cutting back as we are. New test and launch facilities are steadily added . . . and a number of spaceflight systems more advanced than any heretofore used are nearing completion.” Webb forecast Soviet booster with thrust greater than that of Saturn V, resumption of manned space flights, and landing of Soviet instrument packages on Mars in 1969 and 1971. Budget reductions in FY 1968 had compelled revisions, reductions, delays and cancellations in NASA programs. “We can conduct a viable and useful program at these lower levels, hut it will be a sharply reduced one.” Despite reductions allowing almost no flexibility to work around problems, “we still have the possibility of making the lunar landing before 1970.” (CR, 2/7/68, H926-7 ; 2/12/68, E708-9)
Post-launch investigations at msfc and at Rocketdyne Div. of North American Rockwell Corp,, J—2 manufacturer, had revealed J—2 rocket engine malfunctions on April 4 Apollo 6 mission had been caused by ruptures of small-diameter fuel lines feeding engine igniters. Improved designs for lines had been completed and new lines were being manufactured for extensive testing before use in next Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles. (Marshall Star, 5/22/68,1)
Terms for development, production, and launch of two comsats for U.K. under dod contract announced March 8, 1967, were made final in $7,535,000 fixed-price-incentive-fee usaf contract with Philco-Ford Corp.’s Space and Re-entry Systems Div. First satellite would be launched into synchronous, equatorial orbit with Thor-Delta booster from etr in 1968; second satellite would be backup. Philco-Ford would design satellites “to satisfy certain defense communications requirements of the United Kingdom.” Satellites wrould have station-keeping capability to maintain specific positions over earth. Space and Missile Systems Organization would be contracting agency, (afsc Release 195.67) January 16: U.S.S.R. successfully launched Cosmos CXC1X. Orbital parameters: apogee, 221 km (137 mi); perigee, 159 km (99 mi); period, 88.2 min; inclination, 65.5°. Satellite reentered Feb. 1. {Krasnaya Zoez, 1/18/68; gsfc SSR, 1/31/68; 2/15/68)
nasa and German Federal Ministry for Scientific Research (bmwf) were conducting series of four sounding rocket launches from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (terls) to study upper atmosphere near Equator. NASA Nike-Apache sounding rockets ejected barium clouds between 90- and 120-mi altitudes to investigate electric fields in upper atmosphere region of intense electric current. Results would be available to world scientific community. BMwF was responsible for chemical payloads, photographic equipment, and cloud observation; Indian National Committee for Space Research provided launch services; and NASA supplied sounding rockets and rocket launcher. (nasa Release 68—58)
Saturn V launch vehicle has passed Design Certification Review conducted over communication facilities linking NASA and contractor personnel at Washington, D.C., Houston, Tex., Cocoa Beach, Fla., and Huntsville, Ala., into one conference. Purpose was to certify overall design of rocket, including engineering modifications after two previous Saturn flights. Certification for manned mission was issued, subject to verification of data in minor areas in later, limited review. Under particular consideration were engineering changes to correct pogo, or excessive oscillations, during second Saturn V flight and anomalies experienced by J—2 engines on upper stages. Solutions had been tested to satisfaction. Major efforts on both items would continue, (msfc Release 68-216)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Burner II booster into orbit with 529-mi (838.3-km) apogee, 497-mi (799.8-km) perigee, 101.3-min period, and 99.0° inclination. (Pres Rpt 68)
June 13: usaf Titan III—C booster launched from etr inserted eight Initial Defense Communications Satellite Program (idcsp) jam-resistant repeater satellites into separate, random, near-synchronous, 21,000-mi-altitude equatorial orbits. Addition of 8 comsats to 18 IDCSP comsats launched since June 16, 1966, was expected to boost average satellite-availability time between Vietnam and Hawaii from 92% to 98% for top-priority messages and from 60% to 85% for lower priority and to considerably extend expected lifetime of communications system. [W Post, 6/14/68; AP, P Inq, 6/14/68, 2; Pres Rpt 68)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Burner II booster into orbit with 561-mi (902.8-km) apogee, 509-mi (819-km) perigee, 102.1-min period, and 98.9° inclination. (Pres Rpt 68)
Phoebus 2A nuclear rocket reactor was successfully tested by NASA and aec at Jackass Flats, Nev. During 32-min ground test, reactor reached peak power level of approximately 4,200 mw, operating for about 12 min at above 4,000 mw. Power density exceeded that required for 75,000-lb-thrust nerva (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application). Test was part of nasa/aec nuclear rocket program, (aec/nasa Release L-148; W News, 6/27/68, 3)
esro successfully launched Centaure rocket from Kiruna Range in Sweden to collect micrometeoroid data. (SBD, 5/23/68,118)
Aerobee 150 MOD I sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Naval Research Laboratory experiment to 103.2-mi (166.1-km) altitude to photograph solar corona for streamers and to photograph interplanetary dust shadows using two externally occulated coronagraphs and one solar pointing control. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Explorer XXXIX (Air Density balloon) and Explorer XL (Injun V) were successfully launched by NASA from WTR by single four-stage Scout booster. Primary mission objective was to place spacecraft in near polar orbits to extend studies of atmospheric density, geomagnetically trapped particles, and down-flux of these particles into atmosphere. Expected lifetimes were one year each. Explorer XXXIX entered orbit with 1,548-mi (2,492.3-km) apogee, 425-mi (683-km) perigee, 117.9-min period, and 80.6° inclination. The 20.5-lb, 12-ft-dia inflatable sphere was covered with aluminum foil to reflect sunlight and radio beacons and was coated with painted white spots for temperature control. It would extend measurements of latitudinal, seasonal, and solar cycle variations in upper air density and compare previous satellite measurements for further insight into sources of atmospheric heating. Explorer XL, 29-in-high, 30-in-dia, 153.1-lb hexagon, entered orbit with 1,573-mi	(2,530-km) apogee, 424-mi	(677-km) perigee, 118.3-min period, and 80.6° inclination. Satellite’s primary purpose was to measure directly down-flux of charged particles into atmosphere; study geomagnetically trapped charged particles, emphasizing spectra, spatial distribution, and time variations; and correlate VLF radio emissions and measurements of low-energy positive electrons with more energetic particle measurements. Mission was second NASA launch of two spacecraft by one Scout booster. First dual launch successfully injected Explorer XXIV (Air Density balloon) and Explorer XXV (Injun IV) into orbit Nov. 21, 1964. LaRC designed, developed, and constructed Air Density Explorer and Univ. of Iowa designed, developed and constructed Injun V and provided all but one of its experiments. Program was managed by LaRC under ossa direction, (nasa Proj Off; SBD, 8/12/68, 177; gsfc SSR, 8/15/68)	_
NASA Aerobee 150 A sounding rocket successfully launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 300-lb payload containing two white rats to 89-mi (143.2-km) altitude in second of four experiments to study rats’ behavior in artificial gravity field and determine minimum level of gravity needed by biological organisms during space flight. During five minutes of free fall, rats selected artificial gravity levels created through centrifugal action by walking along tunnel runway in extended arms of payload. Data on their movement and position were telemetered to ground stations. Payload impacted 53 mi downrange in the Atlantic; no recovery was attempted. (WS Release 68—11; NASA Release 68—112; NASA Rpt srl)
Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, inserted into Congressional Record his report “Legislative History of Space Nuclear Propulsion for Fiscal Year 1969,” which confirmed “the continued vigorous support of the Congress for this space research and development activity” and that “appropriate agencies should proceed with the development of the NERVA—1 nuclear rocket engine.” Final Congressional action on aec and NASA FY 1969 authorizations strongly supported nuclear propulsion development, he said. NASA authorization had been $55 million for Nuclear Rockets Program. Joint Committee on Atomic Energy had recommended $69 million for aec Nuclear Space Propulsion Systems and strongly recommended program proceed. AEC had requested $72 million for Project Rover, including $49 million for development of NERVA I rocket engine. Final action of both Senate and House Appropriations Committees on Independent Offices bill and aec appropriations bill had restored funds cut by House earlier. It was clear, said Sen. Anderson, “that the view of the Congress is that the Nuclear Rockets Program for fiscal year 1969 is one of the most important and highest priority programs in NASA and should move forward as planned. . . .” Amount finally appropriated for NASA r&d for FY 1969 would not be less than $3.3703 billion, including $55 million for the Nuclear Rockets Program. “The conference committee on the aec appropriations . . . agreed to $53 million on the aec’s program in Reactor Development—Space Propulsion Systems, a figure more than halfway between the House lower figure [$31 million] and the Senate higher figure [$68 million].” (CR, 7/27/68, S9582—4; nasa LAR VII/81)
nasa launched two Aerobee 150 sounding rockets from wsmr. First carried Princeton Univ. Observatory payload to 106.4-mi (171.2-km) altitude to point two spectrographs toward hot stars in Scorpius to study their EUV radiation with 1 A resolution and 0.3 A resolution. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Second Aerobee 150, launched 30 min later, carried Columbia Univ. experiment to 2.1mi (3.3-km) altitude to search for x-ray emission Irom known extragalactic objects in radio galaxy M—87 and in quasi-stellar object 3C273. Rocket performance was unsatisfactory because sustainer did not ignite. Instrumentation performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt SRL)
NASA had concluded agreements for cooperative scientific experiments with space and upper atmosphere research authorities of Brazil, Norway, Spain, and Sweden. Brazilian Comissao Nacional de Ativi-dades Espaciais (cnae) and NASA project would include four sounding rocket launches into upper atmosphere to measure micrometeoroid flux and its variations with latitude in early autumn. Royal Norwegian Council for Scientific and Industrial Research and NASA project would observe earth’s magnetic and electrical fields and charged particle environment during stages of auroral activity by launch in September and October of three barium-release ion-cloud payloads followed by instrumented payloads. Spanish Comision Nacional de Investigacion del Espacio (conie) and NASA project would require launch of 24 Boosted-Dart meteorological sounding rockets to 30- to 60-km (18.6- to 37.3-mi) altitudes at two-week intervals throughout 1969 to obtain synoptic wind and temperature data on structure and circulation of upper atmosphere and wind oscillations. Swedish Space Research Committee and NASA project would study D and E ionospheric layers with instrumented payloads on four Boosted-Areas II sounding rockets in autumn 1968. In all projects, principal experimenters would have first rights to data which subsequently would be made available to world scientific community. Each agency would bear full cost of its agreed responsibilities without exchange of funds, (nasa Release 68—138; SBD, 8/5/68, 148)
nasa launched two sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range. Nike-Tomahawk carried Univ. of New Hampshire-Univ. of California at San Diego payload to 166.5-mi (268-km) altitude. Objectives were to measure electric field, ionospheric currents, auroral light intensity and location, and proton and electron fluxes in 1- to 10-kev region while payload was passing through or close to visible auroral display. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; all scientific objectives were achieved. Launch was second in series of four [see Feb. 5], _ Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Michigan payload to 6-mi (9.6-km) altitude to study atmospheric parameters of temperature, pressure, and density using Pitot-static-probe technique and measure extreme UV emission to determine energy disposition with altitude of incoming particles. No scientific data were obtained because of vehicle malfunction. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried gsfc experiment to 102.6-mi (165.1-km) altitude to obtain monochromatic picture of sun using spectroheliograph and to measure solar spectral irradiance using photoelectric radiometers. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA’s Pioneer IX (Pioneer D), fourth in series of five spacecraft designed to provide continuing measurements over solar cycle at widely separated points in interplanetary space, was successfully launched from ETR by Thrust-Augmented Improved Thor-Delta (DSV-3E) booster into orbit around sun. Orbital parameters: aphelion, 0.99 astronomical unit (au), or 92.04 million mi (148.10 million km) ; perihelion, 0.75 au, or 69.71 million mi (112.19 million km); period, 297.55 days; and inclination 0.09°. Test and Training Satellite Tetr II (tetr—b) carried pickaback on 2nd stage, was successfully ejected after 3rd-stage burnout and entered orbit around earth with 582.3-mi (937-km) apogee, 231.3-mi (373-km) perigee, 97.9-min period, and 32.8° inclination. S-band transponder was operating properly. Tetr 11 was follow-on Tetr 1 (formerly designated Tts 1; launched pickaback on Pioneer VIII Dec. 13, 1967), which was highly successful in testing Apollo communications network. Primary mission objective of 147-lb, drum-shaped Pioneer IX was to collect scientific data on electromagnetic and plasma properties of interplanetary medium for period covering six or more passages of solar activity centers. As secondary mission, Pioneer IX would: (1) acquire data when highly significant solar event occurred; (2) refine primary 'determinations of earth and moon masses, the astronomical unit, and osculating elements of earth’s orbit; (3) provide synoptic study of solar-interplanetary relations; and (4) provide target for checkout of Manned Space Flight Network equipment and training of operations personnel by launching Test and Training Satellite as secondary payload. Pioneer IX separation, boom deployment, and first solar orientation occurred as planned and all eight experiments were operating properly and returning good data. Pioneer VI (launched Dec. 16, 1965), Pioneer VII (launched Aug. 17, 1966), and Pioneer VIII (launched Dec. 16, 1967) were all successful and were continuing to transmit excellent data. Pioneer program was managed by arc under ossa direction. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Release 68-192; UPl, W News, 11/8/68; W Post, 11/9/68, A10; AP, LA Times, 11/9/68; Lannan, W Star, 11/11/68, A17; SBD, 11/12/68, 46; gsfc, SSR, 11/15/68)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by nasa from wsmr carried 115-lb Dudley Observatory payload to 95-mi (152.4-km) altitude to collect micrometeoroid particles during meteor shower and recover payload for analysis and flux determination. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; good data were obtained from telemetry. Payload parachuted successfully but early efforts at recovery were not successful. (NASA Rpt SRL)
President Johnson sent message to Apollo 7 crew: “Everything in the Presidential office came to a halt as Foreign Minister Debre of France and I watched with mounting excitement the magnificent launch of the Saturn. . . .” Message was relayed from Air Force I as President flew from Washington to visit former President Harry S. Truman. On second day Schirra told ground controllers crew was too busy to set up portable camera for live TV coverage because of minor but time-consuming difficulties. Astronauts had to pump waste water manually from spacecraft, Schirra and Eisele had trouble with their biomedical harnesses, Schirra had head cold symptoms, spacecraft evaporator system required maintenance, and hatch windows blurred and were bordered by mysterious “small hairs like fuzz.” Crew fired sps engine for 10 sec and 8 sec to set up rendezvous and maneuvered csm to within 70 ft of tumbling spent 2nd stage, simulating techniques to be used on future flights if LM were to become disabled in lunar orbit. Crew took close-up photos of lm adapter attached to 2nd stage. S—IVB reentered earth’s atmosphere Oct. 18 and splashed into Indian Ocean. On third day crew, which had already accomplished half its objectives, photographed clouds and earth and continued checking out spacecraft systems. Power failure in spacecraft’s Ac electrical system was quickly restored, but overloading prompted officials to reschedule third SPS burn 20 hr sooner than planned. Burn positioned and sized ellipse for CM reaction control system deorbit in case of emergency and set up auxiliary gaging system test. Astronauts, all with head colds, appeared on national TV for 7 min for first time live from space. Crew displayed hand-printed signs bearing greetings from “the lovely Apollo room high atop everything.” Second live telecast for 11 min Oct. 15 showed closeups of spacecraft interior and astronauts so clear that observers could read astronauts’ lips. Third TV appearance Oct. 16, which included nine-minute tour of spacecraft, won astronauts honorary membership in American Federation of Television and Radio Artists. Later, crew successfully fired sps engine for fourth burn, demonstrating 20,500-lb-thrust engine’s minimum impulse capability. As spacecraft passed over Hurricane Gladys in Gulf of Mexico, astronauts photographed storm and relayed data to Weather Bureau hurricane center. They also took pictures of “long plume” of air pollution. Crew continued spacecraft checkout, guidance and navigation procedures, and TV operations on seventh day, but fourth telecast was smudgy. Successful 67-sec fifth SPS burn—longest to date—was performed out of plane to test auxiliary gaging system and readjust ellipse for lifetime and CM reaction control system deorbit. On ninth day astronauts showed viewers exceptionally sharp pictures of main control panels in fifth TV broadcast and performed close-order drill to demonstrate movement in weightless environment. Sixth SPS burn, essentially duplicate of fourth minimum impulse test burn, was successfully conducted. Seventh burn, on following day, adjusted time phasing for backup sm reaction-control-system deorbit burns. At 259:39 get astronauts fired sps engine for eighth time, to deorbit csm for reentry, cm/sm separation, parachute deployment, and other reentry events were nominal, and spacecraft splashed down in Atlantic eight miles north of recovery ship U.S.S. Essex at 7:11 am edt Oct. 22 after completing 163 revolutions. Crew was picked up by helicopter and flown to recovery ship within one hour after splashdown. All primary Apollo 7 mission objectives were achieved, as well as every detailed test objective and three not originally planned. Crew comfort and safety were enhanced by change in cabin atmosphere to 100% oxygen in flight, hot meals, and relatively complete freedom of motion in spacecraft. Engineering accomplishments included live TV from space and drinking water produced as by-product of fuel cells. NASA’s Ats III applications technology satellite relayed TV pictures to Europe. Service module sps main engine, largest thrust engine to be manually thrust-vector controlled, proved itself by accomplishing longest and shortest manned SPS burns, and largest number of inflight restarts. Manual tracking, navigation, and control achievements included full optical rendezvous, daylight platform realignment, optical platform alignments, pilot control of launch vehicle attitude, and orbital determination by sextant tracking of another vehicle. Mission also accomplished first digital-autopilot.controlled engine burn and first manned S-band communications. All launch vehicle systems performed satisfactorily; spacecraft systems functioned with some minor anomalies, countered by backup subsystem, change in procedures, isolation, or careful monitoring so that no loss of systems support resulted. Apollo 7 spacecraft had been redesigned for safety. Original two-piece side hatch had been replaced by a quick-opening, one-piece hatch. Flammability within cm had been reduced by extensive materials substitution, and systems redundancy had been expanded to reduce single failure points. Saturn IB launch vehicle carried less telemetry and instrumentation equipment, to lower weight and increase payload capability. New propellant lines to augmented spark igniter had been installed in J—2 engine to prevent failure which had occurred on Apollo 6. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives and had been recovered in excellent condition. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; MSC was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Releases 68-^168K, 68—179; MSC Historical Off; W Post, 10/12—23/68; B Sun, 10/12/68; 10/23/68; W Star, 10/13-19/68; PD, 10/21/68,1492)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Deputy Administrator whom retiring Administrator James E. Webb had said would be named Acting NASA Administrator by President Johnson, represented “new breed of scientist-administrators making their way into government,” said John Lannan in Washington Evening Star. Unlike Webb, he was new to Government, having come up through “the scientific ranks of the sprawling General Electric Co. over a period of 19 years.” As Webb’s chief deputy since March, Dr. Paine had been authorizing and signing major announcements but had yet to confront Congress. He and Webb saw eye-to-eye, he had said, on agency’s current program emphasis, which had been criticized as too heavily oriented to manned flight. “I am a very strong supporter of doing as much as we can in planetary areas.” Dr. Paine said, “but it’s one of those cases where you’ve got limited resources and you’re trying to do all the things you can. You’ve got to do things in aeronautics; we’ve got to finish up the Apollo program; and we’ve got to do more in earth resources (surveying them from space) here on this planet.” A lot of NASA’s future “is in the questions that we’ll be raising as we continue to probe the planets.” On balancing space needs against problems of cities, Dr. Paine felt U.S. suffered from “what I would call almost a national hypochondria ... in many ways crippling some of the forward-looking things we’re able to do. ... I feel that one of the very highest priority matters is the war on poverty and the problems of the cities. But in the meantime, we’re making . . . a lot of progress in the civil rights area and really, this nation is a good deal healthier than we’re giving it credit for today.” He was confident of a resurgence of public interest in space once the Apollo program got underway. (W Star, 9/17/68, A4)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried GSFC payload to 92.7-mi (149.5-km) altitude to measure intensity and energy spectra of low energy protons helium nuclei and heavier nuclei present during Polar Cap Absorption (pca) event. Launch was first of six scheduled during solar event. Parachute failed to deploy apparently because of technician’s failure to connect flight system pyro-techniques. Extendable nose cone malfunctioned for undetermined reason. Telemetry functioned for full flight duration, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA launched two Javelin sounding rockets from NASA Wallops Station. One carried GSFC payload to 497-mi (800-km) altitude to observe helium ionization levels in exosphere with vacuum-ion chamber and to observe helium and oxygen-ion resonance dayglow with filtered photometer. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. Telemetry signal was received for 16 min 40 sec. Second rocket carried Syracuse University Research Corp. vacuum-ion chamber to observe helium ionization levels in exosphere and Univ. of Southern California filtered photometer to observe helium- and oxygen-ion resonance day-glow to 497-mi (800-km) altitude. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 73.3-mi (118.5-km) altitude to evaluate vehicle performance and measure payload environmental instrumentation, including three-axis acceleration, lateral and longitudinal vibration, three-axis gyro, 10 temperatures, and motor pressure. Rocket performed as predicted and was recommended for acceptance by NASA. All instruments operated to impact, (nasa Rpt SRL)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried 145-lb gsfc payload to 80.8-mi (130-km) altitude to evaluate parachute recovery system for Nike-Apache and Nike-Cajun launch vehicles. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily; excellent data were obtained from all telemetry channels. (NASA Rpt SRL)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Aeronautics, oart, Charles W. Harper presented 31st Wright Brothers Lecture, “Prospects in Aeronautics Research and Development,” at aiaa meeting in Washington, D.C. He said potential of air transportation had not been realized, partly because aeronautics R&D had not fully met its challenges, and suggested: (1) aeronautics researchers and socioeconomists cooperatively analyze possible air transportation approaches to provide basis for most effective r&d program; (2) emphasis on theoretical analysis in all sciences of concern to aeronautics be greatly increased; and (3) increased experimental effort be directed toward solving problem of system integration. (Program; aiaa Paper 68—217; NASA LAR VII/14) *	Air Force Chief of Stag Gen. John P. McConnell announced renaming of Bunker Hill AFB, Ind., to Grissom afb in honor of Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom (l/c, usaf) who was bom in Mitchell, Ind., graduated from Purdue Univ., was first astronaut or cosmonaut to make a second space flight, and died in Apollo fire Jan. 27, 1967. (dod Release 151—68) *	nasa issued 20 rfps for final design of two ATS satellites. Of two contracttors selected to develop final design, one would be designated to build spacecraft. Planned for launch in early 1970s, two satellites carrying communications, navigational, and meteorological experiments would be placed in synchronous equatorial orbit at 22,300-mi altitude by Atlas-Centaur booster. Current program of five ATS launches had two successes in three launches; remaining two (ATS—D and —e) would be launched in June 1968 and in mid-1969. (nasa Release 68—31) *	nasa awarded Boeing Co. Space Div. $3,064,946 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract, effective through September, for continued prelaunch systems analysis and integration for first manned Apollo/Saturn V launch vehicle. Contract brought total for Saturn V systems integration contract to $200 million, (msfc Release 68—29) *	erc scientists Dr. Lothar Frenkel and Thomas E. Sullivan and Bell Telephone Laboratories scientists M. A. Pollack and T. J. Bridges had measured frequency of laser light with error margin of about 20 parts in 1 billion. They viewed experiments as important step toward new measurement of speed of light, a fundamental physical constant, and of distances of space, (erc Release 68—3)
Danish government announced it had banned U.S. rocket flights to probe sunspot effects at high altitudes over Greenland during 1968 because of popular apprehension which followed January crash of nuclear-armed usaf B—52 aircraft near Thule afh. Disappointed scientists noted 1968 was peak in 11-yr sunspot cycle; 1969 would offer hardly enough sunspots for study. (C Trih, 7/6/68, 5)
France had successfully test-fired lex, improved, single-stage experimental hybrid sounding rocket which used liquid oxidizer and inert solid propellant. Developed by Office National d’Etudes et de Recherches Aerospatiales (onera), French space agency, lex could carry 14-lb payload with meteorological experiment to 115-km (71-mi) altitude. {SBD, 1/16/68, 74)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Andoya, Norway, carried gsfc experiment to analyze electric fields from observed motions of neutral and ionized barium clouds during auroral condition. All four barium clouds were released in visible aurora as planned, and good photographic coverage was obtained from all sites. (NASA Rpt srl)
German scientists at Max Planck Institute—using U.S., U.K., and French rockets—had shown that borders of magnetic energy extending from earth could be made visible directly to persons on earth, New York Times reported. Release of barium clouds in space produced glowing, colored filaments outlining magnetic field. Technique showed influence of electric fields in space. Preparations were being made to release barium cloud in heart of inner radiation belt around earth before year’s end. Cloud would inscribe in space magnetic lines of force which held radiation belt in place. ESRO had prepared Highly Eccentric Orbiting Satellite (heos) for launch by U.S. booster in experiment which would be too high for naked eye to observe. Telescopic Schmidt cameras were to be used. (NYT, 9/17/68, 1)
nasa announced personnel changes: Samuel H. Hubbard, omsf Special Assistant, Gemini Program, moved to Apollo Applications Program Office as Special Assistant for Programs, responsible for ensuring adequate communications and documentation were provided by AAP in support of organizations with program interfaces. Col. Maynard E. White (usaf, Ret.), Director, msf Program Control, was named Director of msf Management Operations. Jerald K. Kubat of Apollo Program Control would succeed him. (NASA Ann)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried Dudley Observatory, Albany, N.Y., payload to 96.5-mi (155.2-km) altitude to collect, recover, and evaluate micrometeoroid particles during approximate maximum of Perseid meteor shower. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and telemetry data were obtained during entire flight time. Preliminary data indicated excellent experimental results. Payload was not damaged and was recovered within one hour, (nasa Rpt srl)
//: cooperative program, nasa launched Iris I (Esro II—B) International Radiation Investigation Satellite, for European Space Research Organization, from WTR by four-stage Scout booster. In April photo, Iris I is prepared for mission to orbit seoen solar-astronomy and cosmic-ray experiments from six organizations.
Polish noncommunist party newspaper Zycie Wrszawy said of Apollo 8 crew: “We were all with them during those five days. . . . We congratulate them heartily. At such a time we do not think about politics and we forget about the country from which they come.” Paper also said, “Only a few changes would be enough for the monstrous rocket to carry a nuclear warhead into orbit instead of astronauts.” (upi, C Trib, 12/29/68)
European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) attempt to place 550-lb Italian eldo F—7 into polar orbit failed when technicians lost contact with payload shortly after launch. Satellite launched from Woomera Rocket Range by booster with U.K. Blue Streak 1st stage, French Coralie 2nd stage, and West German Astris 3rd stage stopped transmitting after abbreviated seven-second 3rd-stage burn and could not be tracked. (Reuters, NYT, 12/1/68, 11) During November: Milton Alberstadt reviewed 25-yr history of msfc’s Michoud Assembly Facility. U.S. Government built plant (dedicated Oct. 24, 1943) on Michoud sugar mill site during World War II to assemble Curtiss C—46 Caravan transports. After C-46 contract was canceled, “Flying Dutchman,” air-sea rescue boat carried under belly of Boeing B—17 bomber, was developed. Michoud plant was reactivated during Korean War by Chrysler Corp. to produce 810-hp engines for Patton tanks. It was selected by NASA in 1961 as site to build Saturn rocket to put man on moon. (Boeing Magazine, 11/68, 8—9)
At closed meeting at Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. in July, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, had said contractors’ disregard of planned delivery dates for Apollo equipment amounted to a “disease” in the project, New York Times reported. Apollo Program Director l/g Samuel C. Phillips was quoted as saying, “The lunar landing next year is within our grasp, but we don’t have a hold of it because of the disease Dr. Mueller cited.” Project was running two years behind schedule, with first manned Apollo flight expected no earlier than mid-October and earliest lunar landing in a year. Dozens of contractors in $24-million program, urged to meet tough specifications for mission safety and success at same time, were obsessed with checking and double checking all systems as result of Jan. 24, 1967, Apollo fire. Lunar module (lm) regarded as pacing item of project, had undergone only one flight test. First lm for manned flight had developed problems in rendezvous equipment. Dr. Mueller had said rate of changes in lm was three times that of Apollo command module, whose rate of changes, in turn, was four times that of Saturn V rocket. He said changes placed added burden on technicians who should be concentrating on launching operations, not on vehicle modifications. (Wilford, NYT, 8/15/68,16)
USAF attempt to launch record 12 satellites from Vandenberg AFB with single Atlas-Burner II booster failed when heat shield apparently did not separate as planned. Telemetry during launch indicated Atlas and Burner II stages performed as scheduled, but confirmation of heat shield separation was not received. USAF was still investigating launch attempt. Upper stage had been designed to eject small satellites to measure size and shape of earth, provide targets for radar experiments, and test atmospheric drag in near space. {W Post, 8/18/68; Boeing Release S—9805)
nasa successfully deployed 40-ft-dia parachute with predicted 10lbpercubic-ft dynamic pressure at mach 3.5. Parachute was ejected from five-foot-long canister which had been propelled to 33-mi altitude by three-stage rocket launched from wsmr. Test was to determine possible use of parachute for aerodynamic deceleration in planetary entry missions. Another test in Project shape (Supersonic High Altitude Parachute Experiments) was scheduled for November, (nasa Release 68-185; AP, NYT, 10/27/68, 66)
Dr. Robert H. Guest, professor of organizational behavior in Amos Tuck School of Business Administration, Dartmouth College, was sworn in as consultant by Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, Acting nasa Administrator. Dr. Guest would serve on Management Advisory Panel, (nasa Release 68—220) At 10:42 am est 3rd stage burned for second time, injecting spacecraft into lunar trajectory, and astronauts began journey to become first men to leave earth’s gravitational field. Stage and instrument unit separated as planned and service module propulsion system was fired to increase separation distance from 3rd stage, which was trailing 500—1,000 ft behind spacecraft, spewing unused propellants. Crew fired service propulsion system (sps) engine for 2.4 sec, correcting trajectory and increasing velocity by 25 fps. Second midcourse maneuver, scheduled for second day, was canceled because trajectory was already so accurate that burn would have required velocity change of only 0.7 fps. Borman reported illness, apparently from 24-hr intestinal virus or from reaction to sleeping pills being used during space flight for first time, and Lovell and Anders reported nausea. Crew took navigation sightings and conducted first TV transmission, showing spacecraft interior and earth from 138,690-mi altitude and demonstrating food preparation and movements in weightlessness. Signals were received at ground stations and transmitted to NASA Mission Control Center in Houston before release live to commercial networks. Second TV transmission, on third day, showed excellent pictures of earth from 201,365-mi altitude, including view of Western Hemisphere in sunlight. Crew pointed out North Pole, South America, Cape Horn, and Baja California and noted that U.S. East Coast was very cloudy. Earth, they said, was beautiful; water looked royal blue, land areas brown, and clouds bright white. Reflection off earth was much greater than off moon, sm reaction control system’s four rockets were fired for 12 sec to reduce velocity by 2 fps and to make approach to moon closer to 60 mi at nearest point. On fourth day, Christmas Eve, communications were interrupted as Apollo 8 passed behind moon and astronauts became first men to see moon’s far side, sps engine was fired for 4 min 2 sec, reducing speed by 2,994 fps and placing spacecraft in lunar orbit with 193.6-mi (310.6-km) apolune and 69.1-mi (111.2-km) perilune. In third telecast Anders described lunar surface as “whitish gray, like dirty beach sand with lots of footprints on it. Some of these craters look like pick-axes striking concrete, creating a lot of fine dust.” After spacecraft passed behind moon at end of second revolution, SPS engine burned for 10 sec to reduce speed by 135 fps and to circularize orbit with 70.0-mi (112.6-km) apolune and 69.6-mi (112.0-km) perilune. Lovell said astronauts had “a grand view” of the lunar surface and confirmed that prospective landing sites were satisfactory. He reported that at about two minutes before sunrise a fan-shaped white haze appeared just behind moon’s limb. Crew continued landmark sightings and named numerous unnamed lunar features after other astronauts, NASA officials, and friends. They conducted communications experiment which showed that radio signal from earth to Apollo 8 and back to earth took three seconds to make 460,000-mi round trip. Third TV transmission during ninth revolution showed heavily impacted mountains described by Anders as “a vastness of black and white, absolutely no color. The sky up here is also rather forbidding, foreboding extents of blackness with no stars visible when we’re flying over the moon in daylight. You can see by the numerous craters that this planet has been bombarded through the eons with numerous small asteroids and meteoroids, pock-marking the surface of every square inch. And one of the amazing features of the surface is . . . that most of the craters . . . have a round mound type of appearance instead of sharp jagged rocks. All, only the newest of features have any sharp definitions to them, and eventually they get eroded down by the constant bombardment of small meteoroids.” The moon is “a very dark and unappetizing place. . . .” Crew read verses from first chapter of Genesis and wished viewers “good night, good luck, a Merry Christmas and God bless all of you—all of you on the good earth.” On fifth day, Christmas Day, while spacecraft was behind moon completing its 10th revolution, SPS engine was fired for 3 min 23 sec, increasing spacecraft velocity by 3,523 fps and propelling Apollo 8 back toward earth. Spacecraft left lunar gravity at 201,807 mi above earth. At 104 hours mission elapsed time 14-sec reaction-control-system burn increased velocity by 5 fps. Fifth TV transmission showed spacecraft interior, controls, and food preparation. Data analysis revealed sixth midcourse correction would not be necessary because of accuracy of course. Astronauts reported they had slept well and were in “very good shape.” Sixth TV transmission showed earth from 112,125-mi altitude. On sixth day crew prepared for reentry and SM separated from cm on schedule. Parachute deployment and other reentry events were nominal and Apollo 8 splashed, apex down, in Pacific about 5,100 yd from recovery ship U.S.S. Yorktown at 10:51 am est Dec. 27, 147 hr after launch and precisely on time. According to prior planning, helicopters and aircraft hovered over spacecraft and pararescue personnnel were not deployed until local sunrise, 50 min after splashdown. Crew was then picked up and reached recovery ship at 12:20 pm EST. All primary ApoUo 8 mission objectives and detailed test objectives were achieved and, in addition, five not originally planned. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan. Engineering accomplishments included use of ground network with onboard navigational techniques to sharpen accuracy of lunar orbit determination and successful use of Apollo high-gain antenna, four-dish unified S-band antenna that deployed from SM after separation from 3rd stage. Mission proved capability of Apollo csm and crew, as well as ground support and control systems, to operate out to lunar distances and return through the earth’s atmosphere at lunar velocity. Apollo 8 was fifth Apollo mission to date, second manned Apollo mission, first manned mission on Saturn V launch vehicle, and first manned operation of Apollo system under conditions for which it was designed. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives with the spacecraft recovered in excellent condition. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 Oct. 11—22, had achieved all primary objectives and had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 68—208; NASA Special Releases; W Star, 12/21/68, Al; W Post, 12/21-28/68, Al; NYT, 12/21-28/68, 1; B Sun, 12/21-28/68, Al; MSC Roundup, 1/10/69, 3) December 21: President Johnson sent congratulatory message to Apollo 8 astronauts: “I am confident that the world’s finest equipment will strive to match the courage of our astronauts. If it does that, a successful mission is assured.” {PD, 12/30/68,1738)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Titan III—B booster. Satellite entered orbit with 262-mi (421.6-km) apogee, 85-mi (126.8-km) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 110.5° inclination and reentered June 17. (Pres Rpt 68; SBD, 6/25/68,272)
nasa announced award of $4,521,671 contract to Honeywell, Inc., for management and engineering services during 1968 for Centaur launch vehicle guidance system. Atlas-Centaur booster had successfully launched seven Surveyor spacecraft toward the moon and was scheduled to launch oao, ats, and two Mariners. (LeRC Release 68—3) January 12: XB—70 research aircraft, flown by Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., and Donald L. Mallick, reached mach 2.55 and 67,000-ft altitude and accomplished 70% of primary test objectives during 1-hr 54-min flight from Edwards afb. Purpose of flight was to take wing tuft photos and check stability, control, and handling qualities; inlet performance; boundary layer noise; friction; fuselage bending. (XB—70 Proj Off)
NASA Javelin sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Iowa experiment to 500-mi (805-km) altitude to observe frequency-time spectra and measure relative phase and amplitude of magnetic and electric fields of VLF radio noise in 30 hz—10 khz range; measure electric field amplitude of naturally occurring radio noise from 7—70 khz; measure differential energy spectra for protons and electrons over 5 ev—50 kev energy range; and measure DC electric field perpendicular to payload spin axis. Rocket and instrument performance was satisfactory and all scientific objectives were met. (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Princeton Univ. Observatory experiment to 108-mi (174-km) altitude to obtain UV radiation of bright star in constellation Cassiopeia, using gyro-stabilized spectrograph, ACS, and recovery system. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. ACS stabilized rocket on target at star. Spectra were obtained on three exposures and payload was recovered in excellent condition. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Cone-shaped RAM c—II spacecraft was successfully launched from NASA Wallops Station by four-stage Scout booster at 11:16 am edt. After reentering earth’s atmosphere at 17,000 mph, 264-lb spacecraft completed its eight-minute ballistic flight by impacting 725 mi downrange 150 mi northeast of Bermuda. No recovery was attempted. Primary mission objective of RAM C—II—15-in-long, 26-in-dia spacecraft with 12-in-dia hemisphere nose—-was to measure electron concentrations in flow field at discrete locations along spacecraft during reentry at medium velocity. Secondary objectives were to measure ion concentrations in flow field as function of distance from spacecraft, measure antenna performance and signal attenuation during reentry under specified conditions, and measure spacecraft environmental parameters, including accelerations, pressures and temperatures. Launch was second in NASA’s Project ram (Radio Attenuation Measurement) to study methods for preventing loss of radio signals from reentering spacecraft, ram c—i, launched Oct. 19, 1967, had successfully demonstrated effectiveness of water addition to flow field and use of X-band telemetry signals in maintaining communications through ionized plasma sheath, ram program was managed by LaRC under dart direction, ram c—ii spacecraft was designed, fabricated, and tested by LaRC. (nasa Proj Off; LaRC Proj Off; NASA Release 68-146; ws Release 68—17)
House unanimously accepted $4.013-billion Senate version of nasa FY 1969 authorization bill (H.R. 15856) [see June 10] without conference and sent to President Johnson for signature. Final bill, $357,027 million less than nasa request, reduced funds asked for Apollo program by $13.8 million, to $2,025 billion; cut Apollo Applications from requested $439.6 million to $253.2 million; and halved advanced missions funds, to $2.5 million. It increased House figure of $11.7 million for nerva program to $55 million, still $5 million under request. Lunar and planetary exploration funds were cut from requested $107.3 million to $92.3 million, and space applications from $112.2 to $98.7 million. Final authorization figures were $3.37 billion for total r&d, $603,173 million for administrative operations ($45,027-million reduction), and $39.6 million for construction of facilities. All items were subject to appropriations bills, not yet passed. (CR, 6/18/68, H5052-3; Lannan, W Star, 6/19/68, D9; SBD, 6/19/68, 239; Science, 6/28/68, 1432)
In Washington Post, Thomas O’Toole said Howard R. Hughes organization’s holding company, Hughes Nevada Operations, had requested public disclosure of alleged dod study by Harvard Univ.’s Dr. George Kistiakowsky and mit’s Dr. Jerome Wiesner and James Killian. Company claimed Special Report on Underground Testing concluded there was no reason for continued underground atomic tests, dod spokesman denied existence of study, while Science Adviser to President Johnson, Dr. Donald F. Hornig, said only that he had met with top physicists in November to discuss safety of underground testing. “We may make a public report on it. The subject seems to be of enough importance to warrant a public airing.” (W Post, 12/6/68, 87) Primary mission objective was to demonstrate flight operation to support two experiments provided by Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and Univ. of Wisconsin for at least 30 days. Secondary objective was to obtain scientific data over a range of star magnitudes and wavelengths for at least 50 hr. Experiments would observe interstellar dust and extremely young hot stars in UV portion of spectrum not visible to human eye or earth-based observatories. Satellite would be able to collect six hours of UV data per day—twice as much as had been obtained in 15 yr from 40 sounding rocket launches. Through its complex ground-command spacecraft-attitude system Oao II would be aimed at individual objects in space with precision never before attained by an orbiting satellite. Information from experiments would be radioed to earth as digital data for analysis by experimenters. By Dec. 10 all spacecraft equipment bad been turned on and operated satisfactorily: satellite had been placed in its sunbathing mode with its solar panels oriented toward sun; its six star trackers had been activated; three of the trackers had been locked on to preplanned guide stars; and satellite had established three-axis stabilization. Smithsonian experiment initial power had been turned on. Wisconsin Experiment Package would be turned on Dec. 11. Oao II was second in series of four spacecraft in NASA’s OAO program to obtain precise astronomical observations of celestial objects above earth’s atmosphere. Oao I had been launched into almost perfect orbit April 8, 1966, but had failed because of power supply system malfunction and probable high voltage arcing in star tracker. OAO program was managed by GSFC under ossa direction, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 68—186K; ksc Release KSC-68; upi, W Star, 12/8/68, A5; O’Toole, W Post, 12/8/68; AP, W Star, 12/9/68, A6; SBD, 12/10/68, 172; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 12/12/68, A5)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Alaska experiment to obtain data on horizontal and vertical spatial variation of auroral light emissions and relationship between their intensities and volume emission rates. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory and experiment was successful. Peak altitude was not determined because radar lost track, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA launched 198-lb Explorer XXXVII (Solar Explorer B), second joint project of nrl and NASA to measure solar emissions, from NASA Wallops Station by four-stage Scout booster. Orbital parameters: apogee, 545 mi (877 km) ; perigee, 324 mi (521 km); period, 98.8 min and inclination 59.4°. Primary nasa objective was to place satellite in planned orbit and provide tracking and telemetry support, nrl objectives were to continue and augment overall solar x-ray monitoring program into ascending portion of 11-yr solar cycle; perform temporal measurements of x-ray emission intensity and spectral quality of solar flare emission; correlate measurements with optical and radio ground-based observatories; and provide real-time solar monitoring information. International scientific community had been invited to acquire solar radiation data from satellite. Although Explorer XXXVII did not enter planned circular orbit, orbit achieved would satisfy scientific objectives. Expected lifetime was one year. First nrl—NASA solar monitoring project, Explorer XXX (iQSY Solar Explorer), had been launched Nov. 18, 1965, and had ceased operating Nov. 20, 1967. Explorer program was directed by OSSA. Wallops Station was responsible for vehicle integration and launch operations, nrl was responsible for satellite development, construction, and testing, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 68—43; WS Release 68-5; AP, NYT, 3/7/68,10; W Post, 3/7/68, D21)
Study of Northern Lights, auroras, and polar cap airglow by coordinated use of aircraft flights from Churchill Research Range, sounding rocket launches, satellite overpasses, and ground observations was begun by. nasa. During two extended periods (Jan. 18—Feb. 8 and Feb. 21—March 12) NASA airborne laboratory, Convair 990 jet aircraft, would fly over Churchill area and beyond, from Alaska to Greenland. Three flights would be coordinated with sounding rocket launches from Churchill; many flights would be coordinated with passes of Ogo IV, containing 12 experiments for studying auroral and polar cap phenomena. Aircraft would carry spectrometers, photometers, wide-angle cameras, radio frequency receivers, and magnetometer to study magnetic field activity and time and space variations of auroras and polar gap airglow. NASA’s 1968 Airborne Auroral Expedition would be directed by arc’s Airborne Science Office and managed by arc’s Louis C. Haughney; 14 universities and research organizations in Canada and U.S. would participate. (NASA Release 68—9)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, addressed joint meeting of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) and Canadian Aeronautics and Space Institute (casi) in Montreal: Systems engineering concept applied to management “was pioneered and developed in aerospace programs and is being increasingly applied as a powerful tool in the management of other major enterprises.” In NASA most extensive application was in Apollo program. Factors unique to manned space flight had contributed to management approach, including “sheer size of Apollo program, larger in . . . lead time, money, organization and technological development than any previous program.” Special feature was high reliability and safety required. And space program had been executed under scrutiny of press, public, Congress, and scientific community. Weight and volume budgeting were critical. High cost of flight-testing space vehicles made maximum ground testing necessary, as well as all-up (concurrent rather than sequential) flight testing. Vehicle was as complete as practicable for each flight, to obtain maximum information from minimum number of flights and provide earliest possible system readiness. Open-ended mission concept was used to accomplish as many flight objectives per vehicle as consistent with safety and mission success. Review of status throughout mission determined length of mission. Redundant, or alternate, means of operation reduced ability of single failure to endanger crew or mission. Prime design consideration in all manned space flights was safety. (Text; UPl, H Chron, 7/10/68)
nasa’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf), failed to climb to desired 45,000-ft altitude after air-launch from B—52 aircraft, apparently because of rocket engine malfunction. Vehicle glided to smooth 225-mph emergency landing on Rosamond Dry Lake. Flight from Edwards afb was to have been HL—10’s first powered flight, (nasa Proj Off; LA Times, 10/24/68)
Use of 260-in solid rocket motor as 1st stage for advanced manned launch vehicle was advocated by MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, Aerospace Technology reported. Dr. von Braun, whose support for motor was revealed in Oct. 11, 1967, testimony released by House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, said concept was advantageous for resupply of flights to space stations and for space rescue systems where 80% of emergencies in manned spacecraft in earth orbit were “time critical.” NASA and DOD, in joint study, were considering use of 260-in motor and its development
Cal Tech said Mt. Wilson and Mt. Palomar observatories were keeping close watch for developing sunspots that might threaten Apollo 8 astronauts with dangerous x-ray radiation. (Reuters, W Post, 12/5/68, H9) December 4: USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Titan III—B booster into orbit with 454-mi (730.6-km) apogee, 94-mi (151.3-km) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 106.2° inclination. Satellite reentered Dec. 12. (Pres Rpt 68)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station ejected triethylborane (teb) vapor trails during descent from 95.2-mi (153.5-km) altitude to study nighttime airglow and variations in wind structure, determine vertical profile of atomic oxygen with photometer, and measure electron energy distribution in normal nighttime ionosphere with Langmuir probe. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. Launch, postponed Feb. 21 to check instrumentation for high voltage breakdown, was one of seven launches in series conducted for gca Corp. under gsfc contract [see Feb. 21-22]. (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Alaska payload to examine spatial distribution of ionospheric currents near visual auroral forms with flashing light on rocket used to locate position of rocket on TV film of aurora. Rocket and instrument performance was satisfactory. Radar did not track vehicle to sufficient altitude to obtain peak altitude data. (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa successfully launched Essa VII (tos—e), seventh meteorological satellite in essa’s Tiros Operational Satellite (tos) system, from wtr by two-stage Thrust-Augmented Long-Tank Thor-Delta booster. This was first use of long-tank Thor for a NASA Delta mission, first use of two-stage vehicle for tos spacecraft, and first operational two-burn mission for 2nd stage. Primary NASA mission objective was to place and operate spacecraft
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan III—B-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 266-mi (428.1-km) apogee, 88-mi (141.6-km) perigee, 90.5-min period, and 109.5° inclination and reentered Aug. 16. (SBD, 8/12/68, 177; GSFC SSR, 8/15/68; 8/31/68; Pres Rpt68)
S—II 2nd stage for fifth Apollo Saturn V mission left Seal Beach, Calif., onboard usns Point Barrow en route to Mississippi Test Facility (mtf) , where stage would undergo static testing before shipment to Ksc, Also onboard ship, to save $6,000 in transportation charges, was F—1 rocket engine. Engine would be unloaded for inspection at Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, then transferred to barge for remainder of trip to mtf. (msfc Release 68-23)
afsc’s Space and Missile Systems Organization awarded Philco-Ford Corp.’s Space and Re-Entry Systems Div. $7,805,000 fixed-price-incentive-fee contract for development, production, and launch of two comsats for NATO. First satellite would be launched from etr in late 1969 by Thrust-Augmented Thor-Delta booster into 20,000-mi-altitude synchronous orbit. Second would be backup, (afsc Release 145.68)
Astronauts James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart were scheduled to be launched on Saturn V in second manned Apollo space flight. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 with Saturn IB booster, would carry Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and R. Walter Cunningham into earth orbit in third quarter of 1968. (nasa Release 68-81; W Star, 4/28/68)
NASA Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried gsfc experiment to 126.5-mi (203-km) altitude to obtain solar extreme UV spectra from 40 to 390 A and from 10 to 390 A using bbrc—spc 300D solar pointing control and recovery system. Despite better than expected performance, no solar spectrum was detected. (NASA Rpt SRL)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Max Planck Institute (Germany) experiment to 114.2-mi (183.5km) altitude to measure micrometeoroids by sensitive microphone detectors and electron emission and to measure electrical fields in ionosphere by static voltmeter. Good data were received. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory, (nasa Rpt SRL)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc experiment to 180-mi (290-km) altitude to verify performance of quadrupole ion-mass spectrometer and measure electron density by CU propagation technique. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa successfully launched two Aerobee 150 sounding rockets from WSMR. First rocket carried Naval Research Laboratory and Univ. of Maryland payload to 111.3-mi (179-km) altitude to flight-test flight design verification unit (fdvu) of high-resolution spectroheliograph planned for use on Apollo Telescope Mount-A. Second rocket carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., payload to 93.7-mi (151-km) altitude to obtain high-resolution x-ray pictures of active region of sun during solar flare and general x-ray emission of solar corona. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, but payload of first rocket failed to separate, preventing functioning of parachute recovery system, (nasa Rpts srl)
NASA successfully launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets to 74.6-mi (120-km) and 70.6-mi (113.6-km) altitudes to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating grenades at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. Rockets and instruments performed satisfactorily; sound arrivals were recorded from 19 grenades on each rocket. Data would be compared with data from launches from NASA Wallops Station and Point Barrow, Alaska, (nasa Rpts srl)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 180-mi (290-km) altitude to verify performance of quadrupole ion mass spectrometer in D and E regions of ionosphere and measure electron density using CW propagation technique. Rocket and telemetry performed satisfactorily and good results were obtained from spectrometer, but propagation experiment was lost at 43.4-mi (70-km) altitude, (nasa Rpt srl)
Iris I (Esro II—B) International Radiation Investigation Satellite, designed, developed, and constructed by European Space Research Organization under July 8, 1964, nasa—esro agreement, was successfully launched by nasa from wtr by four-stage Scout booster. Orbital parameters: apogee, 673.7 mi (1,084.2 km); perigee, 204.1 mi (328.5 km) ; period, 98.9 min and inclination, 97.2°. Primary NASA mission objectives were to place Iris I into planned polar orbit and provide tracking and telemetry support. The 164-lb, 35^4-in high, 30-in-dia cylindrical satellite carried seven experiments for solar-astronomy and cosmic-ray studies representing six different organizations from U.K., France, and the Netherlands. Six experiments were operating as planned and their scientific objectives were being achieved. Iris I was backup spacecraft to ESRO II—A, which had been launched May 29, 1967, but had failed to achieve orbit because of Scout 3rd stage malfunction. ESRO was responsible for experiment instrumentation, delivery of spacecraft to launch site, equipment and personnel necessary to mate spacecraft to launch vehicle, and spacecraft testing. NASA provided Scout launch vehicle, conducted launch operations, and supplied data and tracking acquisition support. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Release 68—75; upi, W Post, 5/17/68, D13; W News, 5/17/68, 5; gsfc SSR,5/31/68)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb using Long-Tank Thrust-Augmented Thor (lttat) -Agena D booster. First entered orbit with 242-mi (481.0-km) apogee, 114-mi (183.5-km) perigee, 90.2-min period, and 83.1° inclination and reentered April 10. Second entered orbit with 326-mi (524.6-km) apogee, 299-mi (448.2km) perigee, 94.6-min period, and 31.6° inclination. (Pres Rpt 68; SBD, 3/18/68, 91)
usaf launched two Orbiting Vehicle research satellites pickaback from Vandenberg afb by Atlas-F booster. OV 1—13 entered orbit with 5,789-mi (9,316.2-km) apogee, 346-mi (556.7-km) perigee, 199.5-min period, and 100.5° inclination to determine flexibility of cadmium sulfide solar cells in space and to measure proton/electron energy spectra and angular distribution of electrons. OV 1—14, launched to obtain high-resolution measurements of proton/electron flux, spectra, decay, and time variations, entered orbit with 6,173-mi (9,934.2-km) apogee, 348-mi (560.0-km) perigee, 207.8-min period, and 100.0° inclination. (upi, C Trib, 4/8/68; SBD, 4/9/68, 220; GSFC SSR, 4/15/69; Pres Rpt 68)
NASA successfully launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets two hours apart from Point Barrow, Alaska, to 80-mi (128.8-km) altitudes. Purpose of launches was to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating 19 grenades per rocket at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. Data would be compared with data from two launches to be conducted from Churchill Research Range Oct. 15. Rockets and instruments performed satisfactorily; sound arrivals were recorded for all grenade ejections. Good data were anticipated, (nasa Rpts srl)
Aviation Week reported anticipated $ 100-million cut in FY 1969 funding could halt contractors’ work on usaf Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) in September, with slippage of flight schedule into 1972. Boeing Co. was working on new launch vehicle at nasa’s Michoud Assembly Facility under Project Scrimp. Booster would be vehicle 75 ft in dia and 80 ft high and use TRW engine based on Boeing lunar module ascent engine experience, with 2-million-lb operational thrust—although usaf had not decided to abandon Titan III—M as launch vehicle. (Av Wk, 7/29/68)
President’s Office of Science and Technology released National Atmospheric Sciences Program—Fiscal Year 1969, report describing total $200-million Federal investment in atmospheric science in terms of priority areas and programs of 10 participating Federal agencies. Report was prepared by Interdepartmental Committee for Atmospheric Sciences of Federal Council for Science and Technology. Planned NASA share of funding for FY 1969 was $84,573, dropping from $123,406 in FY 1968. Allocation included $50,594 for meteorological studies; $4,313 for aeronomy, including ionospheric physics atmospheric chemistry, rocket and satellite instrumentation; and $29,666 for study of planetary atmospheres. During past year efforts had increased on weather modification and space environmental forecasting. Special effort had been made to increase support of university research groups in connection with U.S. participation in Global Atmospherics Research Program, essa and nsf had increased meteorology program slightly, essa, dod, and nsf had increased solar-terrestrial research. (Text: ost Release, 5/1/68)
Electric signals out of phase with jet engine noise could be introduced into exhaust flame and converted into sound waves to cancel out engine noise, according to United Technology Center scientist, Dr. A. G. Cattaneo. Idea, in principle, had been demonstrated by recent laboratory experiments in which acetylene torch flame converted electric signals into sound with high fidelity. Evaluation of combustion efficiency during rocket engine tests could be additional application. (Wilford, NYT, 2/11/68, 30)
First launch of British Aircraft Corp.-built Skylark sounding rocket from esrange near Kiruna, Sweden, carried London Imperial College experiment to 105-mi (170-km) altitude to investigate relationship between auroral events and polar “electrojet.” Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. (SBD, 4/4/68, 199)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc payload to gather data on charged particle fluxes associated with aurora and to investigate distribution of electric fields in ionosphere, occurrence of radio noise, and ionospheric electron densities during auroral displays. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; good data were acquired, (nasa Rpt srl)
Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, and Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, Cal Tech President, presided at unveiling of historical marker at JPL commemorating test-firing of rocket engine Oct. 31, 1936, by students of Cal Tech’s Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory under the late Dr. Theodore von Karman. With firing, Cal Tech had become first university actively to sponsor rocket research. Its work had gained Government sponsorship and later had led to establishment of JPL. (jpl Release 492; Diebold, LA Times, 11/1/68)
At background briefing on Apollo 6 mission, NASA Apollo Program Mission Director, Will jam C. Schneider, described flight planning activities for Apollo missions up to landing on the moon. Apollo 6 mission, originally scheduled for launch March 21, would be postponed until April because of “erratic behavior” in service module’s helium check valves. Since Apollo 5 had been so successful, Apollo 6 objectives had been “downgraded to secondary” and primary objective would be to evaluate launch vehicle. New optimum injection method in which S—IVB would be launched toward moon would be used but rest of mission would be basically same as Apollo 5, he said. NASA would continue mission planning, “so that we have the option to select a lunar orbit mission if as a result of previous flights we felt it was technically the best thing to do.” (Transcript; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 3/16/68, 1)
Apollo and Apollo Applications, staff study released by House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on NASA Oversight, included statement by Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.), Subcommittee Chairman: “. . . the general posture of the programs is good [but] the Apollo program, with its inherent complexity, has had and can be expected to have a variety of problems. Yet this study identifies the fact that confidence in the governmental-industrial team accomplishing this work is well placed.” Report found “that the NASA industry team is continuing to effectively employ its resources in the solution of those problems which currently face the program. NASA has indicated that, given the stretchout in the Apollo program caused by the Apollo 204 accident, nasa is not constrained by total funding for the Apollo program during [FT] 1968. The continued reduction in total effort in the Apollo program as the program passed its peak effort in fiscal year 1967 is beginning to cause dislocation in the contractor and nasa center effort to the extent that personnel that will be needed during the flight portion of the program may not be available in the event a major flight problem occurs. Timely support for the Apollo Applications program and other post-Apollo effort could have a major effect on minimizing this problem.” (Text)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 184-mi (296-km) altitude to measure intensity and polarization distribution of hydrogen Lyman alpha at night. Although rocket performance was satisfactory, instruments failed to function, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa was unsuccessful in second Project shape (Supersonic High Altitude Parachute Experiments) attempt at WSMR when parachute was ejected prematurely from five-foot-long canister after three-stage rocket had successfully propelled payload to 33-mi altitude. First test Oct. 23 had been successful, (nasa Release 68—216)
nasa launched two Aerobee sounding rockets from WSMR. One carried American Science & Engineering, Inc., payload to 96.2-mi (154.8-km) altitude to obtain high-resolution x-ray pictures of active regions on sun and general x-ray emission of solar corona. Ten percent loss in rocket performance suggested sustainer ruptured; instruments performed satisfactorily. Data would be degraded by pointing control failure. Second rocket carried gsfc payload to 95-mi (152.8-km) altitude to collect data on x-rays from Crab Nebula and its proximity, using six collimated x-ray detectors. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. Entire payload was recovered in excellent condition. (nasa Rpt srl)
Nimbus B spacecraft launched by NASA from wTR failed to enter orbit because of malfunction in booster. Thorad-Agena D booster and spacecraft were destroyed by Range Safety Officer. Satellite, third in Nimbus meteorological series, contained two 25-\v SNAP—19 radioisotope electric power generators fueled with plutonium 238 to supplement solar panels and enclosed in capsules designed to withstand impact and corrosion. Debris fell into Pacific between Vandenberg afb and San Miguel Island, (wtr Release; AP, W Star, 5/18/68; P EB, 5/18/68; AP, W Post, 5/19/68, A3; AP, NYT, 5/18/68; 5/25/68)
In Annual Report to Congress of the Atomic Energy Commission for 1967, AEC announced fifth launch of twin Vela nuclear detection satellites was planned, with increased detection capabilities. Earth-oriented spacecraft would be launched by Titan III—C booster. Among other programs, large heat source for power system for space applications in mid-1970s was being studied at NASA’s request, with scheduled July 1971 delivery of 25-kw heat-source subsystem consisting of high-temperature fuel capsules integrated into safe flight package. Second Phoebus test reactor, Phoebus-2A, was being assembled at Nuclear Rocket Development Station in Nevada; testing was scheduled to begin in second quarter of year. Work on XE cold-flow engine and testing of first “hot” (uranium-fueled) ground experimental engine were scheduled for second quarter. Power testing of second-generation SNAP-8 reactor was planned and more advanced reactor systems for space use were being examined, including thermionic fuel elements. For treatment of “heart block,” aec was developing plutonium-fueled cardiac pacemaker. Studies were also under contract on isotopic “engine” for pumps to assist or replace functions of damaged heart. (Text; / nteraviaAir Letter, 2/1/68, 11)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried GSFC payload to 12-mi (19-km) altitude to obtain variations in temperature profile and atmosphere structure. Launch was one of series scheduled for winter 1968—69 at Churchill, Point Barrow, Alaska, and NASA Wallops Station. Nineteen grenades deployed and exploded as planned. Second stage failed to ignite causing low apogee, which prevented acquisition of useful data. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried Dudley Observatory payload to 95.8-mi (153.2-km) altitude to determine particle flux during quiet period preceding Geminid meteor shower (Dec. 13—14). Launch was first in series of two; second would be launched Dec. 14. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. All collection trap functions occurred as programmed. Payload was tracked visually during descent and sucessfully recovered. (NASA Rpt srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of New Hampshire-Univ. of California at San Diego payload. Objectives were to detect and identify energetic charged particles that caused aurora, measure local electron density and correlate it with ground measurements of ionization, study aurora light emissions at several wavelengths and detect related electric fields, and investigate auroral ionospheric currents and magnetic fields driving them in ranges 1—15 kev and 2—30 kev and protons from 10—40 kev with electrostatic curved plate analyzers and channel multipliers. Launch was first in series of five to be launched from Churchill. Exact performance was not calculated because of early radar loss; time correlated performance indicated rocket functioned as predicted. Telemetry signals were strong throughout flight. All experimental objectives were achieved, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Boosted Areas II sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc experiment to 26.5-mi (42.7-km) altitude to determine feasibility of launching Boosted Areas II from Areas tube launcher and to obtain data on complete system flight. Booster pressure and acceleration were nominal throughout flight. Pressure transducer produced data until 2nd stage ignition. However, there was no drag separation after booster burnout. Separation occurred at 2nd stage ignition. Radical coning occurred during burn and predicted altitude of 71.5-mi (115-km) was not attained, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA’s Apollo 6 (AS—502) was successfully launched from ksc Complex 39A at 7:00 am est on mission to qualify Saturn V launch vehicle for future manned space flights. Primary objectives were to demonstrate structural and thermal integrity and compatibility of launch vehicle and spacecraft; confirm launch loads and dynamic characteristics; demonstrate S—II/S—IC and S—IVB/S—II stage separations; verify operation of propulsion (including S—IVB restart), guidance and control (optimum injection), and electrical systems; evaluate performance of emergency detection system (eds) in closed-loop configuration; and demonstrate mission support facilities and operations required for launch, mission conduct, and command module (cm) recovery. Launch Vehicle lst-stage performance was near nominal, but two of five 2nd-stage J2 engines shut down prematurely, causing remaining 2nd-stage engines and 3rd-stage engine to burn longer than planned. As result, spacecraft and 3rd stage entered elliptical parking orbit with 223.1-mi (395.1-km) apogee, 107-mi (172.1-km) perigee, and 89.8-min period instead of planned circular orbit of 115-mi (175-km) altitude. When 3rd stage failed to reignite on command after two orbits as planned, NASA switched to alternate mission, firing service propulsion system (sps) to place spacecraft into trajectory with 13,823-mi (22,225.4-km) apogee. Since insufficient propellant remained after extended burn, second sps bum was not attempted and cm reentered at 22,376 mph, just under planned 25,000-mph rate. Spacecraft splashed down 50 mi off target in Pacific 9 hr 50 min after launch and was recovered in good condition by U.S.S. Okinawa. Preliminary assessment indicated four of five primary objectives were attained, even though launch vehicle performance and S—IVB restart and guidance control (optimum injection) were not fully successful [see April 11 and 24], Apollo 6 was second flight for Saturn V launch vehicle and boilerplate lunar module (lm) and fourth for operational Block I command/serv-ice module (csm). Spacecraft had been modified to include Block II heatshield and instrumentation for unmanned configuration, delete crew provisions, incorporate new unified quick-operating hatch and movie camera to record launch escape system (les) jettison and reentry conditions, and relocate sequence camera for earth landmark photography. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn launch vehicle development, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 68—54K; W Post, 4/5/68, A18; upi, W Star, 4/5/68, A3)
NASA successfully launched Canadian Black Brandt IV sounding rocket from nasa Wallops Station to 510-mi (820-km) altitude. Primary objective was to check out instrumentation to be carried later in 1968 on International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies (isis a), Canada’s third ionosphere-probing satellite, and to confirm results of similar 1967 launch. Secondary objectives were to explore spectrum of vlf electromagnetic waves, measure electron density and temperature, and measure thermal gradients in vicinity of a skin depression. Launch was conducted when Canada’s Alouette II was passing overhead, to permit comparison of data telemetered to earth by both vehicles. Good data were obtained, (nasa Rpt srl; WS Release 68—10)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried TRW, Inc., experiment to measure: total flux energy, including spectrum of precipitated energetic H atoms; spectrum of precipitated energetic protons and electrons; fluctuating and DC electron fields; H light-intensity altitude profile; and location and intensity of ionospheric current systems. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory, (nasa Rpt SRl)
NASA’s 860-lb Ats IV (ats—d) (Applications Technology Satellite) was launched from etr by Atlas-Centaur booster on mission to evaluate gravity-gradient system for spacecraft stabilization in synchronous orbit and to obtain data on experiments during first 30 days in orbit. Centaur ignited, successfully injecting spacecraft into elliptical parking orbit with 475.8-mi (765.7-km) apogee, 115.4-mi (175.7-km) perigee, and 29.1° inclination. Centaur engines, which were to have reignited to inject spacecraft into 22,300-mi-altitude synchronous equatorial orbit west of South America, failed to ignite. Since programmer did not receive accelerometer burn indication, it did not issue command to separate and spacecraft and Centaur stage remained joined, tumbling uncontrollably, in parking orbit. Three attempts to fire apogee kick motor were unsuccessful because firing was inhibited by separation switches. Efforts would be made to operate all experiments possible, but information beyond proof of operation was not expected. Although exact rate and direction of tumble had not been determined, preliminary assessment indicated rate was too high for successful boom deployment. Ats IV was fourth in series of seven satellites designed to improve spacecraft technology, develop long-life control systems, advance spacecraft communications, and improve long-range weather predictions. First spacecraft to be placed in earth orbit by Centaur booster, Ats IV was 56 in in dia, 72 in long, and would have been 251 ft across with gravity-gradient rods fully deployed. Spacecraft carried four applications technology experiments—gravity-gradient stabilization system, day-night Image Orthicon Camera (ioc), microwave communications experiment, and ion engine—and no science experiments. Ats I (launched Dec. 6, 1966) had exceeded its test objectives and was still operating satisfactorily. Ats II (launched April 5, 1967), though judged a failure because of eccentric orbit, had transmitted some useful data. Ats III (launched Nov. 5, 1967), last ats spacecraft scheduled to be launched by Atlas-Agena D booster, had operated successfully and transmitted color photos of earth. ATS program was managed by GSFC under ossa direction, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 68—127; upi, NYT, 8/12/68, 34; AP, P Inq, 8/12/68; Lewis News, 8/16/68,1)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, had told Apollo project contractors that U.S.S.R. was developing a “large booster, larger by a factor of two, than our Saturn V,” New York Times’ John N. Wilford reported. Wilford said estimate was part of warning to Apollo team that unless they speeded their efforts, U.S.S.R. might beat U.S. to manned lunar landing. With Dr. Mueller in Europe, NASA spokesman had said he did not know basis of information. Previously, there had been no public statement indicating U.S.S.R. might be working on rocket with greater than 10-million-lb thrust. Saturn V had 7.5-million-lb thrust. (NYT, 8/14/68,11)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Max Planck Institute (Germany) experiment to 114.2-mi (183.5km) altitude to measure micrometeorites and electrical fields in ionosphere. Preliminary analyses indicated good data were received. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt SRL)
NASA Javelin sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Rice Univ. payload to 500-mi (805-km) altitude to investigate auroral fluxes and backscattered particles. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
British physicist Samuel Tolansky, appointed special investigator for Apollo program, had predicted discovery of industrial diamonds among 40 lb of matter Apollo spacecraft would bring back from moon. Theory was based on supposition that lunar craters had been caused by meteor impact or volcanic eruptions producing shock waves. “You can create diamonds by passing a shock wave through carbon,” he said. “And there has to be carbon on the moon.” (NANA, Pasadena Independent, 7/9/68)
nasa launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range carrying Univ. of California experiments to study flux-energy-spectrum, pitch-angle distribution and time and space variation of mirroring and precipitated charged particles in auroral zone with variety of detectors. Good data were received from all experiments except electric field measurement experiment which had two damaged booms. (NASA RptSRL)
nasa launched two Aerobee 150 sounding rockets from WSMR. First carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., experiment to 86.5-mi (139-km) altitude to collect data on location and flux levels of celestial x-ray sources in 1- to 20-kev range using collimator, proportional counters, aspect camera, and attitude control system (acs). acs performance was poor because of timer malfunction; performance of rocket and instrumentation was satisfactory. Second rocket carried GSFC payload to 92.8-mi (149.3-km) altitude to measure spectral irradiance of four early-type stars in 1,100- to 4,000-A interval, using uv stellar spectrometer and strap system for attitude control. Rocket, instrumentation, and strap performed satisfactorily. Good data were obtained, (nasa Rpt srl)
Washington Sunday Star commented on resignation of NASA Administrator James E. Webb: “The abrupt announcement, which was notably lacking in the customary ceremonial niceties, was the final confirmation that NASA’s honeymoon is definitely over. The relationship between the space agency and Congress must rank as perhaps the longest, and in many ways the happiest, official honeymoon on record. For six years, hardly a frown or a cross word came between the blossoming agency and the guardians of the nation’s treasure. The amiable and loquacious Webb proved himself an able administrator who knew his way around in the bureaucratic jungle. Through Mercury and Gemini programs, NASA virtually had only to ask, and Congress was ready to give. Then came the Apollo tragedy.” But Jan. 27, 1967, fire did not cause the change of heart. “It was ... a catalyst that speeded the process. But a growing coolness was bound to develop . . . for the basic economic fact is that America simply cannot continue to meet NASA’s ever-expanding economic demands—not, at least, without a critical weighing of those demands against the nation’s existing domestic, diplomatic and military obligations. . . . “Long before the tragedy that threw the timetable into a shambles, the conflict between America’s technical ability to move men into space and America’s ability to pay the freight could be seen by those who cared to look ahead. . . . Congressional reluctance to commit the nation to further, open-ended expenditures in manned space flight is therefore inevitable. But equally inevitable is the dismay—and in some cases the bitterness—of NASA officials. Webb and his lieutenants can take justifiable pride in what has been accomplished in the brief span of the space age. . . . They have solved problems quickly and accurately that men have never faced before. In the process, they pulled together a scientific and technical team unequalled in the peacetime history of this country. Now they are watching that massive army disband. . . . “Man will someday go to the planets and beyond. But that day must wait until the breakdown of nationalistic barriers makes possible a truly united world space program. Meanwhile, the United States should concentrate on the development of more sophisticated machines, less costly rocket systems and closer cooperation between the military and civilian space programs to avoid wasteful duplication. America’s space effort must not end with the Apollo program. It must be diverted into equally exciting and frequently more rewarding channels of unmanned space exploration.” (W Star, 9/22/68, Cl)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, flown for first time Dec. 22, 1966, made its second flight, following vertical tail fin modifications to direct more airflow over its control surfaces. Piloted by Maj. Jerauld R. Gentry (usaf), HL—10 was air-launched from mother ship flying at 45,000-ft altitude and 400 mph. Rocket engine for craft was not used during 4)4-min flight and 6,000-lb HL—10 was piloted through “U” pattern to make a 220-mph glide landing. Built by Northrop Corp.’s Norair Div., HL—10 was flight-tested in joint NASA—usaf study of potential as spacecraft capable of maneuvering in flight to a ground landing under pilot control, (frc Release 8—68)
U.S.S.R. was expected to make more successful launches than U.S. during 1968 for first time since 1957, with both nations emphasizing military goals, Howard Benedict of Associated Press wrote. In 1957,	U.S.S.R. had launched two Sputniks, U.S. had launched none. In 1958,	U.S. had launched five to U.S.S.R.’s one; thereafter, U.S. had maintained substantial edge, building to 73-46 margin in 1966. In 1967, U.S. had led by only one launch, 67—66. Through 1967, U.S. had had 400 successful launches, with 532 payloads orbited. U.S.S.R. had had 240 launches with 289 payloads. In 1968 to date, U.S.S.R. had successfully launched 40 rockets with 40 payloads; U.S. had launched 22 rockets with 31 payloads, 23 fewer than in 1967, while U.S.S.R. launches had increased by five. Reasons for decline in U.S. launch rate were NASA budget cuts and improved instrumentation and data recovery in military launches (60% of U.S. firings). U.S. military payloads in 1968 numbered 22 to U.S.S.R.’s 24 out of total 40. Tracking experts had reported 16 of 1968 U.S.S.R. satellites on reconnaissance assignments, with 13 reentering after 8-day orbit, two after 12 days and one still aloft. Sole U.S.S.R. Fractional Orbital Bombardment System (fobs) test, Cosmos CCXVIII, had been launched and returned to earth in less than one orbit April 25. Drop from nine fobs tests in 1967 indicated U.S.S.R. might have perfected at least first stage in FOBS development. Neither U.S. nor U.S.S.R. had launched men into space in 1968 but experts listed Cosmos CCXII and CCXIII launchings April 15 as forerunners of manned lunar mission. In 1968, U.S.S.R. had launched nine scientific satellites, three for navigation, and two each for communications, weather, and deep space probes. U.S. had made two unmanned Apollo rocket and spacecraft tests, five scientific payloads, and one moon shot. (Huntsville Times, 8/5/68)
afsc awarded United Aircraft Corp. $3,300,000 initial increment to $33,476,000 contract for advance development program to demonstrate high-performance reusable oxygen-hydrogen rocket engine, (dod Release 4-68)
P. J. Parker listed in Spaceflight “typical examples of space-inspired technology” which had either appeared or were expected to emerge from future space activity: low-weight, high-calorie “spacefoods” developed for mass-feeding undernourished peoples; adaptation of Saturn V air-bearing to other large items such as refrigerators; use of spacecraft automatic monitoring unit in hospitals for relaying data on patient’s heart condition to central point; use of high-pressure oxygen in astronauts’ suits to reduce lung collapse and to save lives of premature babies; potential cure for stuttering from examination of voice communication problems; electric switch adapted for use hy paralyzed patients to operate hospital call boards and wheelchairs; and lunar exploration vehicle redesigned into walking-chair with reciprocating legs. Industrial applications included solar cells used to drive small outboard motorboats and “outback” telephone booster units; heat-resistant coatings for spacecraft used in furnaces, aircraft, and domestic cookers; and new precision tooling methods that worked to nearest millionth of an inch. {Spaceflight, 9/68, 306—7)
NASA announced appointment of William C. Schneider, Apollo Mission Director, as Director of Apollo Applications, succeeding late Harold T. Luskin, who died Nov. 25. George H. Hage, Deputy Director of Apollo Program, would be Acting Apollo Mission Director in addition to his present duties, (nasa Release 68-217)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by nasa from WSMR carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to 108-mi (173.8-km) altitude to measure height profile of nitric oxide and nitrogen and test Mariner Mars UV spectrometer. UV spectrometer measured earth’s day-glow and daylight between 1,100 A and 4,300 A. Inertial ACS successfully maneuvered payload until scat eye took control and caused instrument to scan through 10°. Experiment’s measurements and tests were successful. (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA test pilot William H. Dana flew X—15 No. 1 rocket research aircraft to 104,500-ft altitude and 2,898 mph (mach 4.36) from Edwards AFB to check out aircraft’s electrical systems and test newly developed spray foam insulation planned for use on 2nd stages of Saturn V rockets beginning with vehicle eight. Foam was much lighter than insulation previously used to maintain low temperatures required for cryogenic propellants used in Saturn V. (X—15 Proj Off; msfc Release 68-69)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Maryland experiment to 150-mi (241km) altitude to study dissipation processes and electron acceleration mechanisms in aurora. Four experiments measured energy spectrum of electrons from 1 ev to 200 kev. Photometers, UV emissions, and plasma probes were included. Three of four electron experiments returned data on energy spectra; no data were acquired from optical and plasma experiments because clamshell nose cone failed to deploy. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 64.4-mi (103.6-km) altitude to determine absolute value of positive ion concentration in D and E regions of ionosphere. Quadrupole mass spectrometer for measuring relative abundance of positive ions malfunctioned and, consequently, launch of two supporting rockets was postponed. Vehicle performance and trajectory were good and experimental related events functioned well and on time, (nasa Rpt srl)
Charles W. Mathews, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, addressed Society of Automotive Engineers Space Technology Conference in Washington, D.C.: “A major goal of the Apollo Applications Program is to accelerate the evolution of the utility of space flight using the very major capability that has been developed in the Apollo Program. . . . First, our experience to date leads to the conclusion that the utility of space flight will be greatly enhanced by the participation of men onboard the spacecraft. Second, in manned space flight our ability to maintain operations for durations considerably in excess of those now obtained is necessary for efficient operations. . . . The initial step in this approach is the establishment of a workshop in earth orbit.” Saturn IB orbiting workshop, manned after launch by three-man crew, would be followed by manned Apollo Telescope Mount, which would dock with workshop for 56-day mission to study solar phenomena—“first application of man in space to conduct advanced scientific experiments.” Features and operating modes of Saturn V workshop, to follow, would be based on information gained from Saturn IB workshop. (Text)
Engineering mockup of Saturn l orbital workshop readied for crew station review at Marshall Space Flight Center. Space-sidled astronaut leaves full-size model of Saturn S—IVB rocket stage which will contain individual sleeping rooms, kitchen-dining area, laboratory work spaces, and waste-management area. hope that the conquest of space can contribute to the establishment of peace.” (Text)
In Washington Post Thomas O’Toole said poisoning from overexposure to beryllium powder had resulted in 800 known deaths in U.S. during past 15 yr. Beryllium disease expert, Dr. Harriet L. Hardy of Massachusetts General Hospital, estimated total beryllium cases at 2,500, “about three times as many as we’ve heard about.” New uses for lightweight, heat-resistant metal had pushed production to 150,000 lb per year. Battelle Memorial Institute estimated output would grow at 20% rate per year for next five years; NAS estimated 1979 production at six times 1969’s. Beryllium was being used by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for wheel brakes in C—5A transport and heat shields for Poseidon missile. Boeing Co. used it for new Minuteman missile shield. In past three years estimated $25 million had been spent on beryllium rocket research, O’Toole said one scientist claimed test firing in California had so contaminated site that electrician working there developed beryllium poisoning. Neither NASA nor USAF planned to abandon testing beryllium rockets, however, and beryllium use had “kicked off a lively debate inside the Federal Government.” (W Post, 12/15/68, Al)
nasa Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried NAS-Univ. of Wisconsin experiment to 107.7-mi (173-km) altitude to measure radiation from celestial objects in spectral regions 2,800— 1,200 A, 60-40A, and 15—2A using photometers and gas-filled proportional counters as x-ray detectors. Both x-ray and UV payloads functioned well and acquired data. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Tenth anniversary of first U.S. satellite, Explorer /, launched by abma—jpl team with Jupiter C booster. In defiance of original prediction of three-year lifespan, 30.8-lb stovepipe-shaped spacecraft had traveled 1 y2 billion miles and was expected to continue orbiting through 1968, though silent. Explorer /, currently in orbit with 771mi (1,241-km) apogee, 215-mi (346-km) perigee, and 100-min period, had stopped transmitting data May 23, 1958, after supplying data on cosmic rays, micrometeoroids, and temperature and discovering one of earth’s radiation belts later named after Dr. James A. Van Allen, designer of satellite’s radiation-detection experiment. At National Press Club Ceremony in Washington, D.C., commemorating anniversary, Dr. William H. Pickering, jpl Director, reviewed
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried gsfc experiment to 100.2-mi (161.2-km) altitude to test flight models of impedance measuring instruments to be flown on RAE—A satellite. Rocket and instrumentation performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from vfsmr carried gsfc payload to 129.4-mi (208.2-km) altitude to measure spectral irradiance of Gamma star in constellation Vela and of Zeta star in constellation Puppis using UV stellar spectrograph. Rocket performance was satisfactory. Instrumentation performance was marred by loss of fine pointing 17 sec before end of second exposure, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried arc payload to 98.7-mi (159-km) altitude to check Solar Pointing Aerobee Rocket Control System (sparcs) and map flight-path magnetic field. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried MIT payload to 84.1-mi (135.3-km) altitude to obtain data on celestial locations and energy spectra of discrete x-ray sources in three regions and to search for weak, undiscovered x-ray sources using proportional counters. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Global military expenditures ranked first in world public expenditures. They had risen from $132 billion to 1964 to $138 billion in 1965, $159 billion in 1966, and estimated $182 billion in 1967—record high level. Preliminary data, said U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Report, World Military Expenditures 1966—67, said current military spending exceeded by 40% world’s expenditures on education by all levels of government and was more than three times worldwide public health expenditure. (Text; Shackford, W Post, 1/24/69, A21) During 1968: In 1968 U.S. orbited 64 spacecraft and U.S.S.R., 74. U.S. total included 43 launched by DOD. NASA’s 21 included satellite orbited as secondary payload. Highlight of NASA’s 10th anniversary year was success in carefully planned series of Apollo missions—including first two manned flights in Apollo lunar landing program. Unmanned Apollo 5 and Apollo 6 completed inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. First manned mission, Apollo 7, carried three astronauts around earth for 11 days, verifying spacecraft operation before splashing down precisely on target. Mission included live TV transmission from space, largest number of inflight restarts of sps to date, and new record of 781 manhours in space. Apollo program climaxed Dec. 21—27 with highly successful six-day Apollo 8 mission on which three-man crew demonstrated operation of spacecraft systems in lunar environment while world watched live TV coverage via satellite. Spacecraft orbited moon 10 times, providing man with his first trip out of earth’s gravitational field and first look at moon’s far side and proving capability of crew, spacecraft, and support and control systems to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere at lunar-return velocity. Unmanned Surveyor VII, NASA’s first launch in 1968 and last spacecraft in Surveyor series, softlanded on moon, conducted on-site analyses of lunar soil, and took part in laser-detection communications experiment. Applications satellites launched included Intelsat—III F—2 comsat for ComSatCorp and Essa VII and VIII meteorological satellites for essa. Scientific achievements included orbiting of NASA’s Ogo V, Aao II, Explorer XXXVI, XXXVIII, XXXIX, and XL satellites and Naval Research Laboratory’s Explorer XXXVII. Oao II—heaviest and most complicated U.S. automated spacecraft ever launched—took first UV photos of stars, returning previously unobtainable data. Explorer XXXVI was successfully used by gsfc as target in first daylight operational laser tracking. Pioneer IX, launched into solar orbit, carried Tetr II pickaback and ejected it into earth orbit where it served as tracking target for nasa’s Manned Space Flight Network. Some 157 meteorological sounding rockets and 100 scientific sounding rockets were launched, and RAM C—II spacecraft was launched on suborbital mission to obtain data on radio attenuation during reentry. X—15 rocket research aircraft made 13 flights, ending its flight program with 199 missions, including 154 at mach 4 or greater, 109 at mach 5 or above, and 4 at greater than mach 6. NASA—usaf flight research continued with 13 flights of XB—70 supersonic aircraft, usaf’s C—5A, world’s largest military cargo aircraft, made its maiden flight and three of the aircraft completed 31 flights for 88-hr total flying time. Design of sst was reevaluated and program was delayed until new fixed-wing design was selected, with prototype construction expected to begin in 1969. nasa’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle completed 12 successful glide flights and first powered flight. dod space program included orbiting of 8 IDCSP comsats, 1 Lincoln Experimental Satellite, 5 Orbiting Vehicle research satellites, and 2 environmental research satellites; static test-firings of Titan III—M 1st stage; and near completion of mol launch complex at Vandenberg AFB. In joint NASA—aec effort, propulsion technology highlights included power tests of Phoebus 2A nuclear reactor, first tests of cold-flow test engine in flight configuration in new test stand, and first test-firings of Pewee 1 fuel element test-bed reactor. U.S.S.R. launched 74 payloads, including 64 Cosmos satellites, 1 Luna, 1 Proton, 3 Zond, and 2 Soyuz spacecraft, and 3 Molniya I comsats. Manned Soyuz III rendezvoused but did not dock with unmanned Soyuz II launched one day earlier. Unmanned Zond V and VI completed circumlunar flights and were recovered. Zond IV circled moon and apparently crashlanded. U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 delta-wing supersonic transport successfully made 38-min maiden flight. (Pres Rpt 68; NASA Release 68-219; B Sun, 1/18/69, 28; Shabad, NYT, 1/1/69, 1; upi, W Star, 1/1/69 A7)
USAF launched navigational satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Scout booster into orbit with 711-mi (1,444.2-km) apogee, 640-mi (1,030.0-km) perigee, 106.9-min period, and 89.9° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 3/15/68; Pres Rpt 68)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried Univ. of Michigan payload to 94.7-mi (152.4-kxn) altitude to measure neutral atmosphere density and temperature profile in 17.4- to 63.4-mi (28- to 120-km) -altitude range, compare day measurements with night measurements by rocket to be launched Aug. 9, and flight-test and evaluate new second-generation Pitot probe system flown without ejectable nose tip. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Pitot tube performed well and seemed capable of reaching higher apogees, even without nose-cone tip, than old system. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Michigan payload to 211-mi (340-km) altitude to investigate role of quenching, dissociative recombination, ionospheric decay, and nonthe'rmal electrons on airglow during decay period immediately following sunset. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; peak altitude was as predicted, and 570 sec of telemetry was received. All measuring systems functioned properly and scientific objectives were met. (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Maryland and Johns Hopkins Univ. experiments to 186-mi (300-km) altitude to investigate role of electrons in producing day airglow. Rocket and instrumentation—which included five-wavelength filter-wheel photometer with special sunshade, 3- to 800-ev electron spectrometer, and electron retarding-potential analyzer—performed satisfactorily. Data correlating ionospheric electron density distribution with day airglow emissions in ionosphere were obtained. (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried Dudley Observatory payload to 98.9-mi (159.2-km) altitude to collect micrometeoroids during peak of annual meteor shower. Particles would be studied to determine chemical composition, size distribution, ■ numerical density in upper atmosphere, and crystal structure. Control experiment had been launched successfully Dec. 5. Although two doors failed to operate properly, scientific objectives were accomplished and payload was recovered. (NASA Rpt SRL)
NASA Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried Univ. of Michigan payload to 90.9-mi (146.3-km) altitude to measure neutral atmospheric density and temperature profile at altitudes of 12.4—74.6 mi (20—120 km), compare night measurements with day measurements by rocket launched Aug. 8, evaluate lunar position sensing device for use in resolving payload altitude, and measure wind velocities. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily; data were obtained as planned. Launch was to be last of this Pitot static payload configuration. New Pitot probe system would be used in future. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA awarded $73-million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Boeing Co. for technical integration and evaluation in support of Apollo program. Agreement was an addition to Boeing’s previously contracted Saturn V work and could be extended as necessary, (nasa Release 68—85)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from portable launcher at wsmr carried gsfc experiment to 3.14-mi (5.05-km) altitude to: (1) flight-qualify production lot of VAM—20 variboosters, (2) demonstrate feasibility of Aerobee rail launch, (3) determine exit loads, (4) establish rail-launching procedures, and (5) verify boost-phase dispersion calculations. System was ballasted with water and lead to produce mass and mass distribution of fully loaded rocket with 200-lb net payload. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. Booster web burning time, booster pressure, acceleration, velocity, and system impact occurred as predicted. (NASA Rpt srl)
French Armed Forces Ministry announced successful testing of two new long-range ballistic missiles during preparation for Pacific nuclear test series. First missile, sea-to-ground, two-stage, remote-controlled rocket, would be used on France’s first nuclear submarine, to enter service in early 1970. (Reuters, NYT, 7/5/68, 13; W Post, 7/5/68, A27) July 4^8: NASA launched 417-lb Explorer XXXVIII, Radio Astronomy Explorer (rae—a) , from wtr by three-stage Thrust-Augmented Delta booster in first of two missions to measure frequency, intensity, and source direction of radio signals from solar, galactic, and extragalactic sources. Spacecraft entered elliptical transfer orbit, where it was spin-stabilized with 3,656.1-mi (5,884-km) apogee, 397.7-mi (640-km (perigee, 157-min period, and 59.4° inclination. Apogee motor was fired July 7, placing Explorer XXXVIII into planned near-circular orbit with 3,654.3-mi (5,881-km) apogee, 3,641.2-mi (5,860-km) perigee, 224.4min period, and 59.2° inclination. On July 8, yo-yo despin mechanism reduced spin rate from 93 rpm to 2.8 rpm. As primary objective, spacecraft would measure intensity and direction of radio signals from cosmic sources in 0.5- to 10-mhz range, not normally observable from earth. Secondary objectives were to place spacecraft into circular orbit of about 3,728-mi (6,000-km) altitude and to obtain useful data during first 30 days in orbit, for detailed study of dynamic spectra and decay rates of sporadic radio bursts. Spacecraft was expected to provide first low-frequency radio map of Milky Way and additional data on low-frequency signals from Jupiter and sun. Explorer XXXVIII was equipped with unique antenna system consisting of two antennas made of four i/j-in-dia booms which could be deployed up to 750 ft each, to form X-shaped array. Configuration was to be gravity-gradient stabilized [see July 22]. Spacecraft was also equipped with damper boom, dipole antenna, and TV cameras to monitor spacecraft performance and determine source of radio signals monitored with upper array. Radio Astronomy Explorer project was managed by gsfc under ossa direction, gsfc constructed, designed, and tested spacecraft and provided scientific instrumentation, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 68—109K; Schmeck, NYT, 6/29/68; 8; AP, W Star, 7/5/68; AP, NYT, 7/5/68, 26; W Post, 7/8/68, A6; 7/9/68, A7)
Effects of manned space flight program on communities surrounding NASA space flight centers were discussed in Monthly Labor Review. South had gained most from 1967 decision to proceed with Apollo Program. Total civil service and contractor employment increase of 66,000 in five states bordering Gulf of Mexico was about 5% of area’s increase in total nonagricultural employment. However, economic significance of program had not been uniform. Employment at Mississippi Test Facility exceeded half of total employment in Hancock County in 1966, while space employment in Houston, Texas, was less than 2% of total employment. Space employment accounted for slightly more than 7% of total employment growth in Alabama, Louisiana, and Mississippi since 1961. Employment growth brought population growth, caused expansion of school facilities and faculties, raised per capita income, and increased retail sales. Beginning decline of employment in program in 1966 had moderated economic growth, and if funding continued to decline after 1968 communities would have to adjust to sharply contracting employment. (Holman, Konkel, Monthly Labor Review, 3/68, 30—6)
nasa Aerobee 150 A sounding rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Kentucky experiment to 101.7-mi (163.6-km) altitude to determine gravity preference of small white rat when subjected to artificial gravity field [see Nov. 21]. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Good data were obtained. (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Maryland-Geophysics Corp. of America experiment to 163-mi (262-km) altitude. Primary objectives were to evaluate capabilities and accuracies of pulse and thermal equalization probes, investigate electron energy distribution in normal daytime ionosphere, and evaluate use of wing-slope techniques with Langmuir probes. Rocket trajectory was nominal, but despin was higher than predicted. Problems were encountered in telemetry. GCA antennas broke off at deployment and no data were received. Clamshell deployed properly and exposed pulse probe as planned, but motor for boom deployment malfunctioned. No useful data were obtained, (nasa Rpt srl)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena D booster into orbit with 316-mi (508.5-km) apogee, 300mi (482.8-km) perigee, 94.5-min period, and 74.9° inclination. (Pres Rpt 68)
USAF launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena D booster. One entered orbit with 148-mi (238.3km) apogee, 109-mi (175.4-km) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 81.0° inclination and reentered Dec. 28. Second satellite entered orbit with 916-mi (1,474.1-km) apogee, 862-mi (1,387.2-km) perigee, 114.4-min period, and 80.3° inclination. (Pres Rpt 68)
nasa Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Alaska experiment to 183mi (295-km) altitude to obtain data on horizontal and vertical spatial variation of auroral light emission and relationship between their intensities and volume emission rates. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. Experiment was successful, (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of New Hampshire-Univ. of California at San Diego payload to 161-mi (258-km) altitude. Objectives were to measure electric field, ionospheric currents, auroral light intensity and location, and proton and electron fluxes in 1- to 10-kev region while payload was passing through or close to visible auroral display. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; useful data were obtained from all experiments. Launch was last in series of four [see April 30]. (NASA Rpt srl)
USAF launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena D booster. One entered orbit with 243-mi (391.1-km) apogee, 111-mi (178.6-km) perigee, 90.1-min period, and 83° inclination and reentered Oct. 8. Second satellite entered orbit with 318-mi (511.8-km) apogee, 312-mi (502.1-km) perigee, 94.7-min period, and 83.2° inclination. (Pres Rpt 68)	_
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Titan III—B-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 254-mi (408.8-km) apogee, 77-mi (132.9-km) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 111.4° inclination and reentered Feb. 4. (SBD, 1/19/68, 98; GSFC SSR, 1/31/68; Pres Rpt 68)
nasa successfully launched Explorer XXXVI—also called Geos II (geos—b) Geodetic Earth Orbiting Satellite—from WTR by Thrust-Augmented Delta booster into orbit with 978.4-mi (1,574.5-km) apogee; 670.8-mi (1,079.5-km) perigee; 112.18-min period; and 105.8° inclination. The 460-lb, gravity-gradient satellite, launched to contribute to completion of NASA-managed U.S. National Geodetic Satellite Program (ngsp), carried six geodetic systems for development of a more precise model of earth’s gravitational field and improvement of knowledge of earth’s size and shape: (1) flashing-light beacons with 6,620-candle-sec-per-fIash combined candle emittance to be photographed against background of stars; (2) corner cube quartz reflectors to pinpoint satellite’s position by reflecting a laser beam; (3) three radio transmitters to help determine satellite’s line-of-sight velocity using Doppler shift principle and USN tranet equipment; (4) radio transponder to provide distance between satellite and interrogating USA SECOR network ground station; (5) range and range-rate transponders for simultaneous determination of satellite-to-ground-station range and line-of-sight velocity, using NASA’s stadan system; and (6) C-band transponder systems at stadan stations for calibration and experimentation to determine applicability of C-band radar tracking system to satellite geodesy. Primary mission objectives were to obtain 90 days of precision spacecraft position data, support geodetic positioning of 40 reference control points and 64 densifieation observation sites, and evaluate accuracy of ground-based C-band radars. Explorer XXXVI was fifth satellite launched in ngsp series and second in geos series. Mission of first geos satellite, Explorer XXIX (launched Nov. 6, 1965), had ended in December 1966, hut satellite was still transmitting weak signals on Doppler shift. Geos II was designed, fabricated, and tested by Johns Hopkins Univ.’s Applied Physics Laboratory. Overall mission responsibility was assigned to OSSA. (NASA Release 68-2K; NASA Proj Off; UPl, NYT, 1/11/68, 30)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thrust-Augmented Thor-Agena D booster into orbit with 335-mi (539.1-km) apogee, 285-mi (458.6-km) perigee, 94.5-min period, and 75.1° inclination. (Aero Tech, 1/29/68, 11; Pres Rpt 68)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 176-mi (273.2-km) apogee, 115-mi (185.1-km) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 83.1° inclination and reentered May 15. (Pres Rpt 68)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried GSFC experiment to 102.5-mi (165-km) altitude to measure UV radiation from several early-type stars. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
USAF launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg AFB by Long-Tank Thrust-Augmented Thor (lttat)-Agena D booster. One satellite entered orbit with 269-mi (432.9-km) apogee, 112-mi (180.2-km) perigee, 90.6-min period, and 81.5° inclination and reentered Feb 27. Other satellite entered orbit with 338-mi (543.9-km) apogee, 294-mi (473.1-km) perigee, 94.9-min period, and 81.7° inclination. Flights were fifth and sixth since lttat vehicle was activated on May 9,1967. (SBD, 1/26/68,137; Pres Rpt 68)
Ten years ago Vanguard I, second [/A. satellite, was launched from Cape Canaveral (now Cape Kennedy) into orbit expected to last another 200 years. Satellite, 6Va inches in diameter, proved earth was pear shaped and continued transmitting until May 1964. (Official US. Navy photo) transmitting in May 1964, but was expected to remain in orbit at least 200 yr ionger. (ksc Release 63-68; AP, M Her, 3/17/68) radar tracking difficulties. Measurements taken by rocket-borne experiments, furnished by gsfc and Univ. of Michigan, would be compared with those taken by radiotelescope at Arecibo Ionospheric Observatory in Puerto Rico, and by Canadian Alouette II satellite during overpass for three-way comparison of rocket, satellite, and observatory data. (WS Release 68—7)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Andoya, Norway, carried GSFC payload to analyze electric fields from observed motions of neutral and ionized barium clouds during an auroral condition. All four barium clouds were released in visible aurora as planned. Good photographic coverage was obtained from all sites. Peak altitude would be determined from triangulation of photos. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Major administrative events affecting NASA and its role in space were resignation of Administrator James E. Webb in October, after 7% yr as NASA’s head, and budget cuts necessitating program and personnel reductions. Press marked Webb retirement with praise for many accomplishments of U.S. space program during his leadership. Webb, planning to devote time to interests in education and urban and foreign affairs, continued to serve as consultant to Acting Administrator Dr. Thomas 0. Paine. NASA FY 1969 budget request of $4.37 billion, already smallest since 1963 and $700 million below FY 1968 request, was further trimmed by Congress because of urgent national needs in other areas, particularly Vietnam war and urban problems. Authorization of $4,013 billion was lowered to appropriation of $3,995 billion-—$375.12 million below original request. Revenue and Expenditure Control Act of 1968 again reduced NASA funds, as well as funds for dod and other agencies. Dr. Paine in October announced NASA interim operating plan limited to $3.85 billion for FY 1969. Cutbacks included “sharply limited and deferred” Apollo Applications program, end to Saturn IB and V booster production, 50% cut in advanced mission studies, reduced lunar and planetary exploration program, one-year delay in NERVA development, slips in Biosatellite program, and reductions in astronomy, physics, and basic research. In November Dr. Paine said that below $4-billion level NASA could no longer “hold together our hard-won capabilities and utilize them effectively in critical programs; some of them would have to be dropped entirely.” (EH)
Goddard Space Flight Center fired its 1,000th sounding rocket. Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr carried Lockheed Missiles & Space Coi payload to 97.9-mi (160.5-km) altitude to obtain quantitative measurements of spectrum and intensity of solar x-ray flux in 2- to 30-kev interval with eight proportional counter x-ray sensors, solar aspect sensors, and yo-yo despin unit. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa RptSRL; GSFC Historian)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences approved $4,151 billion nasa FY 1969 authorization, adding $119,137 million to H.R. 15856, which had authorized $4,031 billion. Figure still was approximately 5% below $4.37 billion requested by President Johnson. Senate voted $350 million for Apollo Applications, against $253.2 million by House, and $55 million for nerva program, as against $11.7— increasing r&d funds to $3,475 billion. Both houses agreed on allocation of $2,025 billion for Apollo program. Senate committee cut construction of facilities funds by $5.4 million to $39.6 million, but increased administrative operations by $32.4 million to $635.6 million. (nasa LAR VII/48; AP, NYT, 5/14/68; Sehlstedt, BSun, 5/14/68)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from portable launcher at wsmr carried GSFC payload to 3.1-mi (5.05-km) altitude. Objectives were to flight-qualify production lot of VAM—20 variboosters, demonstrate Aerobee rail launch feasibility, determine exiting loads on rail launcher, establish procedures for rail launching, and verify boost-phase dispersion calculations. Booster web burning time, booster pressure, acceleration, velocity, and system impact were as predicted. (NASA Rpt srl) X—15 No. 1 was successfully flown by Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) to 254,100-ft altitude and 3,716 mph (mach 5.26) in test from Edwards AFB. Primary objectives were to conduct WTR experiment and check out horizon scanner, fixed alpha cone, and fluidic probe. (X—15 Proj Off)
Dr. Arthur Rudolph, Saturn V Manager at msfc for past 4)/, yr, was retiring after 38 yr in rocketry, MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, announced. He would be succeeded by Lee B. James, Deputy Director of Apollo program in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight, (msfc Release 60-106; AP, NYT, 5/15/68,5; AP, W Star, 5/15/68, A2)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., payload to 92.6-mi (149-km) altitude to collect data on celestial x-ray sources in 1- to 20-kev range. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan III—B booster into orbit with 249-mi (400.7-km) apogee, 90-mi (144.8-km) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 106° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 20. (Pres Rpt 68)
India’s Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (terls) was dedicated as international facility by Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi. nasa was represented by Assistant Administrator for International Affairs Arnold W. Frutkin, Director of Space Applications Programs Leonard.Jaffe, and nasa Wallops Station Assistant Chief of Flight Test Div. Robert T. Duffy. Duffy had served as advisor, and Wallops had assisted by helping to develop range, training scientists and engineers, and lending launching and tracking equipment. Teels had been established Nov. 21, 1963, by Indian National Commission for Space Research (incospar) and to date had launched 52 rockets: 17 American Nike-Apaches, 29 American Judi-Darts, and 6 French Centaures. Rockets launched as part of dedication included two Nike-Apaches, one Judi-Dart, and one Centaure. Payloads contained experiments involving French, Soviet, and American collaboration with India. India’s Dept, of Atomic Energy planned Centaure manufacturing unit at terls, and incospar would build space science and technology center at Veli (near terls) to design and develop space research systems, including vehicle, payload, instrumentation, and ground support. Mrs. Gandhi said: “This center represents only one facet of the tremendous industrial and technological revolution in which we are involved. . . . Technology is a key. It is a key to knowledge that opens the door to plenty as well as power. In a sense it is a key to independence, for it was the failure to advance technologically which made Asia and Africa dependent and poverty-stricken.” (nasa Release 68-14; WS Release 68—1; India News, 2/2/68, 4; LA Times, 2/3/68; B Sun, 6/30/68)
President Johnson sent message to Congress on FY 1969 budget. Praising effectiveness of NASA’s cost reduction efforts, he noted that NASA by utilizing idle, excess, and surplus Government property had avoided expenditures of over $22 million for new equipment and facilities and had saved over $16 million by improving procurement practices. However, to meet urgent national needs in other areas, further reductions still had to be made. “New obligational authority requested for [nasa] ... is about $220 million below the 1968 amount. Expenditures will be $230 million below 1968, $850 million below 1967, and over $1.3 billion less than in 1966. This reduction reflects our progress beyond the costly research and development phases of the manned lunar mission, as well as the immediate need to postpone spending for new projects wherever possible. “Based on a careful examination of priorities, the 1969 budget provides increases in some areas to prepare for important advances in future years, while deferring other less urgent, new projects. The production of our large Saturn-class space boosters is continued but at a reduced rate. The development of a nuclear rocket engine to increase the capability of our Saturn V launch vehicle is also continued, but at a smaller size and thrust than originally planned, to reduce development cost.” Planetary exploration would be continued with development of “a new spacecraft for launch in 1973 to orbit and land on Mars. This new Mars mission will cost much less than half the Voyager program included in last year’s budget. Although the scientific result of this new mission will be less than that of the Voyager, it will still provide extremely valuable data and serve as a building block for planetary exploration systems of the future.” Request for dod, increased “to assure that our defense capabilities remain equal to any challenge or threat,” included funds to: (1) maintain strategic deterrent by converting from Minuteman II to Poseidon missiles with multiple warheads and modernizing manned bomber force with additional F—111B aircraft and improved short-range attack missiles; (2) proceed with procurement of Sentinel missile defense system for defense against possible Communist Chinese threat and revamp air defense; (3) augment firepower, mobility, and readiness of general-purpose forces by improving air defenses with new fixed-wing aircraft, helicopters, and weapon systems; (4) improve airlift-sealift capability by purchasing additional C-5A aircraft and procuring fast deployment logistics ship; and (5) continue vigorous R&D effort. (The Budget of the United States Government, FY 1969, 26-9)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of California payload to 161.9-mi (260.6-km) altitude to study flux-energy-spectrum pitch-angle distribution and time and space variation of mirroring and precipitating charged particles in auroral zone. Launch was one of series of four. Apogee was 11% below predicted; telemetry was satisfactory. Electrostatic analyzers performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained. Plasma experiment on boom was 100% successful. Boom deployed late, providing satisfactory data from last 30% of flight. Electric field did not produce necessary data. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Soviet trade union newspaper Trud said mass production of powerful intercontinental rockets had started at U.S.S.R.’s “Rocket City” because “the conquest of space is expanding.” Device made at the unidentified city “will help our scientists discover new mysteries of the universe for the good of man.” (upi, NYT, 11/22/68, 22)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB with Titan III—B-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 260-mi (418.5-km) apogee, 82-mi (132-km) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 99.9° inclination and reentered March 24. (Pres Rpt 68; SBD, 3/14/68, 75)
Apollo Program Director, b/g Samuel C. Phillips, told post-launch press conference at KSC early portion of Apollo 8 mission had been perfect: . . Apollo 8 is now on its way to the Moon. And ... I certainly envy the crew the magnificent views that they might have at this point as they were describing it to us. . . . To he able to see the entire earth. I think by this time in their flight, they are something over 10,000 miles high and moving at about 25,000 miles an hour. . . . The countdown . . . was—during most of the night actually a hit, and even into the late minutes of this morning, the count was proceeding with comfortable margins of time. The flight of the Saturn V was flawless in all of the maneuvers it was expected to make. The performance of the spacecraft . . . has similarly been flawless.” (Transcript)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, told Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences he was greatly concerned about future of entire space program without propulsion capability of nuclear rocket program. Nuclear propulsion was “a must for our future space needs.” Failure to proceed into development phase would result in “losses of experienced personnel and cost-increase effects on the total program. ... A one-year delay in funding could result in as much as two years delay in having an operational nuclear engine.” Nuclear vehicle as 3rd stage on Saturn V could significantly improve payload and mission versatility, and improved capability could be utilized “to improve mission effectiveness, to increase the mission and payload reliability, and to extend the spectrum of potential missions in the late 1970’s and the 1980’s. Equally important . . . for high energy missions requiring the launch of two or more Saturn V’s, with subsequent rendezvous in earth orbit, we will be able to reduce the number of Saturn V’s needed through the utilization of a nuclear vehicle,” at substantial cost savings. In response to questions by Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.), Dr. von Braun said space program was “cutting edge of our technology advancements and of many advances in the applied sciences . . . [because] no other program . . . involves so many branches of technology and science.” Reduction in NASA’s S60-million NERVA request to $11 million recommended by House would be disastrous because to make manned space operations useful, “plenty of payload” was required. AEC funding for NERVA had been approved, hut if cuts were made in NASA funding, program would be nonexistent. (Testimony; Transcript; O’Toole, W Post, 5/1/68, A3)
nasa successfully launched 600-lb Reentry F payload by Scout booster from NASA Wallops Station to obtain inflight fundamental research data on aerodynamic heating and transition from laminar to turbulent flow in boundary layer. Payload, graphite-tipped beryllium cone 13 ft long, tapering from 0.01 in at nose to 27.3 in at base, was designed to measure heat transfer in slender cone at hypersonic speeds for comparison with ground studies. Three of Scout’s four stages were used: 1st and 2nd stages fired during ascent, boosting 3rd stage and payload to 115-mi (175-km) altitude; and 3rd stage drove payload at up to 13,500 mph through earth’s atmosphere. Impact occurred 800 mi downrange, northeast of Bermuda. Reentry F experiment, sixth mission in NASA’s Reentry Heating Project, was designed and directed by LaRC. under sponsorship of NASA Office of Advanced Research and Technology. Payload was constructed by General Electric Co.’s Re-Entry Systems Div. (WS Release 68—9)
Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of Lewis Research Center, was announced winner of Rockefeller Public Service Award in science category. He had supervised plans for rocket installation on Lunar Orbiter and Surveyor spacecraft. Dr. Silverstein had been first Director of Space Flight Programs in NASA Hq. in 1958. Under his leadership first U.S. man-in-space program, Project Mercury, had been planned and groundwork laid for Gemini and Apollo programs. He had joined naca at Langley Aeronautical Laboratory in 1929 and helped design and later was in charge of Full-Scale Wind Tunnel. He was transferred to Lewis Laboratory in 1943, where he was responsible for conception, design, and construction of first U.S. supersonic propulsion wind tunnels. After serving in Washington, D.C., three years he returned to LeRC as Director in 1961. Leonard C. Meeker, State Dept, legal adviser, won award in foreign affairs and international administration for his work on 1967 space law treaty. (W Post, 11/14/68, B7; lerc Biog, 4/67; Lewis News, 11/22/68,1)
usaf and United Technology Center announced that hybrid rocket engine using solid propellant and liquid oxidizer had successfully fired Sandpiper missile from F—4 aircraft in secret test Dec. 12, 1967. Ac
NASA announced joint 1969 project with German Federal Ministry for Scientific Research (bmwf) to photograph earth’s magnetic lines of force high in space would involve release of barium vapor by NASA Scout rocket at 20,000-mi altitude. Scientists would use special optical equipment to view resultant glowing ionized cloud along magnetic field lines and visually map electromagnetic forces acting in barium area. Agreement on project called for BMwF to provide payload, two ground observer stations, and data analysis. NASA would furnish rocket, conduct launch from NASA Wallops Station, and provide tracking and communications services, (nasa Release 68—211)
Javelin sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Syracuse Univ. Research Corp. payload to 520-mi (837km) altitude to observe ionization levels of helium in exposure. Data would be related to aspects of sun and earth relative to payload. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Cone-shaped instrumented payload of French Veronique rocket released at 114-mi altitude fell into Atlantic 164 mi off French Guiana and was swept away by currents, French National Space Center announced. (Reuters, W Post, 7/31/68, A14)
In Science Dr. J. C. G. Walker, Yale Univ. geologist and geophysicist, and N. W. Spencer, Chief of GSFc’s Laboratory for Atmospheric and Biological Sciences, said thermosphere probe experiments had provided largest body of rocket mass-spectrometer data obtained. Tests had been conducted jointly by scientists at gsfc and Space Physics Research Lab. at Univ. of Michigan to determine temperatures of earth’s upper atmosphere. Since 1962, concentration and temperature of molecular nitrogen in upper atmosphere had been measured in 22 successful flights under varying conditions of solar activity, from launch sites at Fort Churchill, Manitoba, Wallops Island, Va., and Vega Baja, Puerto Rico. Scientists had concluded that upper atmosphere consisted of mixture of gases—electrons, ions, and neutral particles—each of which had distinct temperature. Multiplicity of temperatures could be expected in upper atmosphere of planets, though differences between planetary atmospheres must be more striking than similarities because of differences in atmospheric composition and in distance from sun. It was likely that absence of permanent magnetic field on either Mars or Venus caused further substantial differences between upper atmospheres of these planets and upper atmosphere of earth. (Science, 12/27/68, 1437—'11)
nasa announced award of $1,046,123 contract to Thiokol Chemical Corp.’s Elkton, Md., Div. for development of more powerful solid-fuel rocket for automated missions, including possible use as 3rd stage for Centaur and Delta. New 3rd stage was expected to be ready for use in 1971. (nasa Release 68—210)
nasa Administrator James E. Webb shakes hands with Dr. Thomas O. Paine {left) after swearing him in as Deputy Administrator of was A, but questioned whether there would be enough missions for booster to justify high development costs. {Text; Aero Tech, 3/25/68, 12)
House Committee on Science and Astronautics decided on $153-million cut in NASA’s authorization request of $4.37 billion for FY 1969. Reductions included cut from $48.3 million to $11.7 million for nuclear rocket program [Advanced Research and Technology Subcommittee had recommended cut of entire $48.3 million], $36.5 million from unmanned space program, and $60.3 million from request of $2.8 billion for manned space flight program. (AP, W Star, 3/2/68, A3; W Post, 3/2/68, A10; HR 1181, 3/19/68)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Pittsburgh-Johns Hopkins Univ. payload to 96.3-mi (155-km) altitude to perform coordinated auroral experiments with spectrometers and photometers. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
ESRO successfully launched first two-stage Centaure rocket fired from Italy at Perdasdefogu, Sardinia, carrying Max Planck Institute (Landau, Germany) payload to 88.5-km (55-mi) altitude in 118 sec. (AP, W Post, 5/9/68)
nasa Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station carried Physical Research Laboratory experiment to 93.2-mi (150-km) altitude to measure absolute flux and energy spectrum of x-rays from sources in constellations Scorpius, Taurus, and Centaurus and time variation of x-ray fluxes from Scorpius and Centaurus sources. Experiment also would survey southern sky for undiscovered x-ray sources. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Good x-ray data were reported. (NASA Rpt srl)
Nike-Apaehe sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried GSFC payload to 81-mi (129-km) altitude to gather data on charged particle flux associated with aurora and to investigate distribution of electric fields in ionosphere, occurrence of radio noise, and ionospheric electron densities during auroral displays. Experimental results were 70% successful, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Administrator James E. Webb urged Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences to restore $48.3 million cut by House from NASA FY 1969 budget request for nuclear rocket program [see March 1]. Webb stressed importance of proceeding with U.S. development of nuclear rocket propulsion as part of total capability in aeronautics and space to (1) meet potential civil or military requirements for space vehicles and missions, (2) avoid short-sighted cutoffs ot constraint on promising new technological developments because they had no specific justification in advance, (3) prove that U.S. “does not intend to limit its development of large launch vehicles and payload capabilities” to Saturn V class, and (4) serve as “central focus for continuing advance in nuclear and other technologies involved.” Responding to questions, Webb cited recent Soviet development of fractional orbital bombardment system, automatic docking flights, and maneuvering of heavy payloads in orbit as evidence U.S.S.R. was “not neglecting any important capabilities. . . . Everything I know . . . indicates they are still probing for those areas that will put them ahead the fastest and give them the lead over us that we cannot overcome in a short time.” (Testimony; SBD, 4/25/68, 309; NYT 4/25/68, 16)
Soviet Prof. Georgy Petrovich, writing in Trud, praised U.S. space achievements hut pointed to 20 Soviet “firsts” since Sputnik I. Past neutral appraisals had generally agreed with Petrovich that U.S.S.R.’s payloads had been heavier and U.S. hardware more sophisticated. Recent contradiction had been intricate softlanding for Soviet Venus IV, Oct. 18, 1967, and successful U.S. test of Saturn V, world’s largest booster, Nov. 9, 1967. Petrovich praised NASA’s broad application of space equipment in practical commercial use of satellite technology for communication, meteorology, and navigation. (Winters, B Sun, 2/9/68, A3)
usaf Titan III—C booster launched from etr successfully inserted four satellites into separate earth orbits. Satellites were one Lincoln Experimental Satellite (Les VI), two Environmental Research Satellites (Ers XXI, also called OV V—4; and Ers XXVIII, also called OV V—2), and one Orbiting Vehicle research satellite (OV II—5). Powered flight of Titan III—C was very close to planned parameters, according to preliminary figures. First transtage burn placed transtage and payload into parking orbit with 107.5-mi (173-km) apogee 90.8mi (146.2-km) perigee, 87.7-min period, and 28.6° inclination. Second transtage burn moved stage and payload into elliptical transfer orbit with 22,241-mi (35,792.4-km) apogee, 112.7-mi (181.4-km) perigee, 631-min period, and 26.2° inclination. Booster ejected Ers XXVIII (OV V—2) into orbit with 22,236-mi (35,777.7-km) apogee, 115-mi (185-km) perigee, 630.8-min period, and 26.4° inclination, where satellite would investigate radiation in Van Allen belts. Third transtage burn put satellite dispenser frame and remaining three satellites into final orbit with 22,201.9-mi (35,729.5km) apogee, 22,037.4-mi (35,464.9-km) perigee, 1,428-min period, and 3° inclination. Ers XXI (OV V—4), which would conduct research on heat transfer in liquids at zero gravity, was ejected into circular orbit with 22,225mi (35,760-km) apogee, 22,220-mi (35,771.9-km) perigee, 1,435.8-min period, and 3° inclination. OV 11—5, synchronous-altitude research satellite equipped with 10 sensors to investigate radiation, entered separate orbit with 22,232-mi 35,771.2-km) apogee, 21,827-mi (35,771.2-km) perigee, and 1,418-min period. Les VI, major payload, entered synchronous orbit with 22,236-mi (35,777.7-km) apogee, 22,233-mi (35,772.9-km) perigee, 1,435.9-min period, and 2.9° inclination. Second all solid-state UHF-band comsat, Les VI would transmit radio signals to test communications to aircraft, ships, and ground troops. First Lincoln Experimental Satellite, Les V, had been launched July 1, 1967. USAF officials reported all satellites were functioning properly, (dod Proj. Off; UPI, NYT, 9/26/68, 8; AP, W Star, 9/26/68, Al; B Sun, 9/27/68, A3; gsfc SSR, 9/30/68; Pres Rpt 68)
nasa launch from etr of Intelsat-III F—1, first of four Intelsat III comsats scheduled for 1968—69, failed to reach orbit when three-stage Long-Tank Delta booster, on maiden flight, pitched backward and was exploded several thousand feet above Atlantic. NASA Launch Director Robert Gray said booster encountered trouble in gyroscope system controlling pitch rate 20 sec after blastoff. Launch vehicle became erratic and uncontrollable, pitching backward 1 min 2 sec into flight, and 6 sec later ETR safety officer sent signal to destroy vehicle. Delta fuel tanks had already begun to tear apart and burst into flame. Pieces of booster and satellite fell into ocean 12 mi off Florida. Experts were studying radio data to determine cause of failure, which ComSat-Corp said would not have significant effect on 1968 revenue. Delay in completing cycle of four Intelsat Ills would be felt in 1969; ComSatCorp officials termed it “major blow” to plans for early full-scale global system. To be owned by 63-nation INTELSAT consortium, each of satellites was designed to have 1,200-voice capacity or four TV channels; completed series of four was to make coverage available around the world. First had been planned for synchronous equatorial orbit above Atlantic. (ComSatCorp pio; ComSatCorp Release 68-46; AP, W Post, 9/19/68, A3; Dimond, W Star, 9/19/68, A21; CSM, 9/20/68)
Apollo 7 spacecraft had been mechanically mated to Saturn IB launch vehicle at Complex 34, NASA announced. Apollo 7 prime or backup crew, or both, would participate in 10-hr network simulation of first six revolutions of mission and 8-hr launch simulations during week. Spacecraft 2TV—1 command and service modules successfully completed manned checkout Aug. 9 and 10 in preparation for five-day manned thermal-vacuum test at MSC in September to help verify spacecraft in simulated space environment for Apollo earth-orbital and lunar missions. Two-minute captive firing of 6th Saturn V booster stage at MTF Aug. 13 would try out “fix” for Saturn V longitudinal oscillations —conversion of liquid oxygen prevalves into gas-filled shock absorbers. (Text; C Trib, 8/13/68)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Thor-Agena booster into orbit with 161-mi (257.2-km) apogee, 100-mi (160.9-km) perigee, 88.7-min period, and 82.1° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 27 (gsfc SSR, 8/15/68; 8/31/68; Pres Rpt 68)
nasa Apollo Program Director m/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) told press at nasa Hq. briefing that Apollo 6 mission, in spite of anomalies, was “a safe mission from a crew safety standpoint” as demonstrated by spacecraft’s recovery in excellent condition after performing an alternate mission. He cited three substantial technical problems—J—2 engine failure because of fuel leak, amplitude of oscillations during 1st-stage burn (pogo effect), and apparent separation of large piece of paint or skin from lunar module adapter during ascent—and one procedural problem—premature shutdown of second of two 2nd-stage engines because of wiring error made by North American Rockwell Corp. which was not discovered by nasa in prelaunch tests. He said all could be corrected. From demonstrations of Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and information gained from Apollo 6 Gen. Phillips said he had determined “the course of actioh . . . necessary to correct and demonstrate the correction of the problems and . . . recommended to the Administrator of nasa that we proceed with preparations for the manned flight of 205 with the 101 spacecraft which is planned to be the first manned flight in Apollo, and ... a Saturn IB.” He also recommended that NASA prepare third Saturn V (No. 503) for manned flight in late 1968 with option to revert to unmanned mission if necessary corrections did not meet requirements to ensure crew safety on manned mission. NASA Administrator James E. Webb’s decision on Gen. Phillips’ recommendation was expected shortly. (Transcript; W Post, 4/25/68, A9)
U.S.S.R. announced successful completion of rocket tests in two Pacific areas to test equipment for spacecraft landings at sea. Series, which began May 20, had been scheduled to last until June 30. (SBD, 5/29/68,144)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried nrl experiment to 117.4-mi (188.9-km) altitude to obtain UV photographs of sun’s disk and white light photographs of outer solar corona in conjunction with measurements made by others during total solar eclipse. Payload contained two externally occulting coronagraphs, with Univ. of Colorado solar pointing control. Solar pointing control operated properly, with exceptionally steady pointing; white light corona and streamers were recorded in both coronagraphs with excellent resolution, xuv heliograph and spectroheliograph were recorded with excellent resolution, (nasa Rpt srl)
Tenth anniversary of first US. satellite, Explorer I, shown in 1958 photo with jpl scientists before abma—jpl launch. Still in orbit, 30.8-lb 80-inch assembly of instrumented tipper section and final-stage solid-propellant rocket had traveled 1bi billion miles. Left to right are John Smell; the late Dr. /, E. Froelich, jpl project director; Dr. Albert R. Hibbs; Karl IE. Linnes; and Robert Victor. (U.S. Army photo) American and Soviet space statistics: “The U.S, has placed about 500 vehicles in Earth orbit to 250 for the USSR. We have had 13 successful missions to the Moon, the USSR 8. Our reconnaissance spacecraft have obtained about 100,000 high-resolution photographs of the Moon; USSR craft have returned about 100. The U.S. has had three successful missions to the near planets in five attempts. Russia has successfully landed an instrumented package on Venus after an estimated 19 planetary attempts. We have accumulated nearly 2,000 hours of manned space flight time, compared with about 530 for the USSR. Our astronauts have performed multiple rendezvous and docking operations; the Soviets have demonstrated one automatic docking. We have logged over 12 hours of extravehicular activity; the USSR shows 20 minutes.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, critical of cuts in NASA budget, noted: “nasa has not been able to plan for post-Apollo projects with any degree of certainty. NASA has attempted production of the Saturn IB and Saturn V at the rate of two each per year. Frankly, this rate is too low to maintain the progress and momentum so painstakingly acquired in the space program over the past decade. “The dismantling of the high competence built up over the years at jpl and [msfc] has already begun. Both organizations are already losing valuable, highly trained people because of the insecurity and the lack of challenging work for them to do. And we face the grim reality of even further reductions and cutbacks. . . . The exploration of space has proven its worth, and has become deeply ingrained into the everyday fabric of our society. . . .” Space program would be examined closely by Congress, Dr. von Braun said, but “NASA’s record of accomplishments and the ability of its management will bear up well under the scrutiny. In determining what our space program should be during the coming years . . . members of Congress . . . [should] give careful consideration to where we are today in space, at the end of our first decade, and where we could be ten years from now, by building on the accomplishments of the past.” (EH; Texts; msfc Release 68—14; Clark, NYT, 2/1/68, 15)
NASA Apollo Program Mission Director William C. Schneider told news conference astronaut training for possible manned moon-orbiting mission later in 1968 was under way. “We will do the maximum the systems will allow,” he said, “and the maximum you could foresee would be lunar orbit.” Decision in November, after evaluation of Apollo 7 data, would determine if Apollo 8 crew—Astronauts Frank Borman, William A. Anders, and James A. Lovell, Jr.—were to attempt lunar orbit in December, nasa Deputy Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, pointed out that plans for possible manned lunar mission had been made long before U.S.S.R.’s Zond V circumlunar flight. In Oct. 11 Apollo 7 launch, Schneider said, earth orbital flight was set to run up to 10 days 19 hr at altitudes from 120 to 150 mi. Primary objectives were tests of command and service modules with crew, tests of ground control facilities, demonstration of capability for rendezvous with spent rocket section, and eight firings of service propulsion system. Schneider said he would rate Apollo 7 a success if “we get rendezvous and stay up three days to accomplish our main objectives.” Discussing plans to follow Apollo program with lunar exploration program Dr. Paine said, if forced to choose between Apollo Applications program in earth orbit or lunar exploration, NASA “would be most reluctant to give up manned lunar exploration,” as an area “man is uniquely qualified to contribute to” and one “of enormous scientific interest and importance.” (Transcript; Wilford, NYT, 9/24/68, 26; Cohn, W Post, 9/24/68, Al)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from White Sands Missile Range carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to 111.9-mi (185.4-km) altitude to measure intensity of spectral lines in 3,400—1,100A band. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
Lee B. James, Deputy Director of Apollo Program in omsf, returned to msfc’s Industrial Operations as Deputy Director for Special Activities, msfc Director of Industrial Operations b/g Edmund F. O’Connor (usaf) announced. Before assignment with omsf, James had been manager of Saturn I and Saturn IB programs at msfc. (msfc Release 68-16; Marshall Star, 2/7/68, 4)
nasa Astrobee 1500 sounding rocket launched from nasa Wallops Station carried Univ. of Minnesota experiment to 776-mi (1,250-km) altitude to study levels of electric and magnetic field variations in magnetosphere, check operation of antenna systems for use on satellite, and verify vehicle design changes. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Instrumentation suffered partial failure, but cause had not been determined. (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA successfully launched four-stage Pacemaker rocket carrying 52-lb spacecraft from nasa Wallops Station to test performance of phenolic nylon charring ablation material, foamed quartz material, mod v ablation material, and foamed Teflon material. Spacecraft reached 7,200 mph and was lowered into Atlantic by parachute after four-minute flight. Recovery helicopter retrieved payload, which would be evaluated at LaRC. (WS Release 68—12)
Canadian Black Brandt IV sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Barreria. do Inferno Range near Natal, Brazil. It carried msc Space Physics Div. 80-lb South Atlantic Anomaly Probe (saap) experiment package containing speedometer, magnetometers, ion chambers, and heavy ion detector to 502-mi (806-km) altitude to provide fast response capability for measuring radiation dose and dose rate at orbital altitude over South Atlantic. Project, cooperative effort of NASA and Brazilian Comissao Nacional de Atividades Espaciais (cnae) in support of Apollo program, would use data to study dynamics of inner Van Allen belt and possible radiation hazard to astronauts on low-altitude missions, (nasa Releases 68—94, 68—97K; nasa Rpt SRL; SBD, 6/13/68, 213)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Thor-Agena D booster into orbit with 177-mi (284.8-km) apogee, 108mi (173.8-km) perigee, 88.8-min period, and 82.1° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 23. (Pres Rpt 68)
President Johnson presented Harmon International Aviator’s Trophy to Maj. William J. Knight (usaf) for piloting X—15 rocket research aircraft to unofficial record speed of 4,520 mph (mach 6.70) Oct. 3, 1967. During White House ceremony President said, “What we learned from the X—15 program will enable us to improve on all our aircraft. The information gained from Major Knight’s ‘flying laboratory’ will make the airplanes of the future safer, faster, and more efficient.” (NASA PAO; W Post, 12/4/68, A3; SBD, 12/5/68,151; PD, 12/9/68,1660)
U.S. patent No. 3,380,687 was granted to Edwin H. Wrench, staff scientist at Convair Div., General Dynamics Corp., and five associates for satellite dispenser designed to release cluster of satellites into orbit. Launched by rocket-powered booster and propelled by its own engine after separation, dispenser would release satellites one at a time upon radio commands from ground. (Patent Off pio; Jones, NYT, 5/4/68, 53)
Naval Research Laboratory scientist, Dr. Richard C. Henry, speaking at dedication of nrl’s new E. 0. Hulburt Center for Space Research in Washington, D.C., presented data strongly supporting closed universe concept. Aerobee sounding rocket launched from White Sands Missile Range Sept. 7, 1967, carrying soft x-ray detector, had detected radiation from large, unexpected amount of thinly spread intergalactic hydrogen gas, evidence of existence of intergalactic matter previously supposed but undetected. Amount detected indicated presence of 100 times as much matter between galaxies as in all stars in universe— enough to fill up all space and satisfy all theoretical requirements for a closed universe. (Text; Cohn, W Post, 4/18/68, 1)
NASA had completed tests to find solution to “longitudinal oscillations” of Saturn V booster which had occurred during April 4 Apollo 6 mission. Tests revealed that natural frequency of vehicle structure and propulsion system frequently had coincided, multiplying amplitude of oscillations. Problem would be corrected by using accumulators, small gas reservoirs, in lst-stage liquid-oxygen prevalves to change propulsion system frequency. Minor modifications necessary to allow helium injection into prevalves were being made on 1st stages of third and sixth Saturn Vs. (nasa Release 68—128; msfc Release 68—158)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried GSFC photometers and objective-grating wide-angle camera to 105-mi (168.9-km) altitude to measure radiation from celestial bodies in ^2800—X1300 spectral range. Payload instrumentation performed satisfactorily; Aerobee pointing control system (acs) malfunctioned. (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to 121-mi (193-km) altitude to take high-resolution spectra of carbon-2 resonance doublet at wavelength 1,334 and 1,336 A; to retake, for comparison, high-resolution spectra of oxygen-1 resonance triplet at 1,302, 1,304, and 1,306 A; and to measure total intensities of these lines. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Analysis of experiment results awaited recovery and processing of flight film, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle, flown by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, completed first powered flight after air launch from B—52 aircraft near Lancaster, Calif., to demonstrate successful operation of XLR—11 rocket engine and to investigate effects of engine operation on basic stability and control of wingless vehicle. Manke said craft climbed and maneuvered in “marvelous fashion.” Increased performance expected in successive flights would simulate lifting-body spacecraft during terminal portion of flight. Manke ignited two of four chambers in HL—10’s rocket engine and climbed from 35,000 to 43,250 ft, reaching top speed of 610 mph (mach 0.8) during 184-sec engine burn. Eventually speeds of 1,000 mph and altitudes to 80,000 ft were expected. Oct. 23 HL—10 flight had ended with early shutdown of rocket engine, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 68-198; frc Release 26-68; AP, B Sun, 11/14/68, A10; latns, W Post, 11/14/68, A22)
nasa Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr, carried Columbia Radiation Laboratory experiment to 88.3-mi (142-km) altitude to examine x-ray polarization of Sco XR—1 in 10- to 25-kev region with x-ray polarimeter. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. Experiment worked as expected, but some counter or electronic failure, or both, occurred during early part of flight, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried Harvard College Observatory experiment to 111.9-mi (180-km) altitude to scan sun in 1,400—1,875 A spectral region using photo-electronic detector and BB solar pointing control. Solar pointing control malfunctioned, changing signal on experiment detector, (nasa Rpt srl)
Two NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rockets launched from NASA Wallops Station carried payloads to 85-mi (137-km) and 88-mi (141-km) altitudes to investigate D region electron density during solar x-ray flare. Rocket and instrument performance was satisfactory. Preliminary data indicated launches were accomplished during period of decreasing solar activity, (nasa Rpt srl)
usaf successfully launched OV 1—15 and OV1—16 research satellites pickaback from Vandenberg afb by Atlas-F booster. OV 1—15 entered orbit with 1,032-mi (1,660.8-km) apogee, 94-mi (151.3-km) perigee, 103.0-min period, and 89.8° inclination and reentered Nov. 6. OV 1—16, nicknamed “Cannonball,” was 600-lb, 23-in-dia Low Altitude Density Satellite (loads) launched to measure atmospheric density between 90- and 110-mi altitudes for 25—30 days. Densest satellite U.S. had orbited, OV 1—16 had 162-lb-per-cu-ft density, which enabled it to orbit closer to earth than any previous spacecraft. Orbital parameters: apogee, 286 mi (460.3 km) ; perigee, 82 mi (132.0 km) ; period, 90.4 min; and inclination, 89.8°. OV 1—16 reentered Aug. 19. (O’Toole, W Post, 7/12/68, A21; SBD, 7/15/68, 44; gsfc SSR, 7/15/68; 8/31/68; Pres Rpt68)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb using III—B-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 262-mi (421.6-km) apogee, 79-mi (127.1-km) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 111.4° inclination and reentered April 29. (Pres Rpt 68; upi W Post, 4/18/68; SBD, 4/18/68, 275; gsfc SSR, 4/30/68)
Boosted Areas II sounding rocket launched by nasa from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Uppsala (Sweden) Ionospheric Observatory payload to 65.2-mi (104.3-km) altitude. Objectives were to measure electron density profile, distribution of positive and negative ions and secondary x-rays in D region and lower E region of ionosphere during auroral glow, quiet arc, and violent and pulsating auroral conditions and to study its effects on radio wave propagation. Rocket was launched in conjunction with three others. Rocket performance was 12% below predicted. Experimental results were successful, (nasa Rpt srl)
George C. Wilson in Washington Post wrote: “No one is willing to predict what form a new Soviet psychological sputnik would take . . . [but] it was a gut feeling among space leaders that the United States will pay the price eventually for cutting back on its space program while the Soviets move right ahead on all fronts with theirs.” Even Saturn V rocket “does not look big enough to close the thrust gap. NASA Administrator James E. Webb—one of the most underrated administrators in Washington—warns that the Soviets are about to fly a rocket much bigger. . . .” By-product of big boosters was luxury of weight they allowed com-sats. U.S. was using satellites weighing 357 lb at launch and 192 lb in orbit. U.S.S.R. was talking about 1,000-Ib comsats for competing international communications system. “The Soviet Union’s bigness in boosters and payloads will be an advantage in this contest between the two at&ts of space.” (W Post, 9/10,/68, 14) September II: NASA selected Fairchild Hiller Corp. and General Electric Co. to develop spacecraft designs for Applications Technology Satellites (ats) F and G under $4.6-million fixed-price contracts. Configuration would consist of 30-ft-dia deployable antenna and precision control system. Both spacecraft would carry advanced communications, navigation, weather, technical, and scientific experiments. They were scheduled for 1972 and 1973 synchronous orbits at 22,300-mi altitude. Each company would design and develop basic configuration for both spacecraft and provide specifications, drawings, and test procedures, (nasa Release 68—157)
nasa Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr carried gsfc payload to 99-mi (160-km) altitude to check instrumentation. Random failure occurred in control system, but pointing system acquired two of three target stars. Rocket performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt srl)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. engineer John W. Jones was granted patents 3,369,455 and 3,369,485 for new rocket-launching technique with potential military and space applications. Rockets encased in liquid-filled plastic sheaths were fired from a gun, after which sheath fell away, solid propellant ignited, and rocket continued on its own power. Jones said high-altitude research probes could be conducted using seven- or eight-inch gun at one-half to one-fourth cost of present methods. Protective sheath and liquid permitted use of new thin-walled military rockets which had better flight performance and traveled twice as fast as standard artillery shell. (Jones, NYT, 2/24/68, 37; Patent Off Pio)
Team of NASA and Max Planck Institute scientists completed 28-day tour of Argentina, Chile, Netherlands Antilles, Peru, and Venezuela. They had explored potential sites for optical observation of high-altitude ionized cloud experiment proposed as cooperative project of German Ministry for Scientific Research and nasa. Release of barium vapor at 12,000- to 20,000-ft altitudes by Scout rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station was being considered. Barium cloud would be visible from large area of Western Hemisphere. (NASA Release 68-121)
NASA Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched from WSMR carried special parachute and payload to 41.7-mi (67-km) altitude to test parachute deployment at high altitude and to determine ozone distribution in 12- to 40-mi (20- to 65-km) region. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; parachute deployed at approximately 216,000 ft. Recovery attempts, initially unsuccessful because of 65-mi off-range drift, would be continued in attempt to recover onboard camera, (nasa Rpt srl)
USAF launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg AFB by Thor-Agena D booster. One entered orbit with 251-mi (403.9-km) apogee, 113-mi (181.8-km) perigee, 90.3-min period, and 85° inclination and reentered July 16. Second entered orbit with 322-mi (518.2-km) apogee, 273-mi (439.3-km) perigee, 94.1-min period, and 85.1° inclination. (SBD, 6/25/68, 272; Pres Rpt 68)
NASA launched series of three sounding rockets from NASA Wallops Station. First Nike-Cajun carried gsfc experiment to 42.6-mi (68.6-km) altitude to determine ozone concentration and water vapor distribution as a function of altitude and obtain finite data during parachute descent from 43.4-mi (70-km) altitude. Basic payload design proved operational. Rocket performance was good; peak altitude was 6% below predicted. Instrumentation’s tone ranging was lost after payload despin and new AB signal replacing FM signal slowly deteriorated after liftoff. Radar tracked all systems from liftoff to impact. Although parachute was not fully deployed during descent and aluminum oxide hydrometer failed to project because of spring malfunction, key events occurred within two seconds of predicted times and significant data were obtained. Midair-retrieval attempt was not successful, but payload and parachute were recovered. Second Nike-Cajun carried GSFC payload to 73.1-mi (117.6-km) altitude to obtain vertical profile of temperature, pressure density, and wind data between 21.8- and 59-mi (35- and 95-km) altitudes by detonating 19 grenades and recording their sound arrivals at ground. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Grenade timer malfunctioned and instead of ejecting 19 grenades during ascent, vehicle ejected 1 grenade after apogee during descent and 12—14 grenades which detonated at sporadic intervals during descent. Final destruct grenade destroyed payload before impact. Some significant data could be correlated from ground arrivals. Areas sounding rocket carried U.S. Naval Ordnance Test Station payload to 34.5-mi (55.5-km) altitude to measure ozone concentration at 18.6- to 37.5-mi (30- to 60-km) altitudes by observing solar UV light attenuation by ozone during parachute descent. Rocket performed nominally; altitude achieved was within 10,000 ft of predicted. Instruments performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained. Parachute deployed properly and payload was tracked by radar and retrieved in midair, (nasa Rpts srl)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Titan III—B booster into orbit with 200-mi (321.9-km) apogee, 89mi (143.2-km) perigee, 89.1-min period, and 106° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 25. (Pres Rpt 68; gsfc SSR, 9/15/68, 9/30/68)
Eleventh Saturn IB booster was successfully static fired at Marshall Space Flight Center at 1.6-million-lb thrust for 145 sec by Chrysler Corp. personnel. It would be returned to Michoud Assembly Facility for post-static checkout, (msfc Release 68—85)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range carrying Univ. of New Hampshire-Univ. of California at San Diego payload to 66.4-mi (109.7-km) altitude to measure electric field, ionospheric currents, auroral light intensity and location, and proton and electron fluxes (1—10 kev) while passing through or close to auroral display. Rocket did not perform as expected; spin rate was below that anticipated. Payload broke away from rocket and no useful data were received from experiment. Launch was third in series of four [see April 23]. (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating 19 grenades per rocket at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. Rockets reached 78.8-mi (126.8-km) and 77.8-mi (123.5-km) altitudes and performed nominally. Sound arrivals were recorded from all grenades. Data would be compared with data from Oct. 14 Point Barrow, Alaska, launches. (nasa Rpts srl)
NASA Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched from Andoya, Norway, carried gsfc experiment to analyze electric fields from observed motions of neutral and ionized barium clouds during auroral condition. Preliminary results indicated good photographic coverage was obtained from all sites, (nasa Rpt SRL)
