Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (terls) carrying Indian-Japa-nese payload for x-ray astronomy studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by nasa from Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 69.6-mi (112-km) altitude to collect data on wind, temperature, pressure, and density in 21.7- to 59.0-mi (35- to 95-km) range during atmospheric warming by exploding grenades. All 19 grenades exploded as programmed and sound arrivals were recorded. Launch was first in series of four to obtain upper-atmosphere data, (nasa Rpt srl)
Canadian Black Brant IIIB sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station reached 134-mi (215.6-km) altitude on first of two flights to evaluate improved Black Brant IIIB single-stage rocket and to provide data for payload environmental test specification [see May 1]. (nasa Rpt srl)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, outlined possible 1981—1982 manned mission to Mars in speech before Commonwealth Club in San Francisco. With “window opening” on Nov. 12, 1981, expedition “would set forth from earth orbit [where spacecraft were assembled] in two six-man vehicles, each propelled by three nuclear rockets.” At end of Mars injection burn by two outer rockets, rockets would be disengaged and return to earth orbit for later reuse. Third rocket would remain unfired as spacecraft coasted to Mars. On nine-month journey spacecraft could be joined and spun to provide artificial gravity. “On August 9, 1982, the craft would arrive at Mars, and the unused rocket fired to brake each ship into Mars orbit. About three months would be spent orbiting Mars while two surface landers . . . took astronauts down to surface for a month-long stay. These landers would also be three-man laboratories in which men could live and work productively on the surface of Mars. At the end of their surface research the astronauts would rendezvous again with the spacecraft overhead, and then begin the return voyage by firing the nuclear engine again on October 28, 1982.” Spacecraft would swing by Venus Feb. 28, 1983, using Venus’ orbital motion around sun to retard it and sling it toward earth. “Returning to earth on August 14, 1983, the nuclear rocket would fire for the third time to put each space ship into earth orbit. The crews would return to earth via the shuttle. After refurbishing, the space ships would be available for the next voyage.” To hold option open for Mars voyages in 1980s, U.S. should in 1970s develop reusable shuttle for flight between earth and low earth orbit, permanent orbiting space station, and nuclear rocket propulsion. (Text)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Fairbanks, Alaska, carried Univ. of Alaska payload to 134.2-mi (216-km) altitude. Objectives were to examine spatial distribution of atmospheric currents near visual, stable, homogeneous and pulsating auroral forms and to examine relationship between electron and proton precipitation and visual auroral distribution produced. Forward experiment portion of payload functioned satisfactorily, but data reduction was difficult. Some data loss occurred on rear portion of payload and additional data reduction was required. One flashing light failed at apogee. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA successfully launched two Nike-Cajun, one Areas, and three NikeApache sounding rockets from Wallops Station, carrying experiments to measure meteorological, ionospheric, and composition characteristics of upper atmosphere during “winter anomaly”—unusual absorption of radio waves—which occurred during January or early February. Launches would contribute to specimen day program, coordinated investigation of winter variability of ,D region of ionosphere above Wallops. Nike-Cajuns carried GSFC payloads to 75.2-mi (121-km) and 12.4-mi (20-km) altitudes. All 19 grenades on each rocket detonated as planned and sound arrivals were recorded, but poor vehicle performance of second rocket prevented acquisition of useful data. Areas carried Naval Weapons Center payload to 33.2-mi (53.4-km) altitude to measure ozone concentration in 18.6- to 37.3-mi (30- to 60-km) region during parachute descent, but parachute did not deploy satisfactorily and payload descended too rapidly for recovery. First Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Illinois-GCA Corp. payload to 141.1-mi (227-km) altitude to investigate winter variability of D region of ionosphere and measure differential absorption, Faraday rotation, and probe current to determine electron density, collision frequency, and temperature. Second Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Colorado payload to 71.5-mi (115-km) altitude to obtain vertical profile of nitric oxide density, using scanning monochromoter. Third Nike-Apache carried GSFC payload to 72.1-mi (116-km) altitude to measure degree of polarization and intensity of nitric oxide emission at 2,147 A to determine whether resonance scattering of sunlight was responsible for emission in D and E regions. Secondary objective was to determine altitude profile in 46.6- to 65.2-mi (75- to 105-km) region. Desired spectrum was not observed, apparently because of mechanical failure in payload, (nasa Rpts srl; WS Release 69—3)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 265.3-mi (426.9-km) apogee, 86.4-mi (139.0-km) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 110.0° inclination and reentered June 14. (gsfc SSR, 6/15/69; upi, W Post, 6/4/69, A18; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
OV 1—17, OV I—17A, OV 1—18, and OV 1—19 research satellites, carrying 41 experiments, were successfully launched by USAF pickaback on Atlas-F booster from Vandenberg AFB. OV 1—17 weighed 312 lbs and carried experiments to measure incoming solar electromagnetic radiation and its reaction with earth’s upper atmosphere, make electricfield and vlf energy propagation studies, evaluate ionized meteor trails in calibration of ground-based radars, and make engineering tests on spacecraft materials and solar-cell power system. Orbital parameters: apogee, 287.7 mi (462.9 km); perigee, 246.7 mi (396.9 km); period, 93.1 min; and inclination, 99.1°. OV—17 reentered March 5, 1970. OV I—17A, 487-lb payload consisting of OV—17 propulsion module and Naval Research Laboratory two-beacon orbis-cal ii experiment to study unusual transmission of radio waves through ionosphere, entered orbit with 233.0-mi (347.9-km) apogee, 106.9-mi (172.0km) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 99.0° inclination and reentered March 24. OV 1—18 weighed 275 lbs and carried experiments to study ionosphere and measure radio-wave interference, electric-field intensity, and hazardous radiation. Orbital parameters: apogee, 362.3 mi (582.9 km); perigee, 288.3 mi (463.9 km); period, 95.0 min; and inclination, 98.8°. OV 1—19 weighed 273 lbs and entered orbit with 3,592.9-mi (5,780.9-km) apogee, 288.0-mi (463.4-km) perigee, 153.5-min period, and 104.7° inclination, where it would study events resulting in and sustaining trapped radiation in Van Allen belts and hazards to man. (gsfc SSR, 3/31/69; 3/31/70; oar Research Review, 6—7/69, 23—4; Pres Rpt 70 [69]; W Post, 3/19/69)
Boosted Areas II sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried gsfc experiment to 63.5-mi (102-km) altitude to evaluate rocket performance for possible use at Resolute Bay, Canada. Vehicle underperformed according to predicted trajectory; peak altitude was below predicted and tone ranging appeared too weak for Resolute Bay. (nasa Rpt srl)
Astrobee 1500 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried 102-lb gsfc payload to 1,600.0-mi (2,575-km) altitude and transmitted 35 min of data. Primary objectives were to measure cosmic radio noise intensities over 600-khz to 3-mhz frequency band, continue evaluation of Astrobee performance, and verify new Alcor IB 2nd stage. Secondary objective was to test receiver system for Explorer XXXVIII Radio Astronomy Explorer (launched July 4, 1968). Solid-fueled Astrobee 1500 weighed 11,600 lbs and was being developed to provide research rocket to carry heavy scientific payloads to high altitudes with relatively easy handling. (WS Release 69-17; nasa Rpt srl)
Javelin sounding rocket launched by NASA from Natal, Brazil, carried Southwest Center for Advanced Studies experiment to 481.6-mi (775-km) altitude to study ionosphere-protonosphere transition region by measuring vertical profiles of ionospheric parameters. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Excellent data on electron temperature, ion temperature, and ion composition were obtained, (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Arenosillo, Spain, carrying grenade payload for Spain to conduct meteorological studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
Observers in Wisconsin, Iowa, Michigan, and Illinois reported sighting large meteorite or space debris flashing across sky and burning itself out as it entered earth’s atmosphere. Several airline pilots had seen it at O’Hare International Airport, Chicago. Northwestern Univ. astronomer James Wray said it probably was large meteor breaking up in atmosphere, ufo expert Dr. J. Allen Hynek, Chairman of Northwestern’s Astronomy Dept., said flash could also have been reentering debris of U.S. or Soviet space rocket, (upi, W News, 1/27/69, 30; AP, W Star, 1/27/69, B4)	...
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Arenosillo, Spain, carrying grenade payload for Spain to conduct meteorological studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj
NASA awarded Boeing Co. $32,815,000 cost-plus-fixed-fee supplemental agreement extending for additional 12 mos Apollo program technical integration and evaluation support initiated by Boeing June 15, 1967. (nasa Release 69—1)
National Telemetry Conference of Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Inc., presented award for telemetry achievements to NASA team responsible for directing, planning, engineering, implementing, and operating Manned Space Flight Network in support of Apollo program. At Washington, D.C., luncheon, award was accepted by GSFC Assistant Director for Manned Flight Support, Ozro M. Covington. (gsfc Release G—1—69)
NASA Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched from wsmr with Naval Research Laboratory experiment collected data that led to discovery of x-ray pulsar in Crab Nebula. Sounding rocket carried several UV detectors and gas proportional counters to 103-mi (153.5-km) altitude to obtain x-ray spectra in Crab Nebula, region in galactic plane, region near cluster of galaxies, and region toward earth. All detectors gave good data and NHL scientists later reported pulsations were observed at frequency closely matching radio and optical pulsations with 5% of total x-ray power of nebula appearing in pulsed component. Pulsations included main pulse and interpulse separated by about 12 milliseconds. (NASA Rpt SRLj Fritz, Henry, Meekins, Chubb, Friedman, Science, 5/9/69, 709—12)
msfc announced issuance of RFp’s for 10-mo study to establish design concepts and development requirements for nuclear rocket stage to replace Saturn V 3rd stage for advanced missions in late 1970s and 1980s and payload design concepts and development requirements for flight test and early operational applications of stage using nasa—aec neRVA. Study, for which proposals were due April 17, also would in-' vestigate payloads for nuclear-stage test flights including interplanetary meteoroid experiment (ime) and barium cloud experiment (bce). ime would gather information on meteoroid environment in interplanetary space, particularly in asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter, bce would create artificial plasma cloud in space to simulate comet’s tail and to study motions of ionized particles in earth’s magnetosphere. Work would be done at msfc. (msfc Release 69—105)
Washington Post editorial: “There was a certain logic in playing down the purely scientific aspects of the Apollo program in the past since the effort was to land men on the moon before the Russians did. But that day is past. The scientists of space, as contrasted with its engineers and technicians, have been forced into the back seat of the manned space program. It is time now to make them the navigators. The choice of missions—for future flights to the moon and for future operations that will lead some day to a trip to Mars and eventually other planets— should be largely in their hands. They, far better than the men who created the hardware and the knowledge necessary to make space travel possible, know the areas most appropriate for exploration in terms of gaining knowledge.” (W Post, 8/8/69) Pac (Package Attitude Control) system, carried pickaback on Delta 2nd stage, was ejected into orbit with 340-mi (547.1-km) apogee, 300mi (482.7-km) perigee, 94.2-min period, and 32.9° inclination. Primary objective was to flight-test long-life, low-power, three-axis Pac earth-stabilized control system for Delta 2nd stage and to demonstrate feasibility of using stage as experimental platform. Oso VI was spin-stabilized, weighed 640 lbs, carried seven experiments, was designed with six-month lifetime, and had two main sections—wheel (lower), which carried nondirectional scanning experiments and basic support equipment, and sail (upper), which carried pointed experiments. It was similar to previous osos but had unique capability which enabled two sun-pointing telescopes to study in detail uv and x-ray spectra at any point on solar disc and would provide greater knowledge of solar atmosphere (chromosphere) as well as outermost layer (corona) visible only through special instruments or during total solar eclipse. Experiments, designed to continue and extend work of preceding oso spacecraft, were provided by Harvard College Observatory, Naval Research Laboratory, Rutgers Univ., Los Alamos Scientific Laboratories, Univ. of New Mexico, Univ. of Bologna, and University College (London). Both tape recorders were operating at liftoff and were still operating satisfactorily. Spacecraft stabilized and acquired sun as scheduled shortly after entering orbit. By Aug. 15 all experiments had been turned on and were operating satisfactorily. Two minor anomalies— higher than planned use of current by motor that provided fine elevation pointing and lower than expected spacecraft operating temperature —were not expected to affect spacecraft operation adversely. Oso VI was seventh in series of eight oso spacecraft designed to provide direct observation of sun during most of 11-yr solar cycle. Oso I (launched March 7, 1962) and Oso II (launched Feb. 3, 1965) had surpassed their six-month design lifetimes and together provided more than 8,600 hrs of scientific information, oso—c (launched Aug. 25, 1965) had failed to reach orbit when booster malfunctioned. Oso III (launched March 8, 1967) and Oso IV (launched Oct. 18, 1967) continued operating satisfactorily, each providing 7% hrs of real-time data daily. Oso V (launched Jan. 22, 1969) had both tape recorders and seven of eight experiments operating satisfactorily after six months in orbit, oso program was managed by gsfc under ossa direction. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Releases 69—112, 69—112A, 69—123; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying Columbia Radiation Laboratories payload to conduct stellar spectra studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Proj Off)
President Johnson sent $195.3-billion FY 1970 budget request to Congress, including total space budget of $5,946 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $3,599 billion (plus $7.89 million for aircraft technology and $117 million in unobligated funds from prior years to be applied to 1970 program); dod would receive $2,219 billion; aec, $105 million; essa, $10 million; nsf, $4 million; Dept, of Interior, $6 million; and Dept, of Agriculture, $4 million. Total NASA FY 1970 budget request of $3,878 billion was below $4 billion for first time since FY 1963 request. Expenditures were budgeted to decline nearly $300 million from FY 1969 level of $4,250 billion, to $3,950 billion. Of budget request, $3,168 billion would go for r&d, $58.2 million for construction of facilities, and $650.9 million for program management. Slightly more than 50% of total FY 1970 authority—$2,008 billion—would be in manned space flight, including Saturn IB Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount. Space science and applications were allotted $558.8 million; advanced research and technology, $290.4 million. Larger proportion of NASA funds would go to research than to development in FY 1970 as Apollo costs declined. Increases would go to Apollo Applications (total $308.8 million in FY 1970), 1971 Mariner-Mars flight ($45.4 million), Viking project ($40 million), 1973 Mariner-Mercury ($3 million), Planetary Explorers ($8 million), Applications Technology Satellites ($44.2 million), and Earth Resources Survey program ($25.1 million). Aeronautical vehicle technology program, up from $74.9 million to $78.9 million, included $21.78 million for advanced research, $500,000 for general aviation, $11.25 million for v/stol, $16.19 million for subsonic aircraft, $20.9 million for supersonic aircraft, and $8.28 million for hypersonic aircraft. DOD space funding would include satellite development, certain portions of missile development and operating costs, mol (increased to $576 million), Titan III booster, and supporting R&D. In addition, aircraft r&d funds of $1.4 billion would include $500 million for new usn F—14A fighter to replace F—11 IB, $1 billion for series of advanced jet aircraft, $75 million for long-range bomber to succeed B—52, and funds for usaf F—15 fighter and usn vsx antisubmarine aircraft. aec space funding included amounts for nuclear rocket, propulsion technology and nuclear power sources for space applications, including production of isotopic fuels and aerospace safety. ESSA funds would support Earth Resources Technology Satellite (erts) program research. nsf’s total request was up from $400 million in FY 1969 to $497 million. Of this amount, its $4-million space funds were for research in astronomy using rockets and satellite-borne observation instruments. Dept, of Interior would conduct experiments with data from erts spacecraft. faa’s r&d budget would increase from $49 million in FY 1969 to $59 million in FY 1970. Principal increases were for research on air traffic control and noise abatement. President Johnson requested no additional funds for sst program, (nasa Release, 1/15/69; bob Special Analysis Q; Dale, NYT, 1/16/69, 1; Schmeck, NYT, 1/16/69, 24; Lindsey, NYT, 1/16/69, 81; W Post, 1/16/69, A12)
Jerald R. Kubat, former Director of NASA Manned Space Flight Program Control Office, died in Seattle, Washington. He had joined Apollo Program Office in 1964. (nasa Hq WB, 5/12/69, 5)
Qatron Corp. announced it had received $275,000 contract from gsfc to build several recorder-receiver switching and preprogrammable patch systems for Apollo program. (W Star, 9/2/69, A16)
msfc announced Dr. Arthur Rudolph, special assistant to msfc Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, and formerly manager of Saturn V rocket program, would retire Jan. 31. Dr. Rudolph had been awarded NASA Distinguished Service Medal Jan. 13 and on Nov. 15, 1968, had received NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal “for distinguishing himself by meritorious achievement” as manager of Saturn V program from August 1963 to May 1968. Starting career in rocketry in Germany in 1930, he later received patents for liquid-fuel rocket engines and demonstrated operation of liquid-fuel rocket. He came to U.S. with more than 100 other rocket experts in “Operation Paperclip” in December 1945. (msfc Release 69—10)
Apollo 10 astronauts would each carry out about two hours of head exercises early in mission in attempt to prevent motion sickness which plagued previous Apollo astronauts, msc Deputy Director of Medical Operations, Dr. A. Duane Catterson, said. Exercises—which included nodding, rocking, and twisting head—would be done to point just below threshold of illness until normal adaptation occurred. Since pilots who regularly performed drastic maneuvers in aircraft seldom suffered motion sickness, astronauts had flown aerobatic jet flights in barrel rolls and high-gravity maneuvers during week before launch. (Cohn, W Post, 5/18/69, A8) Launch events occurred as planned and spacecraft—carrying Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford (commander), John W. Young (cm pilot), and Eugene A. Cernan (lm pilot)—entered initial parking orbit with 118.1-mi (189.9-km) apogee and 114.6-mi (184.4-km) perigee. Checkout followed lunar trajectory insertion; then csm, code-named Charlie Brown, separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) and lm, codenamed Snoopy. Crew successfully transposed csm and docked with lm. Excellent quality color TV coverage of docking sequences was transmitted to Goldstone tracking station and seen on worldwide commercial TV. Crew extracted lm from S—IVB and conducted 1st sps burn. All launch vehicle safing activities were performed as scheduled and successful propellant dump provided impulse to S—IVB for slingshot maneuver to earth-escape velocity. On second day, first midcourse maneuver was not required. Crew conducted midcourse maneuver number two, which was so accurate that third and fourth maneuvers were canceled. Five color TV transmissions totaling 72 min and showing excellent views of receding earth and spacecraft were made during translunar coast. Spacecraft entered moon’s sphere of influence on fourth day, May 21, at 61:50 get. Crew conducted first lunar orbit insertion maneuver with 356-sec sps burn to reduce speed to 5,474 fps and place spacecraft in initial lunar orbit with 196.1-mi (315.5-km) apolune and 68.6-mi (110.4-km) perilune. Second loi maneuver, 13.9-sec sps burn, circularized orbit with 70.8-mi (113.9-km) apolune and 67.8-mi (109.1-km) perilune. Crew tracked lunar landmarks and transmitted 29-min color TV of lunar surface. Cernan transferred to lm at 81:55 get for two hours of housekeeping activities and communications test. On fifth day Stafford and Cernan entered lm and checked out all systems before firing sm reaction control system thrusters to separate csm and lm ahout 30 ft and again for 2.3-mi separation, lm descent propulsion system burn propelled lm to within 9.6 mi of lunar surface over landing site No. 2. Crew had no difficulty identifying landmarks and Stafford said, “It looks like all you have to do is put your tail wheel down and we’re there. . . . The craters [around No. 2 landing site] look flat and smooth at the bottom. It should be real easy” for Apollo 11 landing, lm crew took numerous photos of lunar surface and provided continuous commentary on their observations after cameras malfunctioned. Astronauts described volcanoes and light-colored craters that glowed as if lit by radioactive substance. Crew conducted lm radar test during low-altitude pass which indicated 47,000-ft pericynthian (lowest point in orbit), dps phasing burn raised apocynthian (orbital high point) to 218.6 mi (351.7 km). lm descent stage was jettisoned and Res separation maneuver and staging were accomplished. Anomaly in automatic abort guidance system caused lm ascent stage to undergo extreme gyrations. By taking over manual control, Stafford reestablished proper attitude. APS insertion maneuver burn at pericynthian established equivalent of standard LM insertion orbit of lunar landing mission (51.8 by 12.9 mi), where lm coasted for one hour. Concentric sequence initiation at apocynthian, constant-delta-height maneuver, and terminal maneuver were conducted. lm successfully docked with csm at 106:33 get, after eight-hour separation; and lm crew returned to csm. On sixth day lm ascent stage was jettisoned; its batteries burned to depletion and it entered solar orbit. Crew made 18 landmark sightings and took extensive stereo and oblique photos of moon. Two scheduled TV periods were deleted because of crew fatigue and crew rested and prepared for return to earth, sps burn at 137:36 get injected csm into transearth trajectory after 61.5 hrs (31 orbits) in lunar orbit. Maneuver was so accurate that two other scheduled midcourse maneuvers were not necessary. During return to earth astronauts made star-lunar landmark sightings, live color TV transmissions, star-earth horizon navigation sightings, and csm S-band high-gain antenna reflectivity test. Pictures of moon from receding spacecraft were spectacular. Scheduled 10- and 29-min color TV broadcasts of earth, moon, and spacecraft interior were later followed by unscheduled TV transmission, which provided beautiful pictures of earth and brought total color TV broadcasts to 19 transmissions totaling almost six hours. On eighth day crew prepared for reentry and SM separated from CM on schedule. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned. Apollo 10 splashed down in Pacific at 12:52 pm edt May 26, 3.4 mi from recovery ship U.S.S. Princeton 192 hrs 3 min after launch and precisely on time. Crew was picked up and reached recovery ship at 1:31 pm edt. All primary Apollo 10 mission objectives and detailed test objectives were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor discrepancies, which were corrected. Flight crew performance was outstanding; all three crew members remained in excellent health and their prevailing good spirits were continually evident. Accomplishments included evaluation of LM steerable antenna at lunar distances; demonstration of lunar landing mission profile; low-level evaluation of lunar visibility; inflight demonstration of Weslinghouse color TV camera; testing of landing radar in near-lunar environment; and manned navigational, visual, and photographic evaluation of lunar landing sites 2 and 3, and in addition other possible lauding sites in highland areas. Apollo 10 was seventh Apollo mission to date, fourth manned Apollo mission, largest payload ever placed in earth and lunar orbits, and first demonstration of lunar orbit rendezvous. Mission acquired major quantities of photographic training materials for Apollo 11 and subsequent missions and numerous visual observations and photos of scientific significance. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had achieved all primary objectives and had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. First manned lunar orbital mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), had proved capability of Apollo spacecraft and hardware to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere at lunar velocity. Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) had proved capability of manned LM to operate in space. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; MSC was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, M5FC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and KSC for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj OH; NASA Release 69-68; W Post, 5/19-27/69, Al; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 5/19-27/69, Al; W Star, 5/19-27/69)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried Univ. of Wisconsin experiment to 139.2-mi (224-km) altitude to examine isotropic component of cosmic x-rays in wavelength region of A> 5 A, using collimated, thin-window gas proportional counters. Peak altitude was 3.5% over predicted but x-ray counters failed to reach design pressure, (nasa Rpt srl)
Atlas said its “Talk of the World” section had “got a little hoarse” on subject of Apollo 11. It quoted “a few of the more unusual moon-thoughts” from international press. El Tiempo in Bogota had reported Colombian wool fabrics were used in Apollo 11 spacecraft upholstery. Canada’s Kitchener Waterloo Record had said lm had touched down on moon with legs made in Canada by Montreal firm. Oiga, in Lima, Peru, had said when Sputnik went into orbit “it was noted that Pedro Paulet Mostajo had invented a jet-propelled rocket back in 1895.” Atlas commented that “this could go on forever.” (Atlas, 9/69, 10)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. payload to collect data on air-glow. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements, (nasa Proj Off)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Minnesota Institute of Technology payload to 83.2-mi (133.8-km) altitude to study neutral composition of polar atmosphere with neutral mass spectrometers. Rocket underperformed; burnout occurred at 42 secs. All instruments worked perfectly. Useful data were obtained in 68.4- to 87.0-mi (110- to 140-km) region, (nasa Rpt srl)
Engineer, journal of Engineers Joint Council, published “The Engineering Profession: A New Profile.” Management, not design or development, was most common job function of engineers. Only about 10% of engineers worked directly for Federal Government and 12% in total aircraft, missile, and rocket area. Median age of engineers was 43 and profession was more than 99% male. (Text)
Between 750,000 and 1 million persons crowded Brevard County, Fla., to witness launch of Apollo 11, including 5,000 dignitaries headed by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew and former President Lyndon B. Johnson. The Rev. Ralph D. Abernathy and 40 representatives of Poor People’s Campaign watched launch from bleacher seats with 10,000 guests including families of Apollo program personnel, while other representatives marched outside ksc. Paris Match had brought 105 European businessmen. Some 3,100 press members were at special stand. As Apollo spacecraft lifted from launch pad there was some applause, but most spectators stared in silence until Saturn V rocket disappeared overhead. Afterward many were caught in monumental traffic jams. Banana River, five miles south of Launch Complex 39, was clogged with several thousand boats registered from New England to Texas. (Greider, W Post, 7/17/69, Al; Weinraub, NYT, 7/17/69, 21; Lyons, NYT, 7/17/69, 21)
Milton Klein, Manager of aec—NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of Space Nuclear Systems, AEC, testified in NASA authorization hearings before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences that for second decade “what is clear is that regardless of the specific directions the space program may take, if it is to be a progressive one, nuclear energy will play an increasingly important role. As payloads become larger and energy requirements become greater to move these payloads farther from the earth, the nuclear rocket will become a workhorse propulsion system. As we move farther from the sun or as the power requirements increase for the more sophisticated payloads, electric power generated from radioisotopes or nuclear reactors will similarly become more and more important. (Transcript)
Boosted Areas II sounding rocket launched by NASA from Resolute Bay, Canada, carried gsfc payload to 68.4-mi (110-km) altitude to obtain electron-density and collision-frequency profiles of high-latitude quiet D region and positive ion-density measurements. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket carrying GSFC payload was launched by NASA from WSMR to conduct stellar uv studies, (nasa Proj Off)
dod internal, classified memoranda suggested Government would waste money buying additional Lockheed C—5A aircraft, Washington Post article said. Central conclusion was that most efficient and least costly transportation network to support two major and one “brushfire” war “for which military wants to be prepared consists of the existing three squadrons (58) [of] C—5As plus smaller carriers like the C—141 and modern freighters.” (Nossiter, W Post, 8/31/69, Al) During August: Pace magazine published articles by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, also nasc Chairman, and by NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine. Dr. Paine said, “To improve conditions in our society we need to create more wealth through greater productivity based on new technology. We should be restless and dissatisfied with our slowness in overcoming social ills, and I hope that the space program will continue to spur us onward here. If we can go to the moon, why can’t we build great and shining cities? Why can’t we eliminate ignorance, crime and poverty? If our space program highlights such questions and helps form a national commitment to find new solutions, it will have served the nation well. Our space advances should embolden the nation to proceed forward with increased confidence in these other areas. Our Apollo program has demonstrated anew what Americans can accomplish given a national commitment, capable leadership and adequate resources. “Man’s future in space is limitless. We have embarked on a new stage of evolution that will engage all future generations of men. We face the unknown in countless areas: What are the effects of sustained zero and artificial gravity? Of time-extending flight at nearly the velocity of light? Of societies genetically selected for extraterrestrial living? “We must find the answers. We must move vigorously forward in space. The practical benefits alone justify this venture, but there are many other compelling human reasons. Progress in space should continue to spur us onward to find new solutions to our age-old problems here on Spaceship Earth. We must make the blue planet Earth a home base, worthy of men who will set forth one day on journeys to the stars.” Vice President Agnew said: “With the remarkably successful Apollo moon-landing program on the verge of culmination, we are now faced with a need to define just what we should proceed to do to make use most effectively of the results of our past and continuing space-exploration investment. Wealthy as our economy is, rich as our technology has become, we must plan carefully in order to meet a wide range of urgent national requirements. ... It is our hope that, with a carefully reasoned set of goals adequately funded by the people through their Congress, the nation and the world will reap the maximum possible benefit from mankind’s most ambitious undertaking. We must keep our horizons wide and our sights high. Despite its many internal domestic priorities, this nation should never turn inward, away from the opportunities and challenges of its most promising frontier.” (Pace, 8/69, 2—4)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from etr by Atlas-Agena booster into near polar orbit with 24,391-mi (39,245.1-km) apogee, 20,302-mi (32,665.9-km) perigee, 1,436.0-min period, and 10.2° inclination. (csfc, SSR, 4/15/69; Pres Rpt 70 [69]; W Post, 1/13/69, A14)
Nuclear energy in space was discussed in address opening U.S. Technical Forum at Nuclex 69 in Basel, Switzerland, by Milton Klein, Manager of aec—nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of aec Space Nuclear Systems Div.: “A forward looking space program such as that envisioned by the Task Group [see Sept. 15, 17] will mean growing reliance on nuclear systems. ... As an integral part of a new capability for space transportation, we look to the nuclear rocket to provide the propulsion to move large payloads from low earth orbit to geosynchronous orbit or to lunar orbit to support extended lunar exploration. It also offers major advantages for transporting heavy payloads into deep space.” nerva development was being initiated, with nuclear engine expected to be in operation in late 1970s. “It is also possible to envision ultimately the use of a controlled thermonuclear, or fusion, reaction for producing propulsion energy. Obviously development of such a propulsion system for space would come only after the development of a useful controlled thermonuclear reaction in a ground based plant, a goal that has not yet been achieved.” (Text)
North American Rockwell Corp.’s Space Div. had earned incentive award fees of $1,100,000 and $270,000 under nasa contracts for Apollo command and service modules and 2nd stage (S—II) for Saturn V launch vehicle, nasa announced. Awards were determined by Performance Evaluation Board on basis of NAR’s achievement of management objectives specified in contracts from Sept. 1, 1967, through Dec. 31, 1968, which encompassed S—II contract activities from Aug. 4, 1968, through Dec. 28, 1968—first of three time increments extending through completion of Apollo program, (nasa Release 69—38)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried TRW Systems Inc. payload to 161.6-mi (260-km) altitude. Objectives were to measure total flux and energy, including spectrum of precipitated energetic (1—20 kev) H atoms and precipitated energetic protons and electrons; fluctuating DC electron fields; Hb light intensity altitude profile; and location and intensity of ionosphere current systems. Rockets and instruments functioned satisfactorily; good data were obtained, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from WSMR with VAM—20 boosters. Aerobee 150 carried Naval Research Laboratory payload to 124.0-mi (199.6-km) altitude to photograph images of sun and part of corona in 150-400 A and 400—650 A region. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and excellent spectroheliograms were obtained. Aerobee 150 MI carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., payload to 112.5-mi (181-km) altitude to obtain high-resolution pictures of time development of solar flare in x-ray region of spectrum. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, photographing IB limb flare with appreciable x-ray emission that lasted throughout flight. (nasa Rpts srl)
Canadian Black Brant IV sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Barreira do Inferno, Natal, Brazil, carrying msc and Univ. of California payload to provide detailed scientific measurements of charged particle environment in South Atlantic Anomaly region. Secondary objectives were to measure magnetic field strength and flight-evaluate payload telemetry-system performance. Rocket reached 532-mi (856-km) altitude, with performance higher than expected. All experiments performed satisfactorily and data were obtained on all channels. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Washington Post reported interview with l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Commander of usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) and former NASA Apollo Program Director. Space shuttle was samso’s top priority program. New family of spaceships was being roughed out on drawing boards. “From a military standpoint, we need to be aggressive advocates of the capability to take a look at and deal as necessary with space vehicles of another country.” usaf and NASA were dividing labor on space shuttle program, which would cost estimated $1 billion. Pace of program would depend on progress toward development of reusable rocket engine which would not burn itself out as it hurtled into space, LeRoy E. Day, Chief of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, said. (Wilson, W Post, 10/15/69, A3)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket with VAM—20 booster launched by nasa from wsmr carried gsfc payload to 116.5-mi (187.5-km) altitude. Primary objective was to obtain solar x-ray spectra from 2 to 400 A. Secondary objective was to obtain integrated solar flux from 8 to 20 A. Data would be used to check calibration of spectrometer on board Oso V (launched Jan. 22). Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRL)
Harold R. Kaufman, Assistant Chief of Electromagnetic Propulsion Div., LeRC, would receive James H. Wyld Propulsion Award for “outstanding leadership in the field of electric propulsion, including the conception design, and development of the world’s most successful ion rocket” at aiaa 5th Propulsion Joint Specialist Conference in Colorado Springs, Colo., June 9—13, aiaa announced, (aiaa News; Lewis News, 5/9/69, 1)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Minnesota Institute of Technology payload to 115.6-mi (186-km) altitude to study neutral composition of polar atmosphere with neutral mass spectrometers. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and experimental data showed “some extremely interesting results*” (nasa Rpt SRl)
Welcome back to earth: Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. (left to right inside the mobile Quarantine facility), were greeted by President Nixon aboard the V.S.S. Hornet after their splashdown. is back in orbit, having left Tranquility Base, and leaving behind a replica from our Apollo 11 patch with an olive branch.” LM docked with CSM at 128:03 get. Crew transferred with samples and film to csm, and LM ascent stage was jettisoned into lunar orbit. SM reaction-control-system separation maneuver placed CSM into orbit with 72,0 mi (115.9-km) apolune and 63.0-mi (101.4-km) perilune, where crew rested and prepared for return to earth. cm separated from SM on schedule at 194:49 GET. Because of deteriorating weather in nominal landing area, splashdown point was moved 247.4 mi downrange, where weather was excellent. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned. Apollo 11 splashed down in mid-Pacific at 12:51 pm edt July 24, 15 mi from recovery ship U.S.S. Hornet, 195 hrs 19 min after launch. Swimmers attached flotation collar and seven-man raft to spacecraft and helicopter dropped biological isolation garments, which were donned by astronauts inside CM and by one swimmer. Two other swimmers moved upwind of CM on another large raft. Postlanding ventilation was turned off and CM powered down, and astronauts climbed out and helped swimmer close hatch. Swimmer then decontaminated all garments, hatch area, flotation collar, and area around postlanding vent valves with Betadine disinfectant. Helicopter carried astronauts to recovery ship, where they entered 32-ft-long mobile quarantine facility (mqf) with recovery physician and technician. They were congratulated by President Nixon and Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, who were on board ship. Crew, physician, and technician remained inside mqf until it was delivered to Lunar Receiving Laboratory (lRl) in Houston July 27. cm was retrieved, placed in dolly on board recovery ship, moved to MQF, and mated to transfer tunnel. From inside MQF/cm containment envelope, mqf engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and CM was sealed until delivery to lrl. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown to Johnston Island and to Houston for transport to LRL. Primary Apollo 11 mission objective—to perform manned landing on moon and return—and all detailed test objectives were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor, corrected discrepancies. Flight crew performance was outstanding; all three crew members remained in excellent health and their prevailing good spirits and proficiency were major factors in mission’s success. Accomplishments included first manned lunar landing and return; first lunar surface EVA; first seismometer, laser reflector, and solar wind experiment deployed on moon; first lunar soil samples returned to earth; largest U.S. payload ever placed into lunar orbit (72,037.6 lbs at lunar orbit insertion); acquisition of numerous visual observations, photos and TV transmissions of scientific and engineering significance; and first operational use of mqf and lrl. Apollo 11 was eighth Apollo mission to date, fifth manned Apollo mission, and first manned lunar landing mission. Mission acquired major quantities of data for subsequent Apollo flights. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. First manned lunar orbital mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), had proved capability of Apollo spacecraft and hardware to operate out to lunar distance and return through earth’s atmosphere. Apollo 9 (March 3—13, 1969) had proved capability of lm to operate in space under manned conditions. Apollo 10 (May 18—26, 1969) had successfully operated complete Apollo spacecraft on lunar orbital mission and had provided major quantities of scientific and training materials for Apollo 11. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by GSFC under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69-83K; NYT, 7/16-25/69; W Post, 7/16-25/69; W Star, 7/16-25/69; B Sun, 7/16-25/69; PD, 7/28/69, 1016)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Point Barrow, Alaska, carrying gsfc payload to obtain data on wind, temperature, pressure, and density during period of atmospheric warming by detonating grenades and recording sound arrivals on ground. All grenades were ejected and exploded as programmed. Launch was first in series of four to be launched from Point Barrow, (nasa Rpt srl)
Oao II (launched Dec. 7, 1968) completed 30 days of flight operation and was adjudged successful by NASA. Experiments had obtained 65 hrs of scientific data over range of eight magnitudes and 4,200 A—1,100 A wavelengths. Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory celescope experiment made 18 mappings and Univ. of Wisconsin experiment made detailed observations of 100 stars. Some 40,000 separate commands had been sent to Oao II and more than 4 million pieces of information had been collected, with 20 times more uv information from stars in 30 days than in 15 yrs of sounding rocket launchings. Satellite’s 11 telescopes were studying extremely young, hot stars which emitted most of their energy in uv portion of spectrum, not visible to ground observatories because of earth’s atmosphere, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69—7)
In international reaction to Apollo 12 moon walk Moscow Radio announced landing eight minutes after touchdown, followed with brief progress bulletins, and broadcast seven-minute film on event seven hours after lm landed on moon. Foreigners in Moscow said BBC broadcast was jammed by two stronger stations just before lunar touchdown. Pope Paul VI at Vatican watched astronauts on TV, then knelt for short prayer. He sent message to President Nixon: “Many, many congratulations to you and the American nation on yet another magnificent step for the human race.” Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, saluted “precision and accuracy” of Apollo 12 lunar landing. He said, “Until the Russians achieve a rocket with the thrust of the order of Saturn 5, or greater, it is unlikely they will be able to stage any manned flight comparable with Apollo.” London’s morning newspapers put Apollo 12 story well down on front pages in contrast to Apollo 11 banner headlines. In Helsinki, Finland, Soviet diplomats attending strategic arms limitation talks toasted Apollo 12 crew. Tokyo TV dealers expressed unhappiness because repeat of run on color sets after Apollo 11 landing failed to materialize. West German Foreign Minister Walter Scheel said Apollo 12 was an invitation to Europe to organize its own space potential. Egyptian newspapers gave Apollo 12 second billing to continuing conflict with Israel. In Poland millions watched lunar landing by direct TV transmission. In Sweden TV reception was poor and viewer interest lagged. Former Argentine President Arturo U. Illia, in Buenos Aires, called lunar landing “a victory for democracy.” Australians watched landing 10 secs before U.S. because of time lag. In France many viewers were unable to watch landing because of electric utility strikes. Moon walk was one of few programs shown on Italian TV during day of general strike. Shah of Iran sent congratulations to President Nixon and Apollo 12 crew for “untiring endeavor.” Landing was shown live on Iranian TV. West Germany’s Wickert Public Opinion Institute estimated 82% of German adults watched TV shots of lunar landing, 92% watched Apollo 11. It concluded Apollo 12 lacked suspense that attended first moon shot. (AP, B Sun, 11/20/69, Al; Robinson, NYT, 11/20/69, 30; W Post, 11/20/69, A16; Spencer, W Star, 11/21/69, A6)
In first test of nerva inflight configuration at Jackass Flats, Nev., engine was held to 1/10 maximum power development of 1,100 mw or 55,000 lbs thrust, during three 25-sec warmups. Full power tests would be held in April by Aerojet-General Corp. and Westinghouse Astronuclear Laboratory, when nerva was expected to produce electrical energy equal to one fourth that developed by Hoover Dam. Test-—to 110 mw and 5,500 lbs thrust to duplicate engine startup procedures in space and verify system performance with liquid hydrogen fuel—marked first test of rocket with nozzle down and thrust blasting into water-cooled firing pit. Engine had produced sufficient energy to boil ton of water every two seconds, (aec/nasa Release M—54; LA Times, 3/23/69)
Washington Post editorial said: “The fact that the Russians may be able to complete a floating [space] station substantially before the United States is ready to attempt it should be of no great concern. Although the psychological impact of knowing that men are up there looking down on us constantly is bound to be great, this should be more than offset by the successes of the Apollo program. The important things are for the American space effort to proceed in a logical fashion designed to reap the largest possible scientific benefits and to remain largely under civilian control.” (W Post, 1/22/69, A26)
U.S.S.R. announced it would conduct series of rocket tests in Pacific from April 17 to June 15. Aircraft and ships were asked to avoid 55-nm-dia circular area north of Midway Island with center at 35°23' north latitude and 172°24' west longitude, (upr, W News, 4/17/69, 9; SBD Space Log supplement, 4/18/69)
NASA Launch Vehicle Review Board recommended resumption of launch operations for spacecraft using Delta booster. In interim report board said recommendation was based on findings of Failure Review Board which had investigated failures of Delta 71 (July 25) and Delta 73 (Aug. 27). Delta 71, carrying Intelsat-111 F—5, had failed because of motor case rupture or nozzle failure; Delta 73, carrying Pioneer E, had failed because of vibrating relief valve which caused hydraulic oil leak. Failure Review Board suggested additional internal insulation, pressure tests, equipment x-rays, installation of specially tested and selected valves, and new acceptance tests of hydraulic system. Next mission scheduled with Delta was U.K.’s Skynet comsat Nov. 21. (nasa Release 69—152)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr with VAM—20 booster carried GSFC experiment to 101.5-mi (163-km) altitude to search for cosmic x-ray radiation near Scorpius and north pole of galaxy. Rocket and experiments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Southwest Center for Advanced Studies payload to 85.1-mi (137-km) altitude for comprehensive investigation of auroral disturbances during active auroral event. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered as planned, (nasa Rpt srl)
Leonard Mandelbaum in Science briefly examined history of U.S. decision to adopt Apollo program. “Cautious approach” to manned space flight gave way after impact of April 12, 1961, “Russian spectacular” —flight of Cosmonaut Yuri A. Gagarin—and U.S. Cuban foreign policy fiasco, Bay of Pigs. “Congress acted without hearing testimony of compelling military need. The Apollo decision was made without reference to any comprehensive and integrated national policy designed to maximize the use of scientific and technological resources for social objectives. ... It was a typical Cold War reaction.” (Science, 2/14/69, 649)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to 65.9-mi (106-km) altitude to measure density of hydroxyl radical between 43.5- and 62.1-mi (70- and 100-km) altitudes, using scanning uv monochromater. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and all experimental objectives were achieved, (nasa Rpt srl)
Controversy was building up over astronauts’ future, Apollo program, and manned space flight generally, Harry Schwartz said in New York Times. Three major debates were over whether engineer-astronauts or scientist-astronauts should be sent on future Apollo missions; who should control mission schedules and astronaut activities, “nasa hierarchy” or ground-based scientists in NASA; and whether U.S. should emphasize unmanned probes or crash program to put men on Mars in early 1980s. “The fact that it is the scientists who have been resigning while astronauts with test pilot backgrounds have been receiving unprecedented public acclaim makes it evident where the balance of power lies for the moment within nasa. But the issue is far from settled, since NASA itself must and does use the prospect of scientific advances as a key argument in seeking appropriations for space activities. Hence the dissident scientists could have substantial leverage if they teamed up with Congressmen and others who oppose the space appropriations for other reasons. It would not be surprising ... if nasa sought to ease the scientists’ irritation by satisfying some of their demands.” {NYT, 8/17/69, D2)
usaf launched unidentified satellite on Thor-Agena booster from Vandenberg afb into orbit with 155.3-mi (249.9-km) apogee, 105.6-mi (169.9-km) perigee, 88.4-min period, and 81.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Jan. 10, 1970. (gsfc SSR, 12/15/69; 1/15/70; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
Boreas (Esro IB) satellite—designed, developed, and constructed by European Space Research. Organization—was successfully launched by NASA from wtr by Scout booster. Orbital parameters: apogee, 237.4 mi (382 km); perigee, 180.8 mi (291 km); period, 91.3 min; and inclination, 85.1°. Primary NASA mission objectives were to place Boreas into planned orbit and provide tracking and telemetry support. Boreas was backup for and identical to Aurorae (Esro I A) successfully launched by NASA Oct. 3, 1968. It carried eight experiments to study aurora borealis (Northern Lights) and related phenomena of polar ionosphere, representing six organizations from U.K., Denmark, Sweden, and Norway. Boreas was third successful esro satellite launched by NASA. First success, Iris I (Esro 1IB), had been launched by NASA May 16, 1968, to replace esro iia, which had failed to enter orbit May 29, 1967. esro was responsible for experiment instrumentation, delivery of spacecraft to launch site, equipment and personnel necessary to mate spacecraft to launch vehicle, and spacecraft testing. NASA provided Scout launch vehicle and launch services in second launching on cost-reimbursable basis under Dec. 30, 1966, agreement with esro. (nasa Proj Off; GSFC SSR, 10/15/69; SBD, 10/3/69, 147)
Solid-fuel U.K. Falstaff rocket, carrying equipment to measure vibrations and temperatures, reached mach 5 after launch from Australian monorail launcher at Woomera, Australia, in joint U.K.-Australia research program. (Interavia, 11/69, 1751)
West Germany’s 157-lb Azur (crs—a) research satellite was successfully launched by NASA from wtr by four-stage Scout booster. Orbital parameters; apogee, 3,145.4 km (1,954.5 mi); perigee, 383.8 km (238,5 mi); period, 121.9 min; and inclination, 103°. Primary NASA objective was to insert spacecraft into quasi-polar orbit in which it could study Van Allen belt, Northern Hemisphere auroral zones, and spectral variation of solar particles versus time during solar flares. The 48-in-high, 30-in-dia cylindrical satellite carried seven experiments from five German research institutes to continue studies conducted by NASA Explorer and OGO satellites. Data would be available exclusively to German principal investigators for one year. Launch was first in series of cooperative missions between NASA and German Ministry for Scientific Research (bmwf) under July 1965 agreement. BMwF was responsible for design, development, fabrication, and testing of spacecraft and experiments and for ground-support equipment
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried mit payload to 97.7-mi (157.9-km) altitude to study x-ray spectrum of Crab Nebula at long wavelengths and to search for weak x-ray sources associated with supernova remnants or with galaxies outside Milky Way. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket with VAM—20 booster, successfully launched from WSMR, carried Johns Hopkins Univ. payload to 103.2-mi (166-km) altitude. Primary objective was to measure vacuum uv spectral emission lines from Venusian atmosphere. Rocket and instruments worked satisfactorily, but experiment failed to receive strap acquisition and Acs failed to receive tracker lock-on. Except for terrestrial airglow, no useful spectral information on Venus or Pro-cyon was received, (nasa Rpt SRL)
France successfully tested Diamant-B carrier rocket 1st stage (L—17) for 112 secs at Vernon, France. Test was first in series of four planned in initial phase of qualification testing. (Interavia, 11/69, 1751)
NASA launched Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Wallops Station carrying gsfc grenade experiment to collect data on atmospheric parameters. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Proj
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried Naval Research Lab. payload to 116.8-mi (187.9-km) altitude to record photographically 18 euv spectra of solar photosphere, chromosphere, and corona, using sparcs and flight-design verification unit of high-resolution spectrograph planned for ATM—A and ATM—B. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt sru)
NASA launched Nike-Cajun sounding rocket from Point Barrow, Alaska, carrying GSFC grenade experiment to collect data on atmospheric parameters. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Proj
. NASA successfully launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Point Barrow, Alaska, carrying gsfc payloads. First launch was to develop experimental techniques for determining atmospheric composition profiles in mesospheric region and to measure distribution of ozone by chemiluminescent technique and of water vapors by aluminum-oxide hygrometer in 40.4- to 12.4-mi (65- to 20-km) region. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. Second rocket was launched to obtain data on wind, temperature, pressure, and density in support of first launch by detonating grenades and recording sound arrivals. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpts srl)
Canadian Isis I (isis—a) International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies was successfully launched by NASA from wtr by three-stage Thrust-Augmented Improved Thor-Delta (DSV—3E) booster. Satellite entered orbit with 2,188.5-mi	(3,522-km) apogee, 356.7-mi (574-km) perigee, 128.3-min period, and 88.4° inclination. Primary NASA objectives were to place Isis I into elliptical earth orbit that would permit study of topside of ionosphere above electron peak of F region and to extend cooperative Canadian-U.S. program of ionospheric studies initiated by Alouette I (launched Sept. 28, 1962) by combining sounder data with correlative direct measurements for time sufficient to cover latitudinal and diurnal variations during high solar activity. Third in series of five satellites to improve understanding of ionospheric physics, Isis I weighed 520 lbs and carried six Canadian and four American experiments. First launch in series (isis x project, Nov. 28, 1965) orbited Canada’s Alouette II and U.S. Explorer XXXI. isis program was joint undertaking of NASA and Canadian Defence Research Board (drb) under December 1963 Memorandum of Understanding. drb was responsible for spacecraft design, fabrication, electrical testing, experiment integration, and satellite control. NASA provided launch vehicles, launch facilities. (NASA Proj Off; nasa Releases 69—14, 69—22)
Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), gave go-ahead to Apollo 11 lunar landing mission for launch July 16. Nine-hour flight readiness review had revealed only one major problem— in guidance system. “Although this problem is not completely resolved at this time,” Gen. Phillips said, “I am confident this will not become a constraint to the July launch.” (AP, W Star, 6/18/69, Al)
Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), addressed National Space Club luncheon in Washington, D.C., on impact of Apollo 8: “Many, if not most, of the world’s newspapers heralded the flight as evidence of the greatness of the United States. I’m told journalists in Germany, England and France speculated on the improved position that the U.S. would enjoy in the diplomatic arenas in which it is engaged in very important discussions. I’m told that a French paper went so far as to say that the lunar flight had vindicated Capitalism as the best system of government, and vindicated our free enterprise system as the most effective way to make progress. I’m aware from personal correspondence and discussions as well as reports in the press that scientists throughout the world have been equally impressed and that they’ve applauded the progress that this flight indicates for us.” Gen. Phillips described Apollo 9 mission as “far less spectacular than Apollo 8, but . . . more complex.” It would be “certainly one of the most vital missions that we’ve had in our mission sequence over the years that leads us to a lunar landing.” Risks would be different but “I personally think they’re a little greater than the risks which we knowingly accepted in committing the Apollo 8 mission.” Apollo 10 would be fifth Saturn V—505—with 106 command and service module and LM-4. Crew would be Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, John W. Young, and Eugene A. Cernan. Scheduled for May, its objectives were “to demonstrate the performance of the crew, the space vehicle, and the mission support facilities during a manned lunar mission with the Command and Service Module and Lunar Module, and to evaluate the performance of the Lunar Module in a cislunar and lunar environment.” (Text)
NASA announced appointment of Gerhard B. Heller as Director of msfc Space Sciences Laboratory, replacing Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, who had been promoted to new position of msfc Associate Director for Science. Heller had worked in rocket R&D since 1940, when he joined Wernher von Braun group in Germany. For more than 10 yrs he had directed fluid and thermodynamics research at Laboratory and its predecessors. He was responsible for thermal design aspects of several satellites, including Explorer /, first U.S. satellite, (msfc Release 69—75)
Year 1969 was one of critical decision and realignment of programs for NASA as primary goal of first decade was achieved through Apollo program. Post-Apollo planning had preceded the coming of the Nixon Administration and Apollo 11. Budget retrenchment accelerated throughout Government as cost of Vietnam war continued high and White House sought to lessen inflation by fiscal economy. Nationwide reevaluation of societal; priorities emphasized problems of pollution, poverty, and crime. Successful lunar landings of Apollo 11 and 12—seen and acclaimed worldwide—mushroomed U.S. enthusiasm for manned space achievement. NASA announced development of plans for further lunar missions and post-Apollo planetary exploration. But year was turning point, with completion of a major goal and examination of possible new goals and priorities for the next decade. Phasing down of Apollo program after climax brought shifts in program emphasis and in personnel. Most of initial Saturn V launch vehicles had been completed. Hardware requirements would decrease as missions slowed. Peak costs during 1960s had built NASA base of people, technology, and facilities as national capability to conduct space missions. Future space objectives and budget options were examined, within Government and outside, for .balance between more manned missions and more unmanned scientific exploration and applications of knowledge already gained. Criticism of past emphasis on engineering rather than on science was partly answered by decision to provide more time for scientific study and planning between the next Apollo lunar missions. Program plans included Apollo Applications, missions to Mars and Jupiter, long-range studies of Venus-Mercury mission and three-planet grand tours, development of permanent space station, joint NASA—DOD studies of space transportation system with reusable shuttle, and accelerated aeronautics activities. nasa FY 1970 appropriation of $3,697 billion was $181 million below budget proposed by outgoing President Johnson and $19 million below President Nixon’s amended request for $3,716 billion. Cutbacks in Government spending forced NASA to announce 1970 closing of Electronics Research Center and DOD to cancel Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, told ERC employees in December that agency had to “effect reductions and consolidation across the board if we are to shape our programs to meet the nation’s future needs in aeronautics and space.” Reductions in work force—largely in contractor personnel—were brought by planned phasing out of Apollo program as well as by budget cuts. Year of man’s first landing on moon, despite its global impact, ended with space goals and levels of effort for the next decade an open question. (Pres Rpt 70 [69]; A&A 69)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying Rice Univ. payload to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
At ksc briefing on NASA FY 1970 budget for community leaders, ksc Director, Dr. Kurt H. Debus, said: “It is clear that we will continue the present pace of launch operations in the Apollo program until the first lunar landing has been accomplished. . . . The continuation of space effort, however, must somehow take into account the same constraints on Government spending which now affect the entire federal budget. . . . The total ksc budget is being revised from $455 million for all purposes to $410 million. I am taking action to accomplish this reduction without crippling the essential launch team capability or drastically impacting the local economy.” Savings would be effected by: gradual cutback in efforts of contractors supporting design engineering; phasing down of Boeing technical integration effort; deceleration of Apollo/Saturn V launch rate to three manned vehicles annually, reducing employment; and greater use of five-day week and two-shift schedule, permitting stabilization of employment level at 18,500 by June 30, 1970, instead of current 23,500. ksc strength would remain at 80% of current level, with reduction in support and stage contractors. Civil service cadre would drop from 2,920 to 2,880 by June 30, 1970. Employment already had been frozen at current level. Saturn IB Apollo Applications missions would require increased employment at Launch Complexes 34 and 37 in 1971, with estimated increase in contract jobs of 2,600 to handle nearly simultaneous or dual launches, ksc also would participate in earth orbital space station studies. (Transcript)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station carrying Dudley Observatory payload to collect micrometeoroids. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
President Nixon submitted to Congress FY 1970 budget amendments [see April 12]. White House, DOD, and NASA released details. NASA funds were reduced $45 million from $3.878-billion Johnson proposal to $3,833 billion (recommended $3,716 in new obligational authority plus $117 million carried over from prior years). Apollo Applications program would be cut by $57 million but new obligational authority of $46 million for resumption of Saturn V rocket production and $40 million for lunar exploration would be added, for net increase of $29 million in manned space flight funds. Space science and applications would be cut by $41 million, to $517.8-million new total. Advanced research and technology would be cut $13 million, to total $277.4 million; and tracking and data acquisition, $20 million, to total $278 million. University affairs funding would remain at $9 million, technology utilization at $5 million, and NERVA funding under nuclear rocket program at $36.5 million. Funds proposed for construction of facilities and for research and program management remained unchanged. At NASA budget briefing, NASA Administrator Dr. Thomas O. Paine said: “The reductions we have been required to make will make necessary difficult program adjustments and will result in reduced accomplishments in many areas. However ... in a context clearly requiring that Government spending be held to a minimum, the Administration has recognized the importance to the United States of a strong and continuing program in space and aeronautics. . . . Last January, I characterized President Johnson’s FY 1970 Budget as a ‘holding’ Budget . . . deferring to President Nixon’s Administration the decisions the nation faces on the future of manned flight programs.” President Nixon’s recommendations, “if approved by the Congress, will ensure that the nation can continue a scientifically effective program of manned lunar exploration and avoid foreclosing our ability to continue large-scale space operations in the future by allowing the capability to produce Saturn V launch vehicles ... to lapse beyond the point where it can economically be resumed.” dod spending was reduced $1.1 billion and requested new obliga-tional authority, $3.1 billion, including $51 million from MOL. Other science budget cuts: aec funding, $78.6 million; agricultural and natural resources conservation, $345 million; hew university facilities, $107 million; and nih, $47.4 million, nsf budget remained at $495 million. Nixon budget made available $92.7-million carry-over for SST r&d but no funds for prototype construction. Overall reduction in space and atomic energy funding was $140 million. (PD, 3/21/69, 561—3; nasa Budget Briefing Transcript; dod Transript; W Post, 4/15— 16/69; NYT, 4/16/69; Science, 4/25/69)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, second in series of four [see Jan. 17] in NASA—SSRC—SRC cooperative program, was successfully launched from Kiruna, Sweden, to study sudden upper-atmosphere warming conditions by detonating grenades between 24.9- and 55.9-mi (40- and 90-km) altitudes. Vehicle underperformed but satisfactory scientific data were expected, (nasa Release, 69—16; NASA Rpt srl)
February 5: dod launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena booster. One entered orbit with 171.0-mi (275-km) apogee, 91.7-mi (147.6-km) perigee, 88.7-min period, and 81.6° inclination and reentered Feb. 24. Second satellite entered orbit with 894.9-mi (1,439.9-km) apogee, 866.4-mi (1,394.0-km) perigee, 114.1-min period, and 80.4° inclination. (Pres Rpt 70 [69])
DOD reported Soviet SS—9 missile had been test-fired with multiple reentry vehicles for first time over U.S.S.R.’s Pacific testing area at 5,000-mi range. Missile, of which U.S.S.R. had deployed 200, was capable of carrying warhead of up to 25 mt or three warheads of 5 mt and was only Soviet missile credited with hard-site destruction capability. Portions of its booster had been used in testing FOBS, (dod Release 310—69; Homan, W Post, 4/23/69, A26) D.C. William L. Sjogren, Paul M. Muller, and Dr. Peter Gottlieb reported discovery that brought to 12 total mascons mapped on moon’s near face and leading and trailing edges and that were expected to refine gravity model used in Apollo navigation. Dr. Gottlieb said latest gravity model produced significant agreement with analysis of tracking information from Apollo 8 mission Dec. 21— 27, 1968. JPL researchers were working with MSFC to predict accurately landing sites several orbits before spacecraft landing. Most data available had been taken from spacecraft in lunar orbit of about 60 mi. JPL team expected new and possibly higher resolution data from Apollo 10 when lunar module orbited at lower altitude, (jpl Release 514; NASA Release 69—61)
NASA’s 148-lb drum-shaped Pioneer E failed on 5:29 pm edt launch from etr by Thrust-Augmented Improved Thor-Delta (DSV— 3L) booster. Satellite had been intended for solar orbit to collect scientific data on electromagnetic and plasma properties of interplanetary medium near earth’s orbital path during six or more passages of solar activity centers. Jettison of three strap-on solid-propellant rockets, lst-stage Thor engine cutoff, and 2nd-stage ignition occurred as planned but vehicle began gyrating, veered off course, and was destroyed by Range Safety Officer at 8 min 2 secs get. Pioneer E and tetr c test and training satellite, carried as secondary payload to test Apollo communications network, splashed into Atlantic about 300 mi southeast of Barbados. Preliminary analysis of data indicated loss of hydraulic pressure during lst-stage burn had permitted engine nozzle to develop uncontrolled gim-baling and vehicle gyrations. Investigation would be conducted to determine exact cause and action to prevent recurrence. Pioneer E was last in series of five spacecraft designed to provide continuing measurements over the solar cycle at widely separated points in interplanetary space. Pioneer VI (launched Dec. 16, 1965), Pioneer VII (launched Aug. 17, 1966), Pioneer VIII (launched Dec. 16, 1967), and Pioneer IX (launched Nov. 8, 1968) had received 25,000	commands from ground and were still producing useful data from widely scattered positions in heliocentric orbits. Most recent Pioneer missions had provided new information on functions of magnetosphere, additional data on finding that diffuse solar plasma regions appeared to have attraction of their own, measurements of cosmic dust populations, data on changes in electrical and magnetic characteristics of solar corona, and targets for precision radar tracking which led to establishment of reliable value for earth-moon-mass ratio and sun-earth-mass ratio. Pioneer program was managed by arc under OSSA direction. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69—116; SBD, 8/29/69, 213)
Atomic scientist Dr. Edward Teller thought nuclear explosion on moon would be scientifically useful, Associated Press reported after New York interview. Vibrations would be source of seismographic measurement for study of moon’s interior. “The best information on earth” came from nuclear explosions, “because the energy-generating event is confined very sharply both in space and in time.” Factors making moon extremely inhospitable to life—absence of air and water—were highly desirable to researchers, since “change that has taken place billions and billions of years ago is still visible today.” Dr. Teller also favored development on moon of research station powered by nuclear reactor that heated lunar rocks to high temperature and liberated oxygen for breathing purposes. There was probability rocks also contained water, which reactor could reduce to hydrogen and oxygen for making rocket fuel to power short-range rocket trips on moon and soft-landing interplanetary spacecraft. Moon’s environment might lead to advances in low-temperature physics and surface chemistry in electronics, which could result in development on earth of smaller, more efficient, and more sophisticated electronic equipment, particularly for information-storing and information-reordering. (Nicholson, AP, W Star, 6/1/69, Al)
Apollo 11 booster, spacecraft, and Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., completed final countdown rehearsal test. Astronauts achieved simulated liftoff at 9:32 am edt—exact time of scheduled July 16 launch. Final countdown for manned lunar landing mission would begin July 10. (AP, B Sun, 7/4/69, A10)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from NASA Wallops Station carried Univ. of Illinois and GCA Corp. payload to 130.5-mi (210-km) altitude to measure electron density, collision frequency, and temperature in lower ionosphere at vernal equinox during sunspot maximum. Rocket and dual-frequency propagation experiment for air-glow photometer performed satisfactorily. Langmuir-Smith probe and UV experiment produced no data and payload did not come out of calibration until near impact, (nasa Rpt srl)
Washington Sunday Star editorial said: “Apollo 11 has cast a harsh light on life on earth, showing man’s failures in sharp contrast to his breathtaking technical achievements. It is a vision that should ... be exploited as an incentive to get the vitally needed jobs done on earth.” But, the U.S. could not withdraw from space. “The complete Apollo program . . . should be funded. Beyond that, serious consideration should be given to the establishment of permanent manned stations on the moon so that we may truly explore and perhaps exploit the new world that we have already conquered. The manned orbiting station that NASA has proposed should be provided to test the ability of men to live and work for long periods in weightlessness. And far more emphasis should be placed . . . on unmanned probes of the planets.” Minimum requirement should be enough momentum in program to prevent it from falling apart through disuse. Every effort should be made “to enlist the cooperation, the technical help, and the financial support of any nation that is willing to contribute to the adventure that must, finally, be seen as the collective achievement of all mankind.” (W Star, 7/27/69, El)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Point Barrow, Alaska, carrying gsfc experiment to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating grenades at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. Rocket, last in series of four launched during period of atmospheric warming [see Jan. 30], performed satisfactorily. All 19 grenades ejected and detonated as planned and sound arrivals were recorded, (nasa Rpt srl)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena booster into orbit with 279.6-mi (449.9-km) apogee, 96.3-mi (155.0-km) perigee, 90.2-min period, and 92.0° inclination. Satellite reentered March 18. (gsfc SSR, 3/15/69; 3/31/69; SBD, 3/7/69, 30; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
Washington Post published results of July 30—Aug. 4 Harris survey of 1,577 U.S. households to determine attitude toward spending $4 billion annually for decade to explore moon and other planets. While 53% of those polled approved funding for lunar landing, narrow plurality of 47% was opposed to further $4 billion annually; 44% favored. Persons under 30 favored extension of space program 60% to 34% but those over 50 opposed it 59% to 30%. Black citizens were opposed 68% to 19%. ( W Post, 8/25/69) Among 400 scientists from 19 countries attending meeting were NASA Apollo Applications Program Director William C. Schneider; Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Director of Flight Operations, and M. P. Frank from msc; Herbert A. Wilson, Jr., Chief of Applied Materials Div., from LaRC; ogo Project Manager Wilfred E. Scull from GSFC; Dr. Thomas Vrebalovich. from JPL; and Leon C. Hamiter, Jr., msfc engineer. Hamiter presented paper on increased computer capacity and lighter weight flight hardware. Prof. Masahiko Kido of Japan’s Ehime Univ. said legal status should be developed for moon before disputes arose over lunar real estate. Other participants urged steps to outlaw military use of moon. Dr. Werner J. Kleen, Director of European Space Research and Technology Center, said ESRO had been given permission to put comsat into orbit and would start work in autumn. Japan announced its space development corporation would begin operations Oct. 1 and would launch MS—4 three-stage rocket in early 1970, followed by comsat launch. (Shabecoff, NYT, 8/26/69, 11; msfc Release 69—181; nasa Int Aff)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb by Thorad-Agena booster. First entered orbit with 157.2-mi (252.9-km) apogee, 110.0-mi (177-km) perigee 88.7-min, period, and 85.0° inclination and reentered Oct. 12. Second entered orbit with 308.2-mi (495.9-km) apogee, 305.1-mi (490.9-km) perigee, 94.4min period, and 85.1° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/69; 10/15/69; upi, W Post, 9/23/69, A20; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
dod announced Martin Marietta Corp. would receive $2,313,740 supplemental agreement to previously awarded usaf contract for design, development, fabrication, and delivery of Titan III booster. Contract would be managed by Space and Missile Systems Organization, (dod Release 1003—69)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena booster. Satellite entered orbit with 234.3-mi (377.0-km) apogee, 85.8-mi (138.1-km) perigee, 89.6-min period, and 108.1° inclination and reentered Sept. 7. (gsfc SSR, 8/31/69; 9/15/69; SBD, 8/26/69, 190)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR with VAM—20 booster carried mit payload to 97.9-mi (157.5-km) altitude to determine precise position of two or more x-ray sources and evaluate small photoelectric detector. Rocket and instruments—including several bands of proportional counters, slot collimators, modulation collimators, aspect cameras, and attitude control system-—functioned satisfactorily. All collimators gave expected rates and modulation on star X—1 in constellation Scorpius (calibration) and on Sagittarius. (NASA Rpt srl)
San Francisco Board of Supervisors had voted to negotiate with Texas millionaire Lamar Hunt on lease of 22-acre Alcatraz Island, United Press International reported. Hunt planned underground museum in tribute to Apollo 11, while restoring island’s historic buildings. (W Star, 10/20/69, B4) weather satellite itos that would be launched in prototype by NASA later in 1969 and in operational form by ESSA in early 1970. “It combines in one spacecraft both the stored-data and direct readout cameras of the present two-satellite [tiros] arrangement. Fewer launches will be required to keep the system in operation. The design allows for growth and the capacity to accommodate a variety of instruments to meet new and developing needs.” System would contain high-resolution infrared radiometer for “nighttime observations approaching daytime pictures in resolution and quality” thus providing 24-hr weather satellite coverage. “This step will enable us to meet fully the first national program objective—providing twice-daily observations of the entire earth, both by stored and direct readout systems, day and night.” (Text) Fifty years of transatlantic flight—from usn NC—4 flying boat’s Lisbon arrival May 27, 1919, to June 3, 1969, maiden Atlantic crossing of Boeing 747—was traced in paper by Dr. Richard K. Smith, Ramsey Fellow at Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. During “the Heroic Years on the North Atlantic between 27 May 1919 and 27 May 1939, there were 175 flights across the Atlantic; 142 were by airplanes, 33 by airships. ... It is confidently believed that all the persons who flew the Atlantic by airplane during that period could be accommodated aboard a 747, perhaps with some seats to spare. However, at least three more 747s would be required to lift those persons who flew by airship during 1919—1937!” (Text) msc Flight Operations Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., said Apollo program might be extended to 1973 to allow NASA to fly three space station training missions in 1972. “It’s going to be some time before we settle it. But it’s going to be difficult to handle both Apollo and Apollo Applications from an operational point of view as well as a people point of view in 1972.” Revised launch schedule set Apollo 19 landing back to November 1972 and Apollo 20 to May 1973. Between Apollo 18 launch Feb. 11, 1972, and Apollo 19 were three orbital flights preparatory for establishment of first U.S. permanent space station in 1975. These flights could come just after Apollo 18, in May 1972 and in September 1972. Further reason for Apollo landings delay was possibility they would be made in remote lunar areas like crater Tycho, almost 1,000 mi below moon’s equator and rated among top-priority landing sites. (O’Toole, W Post, 10/23/69, A21) Dr. Arthur D. Code, Univ. of Wisconsin astronomer, reported discovery that relatively young stars in constellations Orion and Scorpius were generating heats of 45,000°F—5,000° hotter than had been thought. Finding, from data obtained by NASA’s Oao II satellite (launched Dec. 7, 1968), suggested young stars might be more massive and maturing faster than originally believed and supported theories of thermonuclear processes in stars’ interiors that generated such heats. Oao II data also showed younger stars had more complex chemical composition than stars formed near universe’s beginning. They contained fairly large amounts of carbon, silicon, magnesium, and heavier elements, as well as predominant hydrogen and helium. Other Oao II data indicated particles in interstellar space were variety of complex matter, much of which might be debris ejected from stars. (Wilford, NYT, 10/21/69, C19) msc Director of Engineering Development Maxime A. Faget outlined concept of space vehicle with two reusable stages—booster rocket and orbiter craft—both with fixed wings, long fuselages, and rear rocket engines. Vehicle would be 225 ft high and weigh 2.5 million lbs at launch. Orbiter vehicle, capable of carrying 25,000 lbs of cargo and passengers, would be attached pickaback to booster stage’s upper half. Booster, burning liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen, would elevate orbiter to fringe of space, separate, drop away, and cruise to landing like jet airliner. Booster probably would be piloted by two astronauts. Orbiter would ignite rocket engine to continue upward to space station orbiting at 300-mi altitude. After link-up with space station, transfer of cargo or 12 passengers, and pickup of new load, orbiter would be steered by pilot into atmosphere and controlled glide to landing on 10,000-ft runways used by aircraft. Key to reentry would be orbiter’s “angle of attack” when hitting atmosphere. Faget proposed 60° angle with nose up, so flattened bottom would catch airflow to slow descent. Small jet engines would be fired to help control final descent phases of both orbiter and booster. Outer surface of vehicles would be made of metal alloys that could sustain temperatures to 2,700°F. (Wilford, NYT, 10/24/69, 43) Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, discussed dod space activities: “In communications, meteorology and surveillance . . . we are actively pursuing increased capability. . . . Tactical communications using satellite relays are presently being intensely tested and show great promise in improving control of field units and increasing . . . cooperation between land, sea and air forces. In surveillance, our efforts have produced results. Of first importance is a new satellite early warning system that will do a great deal to further insure our ability to deter nuclear attack.” Savings in space travel costs “must be linked to the recovery and reuse of space vehicles. . . . Since major improvement in our ability to use space environment would be of direct assistance to both NASA and the military, we are jointly planning our research and development towards this objective.” (Text) Major aiaa awards presented included Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award to George M. Low, former Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, currently on special assignment to msc Director, for “his leadership role in bringing the Apollo Program to fulfillment, and to the thousands of engineers who dedicated their careers, without public recognition, to the conquest of space.” Daniel Guggenheim Medal for 1969 was presented to retired arc Director H. Julian Allen for “personal contributions to outstanding research and development leading to vastly improved re-entry bodies, missiles, satellites, and spacecraft, and for leadership in directing and inspiring a large group of research men at Ames Laboratory.” Lawrence Sperry Award was given Edgar C. Lineberry, Jr., Chief of Orbital Mission Analysis Branch, msc, for “significant advancement in the field of rendezvous mechanics through his development of the space maneuver logic and associated control techniques, and his formulation of the mission plans which contributed decisively to the success of all rendezvous operations conducted during United States manned space flights.” De Florez Training Award was given to Gifford Bull, Principal Engineer and Engineering Pilot at Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, for “establishing the use of variable stability airplanes as flight dynamics training vehicles for engineering test pilots.” New aiaa Award for Spacecraft Design was awarded Otto E. Bartoe, Jr., Vice President, Aerospace Div., Ball Brothers Research Corp., for “concept and preliminary design of the Orbiting Solar Observatory spacecraft configuration and control systems, the first embodiment of the spin-despin design.” Aerospace Communications Award was awarded Dr. Eberhardt Rechtin, Director of DOD Advanced Research Projects Agency and former JPL Assistant Director for Tracking and Data Acquisition, for “development of phase lock systems for space communications, guidance and control, and for contributions to the design, development and operation of NASA’s Deep Space Network.” (msc Release; aiaa Releases; aiaa Booster, 10/20/69) Honored as new Honorary Fellows at Honors and Award Banquet Oct. 23 were Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force and former NASA Deputy Administrator; German rocket pioneer Hermann Oberth; and Northrop Corp. founder John K. Northrop. Among 29 new Fellows were: Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman, Deputy Director, Flight Crew Operations Directorate, msc; former gsfc Director, Dr. Harry J. Goett, Chief Engineer, Space and Re-Entry Systems Div., Philco-Ford Corp.; Najeeb E. Halaby, President, Pan American World Airways, Inc.; Samuel L. Higginbottom, Vice President, Operations Group, Eastern Airlines, Inc.; l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Commander of usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) and former NASA Apollo Program Director; John G. Borger, Chief Engineer, Pan American World Airways, Inc.; Walter Haeussermann, Director, Astrionics Laboratory, MSFC; Dr. John C. Houbolt, Vice President and Senior Consultant, Aeronautical Research Associates of Princeton, (aiaa Release) During third aiaa President’s Forum, Under Secretary of Interior Russell E. Train said, “Photographs of Earth, taken by our astronauts from the vicinity of the Moon, bring home more forcefully than the words of all scientists of all times the fact that we live on a finite planet with finite but poorly known resources.” (A&A, 2/70) October 21: U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos CCCIV into orbit with 760-km (472.2-mi) apogee, 742-km (461.1-mi) perigee, 99.8-min period, and 74.0° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 10/31/69)
Aerobee 150 Mr sounding rocket was launched by nasa from wsmr with VAM—20 booster to 111.2-mi (179-km) altitude. Objectives were to obtain stellar spectra with 1 A resolution in 1,000—1,600 A far uv wavelength range and to obtain photometric data on stellar fluxes in 1,050—1,180 A, 1,230—1,350 A, and 1,350—1,470 A wavelength ranges. All experimental objectives were achieved and payload was recovered promptly, (nasa Rpt srl)
LeRC announced award of $2.5-million letter contract to United Aircraft Corp.’s Pratt & Whitney Div. to build and test 18 RL-10 A3—3 rocket engines. Engine, developed in 1958 and first liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen engine to be flown in space, would be used on Centaur high-energy upper-stage rockets in early 1970s. (LeRC Release 69-68)
Harry F. Guggenheim said in Washington Evening Star article that rocket expert Dr. Robert H. Goddard “was to the moon rocket what the Wright brothers were to the airplane.” Guggenheim, administrator of Daniel Guggenheim Fund for the Promotion of Aeronautics during period it helped support Dr. Goddard’s research, traced career of “Father of modern rocketry” from early experiments in 1908. Among Goddard’s inventions were: first liquid-fuel rocket, first smokeless powder rocket, and first practical automatic steering device for rockets. It was no wonder American Rocket Society had conceded to Goddard “the almost single-handed development of rocketry ‘from a vague dream to one of the most significant branches of modern engineering.’ ” He had left “testimony to the power of one solitary individual to effect change and to transform the future.” While Dr. Goddard had died without fame which had accrued to Wright brothers in their lifetime, “he died still believing that man would one day shatter the fetters of Earth’s gravity and stride majestically into the vast reaches of space. I wish he were here now to share this moment. It belongs to him.” (AP, W Star, 7/16/69, A15)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by nasa from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Swedish Space Research Committee (ssrc) and British Science Research Council (src) payload to 72.1-mi (116-km) altitude. Launch, third in series of four [see Jan. 19], was made to obtain data on atmospheric parameters of wind, temperature, pressure, and density during atmospheric warming by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; 17 of 25 grenades detonated and were recorded, (nasa Rpt srl)
Canadian Black Brant IIIB sounding rocket was launched by NASA from NASA Wallops Station to 133.6-mi (215-km) altitude. Primary objective was to evaluate improved Black Brant IIIB single-stage rocket, using flight-performance instrumentation. Flight, second of two (first was Feb. 28), was successful and sounding rocket was recommended for consideration as operational vehicle in NASA sounding rocket program, (nasa Rpt SRL; NASA Release 69-9)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena booster. One entered orbit with 156.6-mi (252.0-km) apogee, 102.5-mi (164.9-km) perigee, 86.6-min period, and 82.9° inclination and reentered March 24. Second entered orbit with 318.8mi (513.0-km) apogee, 312.8-mi (503.3-km) perigee, 94.7-min period, and 83.0° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 3/31/69; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
NASA’s Nimbus 111 (Nimbus-B2) meteorological satellite was successfully launched from WTR by Long-Tank, Thrust-Augmented Thor (Thorad)-Agena D booster after three-day postponement because of fuel leak. Satellite entered orbit with 703-mi (1,131.1-km) apogee, 662.2-mi (1,065.5-km) perigee, 107.3-min period, and 80.1° inclination. Nimbus 111 carried usa’s Egrs XIII (also called Secor XIII) Sequential Collation of Range satellite as secondary payload on Agena 2nd stage and injected it into orbit with 704-mi (1,132.7-km) apogee, 667-mi (1,073.2-km) perigee, 107.3-min period, and 99.9° inclination. Primary objectives were to inject Nimbus 111 into orbit and demonstrate satisfactory operation of active, three-axis, earth-oriented spacecraft for at least three months and to acquire representative global samples of infrared spectra for vertical temperature profiles of atmosphere. As secondary objectives spacecraft would make global maps of radiative energy balance of earth atmosphere and cloud cover over at least one seasonal cycle; demonstrate feasibility of surface pressure and tropospheric wind measurements by infrared interferometer spectrometer system and temperature profile determination by infrared spectrometry; make global maps of earth and day-and-night cloud cover for three months from image-dissector camera system and high-resolution infrared radiometer; and demonstrate SNAP—19 system as auxiliary power system for three months. Spacecraft carried seven meteorological experiments—most ever carried on U.S. meteorological satellite—and was first capable of measuring emitted infrared energy that would permit inference of atmospheric profile on global basis. Interrogation, recording, and location system (1RLS) would pinpoint position of special electronic platforms on fixed land sites and moving objects such as buoys, balloons, aircraft, and elk in Yellowstone National Park. Butterfly-shaped 1,269-lb Nimbus III was fourth in series of seven spacecraft designed to develop significantly improved meteorological satellite, prove applicability of instrumentation, and fulfill special data requirements of atmospheric sciences research community. It was replacement for Nimbus B, which failed to enter orbit May 18, 1968, when launch vehicle malfunctioned. Nimbus I (launched Aug. 28, 1964) had operated for one month before solar-array drive system malfunctioned. Nimbus II (launched May 15, 1966) had exceeded six-month lifetime, operating successfully until Jan. 18, 1969. Nimbus program was managed by gsfc under ossa direction, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 69—50)
NASA and AEC announced successful completion of NERVA nuclear experimental rocket engine (XE) testing in Jackass Flats, Nev. Tests, from March through August, had included 28 successful engine startups and 3 hrs 48 min cumulative operating time, with 3.5 min at full power (55,000-lb thrust). XE program had explored wide variety of operating modes and pressure and temperature conditions, demonstrated automatic startups using bootstrap techniques, demonstrated stability of nuclear rocket engine performance, and validated design and operation of engine test stand No. 1. XE engine runs concluded series of successful technology tests over several years. Design and development of flight-rated 75,000-lb-thrust nerva rocket was being initiated on basis of information produced. Nuclear rocket program was managed by AEC—NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, (nasa Release 69—134; AEC—NASA Release M-216)
Plans for launch of first of two Jupiter probes from ksc between Feb. 26 and March 15, 1972, were outlined by Charles F. Hall, manager of Pioneer F and G projects at arc, during meeting of scientists, engineers, and contractors at Mountain View, Calif. Launched by Atlas-Centaur booster, Pioneer F would take 610—770 days to reach Jupiter on voyage through planet’s heavy radiation belt to within 90,000 mi of Jupiter surface. It would carry 60 lbs of instruments and photographic equipment to conduct 13 experiments to measure solar wind and space dust and analyze Jupiter’s radiation and atmosphere. Probe would be first to travel to asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter and eventually would leave solar system. Pioneer G Jupiter probe would be launched in early 1973. (upi, P Bull, 11/5/69)
European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) attempt to place Italian eldo F—8 spacecraft into polar orbit from Woomera Rocket Range failed when West German 3rd stage of Europa booster malfunctioned. U.K. 1st stage and French 2nd stage performed satisfactorily. (SBD, 7/16/69, 14; AP, W Star, 7/3/69, A3; nasa Int Aff)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena booster into orbit with 333.1-mi (536-km) apogee, 288.9-mi (464.8-km) perigee, 94.6-min period, and 75.0° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 7/31/69; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried gsfc and Dudley Observatory payload to 98.2-mi (158.0-km) altitude to provide background particle collection for comparison with data from Nike-Apache launched Aug. 13 during Perseid meteor shower. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Data were expected from all experiments, (nasa Rpt srl)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew said at press conference following tour of October I: nasa launched Boreas, European Space Research Organization satellite, to study the aurora borealis and polar atmosphere. In the photo the spacecraft teas prepared for launch on a four-stage Scout booster from the Western Test Range. jpl:	, the cities may benefit more from what’s happening right here at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory than they do from what’s happening in some community action agency. Now, I’m not downgrading the need to work closely with people . . . but I think it would be a desperate mistake ... to adopt an attitude that we do not challenge the unknown, we do not move forward simply because we can’t predict what we’re going to find.” Columbus “didn’t find what he went for but he found something even better. Maybe that applies to the situation with regard to the ultimate goal . . . about landing a man on Mars. . . . we may do something a lot better.” In reply to question, he said: “We will never reach a point where we’ll have enough money for . . . the problems of the cities and of the population. . . . we could spend every resource we have and forego any scientific exploration and forget the need to research and develop new techniques. ... I suppose you come down to the final determination that you’ve got to put some of your effort in the future and not all of it in the present. And I don’t think the lack of a focus in the space program would be a benefit at all to the future of the cities and the problems you mention.” (Transcript)
At msfc ceremony, NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, presented awards to 117 center employees and industry representatives, mostly in recognition of exceptional service to Apollo program. Employee awards included NASA Medal for Distinguished Service to msfc Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun; Deputy Director, Technical, Eberhard F. M. Rees; Deputy Director, Management, Harry H. Gorman; Director of Science and Engineering Hermann K. Weidner; Vice Commander, Aeronautical Systems Div., m/g Edmund F. O’Connor (usaf) ; Director of Program Management Lee B. James; and Deputy Director of Science and ^Engineering Ludie G. Richard. NASA Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement was presented to James A. Downey, III; Erwin Fehlberg; Gerhard B. Heller; Robert J.	Nauman; and Joseph L. Randall. Other awards received were NASA Medal for Exceptional Service by NASA employees and NASA Certificate for Distinguished Public Service by industry personnel, (msfc Release 69—222)
Space Power Facility, with world’s largest high-vacuum chamber (100-ft dia by 120-ft height, containing 800,000 cu ft), and Spacecraft Propulsion Research Facility were opened officially at LeRC. Space Power Facility—to test large, space electric power generating systems and spacecraft—would first test Brayton cycle power system operated with nuclear isotope or solar heat. Facility could produce equivalent of vacuum in space 100 to 300 mi above earth. Propulsion Research Facility would be used first for development of Centaur, 2nd-stage rocket vehicle. (LeRC Release 69-54)
NASA Wallops Station recovered parachute and payload launched on two-stage Sidewinder-Areas meteorological sounding rocket. Recovery—by fixed-wing Cessna 206 aircraft—was third success to date. Flight investigated performance of Sidewinder-Areas rocket system and demonstrated deployment of 16-ft-dia, disc-gap-band parachute at high altitude. Wallops scored first aerial recovery Nov. 9, 1966, when payload launched on Argentina Orion II sounding rocket was snatched by helicopter. (WS Release 69—7)
In New York Times, Theodere Shabad said Moscow sources indicated Soviet investigators had ruled out possibility of political conspiracy in Jan. 22 shooting during Kremlin ceremonies for Soyuz cosmonauts because of amateurish behavior of gunman identified as “Lt. Ilyin” of Soviet Army. Sources denied earlier reports that gunman had taken poison after shooting and was dead. They said he was undergoing medical and psychological testing to determine his sanity and motives. {NYT, 2/5/69, 2) ComSatCorp on behalf of International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium. The 632-lb cylindrical satellite, launched from etr by Long-Tank Thrust-Augmented Thor (lttat)-Delta	(DSV—3M) booster, entered elliptical transfer orbit with 23,496.9mi	(37,814.6-km) apogee, 157.3-mi (253.1-km) perigee, 671.9-min period, and 29.8° inclination. All systems were functioning normally. On Feb. 7 apogee motor was fired to kick satellite into planned near-synchronous orbit over Pacific at 173.8° east longitude with 22,000-mi (35,719.8-km) apogee, 22,190-mi (35,703.7-km) perigee, 23-hr 56min period, and 1.3° inclination. Intelsat-111 F—3 was second successful launch in Intelsat III series. Intelsat-III F—2 had been launched Dec. 18, 1968, as backup to Intelsat-III F-l, which had been destroyed minutes after launch Sept. 18, 1968. Satellite began commercial service Feb. 16, handling up to 1,200 voice circuits or 4 TV channels, (nasa Proj Off; ComSatCorp Releases 69—7, 69—27; AP, B Sun, 2/6/69, A3; Pres Rpt. 70 [69]; ComSatCorp pio)
William R. Frye described magnificence of Apollo 10 liftoff in Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “TV cameras do not do it justice. It is like 100 claps of thunder, each following the other with machine-gun speed. “The flame that leaps from behind the rocket could have come straight from Dante’s inferno. It is too bright to be seen with comfort by the naked eye. The earth trembles beneath the feet, two miles away. Then the towering rocket, nearly twice as high as Niagara Falls, twothirds the height of the Washington Monument, creeps with agonizing slowness the first few feet off the ground, enveloped by a white cloud. “Then it is gone—and man is left to wonder and to pray.” (P Bull, 5/19/69)
Bright red lights, believed by observers to be meteors, flashed across California, Nevada, and Arizona at 8:50 pm pdt. North American Air Defense Command (norad) later identified lights as parts of Soviet booster burning during reentry. Booster had launched Cosmos CCXCIV Aug. 19. (AP, W Star, 8/27/69, A5; later ed, A13)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from Natal, Brazil, with VAM—20 booster carried Univ. of California at Berkeley payload to 102.3-mi (164.6-km) altitude. Objective was to search sky for diffuse and point x-ray sources in %- to 10-kev range and for possible existence of soft x-ray galactic corona and x-ray emission from Magel-lenic clouds. Rocket—first live Aerobee 150 launched from rail launcher—functioned satisfactorily. One source counter failed after one-third of flight; other counter operated perfectly, but door failed to open. Objective was not achieved, but some data on x-ray sources were obtained. (NASA Rpt SRL)
April 12—14: NASA successfully launched series of three Nike-Apache sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc payloads to study energy spectra and relative abundances of various charge species of solar cosmic radiation during period of solar maximum. Each rocket carried three nuclear emulsion stocks and solid-state detector sensitive to protons above 30 mev. Rockets reached 98.4-mi (158.4-km), 96.4-mi (155.2-km), and 100.0-mi (161.0-km) altitudes and instruments performed satisfactorily. Payloads were recovered in good condition, (nasa Rpts SRL)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range carrying Southwest Center for Advanced Studies payload to investigate auroral disturbances. Mission was unsuccessful, (nasa Proj Off)
U.K.’s three-stage Black Arrow booster exploded 50 secs after launch from Woomera Rocket Range during first full-scale test, (upi, W Star, 6/28/69, A3)
Four-stage Pacemaker rocket launched from NASA Wallops Station carried 58-lb instrumented payload to 65,000-ft altitude and reentered atmosphere at 7,000 mph. Primary objective was to evaluate performance of carbon phenolic, synthetic resin, as ablative material. Secondary objective was to evaluate performance of low-density ablative materials—pyronne foam, polymer blend, and phenolic nylon—for possible use on manned lifting-body reentry vehicles. (WS Release 69—12; WS Pio)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (terls) carrying Indian-Japa-nese payload for x-ray astronomy studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 80.4-mi (129.4-km) altitude to provide data on wind, temperature, pressure, and density in 21.8- to 59.0-mi (35-to 95-km) range during atmospheric warming. All 19 grenades ejected and exploded as programmed and sound arrivals were recorded on ground. Mission was launched in conjunction with Nike-Cajun launch from Arenosillo, Spain, (nasa Rpt srl)
Apollo 9 commander James A. McDivitt was appointed Manager of Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, replacing George M. Low, who was temporarily on special assignment to msc Director to plan future msc programs and work on organizational matters, (msc Release 69-66) *	East Germany’s People’s Chamber unanimously ratified nuclear nonproliferation treaty. West Germany had not yet signed. (P Inq, 9/25/69) *	House Committee on Science and Astronautics reported favorably S. 1287, which authorized appropriations for FYs 1970, 1971, and 1972 for metric system study. (CR, 9/25/69, H8488) Lee B. James, Director of Program Management at msfc, said next moon flights could suffer from lack of proper employee motivation. “We are completing [rocket] stages with welders who know they are going to be laid off.” Sheet metal workers in plants with termination papers were working on vital space hardware. Twenty defects attributed to human error had been uncovered in single rocket. Apollo Program Director Rocco Petrone said future moon landings would be even more demanding than first, with astronauts spending 54 hrs on moon during some. To make missions successful, workers must be motivated to pay greatest attention to detail. Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, said NASA hoped to cut payload launch costs to $200 per pound and reduce number of workers on Saturn V launches from 20,000	to about number required to get Boeing 747 off ground, (msc Release 69—65; Maloney, H Post, 9/26/69)	•	v
Rep. Edgar F. Foreman (R-N. Mex.) introduced H.C.R. 464 for Congressional recognition of Goddard Rocket and Space Museum, Roswell, N. Mex., as memorial to Dr. Robert H. Goddard, “who pioneered in rocket experimentation and contributed to America’s success in landing men on die moon.” (CR, 12/8/69, H11865)
NASA successfully deployed and recovered 40-ft-dia parachute in final Project SHAPE (Supersonic High Altitude Parachute Experiment) test to evaluate possible use of parachute for aerodynamic deceleration for soft landings on planets with thin atmospheres. Parachute was ejected from five-foot-long canister carried to 33-mi altitude and 1,800 mph (mach 2.7) by three-stage rocket. Previous tests had been conducted Oct. 23 and Dec. 11, 1968. (nasa Release 69—95)
President Nixon signed H.R. 11271 (P.L. 91—119), $3.715-billion NASA FY 1970 Authorization Act. It provided for R&D: Apollo, $1,691 billion; space flight operations, $225.6 million; advanced missions, $2.5 million; physics and astronomy, $117.6 million; lunar and planetary exploration, $138.8 million; and bioscience, $20.4 million. Space applications R&D authorization was $128.4 million. Also authorized were $112.6 million for launch vehicle procurement, $9 million for sustaining university program, $27.5 for space vehicle systems, $33.5 for electronic systems, and $22.1 million for human factor systems. Act allocated $20.2 million for hasic research, $36.9 million for space power and electric propulsion systems, $50 million for nuclear rocket, $22.8 million for chemical propulsion systems, $278 million for tracking and data acquisition, and $5 million for technology utilization. For construction of facilities, law authorized $8 million for erc, $670,000 for gsfc, $12.5 million for KSC, $4.7 million for LaRc, $1.7 million for Msc, and $500,000 for Wallops Station. Act authorized $637.4 million for research and program management. (PD, 11/24/69, 1643; PL 91-119)
nasa named Rocco A. Petrone, Director of Launch Operations at ksc since 1966, to succeed l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) as Director of Apollo Program, effective Sept. 1. He would be succeeded by Deputy Director of Launch Operations Walter J. Kapryan. Petrone had been Saturn Project Officer and Apollo Program Manager. His awards included NASA Exceptional Service Award for direction of Apollo 7 checkout and launch and nasa Distinguished Service Medal, NASA’s highest award, for direction of Apollo 8 checkout and launch. (NASA Release 69—124)
Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong would be first man to step on moon, according to NASA plans for July 16 Apollo 11 mission, Apollo Program Manager George M. Low told msc press conference. Armstrong, mission commander, followed by Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., lm pilot, would leave LM and spend 2 hrs 40 min walking on lunar surface, gathering rock samples, setting up experiments, and taking pictures within 100 ft of LM. Astronauts would not go farther, Low said, because “all that we need to carry out in deploying the experiment in doing all of the activities that we have to do on the surface the first time . . . can be done within the first 50 or 100 ft from the LM and we see no reason to go any further and use up a lot of energy walking as opposed to doing those things that we would like to do. . . .” (Transcript)
At Moscow meeting of Franco-Soviet Grand Commission, formed in 1967 to boost cooperation, France and U.S.S.R. signed protocol to join in attempt to put laser reflector on moon. French laser reflector would be launched by Soviet rocket. (Reuters, B Sun, 10/18/69)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, announced reorganization of Hq. Space Applications Programs Office in recognition of increasing importance of applications satellite programs. Leonard Jaffe, former Director of Space Applications Programs, had been named Deputy Associate Administrator for Applications, responsible for near-term and long-range planning and interagency policy coordination. As Acting Director of Earth Observations Programs Office—one of two new program offices into which Space Applications Programs Office was being divided—he would supervise R&D efforts in meteorology and earth resources survey including tiros, Nimbus, Synchronous Meteorological Satellite, ERTS, and sounding rocket programs in support of meteorology. Dr. Morris Tepper would continue to direct scientific activities. Communications Programs Office—concerned with R&D for communications, navigation, traffic control, and geodetic satellites; ATS program; and comsat support—would have as its Director Dr. Richard Marsten, Manager of Advanced Programs Technology, RCA Astro-Electronics Div. Dr. Marsten’s NASA appointment would become effective June 23. (NASA Release 69—76)
NASA Wallops Station announced award of 40-mo, $936,311 contract to Rice Univ. to investigate relationship between field-aligned currents and auroral particle fluxes and document and summarize findings. Rice would construct and test suitable flight and ground instrumentation for three Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket payloads; prepare and preflight-test payloads; and acquire, record, reduce, analyze, and publish resulting magnetic and auroral particle data. (WS Release 69—14)
U.S.S.R. announced completion of rocket tests begun in Pacific April 17. Tests had been scheduled to end June 15. (SBD, 5/26/69, 109; W Post, 5/24/69, A12)
NASA program of returning man from lunar landing was based on conclusion there was no risk, Stanford Univ. geneticist Dr. Joshua Lederberg said in Washington Post. “We could not mount an effective quarantine against a real peril of global infection unless we were prepared to sacrifice the astronaut, which is unthinkable.” Arguments for zero risk were “quite persuasive”—lack of atmosphere on moon, “an absolutely necessary condition for life to flourish,” and fact that earth had experienced lunar material samples from secondary meteorites. Main purpose of quarantine was “to protect the samples from earthly contamination—not altogether successfully, in view of the exhalations from the landing rocket and from the astronauts’ space suits. It was then reasonable to add on whatever additional precautions against back-contamination were possible without impeding the mission.” Project had helped show lunar arrangements would be “quite inappropriate to a real risk, for example a sample return from Mars.” For Mars program, “we must learn a great deal more by instrumented observations left there, before we can begin to design the precautions needed for samples, or men, returned to earth.” (W Post, 7/12/69, A15)
NASA successfully launched first two in series of Nike-Apache sounding rockets carrying chemical cloud experiments from NASA Wallops Station. Rocket launched at 5:22 pm est carried sodium experiment which created reddish-orange cloud visible for hundreds of miles. Rocket launched at 7:30 pm EST carried trimethylaluminum (tma) experiment which created bluish-white cloud. Primary objective was to measure wind directions and speeds in 25- to 135-mi (40.2- to 217.2-km) region and temporal variations that occurred throughout night. Four tma experiments and two acoustic grenade experiments, postponed because of cloud cover, would be rescheduled. (WS Releases 69-19, 69-20)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Churchill Research Range carrying Southwest Center for Advanced Studies payload to investigate auroral disturbances. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
Former NASA Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf), received Distinguished Service Medal from Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., in Pentagon ceremonies. Award was for achievements with NASA from December 1964 to August 1969. Gen. Phillips had left NASA to become commander of usaf Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) in Los Angeles. (AFJ, 9/27/69, 8)
nasa Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was successfully launched from Kiruna, Sweden, to study sudden upper-atmosphere warming conditions by detonating grenades between 24.9- and 55.9-mi (40- and 90-km) altitudes. Launch was first in series of four scheduled under agreement between Swedish Space Research Committee (ssrc), British Science Research Council (src), and nasa. ssrc provided ground equipment, instrumentation, and grenade payloads and was responsible for launch operations, nasa supplied Nike-Cajun rockets and dovap transponders. Second launch would be conducted Jan. 19. (nasa Release 69—16; NASA Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr with VAM—20 booster to 106.6-mi (171.5-km) altitude carrying Univ. of Colorado payload to measure height profile of nitric oxide, nitrogen, and ionized nitrogen and to test Mariner-Mars UV spectrometer. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by nasa from wsmr with VAM—20 booster carried Princeton Univ. observatory payload to 112.5-mi (181-km) altitude to study uv radiation of hot stars in constellation Scorpius with 1 A and 0.3 A resolution. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, but camera and stabilization were completely demolished because of fall after parachute failed, (nasa Rpt SRL)
NASA announced award by Lane of $2.5-million contract to LingTemcoVought Aerospace Corp. to design, develop, and flight-qualify larger lst-stage solid rocket motor for Scout booster. New Algol III motor would have 44- or 45-in dia, 4 or 5 in wider than Algol IIB, and would enable Scout to place 400-lb payload, 100 lbs more than IIB capacity, into orbit with 300-mi altitude, (nasa Release 69/126)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried American Science & Engineering, Inc., payload to 109.4-mi (176-km) altitude. Objective was to obtain high-resolution pictures of general x-ray emission from solar corona in quiescent state, using 9-in-dia x-ray mirror and 12-frame rotating camera with variety of filters. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily; x-ray exposures of considerable scientific value were anticipated, (nasa Rpt SRL)
Into the New Realm,” exhibit of documentary history of U.S. Government in space from early balloon ascensions to origination of Apollo program, opened at National Archives in Washington, D.C. Exhibit included original of National Space Act of 1958, which created NASA, and copies of correspondence on establishment of U.S. space program from President Eisenhower; President Kennedy; first NASA Adminis
Apollo 11 was producing noticeable effect on business and consumer products, Washington Post said. Snoopy the Astronaut dolls were selling out; sales of color TV sets had risen in some stores; and sales of “moon maps and globes, as well as toy rocket ships and lunar exploration vehicles had also lifted skyward.” Two Washington, D.C., department stores were offering Japanese telescopes ranging from $19.99 to $1,000.00. One toy store manager said sales of space-related toys had jumped 70% or 80% in two months. Rockets propelled by solid-fuel inserts sold for $1.50 to $5.00 complete with recovery parachute. One Washington store had sold out supply of $10 spacesuits. Demand for rental of color TV sets in Washington area had been “terrific,” according to area dealer. (Cushing, W Post, 7/16/69, Dll)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Burner booster into orbit with 531.5-mi (855.2-km) apogee, 488.4-mi (785.8-km) perigee, 101.3-min period, and 98.8° inclination. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/69; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR with VAM—20 booster carried Naval Research Laboratory payload to 117.0-mi (188.3-km) altitude to record white-light corona of sun from three to nine solar radii with package containing two externally occulted coronagraphs and three related experiments. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL)
ksc announced selection of Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, to receive 1969 Career Service Award of National Civil Service League at Washington, D.C., banquet June 13. Citation said: “The development of Complex 39, the installation from which the Apollo program launches take place, is the crowning achievement of Dr. Kurt H. Debus’ career. His leadership was pivotal in both the design and construction of the famed Apollo launch complex. Further, he has been responsible for many of the technical advances in launch technology, and for the formation of the government-industry launch team which has carried out more than 150 successful launches, including several notable firsts.” Award—consisting of $1,000, inscribed gold watch, and citation—was one of most prestigious for which civil service career employees were eligible. Also among 10 selected was George S. Moore, Associate Administrator for Operations, FAA, for “an extraordinary record in the development of up to date methods of evaluation of aircraft worthiness.” (ksc Release 154-69; W Star, 4/30/69, A2)
NASA launched four sounding rockets from Wallops Station to obtain upper-atmosphere data on normal winter day. Areas carried Naval Weapons Center payload to 34.9-mi (56.1-km) altitude to measure ozone concentration at altitudes between 18.6 and 37.3 mi (30 and 60 km), using photometer and optical filter wheel. Failure of recovery parachute to open satisfactorily caused fast descent and prevented payload recovery. Obtaining useful information was expected to be difficult, but good data were expected.	. Nike-Cajun carried gsfc payload to 79.4-mi (127.7-km) altitude to obtain temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in upper atmosphere by detonating grenades and recording sound arrivals on ground. All 19 grenades were ejected and detonated as planned and sound arrivals were recorded. Nike-Apache carrying Univ. of Colorado payload reached 72.7-mi (117-km) altitude on flight to obtain vertical profile of nitric oxide density in 15.5- to 65.3-mi (25- to 105-km) region. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Second Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Illinois payload to collect data on ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpts SRL; NASA Proj Off)
Apollo Program Management: Staff Study was submitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics by Subcommittee on NASA Oversight. It identified key concepts contributing to successful evolution of NASA-industry management team and areas where additional studies would be useful in application of its expertise. Key factors included clear definition of primary objective, monitoring and auditing systems that allowed vertical and horizontal information flow, refinement in program-control techniques using incentive contracts, correlation and definition of multiple-program interfaces by use of systems-oriented staff groups, real-time and flexible management reporting system, and balance between governmental in-house capability and industrial capability. (Text)
Tenth anniversary of DOD’s 1,450-lb Discoverer I satellite successfully launched into polar orbit by Thor-Agena booster. Tracking acquisition was hampered by stabilization difficulties and satellite reentered in early March 1959. Agena launch vehicle—most widely used booster in U.S.—had completed more than 250 successful flights in dod and NASA operations since its first mission Feb. 28,1958, and had carried first spacecraft to achieve circular orbit, first to be controlled in orbit by ground command, and first propelled from one orbit to another. It had been continually updated and used as versatile, multipurpose vehicle. (A&A 1915—60; Space Propulsion, 2/28/69, 199)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried gsfc payload to 127.2-mi (204.7-km) altitude to obtain high-resolution spectrograms of belt and sword stars of Orion. Excellent spectrum of star zeta in Orion was obtained and good spectrum of star epsilon in Orion was recorded, (nasa Rpt SRl)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc grenade experiment to obtain data on atmospheric parameters. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (nasa Proj Off)
Canadian Black Brant VB sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station carrying 450-lb Naval Research Laboratory payload containing telescope instrumented for infrared astronomy. Telescope, completely cooled with liquid helium to keep telescope radiation from interfering with measurements, contained photoelectric detectors sensitive to optical radiation in region between visible light and microwaves. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered. (WS Release 69—18)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried GSFC payload to 125.5-mi (202-km) altitude to obtain solar euv spectra from 40 to 390 A and from 10 to 390 A using bbrc—SPC 330D solarpointing control and recovery system. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRL)
At LeRC technical conference on plasmas and magnetic fields, LeRC Electromagnetic Propulsion Div. Chief Wolfgang E. Moeckel said, “Man has reached the Moon and there is now some talk about going to the stars, but we are not yet ready with propulsion systems that are suitable for exploring our own solar system.” Manned flights to distant planets would become reasonable only with advanced nuclear propulsion systems. Thermonuclear fusion rocket, if feasible, could reduce manned Mars mission to four to five months and journey to Jupiter or Saturn to under three years. Solar electric rockets looked promising for unmanned probes to planets as remote as Jupiter. (LeRC Release 69-58; LeRC pao)
msfc announced $48,142,823 modification to contract with North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. to provide for 14-mo extension of S—II program as part of overall Apollo program stretchout. S—II was 2nd stage for three-stage Saturn V launch vehicle. MSFC also announced $1,896,916 modification to Apollo Applications program contract for further Harvard College R&D of modified uv scanning spectrometer to fly in space on Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), (msfc Releases 69—76, 69—77)
Space/Aeronautics described 1969 as U.S.S.R.’s “most active and most frustrating” year in space. “In the fall of 1968 it was possible to believe . . . that the Soviet Union might fly men around the moon before the United States. A year later it was possible to ask: ‘Where are the Russians?’” Most failures were in attempts to prepare man’s way to moon. “The inglorious performance of Luna 15, just as America was landing men on the lunar surface, could almost be called the least of Russia’s lunar problems. By far the worst . . . must be repeated technical troubles with the long-awaited ‘super booster,’ the rough equivalent of Saturn 5. If semi-official rumors are to be accepted as accurate, the Russian vehicle is in a great deal of difficulty. “The . . . launchings of Soyuz 6, 7, and 8 were impressive in many ways—but Western officials still counted the group flight as a disappointment to the Russians. . . . The most skeptical Western estimates now are that the Russians may have abandoned the big booster, that they will not land men on the moon before 1972 . . . and that no large Soviet station will be assembled in orbit before the last half of the ’70s.” {Space/Aeronautics, 12/69, 24—6)
NASA launched series of three sounding rockets from Wallops Station. Nike-Tomahawk carried gsfc payload to 141.1-mi (227.0-km) altitude to test neutral-mass spectrometer system with unique sample-flow and test-leak subsystem necessary for making high-pressure neutral-constituent measurements on planned Mars and Venus missions and to demonstrate capability of sterilized-mass-spectrometer electronics in , flight environment for first time. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and complete data were obtained. Nike-Tomahawk carried gsfc and Univ. of Michigan payload to 197.6-mi (318.0-km) altitude to measure nitrogen density and temperature. Secondary objectives were to evaluate Omegatron system designed for San Marco-C satellite, measure density and temperature of nitrogen simultaneously, compare Pitot-static-probe and thermosphere-probe density in 74.6-mi (120.0-km) region, and validate mass spectrometer nitrogen measurement and electrostatic-probe electron temperature data. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and complete data were obtained. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Michigan payload to 124.3-mi (200.0-km) altitude to measure neutral atmospheric density by Pitot technique in 18.4- to 74.6-mi (30.0- to 120.0-km) region. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and all atmospheric measurements made by Pitot probe were excellent, (nasa Rpts SRL)
TOR—shok energy-absorbing system designed for Apollo program was being installed by State Highway Commission of Kansas along major arteries in and about Topeka, Republic Steel Corp. announced. Developed by Ara, Inc., system used multiple-telescoping, lightweight, high-strength steel tubing to attach guardrail to its mounting posts, concrete abutments, or other roadside objects. When car struck guardrail, most of impact force was transmitted from rail to tor—shoks, rings that absorbed shock by turning inside out. (Republic Steel Release R—1053)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin editorial on Apollo 9 mission: “In the first Apollo launchings, it was the taming of sheer, brute power that awed the on-looker. “At the moment of ignition, it was not what lay beyond the astronauts that gripped the millions watching TV. It was the question whether the huge Saturn V booster would respond to command, whether it would hurl the astronauts into orbit or collapse, toppling slowly into a furnace of its own making. “But with yesterday’s flawless Apollo 9 launch, the Saturn V booster seemed to emerge as a proven piece of space hardware. The preoccupation now is with the complexity, sophistication, the intricate workings of the most complicated of the several machines the United States has put together for the conquest of the moon. ... In its sophistication and vulnerability, [the LM] is ... an extension of man himself.” (P Bull, 3/4/69)
Willy Ley, space author and rocket expert, died at age 62, apparently from a heart attack. Ley—also planning consultant to NASA—had been one of founders of German Rocket Society, fellow of British Interplanetary Society, and member of American Institute of Aeronautical Science. Among his last published hooks were Rockets, Missiles and Men in Space and Watchers of the Skies. (AP, W Stair, 6/25/69, B5; NYT, 6/25/69, 41)
Project research method of supporting principal investigators’ research within universities accounted for about 70% of NASA funds obligated to universities and was serving NASA and schools well, Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in speech at Ohio State Univ. More than 10% of project research support funds had been invested in equipment in university laboratories for continuing education and research. “More than 90% of balloon borne experiments, more than 40% of sounding rocket experiments, and more than 50% of satellite experiments flown On NASA vehicles had principal investigators or co-investigators in our universities. A large share of the significant discoveries in space science were made in university originated experiments.” NASA “supports about 13,000 project oriented research grants and contracts in universities . . . [and] 32 universities in 21 states are now working with NASA on various aspects of the earth resources satellite program.” (Text)
Apollo passive seismic experiment, part of extravehicular activity to be performed by Apollo 11 astronauts on moon, was described in Science as “the most exciting experiment in seismology.” Dr. G. Latham and Dr. M. Ewing of Columbia Univ.’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, Dr. F. Press of mit, and Dr. G. Sutton of Univ. of Hawaii explained objective was to detect naturally occurring seismic events on lunar surface through early Apollo scientific experiment package (easep) planted on moon. Package weighed 105 lbs and would transmit data to earth one year (or maximum two years), during lunar days because its solar cell panels required illumination to provide power. Complete Apollo lunar surface experiments package (alsep), containing at least three additional experiments for measurements of solar wind and magnetic field, would be included on Apollo 12 for day and night operation. In Apollo 11 experiment astronaut would remove instrument from lm to smoothest area within 6.6—9.8 ft (20—30 m) of lm, unfold solar panels, adjust package level to within 5°, orient it with azimuth for maximum illumination of solar panels, and aim antenna toward earth. MSC would issue commands to uncage and level seismometers and select proper gain. Expected sources of lunar seismic activity included several hundred monthly moonquakes, thermal stresses produced by rapid temperature variations at surface; tidal stresses exerted by earth and sun; and meteoroid impacts. By end of Apollo program, scientists hoped to have achieved crude curves of travel time for body and surface waves and beginning of seismicity map of moon. During post-Apollo period, seismologists wanted to achieve wider distribution of detectors to map seismically active belts in greater detail; study mechanisms of energy release; lower minimum detectable ground motion of individual seismometer; and improve performance of long-period seismometer systems at ultralong-period end of spectrum for recording surface waves from moonquakes, free oscillations of moon, and lunar tides. (Science, 7/18/69, 241—50)
Tokyo Univ. scientists successfully launched four-stage Lambda rocket in preparation for launch of Japan’s first satellite in late September, (upi, W News, 8/4/69; Harrison, W Post, 9/24/69, A9)
In Washington Evening Star William Hines said: “. . . Space Administrator Thomas 0. Paine was dead right when he acclaimed Project Apollo as ‘a triumph of the squares.’ ” While word “square” was in disrepute, “you will find no umbrage taken by the clean-cut stars of this week’s cosmic drama if you called them squares. They are, and probably proud of it. There was no fight from Neil Armstrong when Congress told him to plant an American flag on the surface of the moon. , . , The Apollo program is not only run by squares, but for squares, as well; its thrills and glories appeal to the vast majority of Americans who, at the bottom, are just as square as any Armstrong on Earth—Jack or Neil or any other.” (W Star, 7/13/69, D2)
usaf launched unidentified satellite on Titan IIIB-Agena D booster from Vandenberg afb into orbit with 672.5-mi (1,082-km) apogee, 92.0-mi (148-km) perigee, 96.9-min period, and 106.1° inclination. Satellite reentered Feb. 3. (gsfc SSR, 1/31/69; 2/15/69; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena booster. Orbital parameters: apogee, 136.1 mi. (219 km); perigee, 110.6 mi (178 km); period, 88.4 min; and inclination, 74.9°. Satellite reentered Aug. 23. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/69; 8/31/69; InteraviaAir-Letter, 7/25/69, 5; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried Univ. of Illinois and GCA Corp. payload to 127.4-mi (205-km) altitude to measure electron density, collision frequency, and temperature in lower ionosphere on quarterly world day. Payload included dual-frequency propagation experiment. Rocket altitude was nominal but range was only one-fourth that predicted. Instrument performance was excellent and good data were expected from all experiments, (nasa Rpt SRL)
NASA exhibit at Expo 70 in Osaka, Japan, March 15 through September would feature F—1 rocket engine, models of Explorer VII, VIII, and XI, tools being developed for Saturn V Workshop, and Saturn V launch vehicle digital computer, msfc announced. Exhibit also would display weather and communications satellites, Apollo spacecraft, space-suits, flight cameras, and moon rocks, (msfc Release 69—273)
usaf announced award to North American Rockwell Corp. of $700,000 initial increment to $2,473,000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for research on feasibility of using advanced composite materials for production of aircraft wings, (dod Release 200-69) Proposed design and selection of candidate sensors for ERTS had been closely coordinated with other Government agencies. . . . NASA was requesting FY 1970 funds to initiate development of flight hardware for two experimental satellites, erts—a and B, with erts-a scheduled for launch in late 1971 or early 1972. nasa also would proceed with techniques for infrared sounding of atmosphere with Nimbus B-2 and D launches in 1969 and 1970 and had begun construction of Nimbus E and F for development of microwave sounding techniques. Prototype second-generation operational meteorological satellite Tiros-M was being prepared for launch in few months. Study to define third-generation Tiros-N would start in FY 1970. NASA planned to accelerate basic studies of remote sensor signature relationships, instrument development, data processing, user decision models, and aircraft use. Synchronous satellite ats—e would be launched in 1969 with gravity gradient experiment, ats-f and G would not be ready for first launch before late 1971 or early 1972. Synchronous Meteorological Satellite (sms), new FY 1970 effort for 1971 and 1972 launches, would use existing technology and be prototypes for National Operational Meteorological Satellite System (nomss). National Geodetic Satellite program would complete objectives with geos—c launch in 1970. Cooperative Applications Satellite (cas), French satellite, would be launched on NASA Scout booster in 1970 to track some 500 meteorological balloons to determine wind direction and speed. (Testimony)
FRC announced retirement of NASA’s two X—15 rocket research aircraft, designed for manned hypersonic flight research at speeds up to 4,000 mph and altitudes of 50 mi. X—15 No. 1, which had made first flight June 8,1959, would he displayed at Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. No. 2 would he displayed at Air Force Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio. No. 3 had been destroyed in accident Nov. 15, 1967. During $300-million NASA—USAF—USN program X—15 had set two unofficial world records, reaching 354,200-ft altitude and 4,520 mph (mach 6.7). Aircraft served as reusable manned platforms for wide range of experiments that helped advance development of vital spaceflight systems. Final flight, 199th, had been Oct. 24, 1968, and NASA had announced completion of program Dec. 20. (frc Release 9—69)
NASA and British Science Research Council (src) had agreed to conduct cooperative project to launch fourth Ariel satellite, NASA announced. Ariel IV would be launched by Scout booster from WTR in late 1971 or early 1972 carrying one U.S. and four U.K. experiments to explore interactions among plasma-charged particle streams and electromagnetic waves in upper atmosphere. SRC would be responsible for spacecraft design, fabrication, and testing; NASA would provide Scout launch vehicle. Both agencies would participate in tracking, data acquisition, and data reduction, (nasa Release 69—35)
nasa launched two Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Point Barrow, Alaska, carrying gsfc experiments. First rocket was launched to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating grenades at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. All 19 grenades ejected and detonated and sound arrivals were recorded. Launch was third in series of four launches from Point Barrow during stratospheric warming [see Jan. 26]. Second rocket was launched in conjunction with Jan. 11 launch to develop experimental techniques for determining atmospheric composition profiles in mesosphere and to measure ozone and water vapor distribution in 12.4- to 40.4-mi (20- to 65-km) region by separating
Areas sounding rocket Was launched by NASA from Andoya, Norway, carrying Swedish payload to study ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Proj Off)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg AFB by Titan IIIB—Agena booster into orbit with 395.8-mi (636.8-km) apogee, 78.3-mi (125.9-km) perigee, 92.1-min period, and 108.1° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 8. (gsfc SSR, 10/31/69; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
AFSC announced new uhf communications terminal developed by Electronic Systems Div. might solve problems in relaying messages between spacecraft and ground stations. Designed for USAF aircraft as part of joint-service Tactical Satellite Communications Program, terminals would be installed and tested on usaf jet tracking aircraft used for communications support in Apollo program. They would allow aircraft to relay spacecraft information and recovery operations reliably from parts of globe where communications had posed problem. (usaf Release 51.69)
aiaa announced election of Honorary Fellows: Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.; German rocket pioneer Hermann Oberth; and Northrop Corp. founder John K. Northrop. Dr. Seamans, former NASA Deputy Administrator, was honored for “organizing the research, development and operational base which produced the Apollo program.” Honors would be presented at Oct. 23 banquet in Anaheim, Calif, (aiaa Release)
National Geographic Society cartographer and “backyard stargazer” David Moore was one of few amateur astronomers selected by NASA to help nearly 200 professionals who had volunteered to attempt sightings of Apollo 11 spacecraft, Washington Evening Star said. Through telescope in yard of his Wheaton, Md., home he would watch for “small brilliant flashes when rocket engines are turned on or ‘burned’ or . . . when waste water is ejected from the spacecraft.” In ejection, water froze instantly and resultant ice crystals flared in sunlight. NASA had credited Moore with one of few sightings of earthbound Apollo 10. (Radcliffe, W Star, 7/10/69, D2)
NASA unloaded eight-ton airlock at MSFC for ground testing to qualify it as part of orbiting space station. Part of Apollo Applications program cluster to be launched in mid-1970s, 65-in-dia, 17-ft cylindrical unit was flown from McDonnell Douglas Corp.’s St. Louis plant to be joined to multiple-docking adapter. It would provide interconnecting passageway between S—IVB rocket stage and multiple-docking adapter in flight, condition environmental gases, and provide instrumentation, data management, intercommunication, and other services, (msfc Release 69—124)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket, launched by NASA from WSMR with VAM—20 booster, carried Cornell Univ. payload to 97.8-mi (157.4km) altitude to examine sky in far infrared (5 p—1,600 p), using copper-doped-germanium, two gallium-doped-germanium, and indium-antimonide detectors. Loss of residual helium at 162 secs disabled attitude-control system. Timing failed in experimental payload and no useful scientific data were obtained. Some useful engineering data were collected, (nasa Rpt srl)
msfc shipped 20,000-lb, 20-ft-tall F—1 and 225,000-lb-thrust J—2 Saturn V rocket engines from New Orleans to France as part of NASA exhibit at Paris Air Show, May 29—June 8. Other items in display would include Apollo 8 spacecraft and an Apollo lunar module, (msfc Release 69-106; msfc Pio)
Bullpup Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 45.1-mi (72.5-km) altitude to study capability of Bullpup Cajun as sounding rocket system and to test prototype ozone payload. Rocket performed satisfactorily but loss of signal at payload separation prevented analysis of payload performance. Parachute deployed as planned but payload was not recovered, (nasa Rpt SRJ.)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried GSFCDudley Observatory payload to collect micrometeoroids during Perseid meteor shower and to study electric field. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and data were expected from all experiments. Data would be compared with data from Nike-Apache mission to be launched Aug. 22. (nasa Rpt SRL)
Bert Greenglass, former head of Apollo Program Control Office at ksc and later Deputy Director of Management Systems Div. in NASA Office of Technology Utilization, joined hud as Director of Management Information and Program Control Systems. (W Star, 9/24/69; hud pio)
Soviet space program had been severely set back by “catastrophic explosion of 10-million-lb-thrust prototype booster during preparatory launch operations at Tyuratam last summer,” Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. U.S.S.R.’s manned orbiting platform (mop) program, “already at least a year behind schedule and proceeding slowly, has been further retarded because of the . . . failure. Last month’s triple Soyuz launch has emerged as a prime example of rescheduling necessitated by the booster’s absence and by the aftermath of shortterm and conflicting political decisions. . . . “Failure of the booster prototype was only one event in a largely chaotic year for the Soviet space program. During 1969 the Russians: shifted much of their large booster inventory to military purposes in connection with the Chinese border crisis”; postponed scheduled late spring launch of Soyuz VI “because all remaining non-military facilities were in turn preempted by a highly compressed lunar effort”; and hastily launched Luna XV “in an effort to prove, in event of an Apollo failure, that at least a one-way soft landing from lunar orbit could be performed unmanned and, alternately, that failure would not result in loss of human life.” (Av Wk, 11/17/69, 26—7)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried Univ. of Wisconsin payload to 129.9-mi (209-km) altitude to examine auroral directions and intensities of isotopic component of cosmic x-rays. Magnetometer and startracker functioned as planned but doors and covers shielding proportional counters failed to eject and no x-ray data were received. (NASA Rpt SRL)
At Apollo 11 splashdown party at Shoreham Hotel in Washington, D.C. —attended by Apollo 11 astronauts and wives—NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, announced new Apollo Achievement Award of lapel button and certificate. He presented awards to NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller; former Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) ; and former Deputy Director of Apollo Program George H. Hage. (Beale, W Star, 9/10/69, FI)
gsfc scientists and Smithsonian Institution ecologist Dr. Helmut K.	Buechner planned to use female elk named Moe for first experiment in tracking animals by satellite, New York Times said. Wearing 23-lb instrumentation around neck, elk was expected to migrate from point in Wyoming to national elk refuge south of Yellowstone Park at Jackson Hole, Wyo.—100-mi distance. (Teltsch, NYT, 10/5/69, 16) Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, gave Invited Lecture Oct. 6 on Apollo program, space benefits, Apollo Applications program, and lunar exploration. Apollo Applications program would “study the earth through the use of a six lens multispectral camera installation. On Apollo 9 some of the rudimentary work was done using four lenses. 50% more kinds of information will be brought back by the crews of Apollo Applications. Because almost everything on earth has a different reflective quality, as distinctive as a signature or a fingerprint, results from this photographic exploration can be expected to yield rich rewards. Many of the earth sciences look to this kind of information for answers to previously unanswerable questions. Hydrologists are interested in discovering not only the depth, but also the temperature of the waters of the world, and these conditions can be ascertained from space. Warm water attracts certain species of fish, so fishermen are also interested in these experiments. “Agronomists believe that soil chemistry will reveal itself on a large scale in certain kinds of filtered photography. Agriculturists know that different crops, at different stages of their development and in different states of health, reflect distinctive amounts of light. They hope, using the photographs we will take, to get some measure of the world’s crop, as well as some knowledge of its condition. Geologists, who have found clues to mineral deposits in the Gemini and Apollo pictures, look to this more sophisticated photography for additional information, and for distinctions which will eventually permit certain kinds of prospecting from space. Cartographers and Geodesists are interested in everything from urban sprawl to continental drift.” Sun would be prime target for exploration in Apollo Applications program, with experiments conducted by astronaut-astronomers using Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) in orbit. “For the first time we will have a massive set of instruments with high resolution for looking in some depth and detail at the activities of the sun from beyond the veil of the earth’s atmosphere.” Program would consist of three missions into near-earth space, one of 28 days and two of 56 days each. First step would be establishment of Saturn V workshop in orbit, planned for March 1972 launch, followed by launches of solar panels, ATM, and crew of three for 28-day stay. Second manned mission was scheduled for launch about three months after first, with third to follow one month after return of second crew. (Text)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Wallops Station carrying Dudley Observatory payload to collect micrometeoroids. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Proj Off)
l/g Samuel C. Phillips, NASA Apollo Program Director, became Commander of Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso) . Gen. Phillips had been Director of Minuteman program before assignment to NASA in January 1964 as Deputy Director of Apollo program. He was succeeded by Rocco A. Petrone [see Aug. 22]. (nasa Ann, 7/31/69)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried Harvard Univ. payload to conduct solar studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
Senate unanimously adopted S.R. 224, introduced by Sen. Michael J. Mansfield (D-Mont.) for himself and Sen. Everett M. Dirksen (R-Ill.), expressing gratitude on behalf of Senate and of all American people for “dedication, devotion, courage and effort of all associated with the Apollo program and with the Apollo 11 mission.” (CR, 7/25/69, S8575)	...	.
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc grenade payload to obtain data on atmospheric parameters. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (nasa Proj Off)
Aerobee 15Q A sounding rocket launched by nasa from NASA Wallops Station carried payload containing two white rats to 97.9-mi 157.6-km) altitude in fourth of four experiments to study rats’ behavior in artificial gravity field and determine minimum level of gravity needed by biological organisms during space flight. During free fall rats selected artificial gravity levels created through centrifugal action by walking along tunnel runway in extended arms of payload. Data on their position and movement were telemetered to ground stations. Last flight in series had been Nov. 21, 1968. (NASA Rpt srl; WS Release 69-10)
Aerospace industry sales of $28.3 billion in 1969 were second highest in industry’s history despite anticipated decline of 4.1% from 1968 record of $29.5 billion. All areas of aerospace endeavor leveled off except nonaerospace sales by aerospace companies, which increased. Commercial aerospace sales, principally jet transports, were $5,800 million, down from $6,429 million in 1968. Trend resulted from phasing out of current transport models while jumbo jet production was beginning. Sales by aerospace industry to dod were $16.2 million in 1969 and $16.6 billion in 1968. Military aircraft sales totaled $10 billion in 1969 and $10.7 billion in 1968. Space sales dropped to $4,499 million from $5,108 million in 1968, because of approaching completion of Apollo program hardware phase and cancellation of mol. (Aerospace, Winter, 1970)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried GSFC payload to 80.2-mi (129-km) altitude to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating grenades at prescribed times and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket, last in series of four launched from Churchill during stratospheric warming [see Jan. 30], performed satisfactorily. All 19 grenades ejected and detonated as planned. Sound arrivals were recorded for 14—15 grenades because of power failure at receiving station, (nasa Rpt srl)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by nasa from Wallops Station carried Univ. of Illinois and gca Corp. payload to 117.4-mi (189-kni) altitude to measure electron density, collision frequency, and temperature in lower ionosphere at midnight. Secondary objective was to test mechanical delay igniter and monitor, its performance. Simultaneous launch from Chamical, Argentina, studied particle precipitation and transport effects across equator. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched from wsmr with VAM—20 booster carried afcrl payload to 127-mi (204.3-km) altitude. Objective was to calibrate Harvard College Observatory spectrometer on board orbiting Oso VI by studying active regions of sun simultaneously at 300-400 A with telemetering, grazing incidence, scanning EUV monochromator. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt srl)
aec—nasa Nuclear Rocket Development Station in Jackass Flats, Nev., was “scaling down operations, laying off workers, husbanding the facilities it already has—and waiting,” New York Times reported. Like many U.S. space research and test centers, “their futures uncertain amid an increasing emphasis on defense and domestic matters at the expense of space,” station’s scientists and engineers were “waiting for President Nixon to decide on the direction and pace of the national space effort in the next decade.” (Wilford, NYT, 11/4/69, 20)
President Nixon and his daughter Tricia {foreground) watched preparations jor the launch of Apollo 12 from ksc, while Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA A rimin' istrator, shielded Mrs. Nixon from rain. Seconds into flight an electrical discharge shut down the spacecraft fuel cells, but the astronauts corrected the condition. 10,000	ft with tops at 21,000 ft. During ascent observers on ground saw two parallel streaks of lightning flash between clouds and launch pad. NASA reported electrical transients, later attributed to electrical potential discharges from clouds through spacecraft to ground, had suddenly shut off spacecraft’s electrical power at 00:36 get and turned on numerous alarms in cm. Spacecraft automatically switched to backup battery power while crew restored primary power system. Commander Conrad radioed, “We had everything in the world drop out.” Control Center commented, “We’ve had a couple of cardiac arrests down here, too.” “There wasn’t time up here,” Conrad answered. Power system remained normal throughout rest of mission. Spacecraft entered planned parking orbit with 118-mi (189.9-kra) apogee and 115.0-mi (185.0-km) perigee. After postlaunch checkout CSM. separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB) and LM, code-named Intrepid, Onboard TV initiated after separation clearly showed csm transposing and docking with lm at 3:27 GET and ice on windows from rain frozen during liftoff. Crew ejected CSm/lm from S—IYB and conducted first SPS burn for translunar insertion. Slingshot maneuver placed S—IVB into earth orbit with 515,549.4-	to 560,429.9-mi {829,519.0- to 901,731.7-km) apogee and 93,213.2-	to 109,324.1-mi (149,980.0- to 175,902.5-km) perigee and period of 39 to 45 days, instead of heliocentric orbit planned, because of error in instrument unit. To ensure that electrical transients during launch had not affected lm systems, Conrad and Bean entered LM at 7:20 GET for housekeeping and systems checks. All checks indicated systems were satisfactory, Translunar insertion maneuver was so accurate that midcourse maneuver No. 1 was not necessary. Midcourse correction No. 2, at 30:53 GET, placed spacecraft on desired hybrid circumlunar trajectory with closest approach of 69.1 mi; third and fourth maneuvers were not necessary. Good-quality TV coverage of preparations for and performance of midcourse maneuver was transmitted for 47 min. Conrad and Bean began transfer to LM during translunar coast Y2 hr earlier than planned to obtain full TV coverage through Goldstone tracking station. The 56-min transmission, beginning at 62:52 get, showed excellent color pictures of GSM, intravehicular transfer, LM interior, earth, and moon. Gordon reported crew was in good condition. TV broadcast scheduled for 81:30 GET before lunar orbit insertion was canceled because of sun angle and glare on spacecraft windows. Spacecraft entered lunar orbit with 194.3-mi (312.6-km) apolune and 72.0-mi (115.9-km) perilune at 83:25 GET (10:47 pm est Nov. 17) after first sps burn. During first lunar orbit good quality TV coverage of lunar surface was transmitted for 33 min. Crew provided excellent descriptions of lunar features. Second SPS burn circularized orbit with 76.1-mi (122.5-km) apolune and 62.5-mi (100.6-km) perilune at 87:47 get. Conrad and Bean transferred to lm for l^g-hr housekeeping, voice and telemetry test, and oxygen-purge-system check and then returned to CM. CM Yankee Clipper, reported sighting Surveyor III and Intrepid on moon. Conrad opened lm hatch at 115:11 GET, descended LM ladder, and deployed modularized equipment stowage assembly (mesa) containing camera which recorded his descent to lunar surface. Conrad reported seeing Surveyor HI spacecraft and said lm had landed 25 ft down-range from lip of crater. Conrad, inches shorter than Neil A. Armstrong, who had stepped onto moon July 21, had difficulty taking last step from ladder. When he touched lunar surface at 115.22 get (6:44 am est Nov. 19) Conrad said, “Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small step for Neil, but that’s a long one for me.” He said lunar surface was soft and loosely packed, causing his boots to dig in as he walked, and sun was bright like a spotlight, lm had landed so gently its shock-absorbing legs were barely telescoped by gentle impact. Conrad recorded Bean’s descent to lunar surface at 115:52 get (7:14 am EST Nov. 19). Shortly after color TV camera was removed from mesa bracket, transmission was lost and was not regained for remainder of eva. Crew collected 40- to 50-lb contingency sample and reported mounds resembling volcanoes. Mounds were 4 ft high with flattened tops 5 ft wide and sides sloping out to 15- to 20-ft dia. Conrad said he saw neither breccia nor vesicular rocks, only basalts. Lithium hydroxide canisters and contingency sample were transferred to lm ; S-band antenna, solar wind composition experiment, and American flag were deployed as planned, alsep with SNAP—27 atomic generator was deployed 600—700 ft from lm. Shortly after deployment passive seismometer transmitted to earth signals from astronauts’ footsteps as they returned to lm. During deployment astronauts kicked up dust and some adhered to instruments. Overall effect would be determined through long-term measurements of system’s engineering parameters. Conrad and Bean dusted each other off and entered Intrepid after 3 hrs 56 min walking on lunar surface. After resting inside lm and checking plans for second eva period, astronauts left lm at 131:33 get (10:55 pm est Nov. 19), 1 hr 40 min ahead of schedule. Astronauts stored lm TV camera in equipment transfer bag for return to earth for failure analysis. Conrad walked to alsep site to check leveling of lunar atmosphere detector. Astronaut movement on surface was recorded on passive seismometer and lunar surface magnetometer, eva traverse took crew to alsep deployment site, Head Crater, Bench Crater, Sharp Crater, Halo Crater, Surveyor III site, Block Crater, and back to lm. Astronauts walked 1,500—2,000 ft from lm, covering about 6,000-ft distance, their confidence and speed increasing with experience. After walk Conrad reported he had fallen once but Bean had picked him up without difficulty. Conrad rolled grapefruit-sized rock down wall of Head Crater about 300—400 ft from passive seismometer, but no significant response was detected. Crew obtained desired photographic panoramas, core samples, trench sample, lunar environment sample, and assorted rock, dirt, bedrock, and molten samples. They reported fine dust buildup on all sides of larger rocks and said soil color lightened as depth increased. Crew reported Surveyor footpad marks were still visible and entire spacecraft looked brown, as if something had rained on it. Glass parts were not broken. Crew retrieved parts of Surveyor III, including TV camera and soil scoop. They then retrieved solar wind composition experiment and stowed it in equipment bag, took stereo pictures near lm, and transferred all collected samples, parts, and equipment to lm. They dusted off, reentered LM, and jettisoned equipment according to plan, closing hatch by 134:82,get (2:44 am EST Nov. 20), after 3 hrs 49 min walking on lunar surface in second eva period. While lm was on moon Gordon, orbiting moon in csm, completed lunar multispectral photography experiment and photographed Wall of Theophilus and future landing sites, Fra Mauro and Descartes. Film would be analyzed to aid scientists in planning for future sample collection and in extrapolating known compositions from returned samples to parts of moon that would not be visited. At 142:04 get (9:26 am est Nov. 20) lm successfully lifted off moon after 31 hrs 31 min on lunar surface, leaving lm descent stage. Astronauts brought back 95 lbs of lunar surface samples, parts of Surveyor III, films, and miniature flags of 136 nations, 50 U.S. states, and 4 U.S. possessions. A 1.2-sec overburn of lm ascent propulsion system caused by incorrect manual switching sequence prevented automatic shutdown of engine and resulted in insertion velocity 32 fps greater than planned, placing lm in orbit with 71.4-mi (114.9-km) apolune and 10.6-mi (17.1-km) perilune. Crew quickly recognized discrepancy, manually shut down engine, and used RSC trim maneuver to enter planned orbit with 53.3-mi (85.8-km) apolune and 10.1-mi (16.3-km) perilune. Rendezvous maneuvers occurred as planned and lm docked with csm at 145:36 get (12:58 pm est Nov. 20). TV was transmitted from csm for last 24 min of rendezvous sequence. Crew transferred with samples, equipment, and film to CSM; lm ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 5:17 pm est Nov. 20 about 44.9 mi (72.2 km) southeast of Surveyor III. Crash was detected by seismometer left on moon and produced reverberations lasting for more than 30 min. Crew made csm plane-change maneuver at 159:05 GET and took high-resolution and stereo-strip photos and tracked landmarks, to conclude planned photography of Fra Mauro, Descartes, and Lalande. antine facility (mqf) with recovery physician and technician. Crew, physician, and technician remained inside mqf until it was delivered to Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston. cm was retrieved and mated to MQF transfer tunnel on board recovery ship. From inside MQF/cm containment envelope, MQF engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and cm was sealed until delivery to LRL. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown to Pago Pago and to Houston for transport to LRL. Primary Apollo 12 mission objectives—to perform selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of mare area, deploy and activate ALSEP, develop techniques for point landing capability, develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment, and obtain photos of candidate exploration sites—were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor and corrected discrepancies. Flight crew performance was outstanding. All three crew members remained in excellent health and good spirits. Accomplishments included first use of hybrid trajectory, largest U.S. payload placed into lunar orbit (72,335 ibs after lunar orbit insertion), first demonstration of point landing capability, first use of two EVA periods, first recharge of portable life-support system, first double-core-tube sample, first return of samples from vehicle previously landed on moon, longest distance traversed on lunar surface, first multispectral photography from lunar orbit, and longest lunar mission to date. Apollo 12 was ninth Apollo mission to date, sixth manned Apollo mission, and second manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 11 (July 16—24, 1969) had proved capability to perform manned landing on moon and return and to retrieve lunar samples for study on earth. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; Mission Commentary; NASA Release 69—148; FonF; NYT, 11/15—26/69; W Post, 11/15-26/69; W Star, 11/15-26/69; B Sun, 11/15-26/69) November 14: President Nixon became first President to witness space launch while in office when he, Mrs. Nixon, and daughter Tricia viewed Apollo 12 launch at ksc. President called liftoff “spectacular.” Later he addressed NASA personnel in Launch Control: “. . . I know there has been a lot of discussion as to what the future of the space program is. ... I do think you can be assured that in Dr. Paine and his colleagues you have men who are dedicated to this program, who are making the case for it ... as against other national priorities and making it very effectively. I leaned in the direction of the program before. After hearing what they have had to say with re'gard to our future plans, I must say that I lean even more in that direction. ... I realize that in those within the program . . . there are different attitudes as to what the emphasis should be, whether we should emphasize more exploration or more in taking the knowledge we have already acquired and making practical applications of it. . . . We want to have a balanced program, but most important, we are going forward. America ... is first in space.” (Carroll, B Sun, 11/15/69, Al; PD, 11/17/69, 1601-2)
NASA announced appointment of Daniel J. Harnett as Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, effective Oct. 1. He would be responsible for all NASA relationships with industry. Before his appointment he had held executive positions with Northrop Corp. (nasa Release 69—139) September SO: usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb by Thorad-Agena D booster. First entered orbit with 303.2-mi (487.9-km) apogee, 299.5-mi (481.9-km) perigee, 93.8-min period, and 69.6° inclination. Second entered orbit with 586.0-mi (942.9-km) apogee, 574.8-mi (924.9-km) perigee, 103.7-min period, and 70.7° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/69; SBD, 10/7/69, 162; Pres Rpt 70 [69])	...
LeRC announced award of $25,518,000 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div. to design and build first of new series of improved Centaur upper stage rockets. General Dynamics would update and simplify Centaur system and make it compatible with Titan III booster. Centaur, first liquid hydrogen, liquid oxygen rocket developed by U.S., had been used with Atlas booster to launch successfully Surveyor, Mariner, OAO, and ATS satellites. (LeRC Release 69-65)
NASA’s Apollo 10 lunar orbital mission was proceeding well toward launch readiness for 11:49 am EST May 18, Deputy Apollo Program Director George H. Hage told NASA Hq. briefing. Flight readiness test had been successfully completed April 9. Countdown demonstration test (cddt) would begin April 27, completing cryogenic propellant flow May 2; crew participation in cddt would begin May 3. Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford (commander), John W. Young (cm pilot), and Eugene A. Cernan (lm pilot) would be launched from ksc Launch Complex 39, Pad B—being used for first time—on eight-day mission in which crew would enter lunar orbit, separate lm from CSM, and pilot lm to within 50,000 ft of lunar surface. Mission would include 11 different crew operations on TV and Westinghouse Electric Corp.-developed “experiment involving color TV if we can develop it and get it prepared to fly in time to support this mission. If we are able to ... we would do most of the pictures with color TV rather than black and white. . . .” (Transcript)
Aerospace industry was having its greatest week in history with Apollo 11 launch, said New York Times, but aerospace stocks remained in doldrums. Wall Street was “bearish about the industry and, from an investment standpoint, unenthusiastic about space.” Security analysts interviewed agreed Apollo 11 would have little effect on long-depressed stocks, which commenced decline in 1968; many were selling near lows for year. Aerospace industry was chief beneficiary of space program funds, but largest portion of $34 billion spent since 1960 had been allocated before “really spectacular shots” occurred. While Apollo program had been “treniendous boon to the aerospace industry and to the advancement of technology,” it represented small part of total industry revenues and outlook was for further decline. (Hammer, NYT, 7/17/69, 63)
Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified on Apollo program, space flight operations, and advanced manned missions before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight. He explained importance of lunar exploration and outlined plans for new space station.	■ President’s Science Advisory Committee had said answers to questions about moon “may profoundly affect our views of the evolution of the solar system and its place, as well as man’s in the larger scheme of things.” Fact that earth’s moon was largest in relation to its planet, Dr. Mueller said, “implies that the two bodies may have been formed in the same manner at the same time. If true, the moon may be a book containing the secret of the earth’s first billion years of life. This record is lost on the earth which is subjected to . . . erosion by atmosphere and water. ... By comparing similarities and contrasting differences, man may be able to arrive at a greater understanding of the fundamental processes that affect the earth; for example, the mechanisms that cause earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, and the processes responsible for concentrating ore deposits. The orbits of Apollo 8 and the Lunar Orbiters were disturbed by mass concentrations beneath the circular lunar seas. These may be huge meteors that struck the moon with such force that they melted and sank into the interior, or they may be iron deposits. “Another objective of lunar exploration is to learn about man as a space explorer—his capabilities and limitations. Some day man will move on to other planets; the moon is a training ground. . . . We don’t have the basic information which early lunar landings will furnish and we can only speculate today about the feasibility of the moon as a base for an observatory or a permanent science station—about exploiting its environment of low gravity and high vacuum—about its potential for natural resources. ... A long-range goal like the lunar base would direct technological advances, stimulate public interest, and attain subsidiary objectives with earth application such as food synthesis, environmental control, and recovery of useful elements from rock.” Within new program category, Space Flight Operations, nasa was bypassing intermediate space station, launch vehicles, and logistic craft and proposing to move directly to new, semipermanent space station and low-cost earth-to-orbit transportation system. Space station “should be in being by the mid-1970s.” With FY 1969 funds, contractor definition efforts were being initiated. FY 1970 funds would continue definition, preliminary design, and supporting work. Dr. Mueller described space complex 200 to 300 mi above earth planned for 10 yrs’ continuous operation and adaptable for crew size, additional laboratory facilities, or other special-purpose equipment through selection, design, and arrangement of component modules. Crew would rotate at three- to six-month intervals, ferried between station and earth by reusable shuttles. Station’s electric power would come from solar panels or small nuclear generator. (Testimony; NASA Release 69-49)
Bill added $258 million to R&D funds for new total of $3,264 billion, including increase of $75.7 million for Apollo program, to total $1,767 billion. Of this increase, $32.1 million was for Saturn V improvements and $4.6 million for lunar exploration. Within new total of $354.8-million noa for manned space flight operations, bill restored $57 million cut from Apollo Applications by budget amendment and added $66 million for space station and shuttle and $6.2 million for Saturn V production. In space science and applications, bill reduced funds for supporting research and technology by $12 million and deferred funding for four proposed Explorer satellites and for Mariner-Mercury 1973 mission, but restored biosatellite program to originally requested $18 million plus $1.6 million restored for Delta launch vehicle for Biosatellite-F. Earth Resources Technology Satellite funds were increased by $10 million, with transfer of funds to other projects prohibited. Advanced research and technology funds were increased by $31.5 million, including $13.5-million increase for nuclear rocket program, $5.25 million for chemical propulsion, and restoration of $1.20 million for aeronautics. Research and program management total was cut by $7.15 million, to $643.75 million. Construction of facilities total remained unchanged. (Text; CR, 5/15/69; House Rpt 91—255)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried Columbia Univ. payload to 99.6-mi (160-km) altitude to study polarization of x-rays from Crab Nebula in 10- to 25-kev energy region, using x-ray polarimeter with lithium scattering blocks and gas proportional counters. All systems were perfect; good data were obtained. (NASA Rpt SRL)
West German research satellite Azur—first satellite in a cooperative Federal Republic of Germany and nasa program.—was orbited from wtr by nasa to study the earth’s radiation belts, auroral zone, and effects of solar proton events. The spacecraft was photographed during checkout, before mating to its Scout booster. and data-reduction facilities. NASA was responsible for Scout booster, launch, and tracking and data acquisition support, (nasa Release 69-146; nasa Proj Off; gsfc SSR, 11/15/69; AP, C Trib, 11/10/69)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 292.7-mi (471-km) apogee, 78.9-mi (127-km) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 108.7° inclination and reentered April 30. (gsfc SSR, 4/15/69; 4/30/69; SBD, 4/25/69, 264)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Colorado payload to measure Vegard-Kaplan (1,500—1,700 A and 2,300—3,000 A) and Lyman-Birge-Hopfield (1,300—1,500 A) bands of nitrogen in uv auroral emissions. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily. Payload penetrated aurora, and data were excellent. (NASA Rpt SRL)
usaf launched an Advanced Ballistic Reentry System (abres) vehicle from Vandenberg afb by Atlas-F Booster. (AP, C Trib 1/17/69)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried 223-lb Cal Tech payload to 146-mi (234.9-km) altitude to study intensity, spectrum, and degree of isotropy of diffuse x-ray background in 0.1- to 20-kev range and to study energy spectrum of star X—1 in constellation Scorpius in 0.1- to 15-kev range. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and good data were obtained in all 12 prime data channels, (nasa Rpt SRL; WS Release)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by nasa from Wallops Station carried GSFC payload to 79.4-mi (127.7-km) altitude to obtain data on wind, temperature, pressure, and density in 21.8- to 59.0-mi (35-to 95-km) range during atmospheric warming. Seventeen of 19 grenades ejected and exploded as programmed and sound arrivals were recorded. Mission was launched in conjunction with Nike-Cajun launch from Arenosillo, Spain, (nasa Rpt srl)
Merger of military and civilian man-in-space programs was major decision facing Nixon Administration, said Howard Benedict of Associated Press. Many observers felt it necessary because, under separate courses being taken by NASA and dod, costs of competing hardware systems “might explode out of proportion.” Congressmen had charged there was costly duplication in NASA’s orbiting workshop and DOD’s mol, both planned for 1971 launch, but with work on both so far advanced there was no turning back. Air Force Secretary, Dr. Robert Seamans, Jr., former NASA Deputy Administrator, had said any attempt to combine two programs “would jeopardize the returns to each agency and would ultimately increase the cost. . . . These activities require different equipment, different orbits and different timing.” nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, had said classified study to determine mol’s capabilities to accomplish NASA’s long-duration earth orbit objectives had shown extended mol “too limited to provide a significant, cost-effective step toward achieving NASA’s long duration objective.” Many observers believed technology and information for building national space station housing military and civilian personnel might emerge from the two programs. Another possibility was use by both agencies of similar rocket and spacecraft on separate scientific and military missions with equipment standardization providing “considerable saving.” (Huntsville Times, 4/8/69)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from wsmr carried GSFC-Univ. of Wisconsin-Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory payload to 109.8-mi (176.7-km) altitude. Objective was to provide precisely calibrated stellar observations of stars Regulus, Spica, Denebola, and Benetnasch, which had been viewed by NASA’s Oao II—using 12.9-in-dia Dall-Kirham telescope, plane-grating spectrograph, and strap in stellar pointing attitude control system. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily, hut attitude control system malfunctioned. First target was acquired and data were obtained; second and third targets were not acquired; and fourth target was acquired but not identified. (NASA Rpt srl)
At annual meeting of Aerospace Medical Assn, and interview which followed in San Francisco, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, Dr. Charles A. Berry, said it was almost certain that at least one Apollo 11 astronaut would develop illness during 21-day quarantine period following return from moon. “We have to face the fact that we’ve had post-flight illness on every Apollo mission so far. Our problem will be to determine whether any illnesses that show up . . . are due to the stresses of space flight or to some micro-organism picked up on the moon.” Among difficulties noted during Apollo program were loss of exercise capacity for period after return to earth, motion sickness in flight, and damage to red blood cells from atmosphere of 100% oxygen. Blood cell damage had been alleviated by addition of nitrogen to spacecraft atmosphere. (Huntsville Times, 5/7/69)
President Nixon’s Space Task Group had established that less expensive space operations in future depended on nasa and usaf development of lower cost boosters, J. S. Butz, Jr., said in Air Force and Space Digest. Joint effort on booster selection would be made within understanding signed by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, nasa Administrator, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force. Two major complicating factors existed: “First nasa and the Air Force must overhaul their bureaucracies.” Second was “requirement for a compromise between military and civil needs.” While usaf needed vehicle which could be launched quickly in large numbers and carry sufficient fuel for extensive space maneuvers, NASA wanted larger vehicle to carry more people and large cargo volume. More difficult would be choice of reentry vehicle. Both NASA and USAF wanted winged configuration for operational flexibility and airliner-style landings, but development costs would be high. (AF/SD, 6/69, 79—81)
Initial thermal and vacuum testing of flight model of SERT ii (Space Electric Rocket Test) in preparation for fall 1969 launch had been completed, LeRC announced. SERT II, second flight test in development of ion propulsion for space use and first LeRC orbital spacecraft, would be launched from WTR by Thorad-Agena booster into 621-mi (999.4-km) circular orbit to evaluate inflight performance of electron-bombardment engines for six months or more, sert I had carried first ion thruster to operate in space on suborbital mission July 20, 1964. (LeRC Release 69-2)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Yandenberg AFB by Thor-Agena booster. One entered orbit with 202.1-mi (325.2-km) apogee, 104.6-mi (168.3-km) perigee, 89.5-min period, and 64.9° inclination and reentered May 23. Second satellite entered orbit with 283.2-mi (455.7-km) apogee, 255.9-mi (411.7-km) perigee, 93.2-min period, and 65.7° inclination. Satellites reentered Feb. 16, 1970. (gsfc SSR, 5/15/69; 5/31/69; 2/28/70; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR with VAM—20 booster carried Naval Research Laboratory payload to 113.7-mi (182-km) altitude to record white-light corona of sun from three to nine solar radii with package containing two externally occulted coronagraphs and three related experiments. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Hans H. Maus, Director of Executive Staff at MSFC, and Dr. George N. Constan, Director of Michoud Assembly Facility, retired after combined total of 51 yrs Government service. Maus, expert in rocket development and production engineering, had received usa’s Exceptional Civilian Service Award and number of citations for development of manufacturing methods, process automation, assembly, and tooling concept development. Dr. Constan had served with USA at Milan, Joliet, and Redstone Arsenals before his appointment to Michoud in 1961. (msfc Release 69-167)
Japan successfully launched her largest rocket to date—four-stage, 75ftlong, 4.5-ft-dia, 43.8-ton MU3D—Kyodo News Service reported. Rocket reached 100-mi (160.9-km) altitude in 4% min, with last stage reaching 1.8 mps—about half speed thought needed to orbit satellite—and splashing down in Western Pacific after 7 min 35 secs of flight. (B Sun, 8/18/69, A4)
At Third International History of Astronautics Symposium Oct. 10, organized by IAF in connection with its 20th Congress, A. Ingemar Skoog of Swedish Interplanetary Society traced rocket development in Sweden from 1807, when military first understood possibilities of rockets in warfare, to mid-1860s, when rockets were taken out of service. “An examination of the rockets preserved at the Army Museum in Stockholm, has shown that all 14 rockets are still fitted with their original propellant. This will be tested by propellant experts later this year in order to find out the properties of a 140 years old propellant.” (Text) W. Geisler of Polish Astronautical Society had submitted paper on history and development of rocket technology and astronautics in Poland before 1949: use of rockets on Polish territory by Tartars in 13th century probably had marked introduction of use of rockets in Europe. (Resume) Frederick I. Ordway, III, of Univ. of Alabama delivered paper “The Alleged Contributions of Pedro E. Paulet to Liquid Propellant Rocketry.” “Paulet, a Peruvian chemical engineer-turned-diplomat, spent much of his professional foreign service career in Europe. . . . his claim to being a precursor of liquid propellant rocketry rests in a letter he wrote from Rome on the 23rd of August 1927 that was published in the 7 October 1927 issue of the Lima, Peru, newspaper El Comercio. Therein, he describes liquid propellant rocket engine experiments he had conducted ... in Paris thirty years earlier. . . . Relying on this source and derivatives, many subsequent writers have accorded Paulet a perhaps undeserved place in the history of rocketry.” (Summary)
NASA launched Areas sounding rocket from Wallops Station carrying Pennsylvania State Univ. payload to study ion composition. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (NASA Proj Off)
This Week published interview with science fiction author Arthur C. Clarke: Most important recent outer space discovery was pulsars—“It’s possible that they might be signals from some higher civilization.” Scientific surprise in Apollo program was “its immaculate perfection. You don’t expect that, no matter how carefully you prepare.” Clarke was writing space exploration documentary which would show “whole span of human interest in space, back to the Babylonian astronomers and on up through the colonization of the solar system.” It would include Stonehenge which was “as big a burden for the primitive economy that built it—in fact, probably a much bigger burden than the Apollo program is for us.” (Bradford, This Week, 8/24/69, 7)
Areas sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Andoya, Norway, carrying Swedish payload to study ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
In American Scholar architect R. Buckminster Fuller said: “It seems eminently clear that we not only must put our space programs on highest priority of attention and resource investment but that all humanity must be accredited and financed to enter into a new re-educational system that is geared to develop our most prominent awareness, that we indeed are in space and that all of our concern is with the fact that our space-vehicle Earth and its life-energy-giving Sun, and the tide-pumping Moon can provide ample sustenance and power for all humanity’s needs to be derived from our direct energy income without further robbing our fossil fuels energy savings account. In reality, the Sun, the Earth and the Moon are nothing else than a most fantastically well-designed and space-programmed team of vehicles. All of us are, always have been, and so long as we exist, always will be—nothing else but—astronauts. Let’s pull our heads out of the brain benumbing, mind frustrating, misinformedly conditioned reflexes. If it is going to be ‘All ashore who’s going ashore,’ once more intent to return to nonspace down here ON earth, humanity is doomed.” (American Scholar, Winter 1969-70, 27-47) During 1969: In 1969—the year man first set foot on another celestial body —U.S. orbited 54 spacecraft and U.S.S.R., 70. U.S. total included 31 orbited by DOD. NASA’s 23 included 2 satellites orbited for dod as secondary payloads. Highlight of 1969 was achievement of major goal in NASA’s Apollo program—to land man on the moon and return him safely to earth. Lunar landing system completed final phases of test and demonstration when Apollo 9 demonstrated operation of LM in earth orbit and Apollo 10 demonstrated operation of complete Apollo spacecraft in lunar orbit, with LM making two passes within 47,000 ft of lunar surface. Apollo program climaxed with Apollo 11, July 16—24, when LM Eagle landed on moon and Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. —first men on the moon—performed tasks on lunar surface, redocked with csm in lunar orbit, and returned safely to earth with lunar samples. Apollo 12 successfully accomplished second manned lunar landing with pinpoint accuracy, touching down close to Surveyor 111, which had landed on moon April 19, 1967. Crew set up first alsep on lunar surface and returned safely to earth with lunar samples and parts of Surveyor III. Unmanned Mariner VI and Mariner VII passed within 2,000 mi of Mars, transmitting more than 200 times more data about Mars than were obtained by Mariner IV in 1964. Spacecraft measured chemical composition and temperature of atmosphere and surface and took 198 high-quality pictures, providing new insight into Mars surface characteristics. Other scientific achievements included orbiting of Oso V, Oso VI, Ogo VI, and Explorer XL1. Applications satellites included Intelsat-Ill F—3, Intelsat-III F—4, and Intelsat-III F—5 for ComSat-Corp; Essa IX meteorological satellite for essa; Nimbus III; and Ats V. Biosatellite 111 provided significant biological data on instrumented monkey on board, but mission was terminated early after monkey’s physiological condition deteriorated, and monkey died shortly after recovery. Pioneer E, scheduled to enter solar orbit, and its secondary payload tetr—c were destroyed shortly after launch when Delta booster malfunctioned. Some 189 meteorological sounding rockets, 85 scientific sounding rockets, and 60 high-altitude balloons were launched. NASA—usaf XB—70 and X—15 programs were concluded and new joint program was initiated to continue aeronautical R&d, using YF—12 supersonic aircraft. First operational C—5A, military cargo transport and world’s largest aircraft, was delivered to usaf and by November seven C—5As had accumulated 1,320 hrs flying time. Aeronautical R&d continued to improve quality and quantity of options available in aircraft technology, and aircraft industry made first flights of several wide-bodied jumbo jet transports for civil use, including Boeing 747. New SST design with delta wing was approved by faa and prototype construction was recommended by President Nixon. NASA’s HL—10 lifting-body vehicle completed 3 successful glide flights and 15 powered flights included first supersonic flight at mach 1.1 and 54,000-ft altitude, usaf’s X—24A lifting-body vehicle completed 7 flights. dod space program included orbiting of 2 Vela nuclear-detection satellites, 7 Orbiting Vehicle research satellites, Tacsat I tactical comsat, Egrs XIII (Secor XIII) geodetic satellite (launched by NASA), and U.K.’s Skynet A comsat (launched by NASA). Titan HIM development was terminated and usaf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) program was canceled because of budget cutbacks. NASA and aec completed ground tests of xe experimental rocket engine with 28 successful startups and 2.8 hrs of operation, including 3.5	min at full thrust, and validated test stand No. 1 in Jackass Flats, Nev. SNAP—27 generator was used as electrical power source for Apollo 12 experiments left on moon and SNAP—19 was auxiliary power system for Nimbus III. SNAP—29 program was terminated. New liquid-propellant rocket engine was developed and new triprapellant system produced record performance for chemically powered engines. U.S.S.R.’s 70 payloads included 55 Cosmos satellites and 2 Intercosmos, 2 Meteor, 1 Luna, 1 Zond, 5 Soyuz, and 2 Venus spacecraft, and 2 Molniya I comsats. Manned Soyuz IV docked with manned Soyuz V and two cosmonauts transferred from Soyuz V to Soyuz IV before returning to earth. Manned Soyuz VI, VII, and VIII, launched on three successive days, rendezvoused in orbit and performed experiments including photography, communications, and welding. Luna XV, apparent unmanned challenger to NASA’s Apollo 11 for first lunar landing and return, crashed onto lunar surface in July. U.S.S.R.’s Tu-144 delta-wing supersonic transport successfully reached speeds up to 900 mph and was demonstrated publicly in 90-min test flight. (Pres Rpt 70 [69]; nasa Release 69—161; gsfc SSR, 12/31/69)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr with VAM—20 booster. Rocket carried afcrl payload to 135.5-mi (218-km) altitude to calibrate Harvard College Observatory spectrometer on board orbiting Oso VI by telemetering, grazing incidence, scanning euv monochromator to study active regions of sun simultaneously at 300 to 1,400 A. Pointing was marginal but data were 100% satisfactory. (NASA Rpt SRJL)
At 12th annual Goddard Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C., sponsored by National Space Club, Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, said: “. . . we are witnessing another spectacular example of the utilization of scientific knowledge, accumulated by many generations of scientists, some famous and some obscure, who worked away in their laboratories trying to probe the secrets of nature. We have seen how once these secrets . . . have been revealed, engineering skills could be put to work. We see in our space program also an example of the reverse process. ... New technological developments lead to new techniques and new instruments which . . . speed up our basic work in science and lead to new ways of uncovering new secrets of nature. Thus, during these past ten years the advance of science has been enormously aided by the advance of space technology.” (CR, 3/12/69, S2755) Astronautics Engineer Award was presented to NASA’s l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) in absentia since Apollo 9 mission was still under way. Citation read: “For his personal direction of the Apollo program throughout development and into the final phases of flight to the Moon dramatically illustrated by the two successful all-up flights of the Saturn V and the error-free flights of Apollo 7 and the extraordinary flight of Apollo 8 to the Moon and back. His engineering skill and leadership throughout the development and execution of this complex program have made possible an outstanding American success.” Richard J. Allen of nasa Apollo Program Office Test Div. was awarded Hugh L. Dryden Memorial Fellowship presented to NASA employee adjudged “a deserving individual in disciplines applicable to science, astronautics and space administration.” Mitchell R. Sharpe of Systems Safety and Manned Flight Awareness Office, MSFC, received certificate, trophy, and $500 award for winning entry in 1969 Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay competition. (His Development of the Lifesaving Rocket: A Study in 19th Century Technological Fallout was released by NASA June 10 as msfc Historical Note 4.) National Space Club Press Award “for penetrating, consistently informed and lucid writing on all phases of the national space program” was awarded Evert Clark, Washington science correspondent, Newsweek. North American Rockwell Corp. received Nelson P. Jackson Award “for its major contribution to the success of Apollo during 1968.” (Program; msfc Historical Note 4)
In Washington Post Thomas O’Toole said: “. . . man’s flight to the moon and beyond could be the only means he has left of renewing his dwindling spirits. . . . The voyage of Apollo 8 around the moon last Christmas did more than any other single event last year to restore man’s faith in himself-—and that flight will pale beside an actual moon landing when it comes. ... It could just be that when man walks the moon for the first time it will be felt round the world as such a triumph of the human heart that its beat shall go on for a million years.” (W Post, 3/26/69, A27) March 27—April 8: NASA’s Mariner VII (Mariner G) spacecraft was successfully launched from etr by Atlas-Centaur (AC-19) booster on four-month, 193-million-mi, direct-ascent trajectory toward Mars—NASA’s second mission to fly past Mars during 1969 launch window. Launch vehicle performance was nominal. Spacecraft separated from Centaur, deployed its four solar panels, and locked its sensors on sun and star Vega. Because of several minor spacecraft anomalies during launch, spacecraft was kept in sun-Vega cruise while performance was evaluated. Star-lock override command was transmitted to spacecraft April 1; Canopus was acquired as planned initially and Mariner VII entered stable cruise mode. Midcourse maneuver was conducted April 8 to ensure that spacecraft would fly within 1,900 mi (3,057.7 km) of Mars Aug- 5. Primary mission objective was to fly by southern hemisphere and polar regions of Mars to set basis for future experiments, particularly those relevant to search for extraterrestrial life. As secondary mission spacecraft would develop technology needed for succeeding Mars missions. The 900-lb spacecraft carried six complementary experiments to provide information about Martian surface and atmosphere. Mariner March 27-April 8: has* latmcked Mariner VII on an Atlas-Centaur booster as the second of two spacecraft in the Mariner Mars 1969 mission to take photograpks and collect data about [he surface and atmosphere of Mars. Mariner IV (oris launched Feb. 24. An April 8 maneuver ensured that Mariner VII would pass Mars Aug. 5. VII mission, except for flyby area, was almost identical to mission of Mariner VI launched Feb. 24 for investigation of equatorial region and scheduled to arrive at Mars July 31. (NASA Proi Off; NASA Releases 69-26, 69-12)
Japan failed in fifth attempt to launch satellite when four-stage, unguided Lambda booster malfunctioned. (Harrison, W Post, 9/24/69, A9)
Nik e-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried GSFc payload to 77.1-mi (124-km) altitude to obtain data on variation of temperature, pressure, and wind profile by detonating grenades at prescribed times and recording sound arrivals on ground. All 19 grenades were detonated and sound arrivals were recorded. Launch was third in series of four rockets to be launched from Churchill during stratospheric warming period [see Jan. 22]. (nasa Rpt SRI.)
Pakistan had successfully launched her first rocket, a two-stage vehicle to investigate upper atmosphere, Pakistan Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Committee announced. (AP, W Post, 4/2/69, A7)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket, launched by NASA from wsmr with VAM—20 booster, carried Univ. of Hawaii payload to 108,4-mi (174.4-km) altitude. Objectives were to obtain high-resolution spectra of solar disc from 1,800 to 2,000 A, using high-resolution echelle-grating spectrograph pointed by Univ. of Colorado biaxial pointing control. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and photographic spectra were obtained on both camera cycles, (nasa Rpt SRL)
U.S. authorities reported U.S.S.R. had conducted mid-February testfiring of defense rocket that could intercept attacking missiles at 100 to 450 mi from its launch site. Rocket appeared comparable to U.S. Spartan interceptor planned for U.S. ABM system. U.S.S.R. also was reported making progress on phased-array radar judged essential for swift detection and handling of several attacking missiles at once. (Corddry, B Sun, 3/3/69, Al)
NASA announced revised plans for first orbital workshop, with 1972 launch using first two stages of Saturn V to launch workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount together. Workshop would be outfitted on ground and would arrive in 253-mi circular orbit equipped for immediate occupancy by astronauts and with atm attached. Program objectives remained same as when NASA intended to use Saturn IB 2nd stage as 1971 workshop: to provide environment in which man could live and work for extended periods in space and to study man’s physiological and psychological responses and capabilities in space, atm would permit man to operate high-resolution astronomical telescopes in space, free from earth’s atmosphere. Saturn V hardware from Apollo program was available for revised plan, (nasa Release 69—105; Simons, W Post, 7/22/69, Al)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Naval Research Laboratory payload to conduct solar physics studies. Mission was unsuccessful, (nasa Proj Off)
Wendell F. Moore, assistant chief engineer at Bell Aerosystems Co. and developer of rocket belt which could lift man and carry him length of football field, died in Niagara Falls, N.Y., at age 51. He had won John Price Wetherill Medal of Franklin Institute of Philadelphia in 1964 for his invention, first flight-tested in 1961. (upi, NYT, 5/30/69) May 29—June 8: 28th Salon Internationale de l’Aeronautique et de l’Espace —Paris Air Show—featured nearly 550 exhibitors representing 14 nations. U.S., with largest pavilion, emphasized space achievements, taking “Countdown Apollo” as theme. On opening day biggest display attraction, said United Press International, was Apollo 8 spacecraft, which Apollo 9 Astronauts James A. McDivitt, David R. Scott, and Russell L. Schweickart unveiled in ceremony attended by U.S. Ambassador to France, R. Sargent Shriver. U.S. exhibit also included F—1 and J—2 engines of 1st and 2nd stages of Saturn V rocket and full-scale model of Apollo 11 lm. French prototype of Concorde 001 supersonic transport was flown over Paris for first time and later took its place on apron at Le Bourget Airport among 150 aircraft, helicopters, and gliders. Opening day also marked signing of agreement for joint development of short-haul airbus by French Transport Minister Jean Chamant and West German Economics Minister Karl Schiller. Spokesman for U.K. manufacturer Hawker Siddeley said firm was still negotiating on building wings for 250-seat airbus. U.S. exhibited 490-passenger Boeing 747 but did not show Lockheed C—5A, world’s largest aircraft. U.K. exhibits at Air Show included Concorde 002, British prototype; Hawker Siddeley Harrier vtol jet fighter; and Hawker Siddeley Nimrod, maritime reconnaissance version of Comet. French exhibits included Dassault Mirage fighters and Dassault Hirondelle turboprop. U.S.S.R.’s chief entry was 500-passenger An-22 turboprop airliner. (Amer Av, 5/26/69, 33-6; upi, W Star, 5/29/69, A10; Reuters, NYT, 5/30/69, 40)
At dedication of Robert Hutchings Goddard Library of Clark Univ., Worcester, Mass., Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) said: “I am for the space program. But I want to see it in its right priority: One which will let it continue into the future and not have to be cut back or abandoned because the nation that supports it is hobbled by internal disorder. And so, once the lunar landing and exploration are completed, a substantial portion of the space budget can be diverted to the pressing problems here at home. We should develop a plan for an orderly programmed exploration of outer space. But we no longer need an accelerated program. ... We should continue an orderly and rational space program for the advancement of man’s knowledge of the universe and for the considerable benefits it will bring us here at home.” NASA program “has been the first time, outside wartime, in which the nation has organized its scientific and industrial disciplines and techniques, “Our challenge today is to use the same techniques and the same discipline: To lower the cost of production of home building . . . ; to develop command and control systems in the fight against crime; to apply the versatility of computers to education and worker training and the vital work of neighborhood health centers; to organize government and scientific resources to find new and cheaper ways to end the destruction of our environment. The American team of government, industry and labor has been able to achieve Dr. Goddard’s impossible dream: Certainly the same industries, the same employees, the same techniques and support can be applied to the urgent business here at home.” (Kennedy Off Release) Honorary Doctor of Laws degrees were awarded to Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.); J. Leland Atwood, President of North American Rockwell Corp. and general chairman of Goddard Library program; and Jack S. Parker, General Electric Co. Vice Chairman; and Doctor of Science degree to Apollo 11 Astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr. Mrs. Robert H. Goddard, widow of U.S. rocket pioneer, spoke during ribbon-cutting ceremony at which Dr. Charles G. Abbot, 97-yr-old Smithsonian Institution Secretary Emeritus and Dr. Goddard’s close friend, received ovation from audience of 4,000. MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, and North American Rockwell Corp. Vice President Francis D. Tappaan received Clark Univ. chairs during luncheon after ceremonies. (Program)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Southwest Center for Advanced Studies payload to 826-mi (133-km) altitude to investigate auroral disturbances. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and payload was recovered successfully, (nasa Rpt srl)
The supersonic Soviet airliner Tu-144 following its landing at Sheremetyevo Airport, Moscow, after a public-demonstration test flight. {AP wirephoto) will be executed with the same precision that marked the early stages of this trip.” ( W Post, 5/22/69, A24) John Lannan in Washington Evening Star; “Where manned space flight once was fraught with fright and peril, it seems to have moved into an era of fun and games. . . . The astronauts have learned to fly their spacecraft, the ground crews to launch them and the Defense Department to recover them. What remains is to use this accumulated knowledge, and that’s what NASA is attempting to do.” It all pointed to fact that “space flight has come of age.” (W Star, 5/21/69, A4) Marquis Childs in Washington Post: “When the moon landing . . . is completed the cost to the government will be just under $24 billion. The achievement represents an unprecedented orchestration of the resources of science and technology. The contrast with the failures here on earth to begin to try to cure rudimentary ills could hardly at this moment of grave uncertainty be sharper.” (W Post, 5/21/69, A25) Christian Science Monitor editorial: Apollo 10 mission “has again posed the old, old question: If mankind can achieve so spectacularly in space, why cannot we improve matters faster here on earth? The answer, surely, is that it is simpler to mobilize the complex electronics and space-science gadgetry to rocket a spacecraft to the moon than it is to coordinate the manifold and conflicting human emotions, ambitions, and processes necessary for cleaning up the cities, thrusting the black revolution forward with a minimum of friction, and banishing earth’s pollutants. The earth problem is moTe complex than the moon problem. Yet success in the moon venture will offer assurance that the earth challenge can be met. “So let no one call the moon venture a waste of ambition, treasure, achievement. The whole brilliant enterprise is immensely horizon-widening, thought-expanding.” (csm, 5/21/69)
Aerobee 150 MI sounding rocket, launched by nasa from WSMR with VAM—20 booster, carried Univ. of Colorado Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics payload to 124-mi (199.5-km) altitude. Objective was to obtain high-resolution spectra of Carbon IV resonance doublet at 1,548 and 1,550 A using high-resolution, narrow-band spectrograph with echelle as principle dispersing element and sparcs solar pointing control. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (nasa Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Natal, Brazil, carried Brazil-Univ. of California payload to conduct stellar x-ray studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Proj Off)
usaf Titan IIIC booster launched from ETR successfully orbited five unmanned satellites—two Vela nuclear detection satellites and three orbiting vehicle research satellites. Launch was 17th for Titan IIIC and last in development program. Vela IX entered orbit with 69,387-mi (111,643.7-km) apogee, 68.653-mi (110,462.7-km) perigee, 6,718.5-min period, and 32.7° inclination. Vela X entered orbit with 69,614-mi (112,008.9-km) apogee, 68.774-mi (110,657.4-km) perigee, 6,707.6-min period, and 32.8° inclination. Velas would monitor nuclear weapon detonations and natural radiation sources. OV V—5 (ERS—29), OV V—6, and OV V—9 entered orbits with 69,427-mi (111,708.0-km) apogee, 10,480-mi (16,862.3-km) perigee, 3,119-min period, and 32.9° inclination to study particles and fields and solar processes. (Pres Rpt 70 [69]; gsfc SSR, 5/31/69; UPl, NYT, 5/24/69, 6)
NASA successfully launched Essa IX (tos-g) ninth meteorological satellite in essa’s Tiros Operational Satellite (tos) system from etr by three-stage Thrust-Augmented Thor-Delta (DSV-3E) booster. Primary NASA mission objective was to place and operate spacecraft in sun-synchronous orbit with local equator crossing time between 2:15 pm and 2:35 pm so that daily advanced-vidicon-camera-system (Avcs) pictures of entire globe could be obtained regularly and dependably. Satellite achieved nearly polar, sun-synchronous, circular orbit with 934.6-mi (1,503.8-km) apogee, 884.4-mi (1,423.9-km) perigee, 115.2min period, and 101.8° inclination. An advanced version of cartwheel configuration, 320-lb cylindrical Essa IX carried flat plate radiometer to measure atmosphere’s heat balance and two avcs cameras for daily global weather coverage. Photos would be stored on board satellite on magnetic tape until readout by essa’s Command and Data Acquisition (cda) stations at Fairbanks, Alaska, and Wallops Island, Va. Satellite was backup to ensure full coverage after failure of one avcs camera on Essa VII (launched Aug. 16, 1968) and would be primary stored-data satellite in TOS system. Spacecraft was placed in wheel mode and spin rate was adjusted. Only anomaly was 20 rpm spin rate (rather than expected 10 rpm) after spacecraft spin-down. ESSA financed and managed TOS system and would operate spacecraft after NASA completed checkout in month. GSFC was responsible for procurement, launch, and initial checkout of spacecraft in orbit. (NASA Proj Off; essa Release ES-69-9)
At meeting of American Geophysical Union in San Francisco, Columbia Univ. scientist Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for Apollo program’s seismic research, proposed detonation of nuclear device on moon to assist analysis of lunar interior. He announced tentative plans for placement of one- to five-kiloton bomb on lunar far side by unmanned Atlas-Agena rocket between Apollo 15 and 16 missions in November 1970 and envisioned possible cooperative effort with U.S.S.R. “I expect to run into a large number of political snags. But these problems are not insurmountable if we include the Russians . . . and agree to share the data with them. ... I would like to ask them to put the bomb on the moon.” Proposal was to be submitted to nas for approval. Nuclear blast would send seismic waves through moon’s core. These would be measured to yield information on nature and origin of lunar interior. (Reuters, W Post, 12/16/69, A2)
Thomas O’Toole in Washington Post observed similarities among astronauts. Of 23 who already had flown in space, 21 were either only sons or eldest sons. Pattern tied in, he said, with psychologists’ beliefs that only and eldest children tended to achieve more in life because they were disciplined more and trained and treated better by parents. Astronauts also were athletic, showed academic excellence, and had intense love of flying, O’Toole said. (W Post, 3/2/69) Primary objectives were to demonstrate crew, space vehicle, and mission support facilities performance during manned Saturn V mission with CSM and LM; demonstrate LM and crew performance, demonstrate performance of nominal and selected backup lunar orbit rendezvous (lor) mission activities; and assess CSm/lm consumables. Multispectral photography experiment was carried for first time to provide photos of earth resources using several different film-filter combinations. Launch events occurred as planned and spacecraft, carrying Astronauts James A. McDivitt (commander), David R. Scott (cm pilot), and Russell L. Schweickart (lm pilot), entered initial orbit with 119.5-mi (192.3-km) apogee and 117.6-rai (189,3-km) perigee. After post-insertion checkout csm, code-named “Gumdrop,” separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) and lm, code-named “Spider.” Crew successfully transposed csm and docked with lm, and docked spacecraft was separated from 3rd stage with rcs burn. Two S—IVB burns placed stage on earth-escape trajectory. Crew conducted first docked SPS burn. On second day crew tracked landmarks, conducted pitch and yaw roll maneuvers, and increased apogee by firing sps engine three times. On third day, McDivitt and Schweickart entered lm through docking tunnel, evaluated lm systems, transmitted first telecast, and conducted first manned firing of lm descent propulsion system (dps). They then returned to csm and conducted fifth sps burn to circularize orbit. McDivitt and Schweickart reentered lm on fourth day and transmitted second telecast. Schweickart, recovered from earlier nausea, spent 37 min outside spacecraft, walking between lm and csm hatches, maneuvering on handrails, and standing in “golden slipper” foot restraints. He commented on sun’s brightness, photographed spacecraft and earth, and described rain squalls over ksc before he and McDivitt returned to csm. Scott opened cm hatch and retrieved thermal samples from csm exterior. McDivitt and Schweickart reentered lm on fifth day to perform csm—lm rendezvous. Scott separated csm from lm and fired csm reaction control system thrusters to place spacecraft about 3.4 mi (5.5 km) apart, lm dps was ignited twice to set up rendezvous, lm descent stage was jettisoned and LM ascent propulsion system (aps) was fired to set up conditions for circularization. Although problems were encountered with crewman optical alignment sight (coas) because of extremely bright reflections, radar and optical sightings backed up by earth tracking enabled spacecraft to dock successfully after being up to 114 mi (183.5 km) apart during 6%-hr separation. After McDivitt and Schweickart returned to csm, crew jettisoned lm ascent stage and maneuvered to safe distance while stage burned to propellant depletion and entered orbit with 4,309-mi (6,934.5-km) apogee and 142.2-mi (228.8-km) perigee. By end of fifth day 97% of Apollo 9 objectives had been successfully accomplished. On sixth through ninth days crew conducted sixth and seventh SPS burns to alter apogee, tracked NASA’s Pegasus III meteoroid detection satellite (launched July 30, 1965), took multispectral photos of earth, tracked landmarks, exercised spacecraft systems, and prepared for reentry. Final sps burn for deorbit on 10th day was delayed one revolution because of unfavorable weather in planned landing area, cm—sm separation, parachute deployment, and other reentry events were nominal; spacecraft reentered during 152nd revolution and splashed down in Atlantic 180 mi east of Bahamas at 12:53 pm est March 13, 241 hrs 53 secs after launch, within sight of recovery ship U.S.S. Guadalcanal. Crew was picked up by helicopter and flown to recovery ship within one hour after splashdown. Astronauts were welcomed by Guadalcanal crew and received congratulatory telegram message from President Nixon which said: “The epic flight of Apollo Nine will be recorded in history as ten days that thrilled the world. You have by your courage and your skill helped to shape the future of man in space. The three of you and the great team which enabled you to complete your successful mission have shown the world that the spirit of man and his technological genius are eager to begin an age of adventure, an age which will benefit all the people on this good earth.” All primary Apollo 9 objectives were achieved and anomalies were not serious enough to alter mission operations or flight plan significantly. First manned flight of lm qualified last major component for lunar landing mission. Apollo 9 was sixth Apollo mission to date and third manned Apollo mission. Earlier unmanned Apollo flights had yielded all spacecraft information possible without crew on board. Apollo 4 (launched Nov. 9, 1967) and Apollo 5 (launched Jan. 22, 1968) had both been highly successful, completing inflight tests of all major pieces of Apollo hardware. Apollo 6 (launched April 4, 1968), despite launch vehicle problems, had attained four of five primary objectives with spacecraft recovered in excellent condition. First manned Apollo mission, Apollo 7 (Oct. 11—22, 1968), had achieved all primary objectives and verified operation of spacecraft for lunar-mission duration. Second manned mission, Apollo 8 (Dec. 21—27, 1968), proved capability of Apollo hardware and systems to operate out to lunar distances and return through earth’s atmosphere. Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, MSFC for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Releases 69-29, 69-33; PD, 3/17/69, 400)
usaf had awarded three-year, $20-million contract to North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. to design new rocket engine to power payloads in space, Business Week said. United Aircraft’s Pratt & Whitney Div. was also working on concept, magazine believed. (Bus Wk, 10/4/69)
dod’s Tacsat 1 Tactical Communications Satellite was successfully launched from ETR at 4:09 pm est by Titan IIIC booster into synchronous equatorial orbit over Pacific. Orbital parameters: apogee, 22,387 mi (36,020.7 km) ; perigee, 22,332 mi (35,932.2 km); period, 1,446.6 min; and inclination, 0.6°. The $30-million, 1,600-lb, cylindrical satellite would test feasibility of using satellite system to communicate over great distances with small military units such as aircraft, ships, and small ground stations. Tacsat I was powerful enough for ground forces to use portable receiving antennas as small as one foot in diameter. It also would test new gyrostat stabilization system. (W Star, 2/9-10/70; AP, W Post, 2/10/69, Al; gsfc SSR, 2/15/69; dod Release 64-68; Pres Rpt 70 [69])
