Christian Science Monitorsditorial said nasa had postponed manned Mars mission because of budget cutback but “it is keeping its space shuttle program pretty much on schedule.” Reusable space vehicle was “guarantee that space progress won’t be wholly shunted aside by budget stringencies.” It would “help to keep alive the interest of the big rocket and airframe contractors, and the enthusiasm of the thousands of researchers and scientists who have hoped to make space exploration their life work.” (CSM, 2/12/70)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Alaska Rocket Range at Fairbanks, carrying GSFC payload to make simultaneous measurement of electric fields over wide range of latitudes crossing auroral zone and extending into polar cap region. Four barium clouds were released during disturbed magnetic conditions and good photographic coverage was obtained. Rocket was launched in conjunction with series begun March 1. (NASA Rpt srl)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Burner II booster into orbit with 872.3-km (542-mi) apogee, 764.4-km (475-mi) perigee, 101.2-min period, and 98.7° inclination. (Pres Rpt 71; gsfc SSR, 9/30/70)
Technical progress made through space program was described by Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, in commencement address at Whitworth College in Spokane, Washington: Chrysler Corp. was using computer-controlled equipment derived from Apollo checkout equipment to test distributors in its automobile ignition systems. U.S. Bureau of Public Roads had found automotive safety device that originated in Apollo spacecraft couches was trimming 97-km-per-hr (60-mph) impact to equivalent of 8 km per hr (5 mph) when used in conjunction with special highway guardrails. Nationwide insurance company had announced collision premium reductions of 20% for cars equipped with device. (Text) May 25:	Dedication ceremonies were held at Goddard Park in Auburn, Mass., memorial built by Auburn Rotary Club to honor late rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard. Park contained replica of first liquid-fuel rocket invented by Dr. Goddard and Polaris rocket donated by USN. (CR, 6/3/70, E5170)
Japanese scientists reported loss of signals from Ohsumi satellite (launched Feb. 11) during eighth orbit. Scientists discontinued tracking on ninth orbit; they said mission had provided valuable data for development of Japan’s Mu rocket, scheduled for launch in autumn of 1970. (SBD, 2/13/79, 201)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Wallops Station carrying Univ. of New Hampshire payload to study energetic particles. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket, launched by NASA from wsmr, carried Columbia Radiation Laboratories payload to 230.9-km (143.5-mi) altitude to study soft x-ray sources and diffuse background. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt srl)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Univ. of Michigan experiment to study airglow. Mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
House passed by 229 votes to 105 H.R. 16516, FY 1971 NASA authorization, after agreeing to recommit bill to House Committee on Science and Astronautics with instructions to reduce Apollo program funding by $14.5 million and space flight operations funding by $15.5 million. Action brought authorization total to $3,601 billion, $30 million below $3,631 billion reported by House Committee on Science and Astronautics on March 12, but $268 million more than $3,333 billion requested by Administration. (CR, 4/23/70, H3377-23)
U.K.’s first attempt to launch satellite with own booster failed when pressurization system in three-stage Black Arrow booster malfunctioned. Booster was to have orbited 82-kg (180-lb) satellite to study upper atmosphere. Previous U.K. satellites had been orbited by NASA boosters. (Berger, B Sun, 9/3/70)
New York Times editorial commented on 4.6-billion-yr-old rock brought from moon by Apollo 12: “Rock 13’s appearance at this moment in history is more than a major scientific coup for the Apollo program. The recovery of this staggeringly ancient rock strengthens the argument of those who have pressed for extensive exploration of the lunar surface on the ground that the moon will provide the clues needed to understand the origin and development of the solar system. Thus rock 13 fortifies the scientific case for going ahead with additional Apollo flights despite the dangers which were made so vivid by the hazardous journey of Apollo 13.” (NYT, 5/28/ 70)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket, launched by NASA from wsmr, carried mit payload to 146.2-km (90.9-mi) altitude to obtain precise position of two or more x-ray sources. Instruments functioned satisfactorily, but timer on rocket closed shut-off valves at 46 secs. Good data were collected from first target, but data from second target were not expected to be useful. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA announced plans to place White Sands, N. Mex., Test Facility on standby status in June 1971 because of reduced FY 1971 budget requests and reduction of Apollo program work. Move could reduce employment from 641 to caretaker force of 50 following completion of 1970-1971 tests of Apollo lm and Skylab program CMS and sms. Facility would be kept in condition for resumption of work in 60-90 days. In announcing decision Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, said, “The NASA facilities at White Sands are unique and valuable. We plan to consider them carefully for possible use in future NASA programs, and to undertake a survey of possible uses by other government agencies.” (NASA Release 70-31)
NASA successfully conducted first test firing of experimental solidpropellant rocket motor with 1.07-m (42-in) diameter and built-in thrust stopper at Eniwetok Atoll in Pacific. Motor burned 34 secs at 53 400-newton (12 000-lb) thrust before it was stopped by internal water-quench system. Motor had been constructed by Hercules Inc., for jpl. (NASA Release 70-12)
Significance of Soviet flights to moon was discussed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, in letter to Sen. Clinton P. Anderson (D-N. Mex.), Chairman of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. Luna XVI and XVII, launched Sept. 12 and Nov. 10, had been “technically impressive; but as isolated events, their importance to science and technology is relatively minor.” U.S. still held technological leadership with Apollo 11. U.S. had had four men on moon and U.S.S.R. none. U.S. had returned 56 kg (123 lb) of lunar material and U.S.S.R. had returned 85-113 g (3-4 oz). U.S. had placed automated station on moon that had functioned for more than year. U.S. had gained “enormous amount” of lunar information; U.S.S.R. had added very little. In overall trends, however, U.S. launch rate was decreasing while Soviet rate was increasing. In 1970 to date, U.S.S.R. had placed 74 payloads in space, to 31 by U.S. “They have seldom missed a launch window in the exploration of Venus and Mars; our planetary program has many gaps.” U.S.S.R. had continuing manned space program and capability, with Zond spacecraft, for manned circum-iunar flight. Soviets had stated intention to orbit space station before U.S. and reportedly were developing booster of Saturn V class while U.S. had suspended Saturn V production. U.S.S.R. was spending more money on space annually than U.S. “.. .when we view Luna 16 and 17 in the context of trends in our program and theirs, then we must be concerned about our future in aeronautics and space—about our position of leadership that we have worked so hard to achieve.” (CR, 11/30/70, S19002)
X-15 rocket research aircraft, holder of 7274-km per hr (4520-mph) speed record for manned aircraft, went on display at Alabama Space and Rocket Center near msfc. Once piloted by Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong and one of three manufactured for NASA, the 22 700-kg (50 000-lb) $50-million X-15 was on loan from Air Force Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio. Second X-15 was on display at Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. Third had been destroyed in 1967 crash. (Birmingham Post-Herald, 3/28/70)
SAMSO had successfully tested thrust vector control system (tvc), improved steering mechanism for Titan IIIC booster, afsc announced. TVC was lighter and less complicated than present system and would permit orbiting of heavier payloads by Titan IIIC. Mechanism had ring of 24 electrical valves that injected liquid nitrogen tetroxide from pressurized tank into flaming exhaust to deflect hot gases and steer booster. Operational system already in use had hydraulic valves with spaghetti-like collection of hydraulic lines, heavy pumps, and separate tanks for liquid and pressurizing gas. (afsc Release 17.70)
India had successfully completed five flight tests in Rohini multistagerocket development program at terls, including one test of booster to be used for Dart payload, Space Business Daily reported. India had reportedly completed feasibility study of design and development of carrier rocket that could launch 30-kg (66-lb) satellite into near polar orbit and planned to launch first satellite by 1973. (SBD, 5/29/70,143)
President Nixon sent $200.8-billion FY 1971 budget request to Congress, including total space budget of $4,954 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $3,148 billion (plus $185.5 million for aircraft technology); dod would receive $1,674 billion; aec, $99 million; essa, $26 million; Dept, of Interior, $4 million; nsf, $2 million; and Dept, of Agriculture, $1 million. Total NASA new obligational authority (noa) requested, $3,333 billion, was $404.9 million less than FY 1970 noa of $3,737 billion. NASA expenditures were budgeted to decline $486.4 million, from FY 1970 level of $3,889 billion to $3,403 billion. Reductions placed proposed NASA FY 1971 funding at lowest level since 1962. Of budget request, $2,606 billion would go for r&d, $34.6 million for construction of facilities, and $692.3 million for research and program management. Apollo funding decrease of $729.6 million, to $956.50 million in FY 1971, reflecting successful completion of manned lunar landing goal, would be partially offset by increase to $515.2 million for manned space flight operations. The $515.2 million would include $364.3 million for Apollo Applications, $110 million for space shuttie and station, and $40.9 million for operations. Advanced missions would receive $2.5 million, same as in FY 1970, to bring total for manned space flight to $1,474 billion, down $557.5 million from FY Funding for space science and applications programs would increase $45.9 million, from $519.7 million in FY 1970 to $565.7 million. Increases would go to physics and astronomy program, for airborne research ($3 million), s<Jlar observatories ($16.1 million), and Explorer satellites ($25.6 million). Funding for Pioneer program of planetary exploration would increase from $20 million in FY 1970 to $32.9 million. Funding for biosatellites would decrease from $6 million in FY 1970 to $1.5 million. Earth resources survey would receive more than 50% increase in funding, from $26 million to $52.5 million, with $41.5 million allocated for Earth Resources Technology Satellite. New projects funded were navigation and traffic control studies (with dot), $3 million, and Global Atmospheric Research Program (garp) study, $1 million. Total for advanced research and technology programs would be reduced from $272 million in FY 1970 to $264 million, nerva rocket funding would increase from $27 million to $32 million. Increases also were proposed for v/stol aircraft technology ($15 million in FY 1971, from $9.5 million in FY 1970), subsonic aircraft technology ($11.9 million, from $9.4 million in FY 1970), and supersonic aircraft technology ($21.9 million, from $18.9 million in FY 1970), within total $185.5 million requested for aeronautics. Sustaining university program was being phased out, with no funds requested for FY 1971. dod space funding, down $82 million, reflected cancellation of mol program. FY 1971 funding would support satellite development, portions of missile development, and range operations. AEC’s requested $99 million reflected slight decreases for development of nerva rocket and space nuclear electric power sources for space applications. Funds for Depts. of Interior and Agriculture would support participation in erts project. NSF’s $2-million space funding was for research rockets and satellite and observation instruments. faa 1971 budget reflected restoration of $275 million in Federal funds for development of two prototype ssts. (NASA Release, 2/2/ 70; US Budget for FY 1971; bob Special Analysis)
Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, testified on NASA FY 1971 authorization before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: Manned space expenditures for FY 1971 would be about 25% less than in FY 1970 and about half FY 1966 peak. “We are able to make these rapid changes . . . as the result of two fundamental policies .... One of these policies is that the great bulk of the NASA program is carried out under contracts with industry, university laboratories and other institutions in the private sector of our economy. The other ... is that NASA must maintain a civil service staff sufficient in quality and numbers to properly supervise the work performed under contract .... Essentially all the reductions being implemented in the manned space flight programs in Fiscal Year 1971 are in those efforts carried out urtder contract.” In FY 1971 NASA proposed to complete definition of space shuttle and space station and continue studies of systems, missions, and payloads for further economies in future years. In Apollo program, Myers pointed out, scheduled stretchout of manned lunar landings would “add to operational costs of the lunar exploration program, although not to our costs this year.” In Skylab program, design, development, and ground testing of subsystems and assemblies of Saturn Workshop, airlock module, multiple docking adapter, and atm were well advanced. Fabrication had begun on first flight articles, with delivery scheduled for late 1971. In space shuttle program, shuttle would be “designed so that it can be maintained in a state of launch readiness for lengthy periods and yet be launched within two hours notice into an orbit of any inclination. In the event of an emergency in space, it would be able to carry engineering or repair specialists to overcome the problem or rescue an endangered crew.” (Testimony)
Three security automobiles burst into flames in fog-like oxygen vapor 335 m (1100 ft) from Apollo 13’s Saturn V booster at KSC Launch Complex 39, Pad A, during rocket fueling for countdown demonstration test. Patrolmen escaped injury and booster was not damaged. Test was delayed nearly four hours, but engineers successfully completed countdown with simulated ignition. Vented oxygen vapor apparently mixed with gasoline in carburetors and was ignited by spark plugs. Dr. Kurt H. Debus, KSC Director, appointed board to investigate accident, (upi, WPost, 3/26/70, A3)
NASA launched two Nike-Apache sounding rockets. Rocket launched from wsmr carried Univ. of Pittsburgh experiment to study atmos- , pheric composition. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. Rocket launched from Eglin afb, Fla., carried Univ. of Michigan experiment to study atmospheric structure. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Scientific data on March 7 solar eclipse collected by nasa Aerobee 170 sounding rocket at 173.8-km (108-mi) altitude had been recovered from 1783 m (5850 ft) under water by USN cable-controlled underwater recovery vehicle (curv III), Wallops Station announced. NRL payload carrying four cameras had photographed solar flash spectrum in eclipsed sun’s chromosphere, but parachute failed to open and payload sank 120 km (75 mi) off coast of Wallops Island, Va. After recovery, water-soaked film was maintained at 275 K (35°F) while scientists devised special processing techniques to restore film. Photos containing prime uv spectrum during total eclipse were salvaged. (WS Release 70-5)
Christian Science Monitor editorial on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space discussions: “While not wishing to minimize the long road which still lies ahead before America and Russia have peacefully resolved all their major disagreements, we see the new space pact as an extraordinarily heartening development. It has created a new bond, a new mutual interest, a new feeling of joint participation. It is from the multiplication of such ties that international peace and friendship grow. And from such a vision of space togetherness there can come a stronger desire for greater brotherliness on earth.’’ (CSM, 10/31/ 70) During October: Scientists at Boeing Space Center in Kent, Wash., were studying piece of Surveyor III, 5 cm (2 in) long, returned from moon by Apollo 12 astronauts, to determine why original white paint had discolored, Boeing Co. said. White paint reflected intense solar rays in space and helped prevent heat buildup inside spacecraft. Boeing researchers thought paint degraded in space because of contaminating film from rocket exhaust, constant proton bombardment, or other radiation from sun. If discoloring came from contamination, paint could be restored to whiteness through oxygen plasma process. If paint had changed through radiation damage, Boeing could replenish depleted atoms. Results of study would enable Boeing to renew reflective paint of future spacecraft which might need to function for 10 to 20 yrs. (Boeing Release S-0788)
NASA announced it was inviting 450 scientific and technical leaders to Space Station Utilization Conference to be held at ARC Sept. 9-11. Invitees would participate in planning of manned earth orbital space station scheduled for 1976-1978 launch. Laboratory was to be operated in space for 10 yrs. At conference, panels would be formed to screen potential space station uses and panel recommendations would provide material for related study in summer 1971. (NASA Release 70-137) E.	Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins. Among those honored were Apollo 8 Astronauts Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Jr., and William A. Anders; Astronauts Virgil I. Grissom, Roger B. Chafee, and Edward H. White II, killed in Apollo fire; Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and wife Valentina V. Nikolayeva-Tereshkova, Gherman S. Titov, Aleksey A. Leonov, Vladimir A. Shatalov, and Konstantin P. Feoktistov; and late Cosmonauts Vladimir M. Komarov and Pavel I. Belyayev. Others honored included Dr. Hugh L. Dryden, former NASA Deputy Administrator; N. E. Golovin, White Sands rocket scientist; Willy Ley, rocket scientist and author; Dr. W. R. Lovelace, former nasa Director of Space Medicine for Manned Space Flight; Theodore T. von Karman, aerodynamics expert; Joseph A. Walker, NASA X-15 test pilot; and Alan T. Waterman, NASA consultant and first NSF Director. Names had been selected by Working Group on Lunar Nomenclature and were approved by IAU officials. Other names approved included those of medieval Persian poet-astronomer Omar Khayyam, U.S. physicist Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer, U.S. scientist George Washington Carver, mythological figures Icarus and Daedalus, and apocryphal Chinese rocket inventor Wan Hu. (McElheny, W Post, 8/15/70, Al; AP, W Star, 8/22/70, A2; SAOPIO; Sky and Telescope, 11/70,262-6) Communications with Skynet B were lost suddenly during apogee motor firing Aug. 22. Search for spacecraft was being conducted by NORAD. Skynet B was second of two U.K. military comsats launched in IDCSP-A program under dod-U.K. agreement. USAF managed project for DOD and would reimburse NASA for launch services. U.K. would reimburse USAF. Skynet A, launched Nov. 21, 1969, was operating satisfactorily over Indian Ocean. (NASA Proj Off; B Sun, 8/20/70, A3) August /9.-U.S.S.R.. launched Cosmos CCCLVIIinto orbit with 466km (289.6-mi) apogee, 271-km (168.4-mi) perigee, 91.9-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 24. (GSFC SSR, 8/31/ 70; 11/30/70)
NASA launched three Aerobee 150 sounding rockets. Two from wsmr carried mit experiment to study stellar spectra and Johns Hopkins Univ. experiment to study uv spectra. One launched from Woom-era Rocket Range, Australia, carried Univ. of Wisconsin experiment to conduct x-ray studies. (SR list)
AFSC announced award by SAMSO of $9 228 319 contract to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for space experiments support program (SESP) launch scheduled for late 1971 from Vandenberg afb, Calif. Contract called for integration of several satellites onto spacecraft that would be orbited by Thor-Agena booster. Largest experiment was 113-kg (250-lb) flexible solar array designed to test deployment of flexible panels in zero-genvironment and verify long-term power-generation characteristics of new solar cell. (AFSC Release 132.70)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying nrl experiment to study stellar uv. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, reviewed results of Apollo 13 accident investigations and announced postponement of Apollo 14 mission to Jan. 31, in testimony before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. LaRC Director Edgar M. Cort-right, Chairman of Apollo 13 Review Board, summarized prepared statement before Committee. Recommendations of Apollo 13 Review Board [see June 15] would be implemented before Apollo 14 was approved for launch, Dr. Paine said, csm systems would be modified to eliminate potential combustion hazards in high-pressure oxygen. Unsealed f&n motors would be removed from oxygen tanks and additional oxygen tank would be added to Apollo 14 CSM. Electrical wiring within high-pressure oxygen systems would be limited to stainless-steel-sheathed wires, and Teflon, aluminum, and other potentially reactive materials would be used as little as possible and kept away from possible ignition sources. Spacecraft and Mission Control warning systems would be modified to provide more immediate and visible warnings of system anomalies. MSC was reviewing spacecraft emergency equipment and procedures and use of csms and LMs in “lifeboat” modes. ossa, OMSF, and oart had been directed to apply Review Board recommendations throughout NASA and submit report on assessment and actions taken or proposed by Aug. 25. Lessons of Apollo 13 would be disseminated throughout industry and technical community. Dr. Paine had forwarded copy of Review Board report to Soviet Academician Mstislav V. Keldysh “so that lessons which might be learned from our accident can be applied to prevent a similar hazard to Soviet Cosmonauts.” Aerospace Safety Research and Data Institute at LeRC would conduct additional research on materials compatibility, ignition, and combustion at various g levels and on characteristics of supercritical fluids, expanding its review of oxygen handling in aerospace programs. Research would “be of direct long-term benefit to NASA in. . .future programs, and will help other sectors of the economy.” Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel would review NASA management processes in implementing Review Board recommendations and Apollo 13 Review Board would reconvene later in year. Postponement of Apollo 14 mission would move Apollo 15 launch date to July or August 1971, Dr. Paine testified. It was too early to detail costs and budgetary impact of modifications and program changes necessitated by Apollo 13 accident but best current estimate would be “in the range of $10 to $15 million of increased costs, which we plan to handle within our total Apollo budget.” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers presented specific plans for reassessing all Apollo spacecraft subsystems. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, outlined actions planned to carry out Review Board recommendations. (Transcript)
Noaa I (ITOS-A) National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorological satellite was successfully launched by NASA from wtr at 3:35 am pst by two-stage, long-tank, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta (DSV-3N-6) booster. Orbital parameters: apogee, 1472.2 km (914.8 mi); perigee, 1422.6 km (884 mi); period, 114.8 min; and inclination, 102°. Primary objective was to place 306-kg (675-lb) spacecraft in sun-synchronous orbit with local equator-crossing time between 3:00 and 3:20 pm and conduct in-orbit engineering evaluation so that daytime and nighttime cloud-cover observations could be obtained regularly and dependably by both direct readout and onboard storage. Equipment included two avcs, two apt camera systems, and two scanning radiometers to measure surface temperature in cloud-free areas and provide cloud-cover data in visible and infrared channels. As secondary objective launch vehicle carried 2.3-kg (5-lb) Cepe Cylindrical Electrostatic Probe Experiment permanently attached to Delta 2nd stage, to provide information on electron density and temperature and on ion current during first two orbits. Cepe entered orbit with 1475.1-km (916.6-mi) apogee, 1425.4-km (885.7-mi) perigee, 114.9-min period, and 101.9° inclination. Noaa I was first Tiros spacecraft funded by noaa and second spacecraft in itos series. First, Itos I (Tiros-M), had been launched Jan. 23. (nasa Proj Off; gsfc SSR, 12/31/70; noaa Release 70-6; SBD, 12/14/70, 175)	'
NASA launched two sounding rockets from WSMR. Aerobee 170 carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., payload to 175.2-km (108.9-mi) altitude to collect data from cosmic x-ray sources to determine location of sources and flux levels in range 0.2-1 kev. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Nike-Apache carried Cal Tech experiment to conduct x-ray studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRL; SR list)
Javelin sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Island carried experiment to study helium geocorona. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
Sert II (Space Electric Rocket Test), launched Feb. 3, had reached halfway point of six-month endurance test in space with ion engine operating satisfactorily for more than 2000 hrs, NASA announced. Experiment to determine whether electric rocket operation would interfere with radio communications between spacecraft, electric propulsion system, and nearby space indicated there would be no problem. Experiment to measure effects of ion thruster efflux on silicon-cell solar array showed solar cells were being adversely affected. As ions were emitted through molybdenum grid, small particles of grid broke off (sputtered) and were deposited on nearby surfaces, reducing ability of test patches to convert solar energy into electric power. Controllers had turned off electric bombardment engine for sever-. al hours March 7 to avoid damage during solar eclipse when Serf II intersected eclipse path on two orbits with sharp loss in electric power from solar cells. After engine was restarted it continued to function satisfactorily. Only problem had been Feb. 7 failure of miniature electrostatic accelerometer, one of four methods of measuring engine’s thrust. (NASA Release 70-69)
U.S.S.R. launched eight Cosmos satellites with single booster for continued space research. Orbital parameters: Cosmos CCCXXXVI, 1489-km (925.2-mi) apogee, 1464-km (909.7-mi) perigee, 115.4-min period, and 73.9° inclination; Cosmos CCCXXXVII, 1554-km (965.6-mi) apogee, 1469-km (912.8-mi) perigee, 116.2-min period, and 74° inclination; Cosmos CCCXXXVIII, 1517-km (942.6-mi) apogee, 1472-km (914.7-mi) perigee, 115.8-min period, and 74° inclination; Cosmos CCCXXXIX, 1468-km (912.2-mi) apogee, 1450-km (901.0-mi) perigee, 115-min period, and 74° inclination; Cosmos CCCXL, 1468-km (912.2-mi) apogee, 1412-km (877.4-mi) perigee, 114.6-min period, and 74° inclination; Cosmos CCCXLI, 1470-km (913.4-mi) apogee, 1345-km (835.7-mi) perigee, 113.9-min period, and 74° inclination; Cosmos CCCXLIJ, 1470-km (913.4-mi) apogee, 1312-km (815.2-mi) perigee, 113.5-min period, and 74° inclination; and Cosmos CCCXLIII, 1468-km (912.2-min) apogee, 1379km (856.9-mi) perigee, 114.2-min period, and 74°inclination. All systerns were functioning satisfactorily, (gsfc SSR, 4/30/70; AP, W Star, 4/27/70, Al)
Javelin sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Wallops Station, ejected barium cloud at 900-km (560-mi) altitude in cooperative experiment with Max Planck Institute of Munich, Germany, to study earth’s electric and magnetic fields. Red-tinged green cloud was visible for hundreds of kilometers along East Coast. Similar launches would be conduced Oct. 7 and in spring 1971. (WS Release 70-14)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena booster. One entered orbit with 236.6-km (147-mi) apogee, 178.6-km (111-mi) perigee, 88.6-min period, and 83° inclination and reentered June 17. Second entered orbit with 503.7-km (313-mi) apogee, 489.2-km (304-mi) perigee, 94.5-min period, and 83.1° inclination. (Pres Rpt 71; gsfc SSR, 5/31/70; 6/30/70)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Andoeya, Norway, carrying Norwegian experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Oral history of space flight on 647 reels of tape assembled over six years had been presented to Smithsonian Institution’s Air and Space Museum, Washington Daily News reported. Assembled by Michael Kapp, Vice President of Capitol Records Co., tapes began with reminiscences of Mrs. Esther Goddard, widow of rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard, and went through Apollo 11 mission. Six-record LP album had been excerpted from tapes. (W News, 10/27/ 70)
NASA launched Aerobee 170—new 12.5-m (41-ft)-tall sounding rocket configuration consisting of liquid-fuel Aerobee 150 sus-tainer and solid-fuel Nike booster—from Wallops Station at 10:51 am EST, carrying 95.7-kg (211-lb) instrumented payload. Primary objectives were to flight-test first Aerobee 170 production vehicle, flight-test new water recovery system and conduct water recovery operation like one to be conducted during solar eclipse March 7, and fllght-qualify new telemetry instrumentation. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily; payload and Aerobee sustainer were recovered. (WS Release 70-2)
Nimbus IV (Nimbus-D) meteorological satellite was successfully launched by NASA from wtr by long-tank, thrust-augmented Thor (THORAD)-Agena D booster. Launch was 400th for USAF’S Thor booster. Satellite entered orbit with 1098.0-km (682.4-mi) apogee, 1087.2-km (675.7-mi) perigee, 107.1-min period, and 99.9° inclination. USA’s Topo I first in new series of topographic satellites to be used with equipment modified from USA’s SECOR (Sequential Collation of Range) program, was carried as secondary payload on Agena D 2nd stage. Topo I was ejected into orbit with 1092-km (678.5-mi) apogee, 1085-km (674.2-mi) perigee, 107-min period, and 99.8° inclination, where it would investigate new technique for accurate, real-time determination of positions on earth’s surface. Primary objectives for Nimbus IV were to acquire sufficient number of global samples of atmospheric radiation measurements for comparing vertical-temperature, water-vapor, and ozone profiles and to provide basis for comparing merits of at least three of five spectrometric experiments on board. As secondary objectives spacecraft would demonstrate feasibility of determining wind-velocity fields by tracking multiple balloons and demonstrate satisfactory operation of advanced modular three-axis attitude-control system for six months. Nimbus IV carried nine meteorological experiments: three new (backscatter uv spectrometer, filter wedge spectrometer, and selective chopper radiometer) and six carried on previous Nimbus missions (infrared interferometer spectrometer; satellite infrared spectrometer; interrogation, recording, and location system; temperature and humidity infrared radiometer; image-dissector camera system; and monitor of uv solar energy). Spacecraft’s new attitude-control system stabilized Nimbus IV constantly pointing toward earth within 1° accuracy and permitted initial acquisition and reacquisition of earth from any attitude. Butterfly-shaped, 675.2-kg (1488.6-lb) Nimbus IV was fifth in series of seven spacecraft designed to explore and collect data for understanding nature and development of atmosphere and for reduction of economic impact of adverse weather on all nations. Nimbus III had been launched April 14, 1969. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 70-47; AFSC Release 104.70; GSFC SSR, 4/30/70)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Woomera Rocket Range, Australia, carrying Univ. of Wisconsin experiment to conduct x-ray studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, launched by NASA from WSMR, carried MSC payload to 56-km (34.8-mi) altitude to measure, simultaneously, hydroxyl airglow and ozone distributions during day and night. Results would be used to calculate atomic hydrogen distributions in 75-90-km (47-56-mi) region. Rocket trajectory was low and clamshell nosecone separated at liftoff. Data were not useable, but payload was recovered in reusable condition. (NASA Rpt srl)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences conducted hearing on S.R. 49, providing for Congressional recognition of Goddard Rocket and Space Museum at Roswell, N. Mex., as fitting memorial to Dr. Robert H. Goddard, U.S. rocket pioneer. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, testified: “Americans can ill afford to ignore the contributions of Robert H. Goddard in the history of the coming of the space age. Young Americans need to appreciate that what appear as unsoluble problems today are not new to man’s experience. Dr. Robert H. Goddard’s rocket artifacts and his lifelong labors should be an inspiration to each generation of youth as they grapple with their concerns of their day and their dreams of a better world of their tomorrows in a dynamic universe. This nation cannot afford not to have Robert H. Goddards in the future.” Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, testified: “It seems very important that we and our children after us never lose awareness of what key individuals such as Robert Goddard provided to a fuller understanding of the progress of mankind. He, like Konstantine Tsiolkovsky of Russia and Hermann Oberth of Germany, correctly theorized on the use of liquid hydrogen as a fuel with liquid oxygen for high-energy thrust. Based upon the liquid-hydrogen work at the Lewis Research Center, NASA developed the upper stages for the Saturn V which enabled us to achieve the Apollo missions to the moon.” Hearing took place on 44th anniversary of first successful launching of liquid-fuel rocket by Dr. Goddard. (Testimony; CR, 3/17/70, S3828-30; Huntsville News, 3/17/70)
ILK. launched Skylark SL-971 sounding rocket from Woomera Rocket Range, Australia, carrying rotation collimator x-ray telescope to detect x-ray stars in region of Scorpius and Sagittarius. (Spaceflight, 12/12/70,484)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites on one Thor-Agena booster from Vandenberg afb. One entered orbit with 226.9-km (141.0-mi) apogee, 224.7-km (139.7-mi) perigee, 88.4-min period, and 88.4° inclination and reentered March 26. Second entered orbit with 506.9-km (315.0-mi) apogee, 439.4-km (273.0-mi) perigee, 94.0min period, and 88.1° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 4/31/70; Pres Rpt 71)
Wall Street Journal editorial on Apollo program cutback: “Although the Soviet Union has never said so, it appears that its officials decided some time ago that their [space] program was too much of a drain on resources and had to be slowed. At a time when the U.S. Government’s budget is sinking deeper into the red, it’s certainly reasonable that this nation too should start getting a grip on its priorities.” (WSJ, 9/9/70)
Japan launched its first satellite. Ohsumi, becoming the fourth nation to orbit a spacecraft on its own booster. The satellite was photographed during preparation for launch from Kagoshima Space Center, Uchinora, in the Ohsumi district. provision for joint research, (nas-nrc-Nae News Rpt, 3/70, 1: nas pio)
Marshal Nikolay Krylov, Commander of U.S.S.R.’s strategic rocket forces, said in Pravda that forces had carried out “exceptionally important” military construction “in the last few years.” Equipment in all branches of service was being continuously improved for “final victory in contemporary war.” Strategic rocket troops would become “main shock force” in nuclear war. (Starr, C Trib, 11/20/70,12)
LeRC Director Bruce T. Lundin established review board to investigate failure of Atlas-Centaur booster during launch of OAO-B Nov. 30, H. Warren Plohr, Chief of LeRC Advanced Systems Div., was named chairman. (NASA Release 70-208)
MSFC awarded McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. $2-million, oneyear modification to space shuttle study contract. Under new agreement McDonnell Douglas would recommend program to test all structural components of proposed space shuttle’s booster and orbi-ter craft, including verification of design and advanced state-of-the-art testing of materials, wing leading edges, and propellant tanks. MSC, which had companion space shuttle study under way, was negotiating similar amendment with NR. (msfc Release 70-239)
Areas sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying Univ. of Houston experiment to study ionosphere. Mission was partially successful and met minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr., on behalf of Apollo 12 crew, received special Emmy Award from National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences in New York for TV photography during Apollo 12 lunar landing. (AP, W Star, 6/8/70, B9) Reusability requirement might be most difficult of all. “One can speculate that if we can do it in aircraft engines, why not rocket engines? But we are talking about heat fluxes and turbomachinery characteristics in the shuttle engine that extend well beyond those experienced in the engines of the [Boeing] 707, 747, or even the military high performance aircraft. It is yet to be shown if we can fly 100 missions (or even 10 or 20) with this high performance engine, and achieve the confidence and maintainability which the airline operations have in hand. .. .reusability adds a new dimension to rocket engine development.” (Text) Prof. Yu. K. Khodarev, Deputy Director of Institute for Space Research of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and Dr. Valery Yevdokimov, head of Academy’s data processing dept., called for studies of what U.S. and U.S.S.R. could do to establish and operate scientific base on moon. Prof. Khodarev said: “We would like to see concrete lists from American scientists of instruments that we could place on the moon for research. Then we can explore further avenues for cooperation in space. We can’t decide how to transport things there until we first decide what we want to take.” There was general acceptance of U.S.S.R. space efforts among Soviet people “but people are looking for a direct payoff—they want something for their money.” Khodarev said U.S. and U.S.S.R. could “cooperate in a Martian program as well as in intense investigations on the moon.” He suggested area for primary investigation from lunar station would have to be decided. “Do we want to look at the moon, or do we want to look into the cosmos from the surface?” During panel discussion Robert L. Lohman of NASA’s Space Station Task Force invited Prof. Khodarev to attend NASA meeting on advanced space programs at ARC later in year. Dr. Takao Ueda of Japan said Japan was working on comsats, TV satellites, and geosynchronous weather spacecraft. (AAS Paper No. 70-044; Bane, LA Her-Exam, 6/11/70; NASA Sci and Tech Info Div)
Papers of Robert H. Goddard, edited by Esther C. Goddard and G. Edward Pendray, were reviewed in New York Times Book Review by I. Bernard Cohen: “Goddard was not universally appreciated during his lifetime; few dreamers are. He was often ridiculed as ‘the moon man.’ Today his name is commemorated in laboratories and professorships, but his greatest lasting memorial does not carry his name. It is the background of theoretical principles, engineering devices and practical experience, in the decades between World War I and II, that are embodied in every rocket that flies today.... These splendid volumes, handsomely printed and well illustrated, should go a long way to making known the personality of this shaper of our times.” (NYT Book Review, 8/2/70)
Washington Post editorial commented on launch of Project Tektite II: “As the astronauts get ready to soar to the heights, it is worth mentioning that a group of aquanauts have sunk to the bottoms—in this case, the crew of Tektite II.... The drama of undersea exploration is considerably less than probes into outer space; but, in many ways, the world on the floor of the sea is more mysterious, more demanding—and potentially richer in what it offers mankind—than anything on the craterscape of the moon.” (WPost, 4/10/70, A18) April 11-17: NASA’s Apollo 13 (AS-508)—carrying three-man crew, LM-7 Aquarius and CSM-I090dyssey—was launched on lunar landing mission, but 56 hrs into flight toward moon mission was aborted because of SM oxygen tank rupture. In most serious inflight situation experienced in manned space program, crew foljowed lm “lifeboat” emergency plan, transferring to lm and using its systems and supplies to swing around moon and back to earth on fastest feasible course. Emergency procedures were used to make electrical power, water, and oxygen last to end of journey. Crew returned to CM and jettisoned lm before reentry and splashed down safely in Pacific April 17. Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 185.5-km (115.3-mi) apogee and 181.5-km (112.8-mi) perigee. During 2nd-stage boost S-II center engine cut off 132 secs early and remaining four engines burned 34 secs longer than predicted. Space vehicle velocity after boost was 68 m per sec (223 fps) lower than planned, causing S-IVB orbital insertion burn to be 9 secs longer than predicted, but sufficient propellants remained for translunar insertion. Onboard TV was initiated at 1:35 GET for 5 1/2 min. Second S-IVB burn, on schedule at 2:41 get, injected spacecraft on translunar trajectory. csm separated from S-IVB and lm Aquarius. Onboard TV initiated after separation for 72 min clearly showed csm “hard-docking” with lm, ejection of csm/lm from S-IVB/IU at 4:01 get, S-IVB auxiliary propulsion system (aps) evasive maneuver, and spacecraft exterior and interior. First S-IVB APS burn, lasting 217 secs beginning at 6:00 GET, aimed stage for lunar target point so accurately that second burn was not required. S-IVB/IU hit lunar surface at 77:57 GET (8:10 pm est April 14) at 259 m per sec (8465 fps) and energy equivalent to 11.5 tons of tnt at 2.4° south latitude and 27.9° west longitude— 137.1 km (85.2 mi) from Apollo 12 seismometer that detected impact. Seismic signal for S-IVB/IU was similar to signal from Apollo 12 lm Intrepid that had impacted moon Nov. 20, 1969, but was 20-30 times larger and lasted 3 hrs 20 mins—four times longer. Signal was so large that ground command had to reduce seismometer gain to keep recording on scale. Suprathermal ion detector experiment (side) deployed by Apollo 12 crew recorded jump in the number of ion counts after S-IVB/IU impact. Instrument, in lunar shadow, recorded no ions at time of impact; count increased from few ions 22 secs after impact to 250 and up to 2500 before decreasing to few ions and back to none. Scientists speculated ionization had been produced by 6300 K to 10 300 K (6000°C to 10 000°C) temperatures generated by impact or that particles that reached up to 60 km (37 mi) had been ionized by sunlight. Translunar insertion maneuver was so accurate that midcourse correction No. 1 (MCC-1) was not necessary. MCC-2, for 3.4 secs at 30:14 get, placed spacecraft on desired hybrid circumlunar trajectory with closest approach of 114.9 km (71.4 mi). MCC-3 was not necessary. Good-quality TV coverage of preparations for and performance of midcourse maneuver was transmitted for 49 min, beginning at 30:03 GET, including dumping waste water from spacecraft fuel cells with moon visible in background. While joking with Mission Control, Swigert suddenly remembered that he had failed to file his Federal income tax return, but was assured that he could be granted an extension. “Hey, we’ve got a problem here,” Swigert told ground controllers. “This is Houston, say again please.” “Houston, we’ve had a problem,” Lovell replied. And Haise reported “a pretty large bang associated with the caution and warning. A few minutes later crew reported spacecraft was venting something—later determined to be oxygen—out into space. Astronauts could see blizzard of particles flying out of sm, presumably from ruptured tank. Despite desperate efforts improvised on board and suggested by Mission Control, nothing seemed to halt drop in oxygen pressure. Spacecraft dipped repeatedly, apparently because of venting gas. By 57:24 get, Mission Control reported tank No. 2 pressure was “slowly going to zero and we’re starting to think about the lm lifeboat.” Swigert replied, “Yes, that’s something we’re thinking about, too. We’ve been talking it over. ...” Decision was made to abort mission. Astronauts hurriedly had to salvage enough oxygen to supply CM during reentry and keep gyros operating until lm navigation equipment could be powered up. With only minutes of power remaining, crew fed oxygen into reserve tank and hooked up emergency batteries to csm navigation gyros until lm was powered up. Crew activated lm, powered down csm, and used lm systems for power and life support. Astronauts remained calm as they wrestled with procedures to stabilize spacecraft and stretch consumables. All information on April l !-17: Officials conferred at the flight directors' consote in the MSC Mission Operations Control Room as Apollo 13 astronauts attempted to bring (heir crippled spacecraft safely back to earth. Dr. Donald K. Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations, leans an elbow on the console at far left. Circling to the right in front of him are Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager fames A. McDivitl; Deputy Director of Flight Operations Howard W. Tindall, Jr.; Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director at NASA Headquarters; and Dr, Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Flight Operations. Apollo Mission Director Chester M, Tee stands in front of Dr. Kraft. Sealed at the console (center, left to right) are Flight Directors Gera id D. Griffin and Glynn S. Lunney. Behind the console (left to right) are Astronauts Joseph P. Kerwin and Vance D. Brand. Flight Dynamics Officer Philip C. Shaffer, Retro Officer fohn S. Llewellyn, Flight Dynamics Officer Charles F. Dreferich, and Lawrence S. Can/u, guidance navigation and control engineer at MSC. mission—including details of accident and emergency procedures— were made public immediately as data were received, Public’s apparent boredom at beginning of mission was transformed into deep concern for astronauts’ safety. Messages and offers of aid were sent to U.S, from world leaders and prayers were offered by religious leaders on every continent. MCC-4 was conducted with lm’s descent propulsion system (dps) at 61:30 GET, placing Apolio 13 on free-return trajectory around moon on which CM Otfyssey would splash down in Indian Ocean at 152:00 GET. Both lm guidance systems were powered up and primary system used for 263.4-sec dps burn at 79:28 get as spacecraft swung out from behind moon, two hours after closest approach. Bum produced 262-m-per-sec (860 fps) differential velocity, shortened predicted return time to 143:53 GET, and moved predicted landing point to mid-Pacific. After maneuver, passive thermal control was established and lm was powered down to conserve consumables. “Aquarius has really been quite a winner,” Haise said to Mission Control about three hours later. “When this flight’s all over we’li really be able to figure out what a LM can do.” During remainder of transearth coast crew continued emergency procedures to deal with shortage of water to cool LM electronic systems, decreasing temperatures in both cabins, and buildup of carbon dioxide in lm. Fearing that CM instruments needed for reentry might freeze, crew kept spacecraft in passive thermal control—“barbecue mode” of rotation to let sun uniformly heat all sides, Astronauts met cooling water shortage by filling every plastic bag they could with water from CM and carrying it to lm. Shortage of air-cleaning lithium hydroxide in LM was met by rigging combination of cm and lm cartridges; following instructions worked out on ground, crew built adapter and ran lunar spacesuit air hoses from LM fans through tunnel to connect to cm air-scrubbing canisters. Transmission of health data was eliminated and communications held to minimum to conserve electricity. Crew tried to keep warm by wearing boots carried for walking on moon, sleeping in narrow tunnel between LM and CSM that seemed warmer, and wearing extra clothing. Apr// 75-/7; MCC-5 at 105:19 get, by 15-sec LM DPS burn, decreased velocity by 2.3 m per sec (7.5 fps) and raised entry-flight-path angle to -6.52°. Crew partially powered up csm to check thermal conditions. Because of unusual spacecraft configuration (with LM still attached) and LM’s inability to survive reentry heat, officials on ground developed new reentry procedures and verified them in ground-based simulations. A 30-man team at MIT’s Charles S. Draper Laboratory worked throughout night studying stressed Apollo 13 guidance system and working out new trajectories. Simulations and programming of emergency problems were conducted by NR engineers in Downey, Calif., by Astronaut Richard F. Gordon, Jr., in LM at KSC, and by Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan and David R. Scott at msc, so that almost every move Apollo 13 crew made had first been proved out on ground. MCC-7 was successfully accomplished at 137:40 get with 22.4-sec LM RCSburn, resulting in predicted -6.49° entry-flight-path angle. Crew viewed and photographed SM when it was jettisoned at 138:02 get, reporting that one entire panel was missing near S-band high-gain antenna and that great deal of debris was hanging out. CM was powered up and lm was jettisoned at 141:30 get. SNAP-27 nuclear generator carrying 3.9 kg (8.6 lbs) of radioactive plutonium fell from lm into Pacific northeast of New Zealand. “Farewell, Aquarius, and we thank you,” Mission Control responded to spacecraft’s report “lm jettison.” “She sure was a good ship,” Swigert added later. Parachute deployment and other reentry events occurred as planned and Odyssey splashed down in mid-Pacific southeast of American Samoa at 142:54 get (1:07 pm est April 17), 6.4 km (4 mi) from recovery ship U.S.S. Iwo Jima. Astronauts—exhausted but in good health—were picked up by recovery helicopter and were safely aboard recovery ship less than one hour after splashdown. Primary Apollo 13 mission objectives—to make selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of materials in preselected Fra Mauro area; deploy and activate ALSEP; develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment; and photograph candidate exploration sites—were not achieved. Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, announced April 17 that Apollo 13 Review Board, headed by LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright, would be established to determine cause of accident. Apollo 13 flight crew performance was outstanding throughout mission; calm, precise reaction to emergency and diligence in configuring and maintaining lm was noteworthy. Despite lack of adequate sleep and low temperature in spacecraft, neither performance nor spirits faltered. Similarly, performance of flight operations team was outstanding in planning and aiding crew to safe return. Apollo 13 was 10th Apollo mission and third manned lunar landing attempt. Accident was first inflight failure in 22 manned flights in U.S. space program. Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) and Apollo 11
U.S. and Australia would begin construction of top-secret communications station at Woomera rocket range, Australia, AP reported. Australian Defense Minister Malcolm Fraser had announced $4-million contract had been let to Australian firm. U.S. would pay about three fourths of construction bill. Facility would be used for space and defense programs. (PBull, 1/8/70, 3)
Areas sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Pacific Missile Range carrying gsfc experiment to study ozone in atmosphere. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
India announced plans to launch first satellite within 3Vi yrs. Vikram Sarabhai, Secretary of Indian Atomic Energy Dept., said satellite would weigh 29.9 kg (66 lbs), be football size, and be launched by four-stage booster. (Reuters. W Post, 7/21/70, A9)
As U.S. and U.S.S.R. opened strategic arms limitation talks (salt) in Vienna, thoughts of delegates and local citizens were on Apollo 13. Washington Post later said mission was “a symbol of the space age that reflects the arms control problem at these talks. The rocket that put men into space also is the device that can rain death for millions by one superpower upon the other.” (Roberts, W Post, 4/16/70, A10)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range carrying Univ. of Minnesota payload to study atmospheric composition. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine addressed Economic Club of Detroit in last public appearance as NASA Administrator. He summarized NASA projections of potential space advances to year 2000-advances U.S., U.S.S.R., Western Europe, and Japan, alone or in concert, would have industrial and economic resources to realize. For both America and other countries, response to challenge would “determine their futures.” _ New space transportation system—with reusable space shuttle to make return trips to orbit with passengers and cargo, permanent orbiting space station, and automated and manned space tugs for emplacing and recovering satellites and for transportation between orbits—was “bridge to our future in space.” Space shuttle would be “nasa’s major single effort during the next ten years.” New approach to large payloads based on shuttle booster stage would offset termination of Saturn V after completion of Apollo lunar landings by 1972. Skylab program scheduled to start during 1973 would provide basis for final design of space station. Integrated lunar exploration in early 1980s could use station in lunar orbit as platform for descent to any portion of moon’s surface for up to 14 days. Broad, vigorous, unmanned program to explore planets in 1970s would be start of orderly program to visit every planet in solar system, blazing trail for manned trips to Mars and Venus before end of century. “The space in orbit two hundred miles [320 km] above the earth can be thought of as a vast new continent, equal in area to the surface of the entire globe.” Discovered only a dozen years ago, new continent would “become increasingly important as the leading world source of global information and communication services and then, inevitably, as a new home of men from earth.” Beyond solar system, automated and manned astronomical probes would “extend our understanding of the universe through more intensive investigations in optical and radio astronomy and space physics.” Before century’s end, man might find answers to “the overwhelming questions of man’s origin, his destiny, and of his uniqueness as the bearer of intelligence in the universe.” Man “may indeed be unique— but the odds against it approach a thousand billion billion to one. ... Every experiment so far has been negative, but the search will continue. ... We do not know what may exist, but we are upon the verge of knowing.” Of Apollo program Dr. Paine said, “History may record that the substitution of major international technical competition, in place of war, was the great and unprecedented peacekeeping breakthrough of our era.” Benefit on international social and technical change was “evident to all.” (Text)
Bob P. Helgeson, former NASA Director of Safety, died of cancer at age 49. Helgeson had retired from NASA in September 1969 because of illness. He had been Deputy Manager of aec’s Hanford Atomic Works and Director of aec-nasa nuclear rocket development station in Jackass Flats, Nev., before becoming Director of Safety in January 1968. (W Post, 1/19/70, D4)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from WSMR. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Colorado experiment to study airglow, but mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. Aerobee 170 carried GSFC experiment to study x-ray spectra. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range. One carried gsfc payload to 210-km (130.5-mi) altitude to measure extreme uv auroral emissions. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, but door covering photometer did not deploy. Second rocket carried Univ. of Maryland payload into bright aurora to 252-km (156.6-mi) altitude to make detailed observations of visual aurora. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and good data were obtained. (NASA Rpts srl)
At NASA Hq. press briefing, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers and program officers gave status of programs, plans for 1970s, and studies leading into 1980s. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, announced selection of Hadley-Apennine site for lunar landing of Apollo 15, scheduled for launch July 25, 1971. Site, cut by large gorge along base of mountains, was 3° east of moon’s center and 25° north of lunar equator on edge of Sea of Rains. Apollo 15 crew would collect material from base of Apennine Mountains, examine Hadley Rille area, sample fresh-looking mare and volcanic-like features, and deploy ALSEP. Apollo 16 would be launched in January 1972 and Apollo 17, in June 1972. High-priority landing sites were Copernicus, Davy, Descartes, and Marius Hills. To improve CSM return capability in emergencies after landing on moon, an LM descent battery and third tank would be added to Apollo 14 SM. Additional potable water would be generated and stored on way.tomoon. Douglas R. Lord, Deputy Director of Space Station Task Force, described plans for 12-man space station weighing 49 985-54 400 kg (110 000-120 000 lbs) that could remain in earth orbit for up to 10 yrs. Richard J. Allen of Space Shuttle Task Force said NASA was developing plans for shuttle with 100-mission reusable capability. Myers said dod was “very much involved” with shuttle activities. “We have a joint committee operating with the Air Force. . .for continuous communication and review of requirements.” He saw “possibility of international cooperation on certain flights and [U.S.] military use of the vehicle on others.” Myers said he had discussed with European officials possibility of participation in space shuttle program on three levels: orbit-to-orbit space tug, “cleanly separable and easily interfaced piece of equipment” that would probably be managed by European consortium and financed with European dollars; subcontracts from American companies to European contractors without transfer of American money ; and use of technological contributions from European national space activities and national aircraft establishments. (Transcript; NASA Release 70162)
dod announced usaf contract awards: $1 600 000 definitive contract to Aerojet-General Corp. for procurement of spare parts for Titan IIIC booster and $1 841 000 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for r&d on Air Force Satellite Control Facility, (dod Release 144-70)
Development of world’s most powerful continuous-beam laser, with energy output capable of driving sports car, was described by Dr. Edward T. Gerry of Avco Research Lab. during annual meeting of American Physical Society in New York. Laser could produce 30 kw of power in narrow beam and 60 kw in divergent beam. Values were triple those of most powerful continuous-beam lasers in operation. Avco laser resembled rocket engine. Nitrogen-carbon dioxide gas was heated to 1900 K (3000°F) in one chamber and shot through nozzle into second chamber at supersonic speed. Carbon dioxide molecules emitted photons which mirrors focused into beam of light emitted from chamber. At news conference following meeting, scientists denied lasers were being built for use as “death rays.” Wayne State Univ. scientist Dr. Alexander J. Glass said scientists in U.S., U.S.S.R., and France were developing increasingly larger lasers that produced 100 kw of light energy in few trillionths of second. (Lyons, NYT, 4/30/ 70,20)
NASA discontinued use of Guaymas-Empalme station in Mexico for space observations because of changes in Apollo mission profile. Station would be operated by Mexican government for Mexican scientific programs. NASA and Mexican National Commission for Outer Space (cnee), which had cooperated in operation of station, would continue cooperation in developing system approach to use of weather data from U.S. weather satellites acquired by automatic picture transmission (apt) cameras. They also would develop capabilities and applications for earth observations using advanced, airborne, remote-sensing instrumentation. Plans were being completed for new cooperative project for synoptic meteorological sounding rocket launchings. With release of Guaymas-Empalme station, built in 1961, NASA had closed three ground stations in tracking and data acquisition network, as well as retiring three tracking ships and four aircraft, in past year, (nasa Release 70-198)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range. Nike-Tomahawk carried Univ. of Alaska payload to examine spatial distribution of ionospheric currents near visual auroral forms, examine relationship between electron and proton precipitation and usual auroral distributions produced by precipitation, and track flashing light on payload with image orthicon TV system while simultaneously observing aurora. Payload penetrated intense auroral arc forms near northern edge of auroral breakup. All experiments operated successfully and TV system tracked rocket through aurora. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Texas at Dallas experiment to study ionosphere. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (NASA Rpt srl ; SR list)
Intelsat-III F-7 was launched by NASA for ComSatCorp on behalf of International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (INTELSAT). Satellite, launched from etr by three-stage, long-tank Thor-Delta booster, did not reach predicted transfer orbit because bboster underperformed. Engineers fired onboard hydrazine thrusters to push satellite into desired synchronous orbit with 35 772.9km (22 233.0-mi) apogee and 35737.7-km (2221 l.l.-mi) perigee at 19° west longitude over Atlantic. Remaining fuel was expected to maintain satellite in orbit over Atlantic for five years. Full-time commercial service was scheduled to begin May 8. Intelsat-III F-7 was fifth successful launch in Intelsat III series. Last successful mission, Intelsat-IIIF-6, had been launched Jan. 14. (ComSatCorp Release 70-26; NASA Proj Off)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Princeton Univ. experiment to study stellar uv. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Dr. Gary V. Latham, Columbia Univ. seismologist and principal seismic investigator for Apollo program, during Houston, Tex., press conference withdrew proposal that atomic bomb be detonated on moon. Instead, he said, NASA should find way to hit moon hard enough to create strong internal reverberations. Pressure from scientists and public had led to retraction of original proposal. (W Star, 1/8/70, B4)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried Cal Tech experiment to conduct x-ray studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Washington Sunday Star editorial commented on SST: “What the SST adds up to is a large question mark, a gamble with public funds and the environment that comes at time of crisis in both areas. We should improve the odds for survival by pulling out of the SST race until the facts—not the suppositions—are in. We should gamble not on a questionable investment, but on the ability of our economy and our prestige to withstand the impact of losing one part of one industry’s market if the Concorde lives up to its sponsors’ expectations. The ssTprogram should be shelved.” (W Star, 10/4/70, Bl) Soviet scientist Dr. K. Y. Kondratyev described October 1969 experiment in which Soyuz VI and VII spacecraft had been observed simultaneously from on>. aircraft at 7900-m (26 000-ft) altitude, from one at much lower altitude, and from ground, to determine atmospheric distortion of observations of earth surface from space. Additional observations from Soyuz IX in June 1970 and automated measurements from unmanned Cosmos CCXLIII launched Sept. 23, 1968, had combined to show fully equipped space station could clearly identify forms and densities of vegetation; chart geologic formations in inaccessible regions; identify soil suitable for agriculture; trace origin of fungus blights; sight outbreaks of blight and pinpoint forest fires; chart ground temperatures, identifying trends in volcanic activity and mountain building; detect erosion patterns invisible from ground; record seasonal flow patterns in watershed; monitor spread of pollutants; monitor seas for fish movement and evidence of pollution; and transmit photos indicating safe shipping lanes in Arctic ice pack areas. Dr. Kondratyev said orbital space station could be developed within next 5 to 10 yrs and be equipped with sensor system to scan earth at wide range of wavelengths for remote sensing of environment. (Congress Bulletin, 10/6/70,1; NYT, 10/6/70, 21; nasapao) Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Operations, and Prof. Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Soviet Institute of Biomedical Problems, said selection of crews for longer space missions would require special personality testing to identify persons of more dominant type for assignment of roles compatible with that trait. Dr. Berry said he thought use of multinational flight crews was good idea but chances for Orbiting International Laboratory (oil) in near future seemed slim because of problems of language, attitudes, and prejudices such as food preferences. “We can’t have a restaurant with a very large menu.” In interview, Dr. Berry and Prof. Gazenko discussed flashes of light experienced by astronauts in space with eyes closed or in darkened spacecraft. Dr. Berry believed flashes might be produced by heavy cosmic ray particles—atomic nuclei of intermediate weight—that produced ionization in eye retina, affected nervous system, or caused light flashes within eye fluid. Dr. Gazenko said heavy cosmic rays were insufficiently frequent to account for flashes. Soviet cosmonauts had not experienced phenomenon. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/12/70, 19) Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov said muscles of Soyuz IX crew were so atrophied after June 2-19 mission that they stood up with difficulty and walked with peculiar stamping steps. On landing they were so weak that ground crew had to assist them from hatch. Sensation of heaviness lasted 10 to 11 days. Crew had performed antiatrophy exercises during mission but more intensive exercise program might be needed for flights to other planets, with simulation of gravity included. Cosmonauts felt effects of weightlessness were not dangerous unless experienced for more than one month. Soyuz IX cosmonauts displayed photos of June 2 launch and colored films taken inside spacecraft during 18-day orbit. Nikolayev said cosmonauts had slept with head down before launch, to become accustomed to rush of blood to head that had bothered previous cosmonauts and astronauts on early part of flights. Soyuz spacecraft had three sections: orbital module in which cosmonauts slept, exercised, and played chess; central module with three windows and couches for use in liftoff and reentry; and third module containing service equipment. Both orbital and service modules were jettisoned before reentry. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/10/70) Indian government scientists H. G. S. Murthy, E. V. Chirnis, and K. S. Karnik urged U.S. and U.S.S.R. to share economic benefits of space exploration with developing nations. “International cooperation in global planning of assistance for the operation of meteorological communications and navigation satellites will go a long way in helping developing countries. National space programs in developing countries are not a luxury, but a necessity.” (Benedict, AP, Huntsville Times, 10/7/70) Third International Symposium on Space Rescue was held as part of iaf congress. Cochairman P. A. Campbell said letter from Soviet Academy of Sciences had nominated for first time four Soviet engineers to serve on IAF’s 11-nation committee studying space rescue. Later AP quoted iaf Congress sources as saying Soviet engineers might meet with U.S. experts at MSC in November. Herbert Schaefer and Dr. Jack W. Wild of nasa Advanced Manned Missions program said space rescue vehicles would have to be versatile, with several payloads kept at hand to deal with variety of emergencies. Standardized docking system would be needed on all future manned spacecraft to permit rescue by any nation. NASA Assistant Safety Director Philip H. Bolger said, “The rescue of stranded astronauts is a concern recognized by all nations and therefore provides a common base for establishing international cooperation.” It was too late to develop rescue system for four remaining Apollo flights, but reliability of Apollo spacecraft was being improved. Bolger said Skylab three-man space station scheduled for 1972 launch might have double protection—spacecraft that could be separated and returned to earth and standby rescue rocket at ksc. (AP, W Star, 10/8/70, A4; Sullivan, NYT, 10/8/70,4) LeRoy E. Day, Manager of NASA Space Shuttle Task Group, described system characteristics of space shuttle: “It should be a fully reusable two-stage vertical take-off and horizontal landing space vehicle” that could transport 11 340 kg (25 000 lbs) to the design reference orbit of 500 km (310 mi) at 55° orbital inclination. Shuttle “must have a large internal cargo bay which will give it the capability of carrying a variety of manned and unmanned payloads to low earth orbit. The large internal payload compartment will allow the shuttle to deliver to low earth orbit both a satellite and a high energy stage for a synchronus orbit or a planetary mission. We expect the gross jift-olf weight. . .to be approximately 1.6 million kilograms [3.5 million lbs] fully fueled and with the payload on-board.” Rocket engines would be one of most critical subsystems “For both the booster and the orbiter we will use high pressure hydrogen/oxygen rocket engines which can be throttled to keep the acceleration during ascent to less than 3 g’s.” (Text) Dr. George E. Mueller, General Dynamics Corp. Vice President and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said U.S. space shuttle could be “golden transport” to carry passengers between any two cities on earth in an hour in 1980s. Shuttle could be converted easily to transport flying to 130-km (80-mi) altitude and plunging back to target city at approximately 18 500 km per hr (11 500 mph). Rocket-boosted aircraft would take off vertically, eliminating noise problem. Other nations might purchase U.S. shuttle for $50 million. (AP, B Sun, 10/10/70, A3) Fourth International History of Astronautics Symposium was held, with Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian, as Chairman. Papers were presented by I. Saenger-Bredt of Stuttgart, Oleg G. Gazenko of Soviet Academy of Sciences, and R. Cargill Hall, jpl Historian. Papers were submitted by J. Kaplan of ucla, G. H. Osborn and R. Gordon of Aerojet Liquid Rocket Co. (Program; NASA Hist Off) iaf officials elected during Congress were: President, Prof. A. Jaumotte of Belgium; Vice Presidents, Dr. George E. Mueller of U.S., H. G. S. Murthy of India, Prof. L. G. Napolitano of Italy, and Prof. L. I. Sedov of U.S.S.R. (iafRelease 20)
Dr. Carl Mclntire, head of International Council of Christian Churches and Fundamentalist Bible Presybterian Church, had announced purchase of property in city of Cape Canaveral, Fla., including Cape Kennedy Hilton Hotel, Washington Post reported. Property would be used for multimillion-dollar “Reformation Freedom Center and Christian Conference.” Dr. Mclntire had said site, 1.6-km (1-mi) strip from Banana River to Atlantic Ocean, “is alongside the rocket gantries and the moon shots” and would lend to God-inspace-conquest theme. Post said property had been valued speculatively at $25 million. (WPost, 12/30/70, A4)
dod and usaf scientists showed “marked lack of surprise at launch of first Communist Chinese satellite,” AP said. It quoted unidentified dod scientist as saying launch did not indicate, by itself, that Communist Chinese had achieved capability to fire icbms at U.S. Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird had told Congress Feb. 20 that he believed Chinese would attempt launch, AP said. (B Sun, 4/26/70, Al) U.S. was engaged in close electronic monitoring of Communist Chinese satellite and booster launch to determine its characteristics and capabilities, upi reported. Intelligence analysts estimated Communist China might be able to develop and deploy 10 to 25 intercontinental ballistic missiles by mid-1975, which could threaten U.S. (Daniloff, UPI, PInq, 4/26/70)
Aircraft hijacking was discussed by David Hoffman in Washington Post: “That hijacking entails much more today than the Havana detour, a sidetrip costing passengers frayed nerves and the airline $3000, has begun to sink home in official Washington. It has now become an instrument of international policy, a play within a play about the cold war. Quite apart from whether a treaty might help, there exists no treaty. That testifies to the concern of governments, this one included.” {W Post, 9/9/70, A15) At meeting on future of Apollo, scientists proposed crater Tycho near moon’s south pole and Descartes, hilly region near Ocean of Storms, as sites for two of remaining four Apollo program lunar landings. Cal Tech geologist Dr. Leon T. Silver said, “If you had only two missions left to make, you’d send one of them to Tycho.” Tycho offered samples from area of one of last collisions of large meteor with lunar surface, samples from moon’s original southern hills, and samples from deep within moon that had come to surface after impact that had created Tycho. Flight path to and from Tycho would enable astronauts to photograph and examine almost half visible face of moon from lunar orbit. Astronauts could leave scientific instruments less than 1609 km (1000 mi) from moon’s south pole, to give earth-bound scientists listening post on lunar region that would otherwise go unexplored. Surveyor VII photos had shown Tycho landing to be strewn with many varieties of rocks. Difficulty with Tycho landing was that Apollo crew might have to use so much fuel getting to it that they would not have enough to return if they encountered difficulty on approach, Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., said. Donald K. Slayton, msc Chief of Flight Crew Operations, said NASA was studying possibility of Tycho landing: “Our position so far is that Tycho is a bad place. ... But, if we can figure the reasonable way to do it.. .and decide it’s a reasonable place to go, then Tycho becomes a candidate for landing.” Descartes, second site favored by scientists, contained relatively young volcanic material and also crust on surface away from volcanic highlands that might be as old as moon itself. It was thought to be one of two Apollo sites where tnoonquakes might be occurring; other was hills of Fra Mauro, Apollo 14 landing site. Dr. Alfred E. Ringwood of Australian National Univ. told seminar he had concluded from study of Apollo 11 and 12 lunar samples that moon once had heat source 160-480 km (100-300 mi) beneath surface that was emitting 1500 K (2200°F) temperatures. Heat had emanated from abundance of radioactive minerals in moon’s depths, he proposed, and partially melted moon’s inner rock, which then flowed to lunar surface through pores or forced its way upward as it expanded where pores did not exist. Upswelling rock, Dr. Ringwood said, caused lunar features visible on moon’s face. He speculated that moon had lost most of its radioactivity and heat 2 billion yrs earlier. Dr. Charles P. Sonnett, ARC scientist, said he had found “little bumps” of magnetism along lunar surface when studying signals from instruments left on moon. Bumps suggested that radioactive heat was coming to surface and causing parts of moon to behave as if they had magnetic field. Moon was “strong and rigid to depth of 200 mi [322 km],” Dr. Sonnett said, “but I believe that all you need is a porosity of about 10 per cent in that crust to have a warmer and more plastic material leak to the top.” Dr. Rolf Meisner of Univ. of Hawaii said analysis of data from Apollo 12 lunar seismometer led him to believe that moonquakes could not be caused by breaks in moon’s crust but were caused by warm gases escaping from beneath lunar surface in response to earth’s increased gravitational pull. He had recorded 14 moon-quakes, all of which seemed to come from about 240 km (150 mi) east-southeast of seismometer in Fra Mauro hills, where Apollo 14 was to land in February 1971. Dr. Thomas Gold, Cornell Univ. astronomer, argued that lunar maria contained dust and not lava. Lack of electrical activity of surface material and the way Apollo moonquake detectors had reacted to tremors and impacts could mean there was deep deposit of powder. Acoustical signal from Apollo 12 lunar seismometer was “compatible with a deep layer of a very homogenous nature in which the speed of sound is uniform.” (O’Toole, WPost, 9/12/70, A3; 9/13/70, A27; Hill, H Chron, 9/13/70)
Retrorocket parachute—with rocket to provide upthrust to descending parachute carrying heavy and delicate equipment just before it hit ground—was among items shown in Soviet film purchased for U.S. market, AP reported. Half-hour movie made to show Soviet people power of their armed forces, depicted what it called “awesome arsenal” including small rocket that skittered just off ground in search of enemy tanks. (C Trib, 3/29/70,1 A)
USAF launched uSN’s Oscar XIX navigation satellite from WTR at 6:23 am pdt by Scout booster. Orbital parameters: apogee, 1218.3 km (757 mi); perigee, 957.6 km (595 mi); period, 106.9 min; and inclination, 90°. Satellite, which could locate objects in ocean to 91-m (300 ft) accuracy, was part of Navy Navigation Satellite System for positioning fleet, ballistic-missile submarines, attack carriers, ana oceanographic and miscellaneous vessels. Oscar XVIII had been launched March 1, 1968. (Pres Rpt 71; gsfc SSR, 8/31/70; USN CNO PAO)
Areas sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Cold Lake Range, Primrose Lake, Canada, carried gsfc payload to 62-km (38.5-mi) altitude to measure ozone in conjunction with overpass of Nimbus IV satellite. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and good data were obtained. Launch was second in two-rocket series; first had been lanched Oct. 10. (NASA Rpt srl)
Impact of space requirements on U.S. computer industry was discussed by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, at ARCS (Achievement Rewards for College Scientists) Foundation Annual Scholarship Awards Banquet in Houston, Tex.: “In Project Mercury, ground-based computers were only required to determine quickly and accurately booster cut-off conditions. In Apollo, however, computers are used throughout the mission in real time, to calculate the trajectory to the moon and back, to compare three separate solutions for the lunar descent, to record and analyze thousands of bits of telemetered spacecraft information, to compare these to predicted values to detect trouble, and . .. to monitor the well-being of the crew. For Mercury, the computer program contained 40 000 computer words; for Apollo, a 1 500 000-word program was needed, while at the same time, the speed of the computers has increased sevenfold.” U.S. computer industry was doing $8 billion worth of business annually, paid highest average wages of any U.S. industry, and was “one of the most rapidly growing.” In 1960, U.S. exported $48 million worth of computers; in 1969, $728 million dollars worth. “U.S. computer exports have increased by over 1400 percent in the first decade of the space age. This impressive record was built on excellence of performance through continuing technological superiority. In a large measure it was the stimulus of NASA’s requirements that brought about these technological advances in the computer industry.” (Text) May 3; With exception of Mission Control, msc buildings normally open to public had remained open during Apollo 13 crisis, New York Times commented. Visitors could watch—from overhead catwalk in Building 5'—scientists and astronauts devising techniques for Apollo 13's return to earth. (Gordon, NYT, 5/3/70,7)
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying gsfc experiment to study stellar uv. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Javelin sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, carried Univ. of California at Berkeley payload to 494-km (307-mi) altitude. Objectives were to observe auroral protons and electrons over energy spectrum from thermal levels to several hundred kilovolts and to study electric fields and their relation to particle fluxes; density, temperature, and motion of ionospheric plasma currents; alpha particle and neutral fluxes in aurora; and auroral radiation. All experiments functioned satisfactorily and useful data were obtained. (NASA RptSRL)
Areas sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying Univ. of Houston experiment to study ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc experiment to conduct auroral studies. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list) During February: In afsc Newsreview editorial Gen. James Ferguson (USAF), afsc Commander, praised command’s two decades of “distinguished progress” in science and technology: “When the F-15 air-superiority fighter outclasses everything in the air—when the B-l advanced bomber is operational—when a new generation of icbms helps to maintain peace—when a million-pound airplane can remain on station indefinitely because of nuclear power—and when military men maneuver into and out of space orbits, at will, from conventional airfields—all these, and more, will have been possible not only because of what we learn today and tomorrow, but because of all the things we learned in our first two decades.” (afsc News-review, 2/70,2)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying arc experiment to collect dust particles. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched two Aerobee sounding rockets. Aerobee 350 launched from Wallops Station carried Univ. of Michigan experiment to conduct radiation belt studies. Rocket and instrument functioned satisfactorily. Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr carried nrl experiment to 185.6-km (115.3-mi) altitude to study extreme uv spectra. Experiment, model of solar experiment scheduled to fly on NASA’s Apollo Telescope Mount, successfully photographed sun for 300 secs and recorded excellent scientific data. (SR list; MSFC Release 70-213)
ComSatCorp’s Intelsat-IIIF-6— first Intelsat comsat insured against launch failure—misfired but remained on launch pad, apparently undamaged. Satellite was insured for $4.5 million with Lloyd’s of London and Associated Aviation Underwriters. Launch by NASA, originally scheduled for Jan. 7, had been postponed because of bad weather and difficulties with Delta booster, (upi, NYT, 1/11/ 70, 52; Newsweek, 1/26/70)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Univ. of Minnesota experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying nrl experiment for stellar studies. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements, but instruments on board rocket detected molecular hydrogen in interstellar space for first time. Although much indirect evidence for presence of large amounts of molecular hydrogen in space had been accumulated, detection by Aerobee 150 was first direct measurement. (SR list; Naval Research Reviews, 7/70, 31)
Javelin sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, carried Univ. of California at Berkeley payload to 557-km (346-mi) altitude. Objectives were to observe auroral protons and electrons over energy spectrum from thermal levels to several hundred kilovolts; study electric fields and their relation to particle fluxes; study density, temperature, and motion of ionospheric plasma currents; and study alpha-particle and neutral fluxes in aurora. All experiments performed satisfactorily and excellent data were obtained. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried GSFC experiment to obtain data on atmosphere by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
dod and aec conducted nonnuclear, high-altitude test with Thor booster at Johnston Island in Pacific. Test vehicle carried test simulator and stellar x-ray package to locate and identify stellar x-ray sources and transmit data to earth. Purpose of launch was to ensure that delivery system could transport test device for detonation at predetermined time and point in space. Test Was part of dod-aec readiness tests conducted since limited test-ban treaty became effective in 1963. (aec-dod Release N-66; dasa Release)
Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences favorably reported H.R. 16516, NASA FY 1971 authorization bill, with amendment reducing total authorization to $3,316 billion—$285 million less than $3,333 billion requested by Administration. Committee’s recommended total—providing $2,606 billion for R&D, $32.5 million for construction of facilities, and $677.3 million for research and program management—was lowest recommended by Senate Space Committee since 1961 and $399.6 million less than total recommended by Committee in FY 1970. Committee rejected House increase of $130.5 million over Administration request for Apollo program. It also rejected increases of $139.5 million for space flight operations, $5.6 million for ATS project, $2.3 million for selected aeronautics research efforts, $500000 for technology utilization program, and $2.05 million for construction of Earth Resources Technology Laboratory “at this time.” It restored House cuts of $1.5 million to advanced manned missions program, $5.6 million to Explorer satellite project, and $4.2 million to tracking and data acquisition. Committee strongly urged Executive Branch to develop formal interagency agreement defining responsibilities for experimental and operational erts systems. (Senate Rpt 91-833)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 410.4-km (255-mi) apogee, 118.9-km (73.9-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 108.8° inclination and reentered July 6. (Pres Rpt 71; GSFC SSR, 6/30/70; 7/31/70)	.
Experimental InterAmerican Meteorological Rocket Network (exametnet)—joint project of U.S., Argentina, and Brazil—released Annual Report, 1968 (NASA SP-231), describing 1968 activities with summary of meteorological rockets and data and list of publications, reports, and related handbooks, exametnet provided scientific measurements of upper atmosphere to facilitate research into structure and circulation of atmosphere in Northern and Southern hemispheres. (Text)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying Univ. of Minnesota experiment to study atmospheric composition. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA announced it had signed agreement with Italy under which Italy would launch three NASA satellites—one Small Scientific Satellite (sss) and two Small Astronomy Satellites (sas)—from San Marco platform in Indian Ocean off coast of Kenya. Use of Italy’s equatorial launch facility would enable NASA to orbit satellites with Scout booster rather than with larger boosters required for launches from KSC. Contract, signed by NASA and University of Rome’s Centro Ri-cerche Aerospaziali (cra), implemented Memorandum of Understanding signed by U.S. and Italy in February 1969. NASA would supply satellite and Scout booster. NASA-trained cra team would assemble, check out, and launch satellite and provide some tracking and data acquisition and would be reimbursed by NASA. (NASA Release 70-139)
Safely home, the Apollo 13 crew stepped aboard the U.S.S. Iwo Jima recovery ship after splashdown in the South Pacific. Leaving the helicopter (at top, from left) are Astronauts Fred W. Raise, Jr., James A. Lovell, Jr., and JohnL. Swigert, Jr. Li the once-tense Mission Operations Control Hoorn at msc (at bottom), Dr. Donald K. Slayton (left of center), Director of Flight Crew Operations, shook hands with Apollo Mission Director Chester M. Lee as arriving Astronaut Lovell appeared on the TV monitor. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Dkector, stands behind Lee, with Flight Control Division Chief' Eugene F. Kfanz sitting at the console in front. (July 16-24, 1969) manned missions had successfully landed on moon and returned to earth with lunar samples. (NASA Proj Off; FonF, 4/16-22/70, 253-5; W Star, 4/12-14/70; NYT, 4/15/70; 4/18/70; 4/19/70; W Post, 4/15/70; 4/18/70, Al; msc Hist Off; Off NASA Administrator)
Samuel K. Hoffman, President of NR Rocketdyne Div., retired after leading company’s work in development of rocket engine technology for more than 20 yrs, including 10 yrs as Rocketdyne President. Hoffman received American Rocket Society’s Robert H. Goddard Memorial Award in 1959 for outstanding work in liquid-propellant rockets. (NR News, 5/1/70, 1; Aeronautics and Astronautics, 191560,176)
International cooperation in space was described in Science by Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs: NASA had developed extensive program which “opens the entire range of its space activities to foreign participation and benefit.” Limitations in program lay in areas of manned space flight, large-booster development, and cooperation with U.S.S.R. Low level of European space budgeting accounted for gaps in manned space flight and booster development. Lack of Soviet cooperation “seems to rest with Soviet political views rather than with technical problems or any lack of interest by the United States.” Despite restricting factors abroad, there was “every reason to persevere with existing and improved programs for international cooperation.” (Science, 7/24/70, 333-8)
NASA launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets 11 min apart— one from Dew Line Station, Bar Main, Barter Island, Alaska, and one from Alaska Rocket Range at Fairbanks—carrying gsfc payloads. Primary objective was to make simultaneous measurement of electric fields over wide range of latitudes crossing auroral zone and extending into polar cap region. Four barium clouds were released from each rocket and good photographic coverage was obtained from ground stations. Similar launches had been conducted March 1 and 3. (NASA Rpts srl)
Japanese government had asked U.S.S.R. to suspend series of carrier rocket tests begun in Pacific March 21, Space Business Daily reported. Japan said tests so close to Japanese islands of Kuriles, Shikoku, and Niigaia would disrupt shipping, air service* and fishing and warned that continuing tests could damage Soviei-Japanese relations. (SBD, 3/30/70, 138)
Areas sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Ft. Sherman Canal Zone, Panama, carried GSFC payload to 59.5-km (37-mi) altitude to obtain ozone measurements in conjunction with Nimbus IV satellite overpass. Rocket was first of two-rocket series; second would be launched Nov. 13. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and good quality data were obtained. (NASA Rpt srl)
Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy Was presented to Smithsonian Institution for permanent retention at National Space Club Christmas reception in Washington, D.C. Frederick C. Durant III, Assistant Director of Smithsonian’s Air and Space Museum, received award from donor, Mrs. Esther Goddard, widow of rocket pioneer. (NSC News Letter, 1/8/71)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying gsfc payload to conduct stellar studies. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
usaf’s X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Gerauld R. Gentry (USAF), successfully completed first powered flight after air launch from B-52 aircraft at 12 200-km (40 000-ft) altitude. XLR-11 rocket engine burned 160 secs, boosting vehicle to 13 700-km (45 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.8 before it glided to landing on Rogers Dry Lake, Calif. Objective of flight, 10th in X-24A series, was to check operation of rocket propulsion system, stability and control system, and handling characteristics duringpowered flight. (NASA Proj Off; afftc Release 70-3)
Aerobee 150MII sounding rocket, launched by NASA from wsmr by VAM-20 booster, carried Univ. of Wisconsin payload to 168.3-km (104.6-mi) altitude to measure uv flux from three stars in constellations Lyra, Cygnus, and Ursa Major to provide check on prelaunch calibration of Wisconsin oao payload. Rocket functipned satisfac-tonly, but program stars were not acquired and experiment collected no data. (NASA Rpt srl)
Launch of Orbiting Frog Otolith (OFO) satellite, originally scheduled for Aug. 19 and postponed because of booster malfunction and countdown discrepancies, had been postponed until at least Oct. 19, NASA announced. Bullfrogs being trained for mission had been killed or disabled by redleg, virus infection common to water life, and new set of frogs was being trained. OFO, with Radiation Meteoroid (RM) spacecraft as secondary payload, would carry two bullfrogs into orbit for five-day mission to study adaptability of vestibule in inner ear to sustained weightlessness and to acceleration. (NASA Release 70-160)
USAF contract awards: Aerojet-General Corp. was being issued $12 100 000 initial increment to $33 409 607 fixed-price-incentive contract for procurement of Titan IIIB, C, and D stage 1 and 2 liquid-rocket engine systems. TRW Inc. was being issued $351 000 initial increment to $4 669 800 contract for advanced development of electronic propulsion system for space satellites. General Dynamics Corp. was receiving $250 000 initial increment to $2 585 000 contract for development, assembly, test, and launch support of integrated unmanned spacecraft for space flight-testing of dod experiments. (dod Release 544-70) During June: Hypersonic aircraft technology and applications were discussed in Astronautics & Aeronautics by Dr. Alfred J. Eggers, Jr., NASA Assistant Administrator for Policy; Richard H. Petersen, Senior Research Scientist in arc Mission Analysis Div.; and Nathaniel B. Cohen, special assistant in NASA policy research program. Because of long-life requirements of its structure, it was unlikely that hypersonic transport would be developed until operational experience was available on some other hypersonic aircraft. Therefore, hypersonic transport would benefit not only from technology developed for space-shuttle vehicle, but very probably from experience gained during shuttle operation. Operating experience with high-temperature structures would help immensely in developing longer life structures for hypersonic transport and gain considerable new knowledge of hypersonic aerodynamics. In contrast to situation in aerodynamics and structures, technology program being planned by NASA to support development of rocket propulsion for shuttle would not contribute significantly to hypersonic airbreathing-propulsion-system technology. Current generalized scramjet research program had amply demonstrated feasibility of such engines. Developing airbreathing propulsion for either hypersonic transport or secondgeneration airbreathing 1st stage for space shuttle would require applied program focused specifically on scramjet. (A&A, 6/70, 30-41)
Robot developed by UCLA engineer Dr. Amos Freedy mimicked human motions, Huntsville Times reported. Autonomous control subsystem (ACS) learned, thought, and made decisions. Consisting of manipulator arm and claw in rigging operated by small analog computer connected to IBM 1800 process-control computer several floors away, machine might be adapted to use on unmanned space flights, in rehabilitation of handicapped persons, and in housework. (Latty, Huntsville Times, 6/4/70) June 5:	NASA and Astronomical Netherlands Satellite Program Authority agreed on cooperative project to launch first Netherlands scientific satellite, ans, on four-stage solid-fueled Scout booster from WTRinto near sun-synchronous orbit in August 1974. Satellite would carry U.S. and Netherlands experiments to study stellar uv and x-ray sources. Spacecraft would be designed and developed in Holland. NASA would provide one experiment, the booster, launching, tracking, and emergency data acquisition. (NASA Release 70-91)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket, launched by nasa from Wallops Station, ejected barium cloud at 257.5-km (160-mi) altitude to provide data on electric and magnetic fields in geomagnetosphere. Barium-release payload was first to use liquid fluorine. Fuel tank contained hydrazine mixed with barium salts. Fluorine oxidizer, carried in separate tank under cryogenic conditions, reacted hyperfolically with fuel via valve, manifold, and burner system. Resulting arium cloud was photographed and tracked from several sites along East Coast. Similar launch had been conducted Oct. 5. (WS Release 70-15)
USAF launched two Vela nuclear-detection satellites from etr on one Titan IIIC booster. Vela XI entered orbit with 110 739.5-km (68 810.3-mi) apogee, 110 091.8-km (68 478.4-mi) perigee, 6695-min period, and 37.7° inclination. Vela XIIentered orbit with 111 379.8km (69 281.8-mi) apogee, 111 111.1-km (69 041.2-mi) perigee, 6699min period, and 32.9° inclination. Each 350-kg (770-lb) satellite carried optical sensors to detect electromagnetic pulses—brief radio signals generated by atomic explosions—anywhere in atmosphere. Sensors could also detect atomic weapon tests up to 160 million km (100 million mi) into space and could distinguish between weapon tests and exploding stars. Launch was last in Vela series begun in 1963. (GSFC SSR, 4/30/70; W Post, 4/9/70, A8; AFSC Release 106.70; Pres Rpt 71)	..........
Alabama Space and Rocket Center at Huntsville opened with $10million exhibit of hardware from MSFC, Army Missile Command, and U.S. aerospace-missile companies. Speakers at dedication ceremonies included Dr. Wernher von Braun—NASA Deputy Associate Administrator and former MSFC Director—and Astronaut Frank Borman. Center, managed by Alabama Space Science Exhibit Commission, was financed by $1.9-million state bond issue and built on 14 hectares (35 acres) transferred by USA from Redstone Arsenal property. (Marshall Star, 3/11/70,1)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, carrying Univ. of Minnesota experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Milton Klein, Manager of Space Nuclear Propulsion Office, oart, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology on role of nuclear rockets in future space transportation. Potential for reuse of nuclear stage provided additional prospects for spaceflight economy. Nuclear rocket would be in-space link between earth-to-orbit transportation system and operations at moon and in distant earth orbits. NASA budget request for $38 million for program in FY 1971, however, could “be viewed as maintaining progress in only the most important longest-lead-time development activities in nerva.” Progress made in “early, critical years, will permit later development activities. . .to proceed smoothly.” Effort was essential to meet major milestones: first ground test of series of nerva flight reactors in 1973 and first ground test of series of nerva flight engines in 1974. (Testimony)
Aerospace industry sales continued anticipated decline in 1969, to $24.9 billion from $26.1 billion—decrease of 4.6%. Commercial aerospace sales, primarily jet transports, increased 13.7% in 1970 from $4,342 million in 1969, to $4,910 million. Increase reflected delivery of wide-bodied jet transports. Space sales continued decline, to $3,606 million from $4,272 million in 1969, beciause of completion of Apollo program hardware phase and decline in military space expenditures. Aerospace industry remained Nation’s largest manufacturing employer during 1970, with more than 1 million workers. Employment in aerospace industry declined from average of 1 347 000 workers in December 1969 to 1 067 000 in December 1970. Production workers dropped from 696 000 in December 1969 to 515 000 in December 1970, a 26% decrease. (Aerospace, 12/70, 3)
NASA launched Itos 1 Improved Tiros Operational Satellite into orbit to photograph the earth day and night and flight-qualify the spacecraft for use in the National Operational Meteorological Satellite System. Itos I would take night infrared pictures and transmit cloud-fop and surface temperatures. TV photos could be received by automatic picture transmission system stations. "Super-six" version of two-stage, long-tank Thor-Delta launch vehicle (at right)—thrust augmented for the first time by six soiid-fuel strap-on Castor rockets instead of. three—made its debut to orbit the spacecraft weighing more than twice as much as previous ros satellites. Before the launch, above, the spacecraft was photographed as it was prepared for mating to the Defta-N at the Western Test Range. Oscar V was launched pickaback for use by amateur radio operators at Melbourne University, Australia. Itos I was first in new series of operational meteorological satellites to be launched in joint NASA-ESSA program to replace tos satellites operating in National Operational Meteorological Satellite System. Itos I weighed 306 kg (675 lbs)—more than twice as much as previous TOS satellites—and carried both automatic picture transmission (apt) and advanced vidicon camera system (avcs) cameras, previously carried on separate missions. Satellite was boxshaped with three-panel solar array and had new “stabilite” three-axis stabilization system. Onboard experiments included two redundant avcs cameras for stored global cloud-cover data for remote readout; two redundant apt cameras for local readout of global cloud-cover data; redundant scanning radiometers for global cloud-cover data for remote and local readout, both day and night; flat-plate radiometer for data on global heat balance; and solar proton monitor for routine observation of solar flares. Spacecraft would more than double daily weather coverage possible from ESSA satellites already in orbit and give more effective coverage at less expense for longer time. Nighttime photo capability would provide cloud-cover photos night and day every 12 hrs; essa series provided one picture per day. Itos I was 19th spacecraft to be launched in nomss. First, Tiros I, had been launched April 1, 1960; last, Essa IX, had been launched Feb. 26, 1969. Itos I was funded by NASA except for meteorological sensors; ksc was responsible for launch operations and GSFC was responsible for Delta booster. Future itos spacecraft would be funded by essa and would be turned over to essa by NASA after postlaunch checkout. (NASA Proj Off ; NASA Release 70-2)
U.S.S.R. announced completion of Pacific carrier rocket tests begun
Col. Gen. Nikita V. Yegerov, ideological chief of U.S.S.R.’s strategic rocket forces, died at age 62. (WPost, 5/7/70, B14)
Black Brant IV sounding rocket was launched by Brazilian space team for NASA from Natal, Brazil, carrying MSC experiment to study energetic particles in South Atlantic Anomaly region. Rocket and instruments—including positive ion telescope, integral flux spectrometer, and two magnetometers—functioned satisfactorily. Launch was first of two in series; second would be launched Sept. 29. (SR list; MSC Release 70-105)
House concurred in S.C.R. 49, providing for congressional recognition of Goddard Rocket and Space Museum. Action cleared measure for President’s approval. (CR, 9/14/70, H8620)
Tass announced U.S.S.R. would conduct carrier rocket tests in Pacific from July 25 to Aug. 25 and warned ships and aircraft to avoid area 966 kin (520 nm) northwest of Midway Island with 74-km (40nm) radius between noon and midnight local time, (upi, W Star, 7/20/70, Al)
Apollo 14 spacecraft underwent second day of flight-readiness tests after all-night vigil by guards following anonymous telephone threat that KSC would be blown up. Deadline of 11:00 pm given by caller passed without incident. Tests were interrupted for several hours during night to replace faulty computer but engineers expected to complete simulated countdown and liftoff satisfactorily. (UPl.W Star, 12/20/70, A2) December 19:	Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying Cal Tech experiment to conduct x-ray studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from WSMR carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., experiment to conduct solar x-ray studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena D booster. Satellite entered orbit with 407.2km (253-mi) apogee, 125.5-km (78-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 109.9° inclination and reentered Feb. 1. (Pres Rpt 71: gsfc SSR, 1/15/70:2/15/70) •
USAF launched unidentified satellite from etr by Atlas-Agena booster into orbit with 39 831.3-km (24 750-mi) apogee, 31 913.3-km (19830-mi) perigee, 1441.9-min period, and 10.3° inclination. (Pres Rpt71; AP, WPost, 9/2/70; GSFCProj Ops Support Div)
Environmental scientist Dr. H. Peter Metzger filed suit in Federal Court in Denver, Colo., to block static nuclear rocket test scheduled for January in Nevada as experiment for possible future deep space probes. Metzger charged aeC-nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office had failed to comply with National Environmental Policy Act requirements that test be fully studied and reported to other agencies for comment. Defendants named were Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, aec Chairman; Milton Klein, Space Nuclear Propulsion Office Director; and Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator. (NYT, 12/19/70, 14)
NASA successfully launched 134.7-kg (296-lb) ram c-iii (RAM C-C) spacecraft from Wallops Station at 4:06 pm edt by four-stage Scout booster. Spacecraft reached 209.2-km (130-mi) altitude, reentered atmosphere at 7.6 km per sec (25 000 fps), and splashed down in Atlantic 277.8 km (172.6 mi) northeast of Bermuda after eight-mimite flight. Primary objective was to determine relative effectiveness of water and freon in restoring communications during reentry blackout period. Preliminary data, obtained by Langmuir probes on board, indicated all downrange telemetry stations received signals before and after blackout and intermittent signals during blackout. ram c-lll, was third and last mission in NASA’s RAM (Radio Attenuation Measurement) program to study problems of communicating through plasma sheath around reentering spacecraft. Results could be applied to advanced lifting-body vehicles, space shuttle, and other reentering spacecraft, ram c-i had been launched Oct. 19, 1967, and ram c-ll Aug. 22, 1968. (NASA Proj Off; WS Release 70-13)
NASA successfully launched 1500-kg (3300-lb) Serf II (Space Electric Rocket Test) from wtr at 6:49 pm pst by Thorad-Agena booster. Spacecraft entered orbit with 1008.9-km (626.9-mi) apogee, 998.4-km (620.4-mi) perigee, 105.2-min period, and 99.1° inclination. Deployment of solar panels, disabling and dumping of Agena attitude control system, and transfer of Agena horizon sensor to spacecraft were accomplished satisfactorily. Spacecraft attitude was being maintained by gravity gradient forces and control moment gyros to well within required limits. Primary mission objective was to operate electric ion thruster system in space satisfactorily for six months. Secondary objectives were to determine variation of thruster power efficiency with mission time; measure rf noise from ion beam in frequency bands associated with interplanetary communications systems; measure extent of coupling between ion beam and space plasma; measure magnitude of ion engine’s thrust by electrostatically suspended accelerometer, orbit change, or thruster measurements; measure long-term effects of ion thruster efflux on silicon-cell solar array; and measure change in equilibrium temperature of optically reflective coating in space environment. Sert II system had large solar array, cylindrical spacecraft support unit (ssu), and spacecraft ring housing two ion engines, electric propulsion experiments, power conditioning, power switching and signaling equipment, and reacquisition control system, ssu housed two telemetry transmitters, two command systems, two tape recorders for data storage, power distribution system, battery for reacquisition control, and four control moment gyros. Serf II was second mission in sert project, sert i, launched on suborbital mission July 20, 1964, had proved that ion engines could produce thrust in space, sert project was managed by LeRC under oart direction. Tracking and data acquisition were conducted by gsfc. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Release 70-8; LeRC Release 70-2)
First U.S. satellite—14-kg (30.8-lb) Explorer I, launched from Cape Canaveral, Fla., by Jupiter C booster Jan. 31, 1958—reentered atmosphere over South Pacific. Satellite had discovered Van Allen radiation belts, had completed 58 408 revolutions of the earth, and traveled 2.67 billion km (1.66 billion mi). Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, who was Director of Army Ballistic Missile Agency at time of launch, said: “By today’s standards/Explorer 1 wasa feeble, first step in space. But in its day it was an outstanding accomplishment, done on short notice to place the free world in the space race.... We have come a long way from that tiny Explorer, demonstrated by the fact that the Saturn V we are now flying can place in Earth orbit about 10,000 times as much payload as the little Jupiter-C that launched Explorer 1.” (NASA Release 70-49;.GSF.c Mission & Analysis Div)
Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, replied to Sept. 10 letter by 39 lunar scientists protesting NASA’s cancellation of Apollo 15 and 19: “Forced into the development of an interim operating plan occasioned by the Presidential veto of the Independent Offices Appropriations Bill and reduced funding levels, the NASA management had to determine how best to carry out the Apollo and other ongoing programs to realize maximum benefits from them while preserving adequate resources for the future programs. Had your views on the Apollo program been as forcefully expressed to NASA and the Congress a year or more ago, this situation might have been prevented.” (Text)
Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Administrator, released statement: “Red China has apparently become the fifth nation to launch an Earth satellite with its own booster following the Soviet Union, the United States, France and Japan. Working in close cooperation with the U'S., Canada, Britain, France, Italy, Australia, and the European Space Research Organization (esro) have flown Earth satellites. This new development has been anticipated for some time. ... It is a dramatic demonstration of the determination of the Chinese leaders, despite many problems, to put science and technology very high on their list of national priorities.” (Text)
Fire in KSC rocket gantry extensively damaged “clean room” under reconstruction at Launch Complex 17, Pad B, one of two pads used to launch unmanned spacecraft by Delta boosters. There were no injuries. (WPost, 11/18/70, A8)
Scripps Howard newspaper survey had shown NASA’s rocket building program “all but grounded” because of budget cuts, Washington Daily News reported. With last rocket of $9.3-billion Saturn project nearing completion, layoffs of scientific and technical personnel had reached 80% in some areas. At peak of 11-yr Saturn project, NASA had employed more than 125 000 engineers, scientists, and technicians to build 37 Saturns including 15 Saturn Vs. “Today only 10 000.. .are still with the space program. And the boom towns that built, tested and launched the rockets. . .are starting to deflate.” At Seal Beach, Calif., NR had said only 1743 out of 10 800 engineers and technicians who built Saturn V 2nd stage were still employed, an 84% decline. At New Orleans, Boeing Co. and NASA had laid off all but 1800 of 11 994 Saturn V lst-stage builders. NASA was constructing only 21, smaller and less expensive, rockets for planetary exploration. Two of five kinds of rockets used to explore space and launch satellites were out of production and no new rockets were being developed. (Kirkman, W News, 8/21/70)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried West German payload to 257.5-km (160-mi) altitude. Payload, launched for West German Federal Ministry for Education and Science, consisted of leeches in Biosonde. Primary objective was to test under weightlessness a newly developed life-support system designed for use in satellites. Secondary objective was to obtain information on behavior of leeches when subjected to high-stress conditions of rocket launch. Weightlessness was maintained for IY2. min and data were obtained on operation of special oxygen-producing electrolytic cell in life-monitoring system. Data were also obtained on leeches’ behavior by monitoring their movement. Payload was recovered by usns Range Recoverer 158 km (85 nm) southeast of launch site. Launch, first in series of two, was conducted on cost-reimbursable basis in support of bioinstrumented tests for Univ. of Frankfurt, Germany. Second launch would be conducted Dec. 16. (WS Release 70-24)
Chicago Tribune article blamed Apollo program for demise of usaf’s Project Blue Book ufo study: “Wonderful as the saucers were, the moon shots probably killed them. The idea of little men with bulbous heads and wagging antennae landing.. .wasn’t a bit more amazing than the spectacle of human beings traversing space and walking the surface of a dead world. And, in addition, the latter was undoubtedly true.” (CTrib, 1/5/70)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range. Aerobee 150MI launched with VAM-17 booster carried Johns Hopkins Univ. and Univ. of Pittsburgh payload to 164.4-km (102.2-mi) altitude. Objective was to measure neutral and ion composition in auroral discharge, visible emission features of aurora, primary and secondary electron energy distributions, and auroral height profile. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Nike-Tomahawk carried Univ. of Colorado payload to 235-km (146.0-mi) altitude to measure Vegard-Kaplan and Lyman-Birge-Hopfield bands of nitrogen in uv auroral emissions. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and good data were obtained. Prototype parachute recovery system, being tested for first time, failed and payload was not recovered. (NASA Rpts SRL)
In international cooperation program, NASA successfully launched U.K.’s Skynet B military comsat for dod, Nato I military comsat for NATO, and Oscar V radio propagation satellite for U.S. and Australian amateur radio operators. Italian crew, trained by NASA, launched NASA’s Uhuru on NASA launch vehicle. U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreement was reached on procedure for joint efforts to design compatible rendezvous and docking systems for manned spacecraft. Since European Space Conference had indicated that major participation in U.S. space transportation program would probably mean end to Europa III launcher program funding, esc was assured U.S. would continue to make reimbursable launch services available for European payloads for peaceful purposes. Such participation was understood to mean at least 10% of developmental costs of space transportation system, or about $1 billion. During year NASA held briefings for U.N. Outer Space Committee and invited u.n. and specialized agencies to participate in International Workshop on Earth Resources Survey System in 1971. Discussions were held with Brazil, Canada, and Mexico on agreements to extend cooperation in earth resources area; experimenters from 28 countries signified intention to submit proposals to analyze data acquired by erts. Joint working group meetings were held in India and U.S. on satellite instructional TV experiment for ats-f. nasa and aid began 18-mo experimental project with Korea in application of aerospace technology to Korean economic problems. NASA and Canadian government signed agreement to study application of augmentor-wing concept to v/stol aircraft. Agreement was concluded with U.K. to test-fly NASA’s XH-51 rigid-rotor helicopter in U.K. and to share data. Agreements for new projects were reached with Netherlands, U.K., and Italy. Netherlands agreement called for cooperative development ana launch in 1974 of small astronomical satellite (ans) with one U.S. and two Dutch experiments to investigate stellar uv and x-ray radiation. U.K. agreement was for 1973 launch of uk-R x-ray satellite, fifth in Ariel series. Italian agreement established principles for nasa launch on reimbursable basis of Italian Sirio satellite to study wave propagation and electron flows in magnetosphere. nasa accented experiment from French National Laboratory for Space Astronomy to study stellar uv emissions from Skylab and accepted instrument developed by French National Laboratory for Stellar and Planetary Physics for investigating solar chromosphere structure from osO-i, scheduled for 1973 launch. Assistance was accepted from U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Observatory in planning activities of radio science team for 1975 Project Viking Mars probe. New sounding rocket agreements were signed with Australia, India, Spain, and Sweden, and negotiations were held with France for cooperative upper-atmosphere sounding rocket launchings at Kour-ou in French Guiana. Lunar material returned by Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 was studied by 54 foreign principal investigators in 16 countries in addition to U.S. scientists. (A&A 70; Pres Rpt 71)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Fairbanks. Alaska, carrying Univ. of Minnesota experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena D booster into orbit with 386.2-km (240-mi) apogee. 136.8-km (85-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 110.9° inclination. Satellite reentered May 6. (gsfc SSR, 4/30/70; upi, NYT, 4/17/70, 48; Pres Rpt 71)
Ofo Orbiting Frog Otolith and secondary payload, RM Radiation/Meteoroid satellite, were successfully launched by NASA from Wallops Station at 1:00 am est by four-stage Scout booster. Two spacecraft separated 9 min after launch and entered orbit with 528-km (328-mi) apogee, 299.7-km (186.4-mi) perigee, 92.8-min period, and 37.4° inclination. Countdown had been aborted five times since original August launch date because of bad weather, instrument malfunctions, and death of frogs. Primary objective of 132.5-kg (292-lb) Ofo was to obtain information on functioning and adaptability in weightlessness of vestibule, portion of inner ear which controlled balance, by studying two male bullfrogs (Rana castebianca) on board. Through microelectrodes surgically implanted in vestibular nerves leading from sensor cells in frogs’ otholiths, scientists would be able to study for the first time electrical response of otolith sensors under weightlessness and simulated gravity provided by centrifuge for at least three days. Frogs had been chosen for flight because their inner ear mechanism functioned similarly to man’s and because they were small and amphibious. Onboard spacecraft they were submerged in water with oxygen composition controlled by instruments. After several hours in orbit frogs were in good condition and spacecraft was transmitting data satisfactorily.	' Primary objective of 21-kg(46-lb) RMsatellite was to demonstrate feasibility and accuracy of advanced radiation dosimeter concept in space and to verify, in flight, operation of instruments to be used on long-duration flights to study meteoroids for at least three months. Satellite reentered Feb, 7. 1971. Ofo experiment was managed by arc and RM by msc. ofo project was managed by WS. (NASA Proj Off; NASA Release 70-132; WS Release 70-18)
Japan successfully launched 38-kg (84-lb) Ohsumi (Lambda 4S-5) satellite carrying 10.9-kg (24-lb) instrumented payload from Kagoshima Space Center at Uchinora at 1:25 pm local time, becoming fourth nation to orbit earth satellite on own launch vehicle. Orbital parameters: apogee, 5136 km (3191.4 mi); perigee, 525 km (326.2 mi); period, 116.1 min; and inclination, 31.4°. Total cost of satellite and 16.5-m (54-ft) four-stage Lambda 4S booster was 118 million yen. Onboard equipment included 4th-stage spherical motor 48 cm (18.9 in) in diameter with small radio transmitter, battery, thermometer, and accelerometer in nosecone and four antenna spikes projecting from cone. Launch was fifth attempt by Japanese Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science to orbit satellite. Spacecraft was named for district from which it was launched. (GSFC SSR, 2/15/70; SF, 5/70,189; NASA Int Aff)
NASA launched two rockets from Wallops Station. Four-stage Trailblazer II launched at 6:56 pm est carried 34-kg (75-lb) AFCRL payload to 321.9-km (200-mi) altitude to measure plasma effects upon microwave systems during reentry. Launch supported USAF program to study techniques for improving transmission of radio signals from aerospace vehicles during reentry. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload reentered at 5.5 km per sec(18 000fps). Three-stage, solid-propellant rocket, launched at 10:17 pm est, carried 103.4-kg (228-lb) nrl payload to 1600-km (1000-mi) altitude before it impacted in Atlantic 25 min after launch. Primary objective was to measure, over wide range of wavelengths, the intensity, spatial distribution, and altitude variation of the diffuse far-uv radiation of the night sky and thereby determine its source. Secondary objective was to measure, over a wide range of wavelengths, the far-uv radiation from stars and other discrete sources. (WS Releases 70-21, 70-22)
Three-stage eldo booster built by U.K., France, and West Germany successfully lifted off launch pad at Adelaide, Australia, but Italian-built test satellite failed to enter orbit, eldo spokesman said launch would still be considered successful. (Reuters, WPost, 6/13/70, A2)
Senate passed S.C.R. 49 to provide Congressional recognition of Dr. Robert H. Goddard and Goddard Rocket and Space Museum. (CR, 4/7/70, S5153)
Meteorological rockets were being launched from EC-121 “Super Constellation” ailcraft at pmr for first time to test new sounding rocket system, pmr announced. EC-121 carried line of six rockets that were launched at 45° angle to rear of aircraft, curved to 91 000 m (300 000 ft) above flight level, and transmitted atmospheric data to aircraft while parachuting to ground, (pmr Release 1084-70)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, and Prof. Giampietro Puppi of Italian National Research Council (cnr) signed agreement specifying conditions under which NASA would provide reimbursable launchings for Italian scientific spacecraft and responsibilities of each party, cnr would provide spacecraft and experiments, inform NASA of spacecraft’s design and mission, and reimburse NASA for launch vehicle and associated services. NASA would furnish booster that would meet mission requirements and provide launch, tracking and data acquisition, and other services. First launch under agreement would be Italy’s Sirio, scheduled for launch by Delta booster into 35 400-km (22 000-mi) stationary orbit in 1972. Satellite would carry telecommunications, technology, and scientific experiments to be conducted with ground stations in Europe. (NASA Release 70-42)
Actions in response to Apollo 13 Review Board Report [see June 15] were recommended by Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, in memo to Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator. They included oxygen tank modifications, addition of third oxygen tank on Apollo 14 and 15, modification of fuel-cell oxygen reactant valve to separate Teflon-coated wires from oxygen environment, caution and warning system modifications, addition of second-level limits sensing in Mission Control Center, comprehensive review of consumables and emergency equipment in lm and CM, and tests and analysis recommended by Review Board. (Hearing, Sen Com on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, Apollo 13 Mission Review, 6/30/ 70, 52, 57)
U.S.S.R. announced successful completion of carrier rocket tests begun in Pacific March 21. Tests, scheduled for completion April 10, had been protested by Japanese government March 30. (AP, W Post, 4/1/70, A17)
msfc announced award of separate $150 000 three-month contracts to three firms to study possible conversion of 12 existing rocket engine test stands for captive firings of propulsion system for new space shuttle engine. New engine, not yet under development, would be used in clusters to power reusable space shuttle which could be flown up to 100 times. Four test positions at msfc would be studied by Aerojet-General Corp.; four at NASA Rocket Engine Test Site at Edwards, Calif., by nar Rocketdyne Div.; and four at mtf, by United Aircraft Corp.’s Pratt & Whitney Div. (msfc Release 70-27)
U.S.S.R. began series of carrier rocket tests in the Pacific about 725 km (450 mi) north northeast of Midway Island and warned ships and aircraft to stay away from area with 177-km (110-mi) diameter until completion of tests April 10. (AP, NYT, 3/22/70,7)
usaf launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Thor-Agena booster into orbit with 503.7-km (313-mi) apogee, 484.4-km (301-mi) perigee, 94.4-min period, and 74.9° inclination. (Pres Rpt71;GSFCSSR, 8/31/70)
Serf II Space Electric Rocket Test, launched Feb. 3 to accumulate 4383 hrs of electric ion thruster operation, was adjudged unsuccessful by NASA. Thruster No. 1 had operated 3782 hrs and No. 2, 2011 hrs. Both had failed apparently because of electrical shorts in high-voltage system. Although endurance objectives were not met, secondary objectives were met and mission was considered significant contribution to advancement of ion system. (NASA Proj Off)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by ThorBurner II booster. Satellite entered orbit with 872.3-km (542-mi) apogee, 772.5-km (480-mi) perigee, 101.3-min period, and 98.6° inclination. (Pres Rpt 71; gsfc SSR, 2/15/70)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by nasa from Wallops Station carrying Univ. of Michigan payload to study atmospheric structure. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
In Washington Sunday Star William Hines advocated abandonment of sst program “and substitution of a longer range objective: a hypersonic transport airplane (hst) to become operational around 1990.” R&D for 500-passenger, 8000-km-per-hr (5000-mph) global-range hst was “going to be bought and paid for anyway” as part of NASA’s space shuttle program. This would be a classic case of ‘spinoff’—a byproduct of the space program useful to the civilian economy.” There seemed little doubt “that an aerospace-plane capable of shuttling Earth-to-orbit could be adapted to serve long-range world markets as a pure airplane if travel demands could be shown to justify its construction.” sst was “not a spinoff but a drainoff.” Its “most dubious aspect” was “direct federal subsidy of r&d, which in effect amounts to a $1.5 billion loan to private enterprise at zero interest,” Hines said. (W Star, 1/18/70, C4) During Week of January 18: India successfully test-fired four Rohini rockets at Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station. Additional launches would be conducted following week. (AP, W Post, 1/23/ 70, A21)
usaf launched two unidentified satellites from Vanden-berg afb on one Thor-Agena D booster. First entered orbit with 225.9-km (140.4-mi) apogee, 177-km (110-mi) perigee, 88.5-min period, and 82.9° inclination and reentered Dec. 11. Second entered orbit with 511-km (317.5-mi) apogee, 486-km (302-mi) perigee, 94.5min period, and 83.1° inclination. (Pres Rpt 71; GSFC SSR, 11/30/70; 12/31/70; Baltimore News-American, 11/19/70)'
Space Business Daily reported dod had confirmed that U.S.S.R.’s Cosmos CCCLXV (launched Sept. 25) had been FOBS test launched by modified SS-9 booster. (SBD, 9/30/70, 129)
Oran W. Nicks, NASA Acting Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during NASA FY 1971 authorization hearings: Jet aircraft noise-reduction goals of NASA’s acoustically treated nacelle program had been achieved. McDonnell Douglas design modifying nacelles of DC-8 had reduced noise by 10.5 epndb with estimated 4.2% direct-operating-cost increase. Boeing design for 707 aircraft had reduced noise by 15.5 epndb with estimated 9.2% direct-operating-cost increase. Long-range approach to reducing jet transport noise was under way in quiet engine program, with quietness as design requirement for first time in aviation history. Quiet engine incorporating high bypass ratio, low-noise fan design, and sound attenuating ducts would be built by General Electric Co. Three lifting-body vehicles—USAF X-24A, NASA M2-F3, and NASA HL-10—were investigating low-speed flight problems to be encountered by space shuttle orbiter and booster in future and providing information on subsonic and transonic flying qualities. In human factors program, NASA was preparing life support systems for extended space missions. “Continuous testing of candidate sub-systems integrated into functional life support systems has been accomplished for up to 60 days. The space vehicle simulation.cham-bers employed. . .have accommodated four-man teams. A 90-day test with the four-man simulator will be conducted this year.” Test would include onboard oxygen recovery system with water electrolysis unit—major component in subsystem for oxygen recovery from carbon dioxide. During 90-day run, advanced subsystems for water recovery employing vacuum distillation and vapor pyrolysis with isotope power source and water vapor electrolysis unit for humidity control would be validated. (Testimony) Gerald M. Truszynski, NASA Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, testified on communications satellites before Committee: “NASA has recently completed negotiations and signed an agreement with the Communications Satellite Corporation (Comsat) for a continuation of satellite services. .. . New contracts have been negotiated for continuing this service with Cable and Wireless, Ltd., England; Australian Overseas Telecommunications Commission; and Compania Telefonica Nacional de Espana, Spain.” (Testimony)
USAF launched 500th successful U.S. satellite into orbit from etr by Titan IIIC booster. Orbital parameters: apogee, 35 886.8 km (22 299 mi); perigee, 26 048.8 km (16 186 mi); period, 1197.1 min; and inclination, 7.8°. U.S. press reported that satellite, carrying several new sensors, was part of early warning system to provide 30-min warning of JCBMs fired from U.S.S.R. or Communist China. (Pres Rpt 71; GSFC SSR, 11/30/70; Beecher, NYT, 11/7/70, 1)
French Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (cnes) successfully launched French Diamant-B rocket carrying Franco-German scientific satellite Dial (Diamant pour 1’Allemagne) from Guiana Space Center (gsc), Kourou, French Guiana. Mission, under joint agreement with West Germany, was France’s fifth successful launch. The 115-kg (253-lb) payload included German scientific “WI Kapsule” wika and French technological “Mini Kapsule” mika which was damaged by vibration between 2nd and 3rd stages. French capsule was to have checked Diamant-B stages during flight. Satellite entered orbit with 1613-km (1002.3-mi) apogee, 308-km (191.4-mi) perigee, 104.3-min period, and 5.4° inclination, (gsfc ssr. 3/31/70; C Trib,3/11/70; Av Wk, 4/6/70; NASA Int Aff; SBD, 3/12/70, 57; SF, 51 70,189)
NASA successfully launched Itos /(Tiros-M) Improved Tiros Operational Satellite from wtr at 3:31 am pst by two-stage, long-tank Thor-Delta (DSV-3N-6) booster with six solid-fuel, strap-on Thiokol rockets. Satellite entered polar, sun-synchronous orbit with 1478.2-km (918.7-mi) apogee, 1432.3-km (890.2-mi) perigee, 115-min period, 102° inclination, and 0.02° per day orbital drift. Australis Oscar V (Oscar A) Orbiting Satellite Carrying Amateur Radio, carried pickaback on 2nd stage, was successfully ejected and entered orbit with 1482-km (920.9-mi) apogee, 1434-km (891.1-mi) perigee, 115-min period, and 101.9° inclination. Oscar V was fifth in series of Oscar launches; previous spacecraft had been launched in conjunction with dod missions. Satellite had been constructed by amateur radio operators at Melbourne Univ. in Australia and prepared for launch by U.S. Radio Amateur Satellite Corp.; 17.7-kg (39-lb) satellite would transmit at 29.45 mhz in 10-m band and 144.5 mhz in 2-m band. Primary objective of Itos I was to flight-qualify prototype spacecraft for Improved Tiros Operational System and obtain engineering data for evaluation of single-momentum, wheel-stabilized system for earth-oriented stabilized platform. Secondary objective was to evaluate use of stabilized platform for operational meteorology by observing cloud cover by direct readout.
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carrying gsfc experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched two sounding rockets. Nike-Cajun launched from Wallops Station carried gsfc payload to 132-km (82-mi) altitude to obtain data on temperature, pressure, and wind between 35 and 95 km (22 and 59 mi) by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily; 18 of 19 grenades exploded as planned. Launch was in conjunction with essa program to study temperature-sensing methods using balloon sonde, Areas and Loki-Dart rockets, and Nimbus III and IV satellites. Aerobee 150 launched from wsmr carried Hawaiian experiment to conduct solar studies. (NASA Rpt srl; SR list)
Institute for Strategic Studies in London had released annual report, The Military Balance, 1970-71, Reuters said. July survey had shown U.S.S.R. could deploy 1300 ICBMs—246 more than U.S. But U.S, “promises to increase its warhead lead” with three-warhead system on Minuteman III rocket with 12 900-km (8000-mi) range. U.S. also was converting submarines to take 10-warhead Poseidon missile. U.S.S.R. had been testing three-warhead system. Report estimated that U.S. had more than 6000 nuclear warheads fitted to missiles capable in theory of reaching Soviet territory, while some 2000 Soviet warheads were fitted to missiles with range to hit continental U.S. U.S. had 656 submarine-launched ballistic missiles; U.S.S.R., 280. (Maynes, WPost, 9/4/70, A18) Septembers: NASA announced it had reversed April 8 decision to award $50-million ats-F and ATS-G contract to General Electric Co. and would award contract to Fairchild Hiller Corp. instead. Decision was based on Aug. 26 report of ats Procurement Review Committee (PRC) and recommendations of Selection Panel appointed by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, July 16. Panel concurred with PRC finding that procedural discrepancies had not affected outcome of competition and that cost difference between final proposals was not significant as basis for selection, but that important technical differences existed in which Fairchild Hiller was superior. It did not concur with PRC conclusion that Fairchild was superior in nearly all aspects of organization and management. (NASA Special Release; Memo of Decision)
U.S. space program problems were described in Washington Post by Thomas O’Toole: U.S. needed to begin development of space shuttle “now, which in a way is the worst possible time for it.” Country was “weary of big new space projects, particularly while the spectacular Apollo project is -still unfolding. . . . Also, the space agency is without an appointed administrator, which means that NASA cannot exercise its full role with Congress or the White House.” NASA managers “go on sailing a skipperless ship. But what they find more disturbing is the feeling that nobody at headquarters cares whether the ship gets a captain or not.” It was no secret that “men who run the space program are deeply disappointed in the Nixon Administration.” They felt “that the White House neither understands nor cares to understand what the space program means or what it can do for the country.” There was feeling Congress had ceased to care, too. House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on nasa Oversight had canceled hearings on Apollo future because, “outside of Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.), chairman of the Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, none of the subcommittee members was concerned enough. . . .to agree to the urgency of the hearings.” (WPost, 9/27/70, Bl) September 28:	Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from WSMR carrying American Science & Engineering, Inc., experiment to study x-ray spectra. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Editorial comment as damaged Apollo 13 attempted safe return to New York Times: “An emergency in a space craft on the voyage between earth and moon was bound to occur sometime. The enormous hazards of the long journey through the most hostile of environments, the ever present possibility of failure by one or more of the millions of components contained in an Apollo vehicle, the ubiquitous threat of human error, all these combine in lunar flights to make them the most dangerous expeditions human beings have ever undertaken. In retrospect, the remarkable fact is not that such ominous peril has arisen in the now-aborted trip of Apollo 13, but that the actually hazardous trips to the moon and back by Apollos 8, 10, 11, and 12 were accomplished in safety.” (NYT, 4/15/70) Washington Post: “Lindbergh gave up a continent, as the astronauts gave up a planet, because he had measured the risks and found them reasonable, for all the possibility of disaster lurking around the corner—it does so every day for men and nations. So if we are going to apply the glories, we must confront the dangers along the way. All we can do now, as that unlikely looking craft limps back from the moon, is to hope that the men who ride in it and the men in Houston who guide it can find what Lindbergh found. ‘Somewhere in an unknown recess of my mind,’ he wrote T’ve discovered that my ability rises and falls with the essential problems that confront me. What I can do depends largely on what I have to do to stay alive and on course.’ ” (WPost, 4/15/70) Baltimore Sun: “The safety record of the Apollo program has, except for one hideous ground accident, been a perfect one. Perhaps we have too easily assumed that therefore all expeditions would begin and end without serious and unforseen breakdown, without the torments of suspense when the line between splendid accomplishment and bitter tragedy is drawn very fine. The truth is, of course, that exploration, especially in a realm new to man, can never be free of deadly hazards. But the astronauts and the men associated with them in their ventures have always known it.” It was clear astronauts were equal to emergency, “but they remain at the mercy of machinery which in some still unexplained way has failed them. The rest of us can only wait from desperate hour to hour, trusting that superlative skill, universal hope and fervent prayers will prevail over cruel chance.” (B Sun, 4/15/70)
msc announced award of $34 065 390 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Boeing Co. Southeast Div. to define letter contract for systems engineering and conduct flight readiness assessment for Apollo program. Contract would cover Jan. 1, 1970, through Dec. 31, 1970, with options for 1971 and 1972. (MSC Release 70-45)
Uhuru (Explorer XL]I) Small Astronomy Satellite was (aimdied into an equatorial orbit by Italy Iron the San Marco launch platform off the coast of Kenya, East Africa, on Kenya’s Independence Day. “Lfhuru" was the Swahili word for “freedom." Boosted by a four-stage Scout vehicle to map x-ray sources both within and beyond the Milky Way Galaxy, the satellite was the first launched for the United States by another country. At left Mrs. Marjorie Townsend, project manager, discussed satellite performance with a colleague during p re flight tests at Goddard Space Flight Center. During first day of operation Uhuru was expected to collect more data than had been obtained with sounding rockets in past eight years. Satellite’s Jong observing time, rather than the few minutes for sounding rockets, would permit observation of x-ray sources from 30 to 50 times fainter than those observed thus far, probably increasing number of observed x-ray sources from 540 to several hundred. Uhuru was first in series of three explorers in Small Astronomy Satellite program to survey sky above earth’s atmosphere and identify x-ray, gamma-ray, UV, and infrared sources. It was first U.S. satellite launched by another country. Under NASA and Univ. of Rome agreement NASA provided booster and satellite; Italian team, trained at Wallops Station, conducted assembly, checkout, and launch services on cost-reimbursable basis, sasb would be launched in October 1971 and SAS-C in December 1972. (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 70-203)
NASA and U.K. Science Research Council (SRC) signed agreement for NASA to launch fifth U.K. satellite in 1973. UK-5, carrying six scientific experiments, would be launched by NASA Scout booster into orbit with 555-km (435-mi) altitude, where it would study cosmic x-ray sources. Satellite would be U.K.’s first employing magnetic-core data storage, pulse-code-modulatioft telemetry, and gas-jet attitude-control system that could be programmed by ground command. U.K.’s Ariel I (launched April 26, 1962), Ariel II (launched March 27, 1964), and Ariel III (launched May 5, 1967), had been launched by NASA under cooperative agreements. Fourth satellite, UK-4, would be launched into near-polar orbit in 1971. (NASA Re^ lease 70-195)
Areas sounding rocket launched by nasa from pmr carried gsfc experiment to study ozone in atmosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
USAF launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg afb by Titan IIIB-Agena booster into orbit with 395.9-km (246-mi) apogee, 151.3-km (94-mi) perigee, 89.9-min period, and 110.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 3. (Pres Rpt 71; gsfc SSR, 8/31/70; 9/30/ 70)
JPL and USAF officials commemorated 25 yrs of rocket engine testing at Edwards Test Station, Edwards afb, Calif., by placing historical marker at approach to ETS administration building. Plaque cited April 2, 1945, date of arrival at Muroc Dry Lake of first cadre of 10 jpl engineers and technicians. (Boron, Calif Enterprise, 4/2/70)
Milton Klein, Manager of AEC-NASA Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of aec Space Nuclear Systems, testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: “During the past year, the aec program to provide technology for space nuclear power has furnished operational systems for an earth satellite and the surface of the Moon, and in the near future will provide nuclear power for a new navigational satellite and probes of Jupiter and Mars. Moreover, nuclear power will be imperative for the deep space unmanned planetary missions, the space station/space base and a variety of other missions planned for the new decade and beyond.” Basic technology program had demonstrated “nuclear rocket technology is ready to fulfill this vital role in space and forms the basis for the development of the flight rated nerva.” (Testimony)
USAF launched unidentified satellite by Titan IIIB-Agena booster into orbit with 399.1-km (248-mi) apogee, 130.4-km (81-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 1110 inclination. Satellite reentered Nov. 11. (Pres Rpt71;GSFC SSR, 10/31/70; 11/30/70)
Sert II spacecraft with experimental electric rocket engine (launched Feb. 3) was already setting endurance records and returning valuable technical data, NASA announced. Endurance test begun Feb. 14 was continuing satisfactorily. Only problem was failure of miniature electrostatic accelerometer, one of three instruments for measuring thrust. (NASA Release 70-34)
Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal seismic investigator for Apollo program, asked astronomers worldwide to study moon each month at its closest approach to earth to determine whether surface cracks were opening and closing under gravitational attraction. Request was made through Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory’s Center for Study of Short-Lived Phenomena, which mailed “alert” cards to subscribers. Dr. Latham and NASA team at msc had determined from lunar seismograph left on moon’s surface by Apollo 12 crew that moon’s surface might show 7.6-cm (30-in) bulge earthward during these periods. It was also during these periods that astronomers studying moon with ground-based telescopes had reported sudden flares of color. If optical observations from telescopes of opening and closing of lunar surface cracks could be correlated with detection of moonquakes [see July 26], Dr. Latham said, “it would be strong evidence that the glows are produced by the escape of gases from the lunar interior through cracks which open and close each month.” (SAO-PAO; Alert card; W Star, 8/9/70, A19)
NASA had applied for patent on magnetic hammer that synthesized small quantities of clear and yellow diamonds from graphite, msfc announced. Devised by msfc engineers John R. Rasqum and Marvin F. Estes, process produced diamond grit of kind used by industry for cutting operations. Hammer, which might be used for making other crystals, had been developed for use in Saturn rocket production. (msfc Release 70-265)	' Apollo 11 July 19-20, 1969. (Program; NASA Hist Off; CR, 12/17/70, HI 1884-5)
USAF launched unidentified satellite on Titan IIIB-Agena booster from Vandenberg afb into orbit with 404-km (251-mi) apogee, 118.9-km (73.9-mi) perigee, 90.1-min period, and 59.9° inclination. Satellite reentered Aug. 19. (gsfc SSR, 7/31/70; 8/31/70; Pres Rpt 71)
Press comment on Apollo program cutback: Washington Post editorial: “There has rarely been a major program that has gone up the hill and down again as fast as has the manned space program. Just a year ago NASA was riding high on the success of Apollo 11. Now it is scratching operations and scrambling for money to keep even a portion of the original program and its progeny in business. This, in our view, is bad because if it is carried too far it threatens to turn the entire manned space effort into the most spectacular (and most expensive) stunt in history instead of the first step in a genuine effort to learn a little more about some of the secrets of the universe. NASA’s decision to focus on the future rather than on a full study of the moon will help at least to keep the option of a worthwhile space program open.” (WPost, 9/6/70, B6) Richard D. Lyons in New York Times: When U.S. politicians first proclaimed national effort to land men on moon influential scientific leaders had scoffed. “A decade later the scythe of discontent with Apollo has swung full circle. Now it is the politicians who are attacking the program while the scientists wring their hands over lack of support.” Nixon Administration had “not been kind to the space program, although the President repeatedly stated that he supports it enthusiastically. The main reason is money, or the lack of it, which was almost no object when Apollo was bom.” (NYT, 9/6/70, 4:7)
nasa launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Wallops Station carrying live leeches in Biosonde experiment for West German Federal Ministry for Education and Science. Rocket reached 246.2km (153-mi) altitude and good data were obtained. Launch was second in series of two to test new satellite life-support system and ob: tain information on leeches’ behavior during flight. First launch had been conducted Dec. 10. (WS Release 70-26)
aiaPresident Karl G. Harr, Jr., said in Aerospace Technology: “In terms of its scope and novelty no single enterprise matches man’s landing on the moon—the Apollo program. Nor has any other enterprise in history broker* so much new technical ground. The technical and managerial ingredients of these space accomplishments, as well as of comparable national security programs, are available for broader applications in the nation’s service. The problem is how to harness them effectively for such purposes. The Apollo program centered on a clearly stated goal with adequate funding for its attainment. Because it represented achievement of a national goal, lines of authority and responsibility were clear, simple and strong. Our nation’s environmental problems, however, often do not enjoy such clear delineations. . . . The greatest need is for the development of innovative means to overcome such constraints so that technology’s revolutionary new tools can be more effectively applied to the pressing needs of our society. . . . The transfer of aerospace technology to domestic areas is underway and is already making significant contributions.” Magazine cited computer technology used by NASA to evaluate spacecraft systems and by USN to study pilot behavior as space age spinoff which might “soon be used to conduct highway safety research or to design new houses and urban renewal projects.” (Aero Tech, 3/70,3)
NASA Hq. briefing explained to university administrators effects of NASA budget cuts on funds for educating space scientists. Termination tof sustaining university program in FY 1971 would eliminate more than 200 predoctoral training grants which had been funded at $4.18 million. Funding for multidisciplinary research grants also would end. Students would not be cut off immediately, since grants had been step-funded and would be reduced over three years. NASA Assistant Administrator for University Affairs F. B. Smith said other agencies might assume funding of some grants, since university r&d funding in total Federal budget would increase by $114 million during FY 1971. Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. Du-Bridge, said increase would not compensate for leveling off of r&d budgets in past few years nor for effects of inflation. He noted Government support for graduate students was declining generally and said Government did not need as many scientists as previously. Total $21 million would be cut by NASA in contracts and grants to universities. In ossa, university R&D grants in bioscience would be cut by 30%. Cuts would eliminate a high-energy astronomical observatory. oart would experience 30% cut in university r&d, chiefly affecting electronics and space vehicles research, omsf contracts with mit for Apollo program would be reduced by $2 million. University grants and contracts which survived would be reoriented in FY 1971, with emphasis on what universities could do for NASA. (nasa Off of Univ Aff.; Gruchow, Science, 2/20/70, 1107)
Black Brant IV sounding rocket launched by Brazilian space team for NASA from Natal, Brazil, carried MSC experiment to study energetic particles in South Atlantic Anomaly region. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Launch was second in two-rocket series; first had been launched Sept. 25. (SR list; MSC Release 70-105)
France successfully launched Peo/e (Preliminaire Eole) experimental meteorological satellite on Diamant-B booster from Kourou, French Guiana, into orbit with 749-km (465.4-mi) apogee, 635-km (394.6-mi) perigee, 98.6-min period, and 15.0° inclination. Peole—70-kg (154-lb) octahedron with 711-mm (28-in) diameter—was preliminary to Eole (ias-a) International Applications Satellite and carried interrogating system to collect data from balloon system to be utilized by Eole. Launch, originally scheduled for Aug. 24, had been postponed because of vibration problem in Diamant-B booster, (gsfc SSR, 12/31/70; SBD, 12/15/70, 181; Spacewarn, 12/29/70, 1; SF, 6/71,213,
MSFC announced McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. had received $60 918 000 modification to $97 340 000 NASA contract for conversion of original orbital workshop to be launched by Saturn IB booster to completely outfitted workshop for launch by Saturn V. (msfc Release 70-178)
Apollo 13 editorials: Baltimore Sun: “The simple, grateful ‘welcome home’ spoken throughout the world yesterday not only lifted a burden of dread; it celebrated a new and unforgettable triumph in man’s exploration of space and his own resources of courage and ability at their highest.” (B Sun, 4/18/70) New York Times: “Only in a formal sense, Apollo 13 will go into history as a failure . . . Apollo 13’s booster rocket was sent crashing into the moon on schedule, and that did produce some useful and important scientific data. But in a larger sense, Apollo 13’s flight was enormously productive. The emergency which so gravely endangered its crew turned this flight into a crucial—though unintended— experiment in space rescue .... The lessons learned from this near-disaster will help save spacefarers who are still unborn. And Apollo 13’s ordeal must raise more insistently than ever the question of creating an international space rescue organization with the rockets, crews, and other necessities required to give aid to distressed travelers in space.” (NYT, 4/18/70) Cleveland Plain Dealer: “The very real triumph of Apollo 13, the successful return of a crippled craft, could help the United States space program. What NASA can learn from its inquiry into the cause of the accident could further advance space science and technology —and safety. Certainly further evaluation of the space program’s timetable is in order. But man learns from his failures as well as from his spectacular achievements.” (C Plain Dealer, 4/18/70) New York News: “President Nixon has very fittingly proclaimed tomorrow a day of national thanksgiving. And with that attended to, the U.S. space research and exploration program should proceed full-speed ahead, with special reference to more manned moon shots, and the sooner the better. To falter or fail now would be. . .unworthy of Americans or America.” (NY News, 4/18/70) Nature: “One of the striking features of the past days has been the sheer competence of the people who have been concerned on the ground as well as in the sky. As always, NASA has put on a good show, and there is more to this than the mere capacity to keep a stiff upper lip or even to diminish real dangers.” NASA had functioned “superbly” during daring exploits. “A part of the secret has been that there have been enough men on hand to think of everything, or nearly everything. Another has been the logic of the planning.” Conduct of Apollo would be “monument to the way in which pure reason can accelerate complicated technical developments. Nothing decided in the next few months should diminish the importance of this brilliant demonstration. Those who are inclined to complain that there had been an accident should, rather, wonder why it has not happened before.” (Nature, 4/18/70* 197)
Japan’s space goals were described in Aviation Week & Space Technology: “Japan is redirecting the orientation of its national space program with the ambitious goal of placing a series of advanced satellites into orbit by the mid-1970s.” Plans provided for variety of payloads, including comsats, navigation, and geodetic satellite packages. “If successful, and if the funding to support it is forthcoming, [Japan’s] satellite and booster technology will outstrip that of the older programs of western Europe, placing Japan third in line behind the U.S. and the Soviet Union.” (Brownlow, Av Wk, 2/23/ 70, 75-85)
NASA held 12th Annual Honor Awards Ceremony in Washington, D.C., with Dr. George M. Low, Acting NASA Administrator, as keynote speaker. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew presented NASA Distinguished Service Medal to Dr. Thomas O. Paine, former NASA Administrator; Apollo 11 Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr.; Apollo 12 Astronauts Charles Conrad, Jr., Richard F. Gordon, and Alan L. Bean; and Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., John L. Swigert, Jr., and Fred W. Haise, Jr. Vice President said award ceremony was “perhaps the most significant since NASA was founded. Those individuals we honor have accomplished goals that required over a decade of vision, hard work, determination and courage by thousands in the NASA, industry, and university research and development team. ... NASA has had an outstanding beginning, successfully meeting its challenging mission and goals.... Though some reordering of national priorities and some fiscal constraints will not permit us to do all the things we would like to do in the immediate future, the future still holds many challenges and wonderful opportunities.... I am proud of you, the President is proud of you. We salute you.” Dr. Low said NASA could look forward to new achievements in program designed “to maintain that hard-earned lead, but one that also recognizes the many other problems that we as a nation must face. Today,we are moving forward on all...fronts—we have accepted the challenge of the future—a challenge in aeronautics, a challenge in science, a challenge in applications, and above all, a challenge in the exploration of the unknown.” Presidential Medal of Freedom was presented to Apollo 11 and Apollo 13 astronauts and to Apollo 13 Mission Operations Team. Herbert W. Grandy, Stationary Engineer at GSFC, received Exceptional Bravery Medal for responding quickly and “without regard for personal safety” to smoke alarm in gsfc building housing satellites, computers, and clean rooms—preventing loss of thousands of dollars and sustaining serious injuries. Group Achievement Award was presented to LeRC Dynamic Power Systems Group; FRC, ARC, and LaRC Lifting-Body Team; Wallops Station Solar Eclipse Sounding Rocket Project; and USN Solar Eclipse Underwater Salvage Team Associated with Recovery of Payload. Outstanding Leadership Medal was presented to Robert L. Krie-ger of Wallops Station and to former ERC Director James C. Elms. Other awards included Exceptional Service Medal to 18 persons and Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal to 17. (Program; NASA Release 70-196; NASA Activities, 12/15/70)
Editorials on Apollo program cutback: New York Times: “Throughout the last decade this newspaper opposed the top priority then accorded Project Apollo on the ground that too much money was being diverted from urgent social needs. But now that these huge sums have been spent the need is to obtain the maximum yield, scientifically and otherwise, from that investment. Surely, NASA, which has been able to reach the moon, can find a better solution than the one now offered for adjusting to austerity in space research. One desirable alternative would be to enlist foreign resources in the exploitation of Apollo technology, perhaps by offering to send teams of British, French or Soviet astronauts on the journey pioneered by Apollo 11.” (NYT, 9/4/70)
Bullpup-Cajun sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Wallops Station, carried gsfc payload to 41-km (25.5-mi) altitude to measure ozone distribution in mesosphere and stratosphere and ozone in 20-to 65-km (12- to 40-mi) region. Rocket underperformed because of pitch-roll lock-in during 2nd-stage burn, which increased coning angle. Instrument performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt srl)
Seismic data from impacts of Apollo 12 lm and 3rd stage of Apollo 13 booster (S-IVB), relayed by seismic station installed on lunar surface by Apollo 12 astronauts, were described in Science. Team of lunar scientists headed by Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal seismic investigator for Apollo program, made report. Unusually long reverberations suggested “that the lunar mare in the region of the Apollo 12 landing site consists of material with very low seismic velocities near the surface with velocity increasing with depth to 5 to 6 kilometers per second [3.1-3.7 mps] (for compression waves) at a depth of 20 kilometers [12.4 mi]. Absorption of seismic waves in this structure is extremely low relative to typical continental crustal materials on earth. It is unlikely that a major boundary similar to the crust-mantle interface on earth exists in the outer 20 kilometers [12.4 mi] of the moon. A combination of dispersion and scattering of surface waves iqiplies the presence of heterogeneity within the outer zone of the mare on a scale of from several hundred meters (or less) to several kilometers. Seismic signals from 160 events of natural origin have been recorded during the first 7 months of operation of the Apollo 12 seismic station. At least 26.. .are small moonquakes. Many.. .are thought to be meteroid impacts.” (Science, 11/6/70, 620-6)
Prince Philip of Great Britain inspected Apollo 13 rocket during tour of KSC. (UPI, WPost, 2/15/70, A2)
News conference on results of Apollo 12 lunar surface experiment’s was held at NASA Hq. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, said first anniversary of alsep was “scientific and technological triumph. The design specification was for one lunar day and night. Our design goal was for one calendar year.” Year after deployment alsep had received and processed over 6500 commands, had undergone 2600 533-K (500°F) swings of temperature, and was still being operated remotely 24 hrs a day, 7 days a week. Astronaut Alan L. Bean said unmanned vehicle, such as U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod I, could not explore surface as well as men could because men could deploy more equipment more effectively, perform more experiments, and collect more samples. He noted that Apollo 11 had collected 22.7 kg (50 lbs) of samples; Apollo 12, 34 kg (75 lbs); and Luna XVI, 90 g (0.2 lb). Dr. Gary V. Latham of Columbia Univ.’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Laboratory said seismic events were being recorded at rate of about one per day; some were impacts from grapefruit-size meteoroids and some appeared to be small moonquakes. In region of Apollo 12 station there were at least nine places at which moon-quakes occurred “every month at or near the time when the moon comes closest to earth in its monthly orbital cycle.” Most active zone for moonquakes was about 193 km (120 mi) southeast of al-SEP, near rilles in Fra Mauro crater, Apollo 14 landing site. Dr. Charles P. Sonett of arc said data indicated moon’s temperature increased very slowly with depth below surface, probably rising no higher than 1273 K (1332°F)—too cool for molten core characteristic of volcanic body. Dr. Conway M. Snyder of jpl described behavior of thin cloud of ionized gas detected after ascent stage was crashed into moon. Solar wind of ionized particles should have blown the gas downwind; it traveled upwind and was detected by alsep instruments. Cause of acceleration of the particles was unknown. (Transcript; Schmeck, NYT, 11/19/70,32; O’Toole, WPost, 11/19/70, A14)
NASA announced selection of Aerojet Liquid Rocket Co., NR Rocketdyne Div., and United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. for final negotiations of $6-million, fixed-price contracts for 11-mo parallel studies for design definition of space shuttle main propulsion system. Contracts would be managed by msfc. (NASA Release 70-64)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying ncar experiment to collect air samples. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
nsf problems in stabilizingiU.S. basic science research during FY 1971 “with budgetary squeezes on mission-oriented agencies such as NASA, and aec, and Mansfield-amendment effects rippling through dod,” were described by nsf Director William D. McElroy in interview published by Astronautics & Aeronautics magazine: “We can identify positively right now the order of $70 million [in basic science research] that has been previously supported by other agencies. .. .we don’t have $70 million additional money to pick that up, so there is going to be a squeeze here.” Though nsf FY 1971 budget would show $73-million increase over FY 1970 amount of $438 million, only $10 million could be earmarked for picking up programs cut by other Government agencies, (A&A, 12/70, 12-14) During 1970: U.S. orbited 38 spacecraft in 28 launches—including Apollo 13's CSM Odyssey, lm Aquarius, and S-IVB stage intentionally crashed onto moon. U.S.S.R. orbited 88 payloads in 81 launches; France, 2; Italy, 1 (for NASA on NASA launch vehicle); Japan, 1; and Communist China, 1. U.S. total included 21 orbited by dod in 17 launches and 17 by NASA in 13 launches. NASA’s total included 1 launched for NATO and 1 for dod. NASA’s manned space flight program continued with launch of Apollo 13, but mission was cut short by an oxygen tank rupture. Three-man crew, taking emergency measures and using lm as “lifeboat,” returned safely to earth after looping around moon. Analysis of Apollo system and modifications necessary to prevent or meet future emergencies and reevaluation of Apollo program caused rescheduling of Apollo 14 from 1970 to early 1971 and reduction in number of remaining Apollo missions from six to four. Unmanned program included orbiting of Intelsat-III F-6, Intelsat-Ill F-7, and Intelsat-III F-8 comsats for ComSatCorp; Noaa I meteorological satellite for noaa and prototype meteorological satellite Itos I; NASA’s Nimbus IV in support of world weather program; Uhuru (Explorer XLII) Small Astronomy Satellite (launched for NASA by Italy); Serf II Space Electric Rocket Test; and Ofo Orbiting Frog Otolith, carrying two bullfrogs. Launched as secondary payloads were Oscar V(U.S.-Australia) amateur radio-propagation satellite carried on Itos I; DOD’s Topo 7 geodetic satellite, on Nimbus IV\ RM Radiation/Meteoroid Satellite, on Ofo; and Cepe Cylindrical Electrostatic Probe Experiment, on Noaa I. Almost 100 scientific sounding rockets were launched to altitudes between 160 and 1600 km (100 and 1000 mi) to study space physics and astronomy, including 19 during solar eclipse. One of the 19 detected unexpectedly high amount of neutral hydrogen streaming into earth’s atmosphere. Meteorological sounding rockets included 46 Nike-Cajuns and more than 200 boosted Dart and Areas rockets. About 60 high-altitude balloons—including one carrying Strato-scope II optical telescope—were launched to altitudes as high as 45 700 m (150 000 ft). In joint NASA-USAF lifting-body program M2-F3, HL-10, and X-24A lifting-body vehicles made 22 flights. HL-10 reached mach 1.86 (1970 km per hr; 1224 mph), setting new lifting-body speed record. M2-F3 made its first glide flight and X-24A made its first supersonic flight, reaching 1223 km per hr (760 mph). In aeronautics, YF-12A aircraft made 60 flights in joint nasa-usaf research program. Boeing 747 jumbo jet began commercial operations, and maiden flights were made by usn F-14A Tomcat air superiority fighter, Lockheed L-1011 airbus, and Douglas DC-10 airbus. C-5A cargo transport was delivered to Charleston afb for operational use. SST development continued—amid much debate over costs, sonic boom, and environmental pollution—with Congress approving funding through March 1971. Full-scale hypersonic research engine was tested for first time in LaRC’s 8-Foot High-Temperature Structures Tunnel at mach 7.4, and thick supercritical wing was flown on modified usn T-2-C aircraft. Other aeronautical research included studies on runway slipperiness, v/stol avionics, aircraft noise, landing radar, and pilot warning indicators. dod space program included orbiting of last two Vela nuclear detection satellites, Topo I geodetic satellite (launched by nasa), and U.K.’s Skynet B military comsat (launched by nasa). In joint NASA-AEC effort, SNAP-19 and SNAP-27 radioisotope generators completed one year of continuous operation on lunar surface, candidate fuel element for nerva completed 10 hrs of electrical corrosion testing, and Peewee-2 experimental reactor was fabricated and delivered for testing in early 1971. U.S.S.R.’s 88 payloads included 72 Cosmos satellites, 2 Lunas, 1 Zond, 1 Soyuz, 1 Venus, 2 Intercosmos, 4 Meteors, and 5 Molniya Is. Unmanned Luna XVI landed on moon and returned to earth with lunar samples. Luna XV/flanded on moon and released Lunokhod I unmanned explorer that traveled across lunar surface and conducted experiments by ground command. Venus VII landed on planet Venus and transmitted data on Venusian surface and atmosphere. Only manned mission was Soyuz IX, which carried two cosmonauts on 18-day earth-orbital mission, a new space endurance record. Two countries orbited their first satellites: Japan launched Ohsu-mi and Communist China launched Chicom I. France launched two satellites—Dial, carrying West German wika minicapsule, and Peole applications satellite. (Pres Rpt 71)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried arc experiment to study dust particles in atmosphere. (SR list)
Apollo 14 Astronauts Alan B. Shepard, Jr., Stuart A. Roosa, and Edgar D. Mitchell visited Noerdlingen Crater near Tuebingen, West Germany, during field trip to familiarize themselves with kinds of rock they expected to find on moon. (AP, WPost, 8/12/70, A7) August 12: Development by MSFC scientists John W. Kaufman, Dennis W. Camp, and Robert E. Turner of “maxometer” that could record Seak hurricane velocities of more than 320 km per hr (200 mph), was escribed in Marshall Star. One version of maxometer was antispark severe-environment sensor that could withstand extreme temEeratures of Saturn rocket engine exhausts and acquire peak ex-aust-gas-flow speeds during launch. Other version was ambient environment sensor for recording peak wind speeds in thunderstorms, squall line activity, tornadoes, and hurricanes. Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. had turned concept into dynamic pressure disc-spring device to measure 555-km-per-hr (345-mph) speeds to study air flow from launch of Saturn vehicles, essa had installed maxometer at National Hurricane Center at Miami and at Booth-ville, La., to gather hurricane data. (Marshall Star, 8/12/70, 1)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, launched by nasa from Wallops Station, carried noaa and Univ. of Michigan payload to 115.7-km (71.9-mi) altitude to measure ambient atomic oxygen between altitudes of 80 and 110 km (50 and 68 mi). Payload—including four silver probes calibrated to measure atomic oxygen, lateral magnetometer, solar-aspect sensor, and photocell to monitor nosecone ejection—was being flown for first time. Apogee and impact were less than predicted; instrumentation performance was satisfactory. (NASA Rpt srl)
Papers of U.S. rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard, recording his life work, were published by McGraw-Hill Book Co. of New York. (AFJ, 4/18/70, 6)	.
Aerobee 170 sounding rocket was launched by NASA from wsmr carrying American Science and Engineering, Inc., experiment to study x-ray spectra. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR list)
nasa launched two sounding rockets. Areas launched from Ft. Sherman, Canal Zone, Panama, carried GSFC payload to 60-km (37.3-mi) altitude to obtain ozone measurements in conjunction with Nimbus IVsatellite overpass. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Launch was second in two-rocket series; first had been launched Nov. 6. Nike-Tomahawk was launched from Andoeya, Norway, carrying Norwegian experiment to conduct auroral studies. Rocket and irn struments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt SRL; SR list)
NASA launched 1384.4-kg (3052-lb) sped (Supersonic Planetary Entry Decelerator) experiment from Wallops Station at 1:57 pm EDT, by one-stage Castor booster with two Recruit rockets strapped on. Payload separated from booster at 72.4-km (45-mi) altitude and coasted to 91,7-km (57-mi) altitude before descending. At 70,8-km (44-mi) altitude the conical aeroshell, 4.6-m (15-ft) in diameter, popped open like a parasol to simulate Mars entry spacecraft speeding through thin atmosphere. Aeroshell splashed down in Atlantic and was recovered by USNS Range Recoverer. Onboard cameras and test equipment parachuted toward earth 112.7 km (70 mi) from Wallops and were recovered in midair by helicopter. (NASA Release 70-171)
Testimony on Apollo 13 mission was given before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences by Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator; Apollo 13 Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John L. Swigert, Jr.; Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director; and Apollo Flight Director Glynn S. Lunney. Astronaut Fred W. Haise, Jr., was unable to attend. Dr. Paine said: “The Apollo 13 mission was a failure. We did not succeed in America’s third lunar landing attempt and we were therefore unable to explore the moon’s Fra Mauro formation. This hilly region remains a high priority objective in our lunar program. . .. We cannot yet say which of the remaining Apollo missions will be sent there. Although the Apollo 13 mission failed, we regard the recovery actions that followed.. .as a gratifying success which will contribute greatly to the nation’s space flight competence.” There was no reason “why this setback should be—or should be made to be—the occasion for a major change in the course of the nation’s space program. We have clearly demonstrated the basic soundness of the Apollo system and of our operational procedures. ... From a technical standpoint, there is no question but that we are prepared to move forward in the 1970’s with the space program we have outlined to you....” Dr. Paine said President Nixon “fully shares this view.” (Testimony) Dr. Petrone testified: “This long arduous voyage continuously presented the challenge to balance the spacecraft systems required to perform necessary functions against the availability of consumables, of water, electrical power, oxygen, and the lithium hydroxide to remove the carbon dioxide. The options available to flight and ground crews in every case permitted acceptable courses of action to be selected. During this emergency situation, the remaining systems performed in an outstanding manner meeting the unusual demands placed upon them. At the same time, the flight and ground crews demonstrated exceptional confidence in meeting these sets of unusual circumstances.” Mission ended with “set of consumables which were within about two percent of what we had predicted back at 63 hours or about seven hours after the problem occurred,” Lunney told Committee. “If the consumable posture. . .had worsened or if we had absorbed another failure. . .we would have had to resort to scheduling communication times with the crew.” Although probably within 12 hours to 24 of running out of most critical consumable, water, “had we proceeded into.. .duty cycling the communications gear onboard, we probably could have stretched that period.” Astronaut Lovell described crew’s feelings during crisis: “We soon realized that our only hope of survival was to go into Aquarius, power up its systems and use the systems and the consumables on board. . .for a return home. And it was here that we realized that it was now a case of survival.” Spacecraft was on trajectory that “would have entered us in a sort of permanent orbit, some . 230. . .thousand miles [370 000 km] in apogee, and maybe a thousand [1600 km] or so in perigee. ... Again, the ground came through, and gave us. . .the free trajectory burn, which was required to get us back to earth. My main concern at this point was to get this spacecraft back within the earth’s atmosphere.” (Transcript)
NASA’s X-24A lifting-body vehicle, piloted by NASA test pilot John A. Manke, completed 13th flight from frc. Two of four rocket chambers failed to fire after air launch from B-52 aircraft at 12 800m (42 000-ft) altitude and desired speed (mach 0.95) was not achieved. Some data were obtained at about mach 0.7 and below. (NASA Proj Off)
NASA launched two sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range. Areas carried Univ. of Houston payload to study ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Texas at Dallas payload to study ionosphere, but mission was unsuccessful. (SR list)
AP said Tass had reported construction of meteorological rocket launch complex at Molodezhnaya, Soviet station in Antarctica. Powerful radio was being constructed to speed information to Moscow and other world weather centers. (C Trib, 6/6/70)
Challenge and objectives of space science and applications program for next decade were outlined by Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, before House Committee on Science and Astronautics during NASA FY 1971 authorization hearings: “In the allocation of its scarce resources NASA is emphasizing those projects which help solve immediate problems and deferring to a later year those major new starts whose objectives are primarily to gain the new knowledge. Obviously, we cannot continue to defer such promising scientific projects indefinitely without mortgaging the economic health, the technical progress, and the security of this Nation. “In the immediate future these postponements are tolerable because of our active ongoing program. Future Aeronomy and Interplanetary Monitoring Platform (imp) Explorer missions will be directed at the earth’s environment: improved oso’s will study the sun and provide data for correlation with ecology studies; the Small Astronomy Satellites (sas) will start giving us continued data on galactic x-rays and gamma-rays; and future missions of the OAO will continue the successful observation program begun with oao-2. Before the middle of the decade, we will visit two additional planets, Jupiter and Mercury. We will orbit Mars in 1971 and land in 1976. Under our supporting programs, we are analyzing space data, developing theories to explain the findings; we are conducting relatively less expensive but very productive investigations with sounding rockets and airplanes; and are developing concepts and investigations for future missions.” Establishing scientific priorities, allocating proper resources to research, and deciding between various expensive scientific projects would continue to be “a most difficult problem.” NASA would work with in-house scientists, advisory groups, and nas and nae “to be sure that the scientific projects we are undertaking are sound and worthy of support.” (Testimony) Donald P. Hearth, Director of Planetary Programs, ossa, testified on continuation of Mars program before Committee: “The results of the Mariner 6 and 7 missions have affected very little the probability that life, in some form, may exist and they have not dampened the enthusiasm of the biologist to search for life on Mars. The apparent low nitrogen content in the atmosphere can be tolerated by many organisms. In fact, biota can be readily conceived which do not directly utilize gaseous nitrogen at all. The results have increased the geological interest in Mars primarily due to the discovery of the chaotic and featureless terrains. An understanding of these geological differences could shed new light on the origin and evolution of Mars and, thereby, on the origin and evolution of the solar system as a whole. We are, therefore, continuing the Mars program. . . . However because of the need to minimize expenditures. . .it has been necessary to delay the Viking missions from 1973 to 1975.” (Testimony) R. B. Marsten, Director of Communications Programs, OSSA, testified on broadcast service of NASA advanced flight experimentation in satellite communications: “Broadcast services come in three classes—the distribution class, which, through a relatively small satellite, would broadcast program material to large receivers, perhaps co-located with local broadcast transmitters for rebroadcast in the conventional mode; a somewhat larger satellite in the community mode, which would broadcast to moderate size receivers located in village squares, or in remote areas and connected to a cable distribution system for redistribution of the program material to viewing sets; and. . .direct broadcast mode, in which multi-kilowatt power level satellites broadcast directly to the user, who may have a conventional TV receiver. This application has the potential of providing instant national service where there is no ground infrastructure, and is much talked about now for educational purposes.” (Testimony) Jesse L. Mitchell, Director of Physics and Astronomy Programs, OSSA, said in submitted statement that research with instrumented aircraft was integral part of NASA program. “This research helps to bridge the gap between groundbased experiments and those that require the more expensive rockets and space vehicles. We have conducted auroral and airglow research observations of the solar corona during total eclipses and infrared observations. The ability to investigate interstellar dust and other celestial objects by observing their infrared emissions is opening up a promising line of research. A small jet aircraft has been used to take a 12-inch [305-mm] infrared telescope to 50 000 feet [15 200 m] above the earth. At this altitude, much of the infrared radiation from the universe is observable; in contrast, at the surface of the earth it is obscured by water vapor. Investigators from the University of Arizona have used a Lear jet from ARC for observations of planets, stars, and galaxies at wavelengths from 30 to 300 microns.” They had discovered centers of galaxies were bright in infrared. Because of importance of this area of astronomy, “36-inch [914-mm] telescope is presently being constructed to be placed in a C-141 jet airplane. This plane and the larger telescope will constitute a unique and effective airborne astronomical observatory.” (Testimony) Joseph B. Mahon, Director of Launch Vehicle and Propulsion Programs, OSSA, submitted statement on NASA plans for use of Titan IIIC and Titan-Centaur booster configuration. Titan IIIC would be used to launch ATS-Fand ATS-G into synchronous orbit. Introduction of Titan-Centaur configuration in time scale to support Viking mission would represent "vital portion of the effort associated with the Centaur Program in Calendar Years 1971,1972, and 1973.” NASA and USAF had concluded basic management agreements for operation of Titan IIIC and Titan-Centaur systems, usaf would act as Titan IIIC launch vehicle systems manager, responsible to NASA mission direction. NASA would be Titan-Centaur launch vehicle systems manager but would use selected elements of existing usaf contractor organizations. Titan III complex at etr would be modified to provide single launch pad capability for supporting planetary opportunities with two launches from the same pad. Plans for Titan Ill-Centaur included engineering proof flight of all-up Viking configuration late in 1973. First operational use was planned for 1974 to support He-lios-A solar probe, subject to discussions with West Germany. During FY 1970, preliminary design and program definition effort for Titan Ill-Centaur would be completed and final design and qualification effort initiated, as well as action for procurement of proof-flight vehicle and supporting hardware. (Testimony)
Budget limits had caused cancellation of one lunar landing and stretchout of remaining seven Apollo missions into 1974, Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said in interview following LSI dedication in Houston, Tex. Eighth lunar landing had been dropped to permit use of Saturn V rocket to launch first U.S. space station in July 1972. (UPI, NYT, 1/5/70, 1)
Aerobee 150MI sounding rocket, launched by NASA from wsmr with VAM-20 booster, carried Princeton Univ. payload to 168.9-km (105.0-mi) altitude to obtain uv spectra of hot atmospheres of stars. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and unique uv photo of comet Tago-Sato-Kosaka was recorded. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA’s HL-10 lifting-body vehicle, piloted by Maj. Peter A. Hoag (usaf), successfully completed 36th flight at frc, demonstrating and evaluating powered approach to landing for first time. After air launch from B-52 aircraft at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude, HL-10 reached mach 0.07 and fired three hydrogen-peroxide rocket engines to approach landing on 6° glide slope instead of usual 18° slope used on unpowered flights. (NASA Proj Off)
Moon watchers in California and Oregon had reported splotches on moon’s surface during its closest approach to earth in August, Dr. Gary V. Latham, Apollo program chief seismic investigator, said in telephone interview with Washington Evening Star. Reports were in response to Dr. Latham’s Aug. 10 alert to astronomers. Observations, coupled with recent series of simultaneous moonquakes, “may indicate the moon is not as cold and dead as we thought.” Dr. Latham said current sightings had not yet been verified, but he and colleagues at MSC and at Lamont Doherty Geological Observatory at Columbia Univ. had detected 160 moonquakes, 27 at time of moon’s closest approach to earth, in analysis of seven months’ data. Quakes had been mild, “about 1.4 on the Richter Scale.” (Lannan, W Star, 9/1/70, A4)
Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Dew Line Station, Bar Main, Barter Island, Alaska, carrying gsfc payload to measure electric fields over wide range of latitudes crossing auroral zone and extending into polar cap region. Rocket, last in Alaska series [see March 4], released four barium clouds that were photographed from ground, (nasa Rpt srl)
Communist China launched her first earth satellite (designated Chicom f by norad) from Shuang-ch’eng-tsu, east of Lop Nor nuclear test site. The 173-kg (380.6-lb) satellite entered orbit with 2387-km (1483.2-mi) apogee, 439-km (272.8-mi) perigee, 114-min period, and 68.4° inclination, broadcasting telemetry data and revolutionary song “Dong Fang Hong” (“The East is Red”) on frequency of 20.009 megacycles. Launch made Communist China fifth nation to orbit satellite with own booster. Radio Peking, announcing launch on evening newscast, credited feat to Communist Party Chairman Mao Tse-tung’s leadership, (gsfc SSR, 4/30/70; SBD, 4/28/70, 271; UPl, W Star, 4/25/70, Al; Newsweek, 5/4/70)
Otto Hirschler, last U.S. Army employee among 118 German V-2 rocket experts brought to U.S. by Dr. Wernher von Braun, had lost his $25 000-a-year job as electronics expert with Army Missile Command in USA personnel cutback, Reuters reported. Most of other German rocket experts had transferred to NASA. (NYT, 7/5/ 70,2)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Wallops Station, carried GCA Corp. and Univ. of Illinois payload to 142.8-km (88.7-mi) altitude to measure electron concentration, electron collision frequency, electron temperature, and electric field intensity during daytime intense-blanketing sporadic E at altitudes of 100-110 km (62-67 mi). Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and usable data were obtained. (NASA Rpt srl)
Dozen veterans of 118-member German V-2 rocket team of Dr. Wernher von Braun had received notice of demotion or layoff from nasa at msfc. New York Times reported. At least seven would lose their jobs altogether before Oct. 1 because of manpower reductions. Notices had come as team was planning October reunion to mark 25th anniversary of its arrival in U.S. (Wilford, NYT, 9/3/70, 1)
Aerobee 350 sounding rocket, launched by NASA from wsmr, carried gsfc payload to 87.8-km (54.6-mi) altitude. Objectives of mission, first Aerobee 350 launch from wsmr, were to demonstrate suitability of complete Aerobee 350 system for scientific research and to investigate solar and stellar x-ray phenomena. Rocket performance was unsatisfactory because premature sustainer-thrust termination seriously limited apogee. Payload recovery system operated successfully and ACS turned on and tried to erect. No useful x-ray data were obtained, but good performance data were recorded. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launched by_ NASA from Woomera Rocket Range, Australia, carried msc experiment to study uv spectra. Mission did not meet minimum scientific requirements. (SR fist)
Management of U.S. and Soviet space programs were compared in Science by Dr. Foy D. Kohler, former U.S. Ambassador to U.S.S.R., and Dr. Dodd L. Harvey, both of Univ. of Miami: Programs had been roughly equal in complexity and in input of resources. “If, as has been asserted, the U.S. moon undertaking represented a task equal in technological complexity to the total of all the great tasks performed by man from the building of the pyramids through explosion of the atom bomb, hardly less can be said of Soviet space enterprise.” Soviet investment in space program had been comparable to that of U.S., “if not substantially greater.” Both programs had depended for success on effective organization and use of existing organizations and expertise and both had required extensive organizational and administrative innovations and new management techniques.In both programs most of basic scientific knowledge and technology already existed. Organization and management had been complicated by necessity of serving both military and nonmilitary objectives and by pressures of diverging national interests. Both programs represented “organizational triumphs of a high order.” Aspect of U.S. moon landing now generally forgotten was “that a number of knowledgeable people were convinced it could not be done.” Programs differed in that “to the Soviet regime.. .the name of the game in space has been ‘the system,’ not scientific and technological excellence as such.” In U.S., National Aeronautics and Space Act “reflected the operation of the representative process at what could be called its best.” Its provisions “subjected space activities to continuing congressional control in accord with long-established processes.” U.S. space effort represented “new sort of partnership between government, industry, and universities. . . a partnership that has benefited and strengthened each of the participants without impinging on their interests and integrity.” Soviet space effort had had less impact on national economy than had U.S. effort. Soviet sources had revealed continuing shortcomings in computer technology and hardware upon which space program was dependent. Soviet scientists and technologists not directly engaged in space program did not receive direct knowledge of space program’s technical discoveries and innovations and were denied use of research tools and techniques employed. “The Soviets themselves are evidencing increasing agitation over their inability to match the United States in transferring ‘great prestige’ and ‘great accomplishments’ in science and technology to meet the general needs of society.” Authoritative statement indicated U.S.S.R. intended to triple space expenditures in next few years, while in U.S. “prevailing national mood seems to be moving strongly against investments for the future in favor of maximum utilization of resources for the immediate betterment of conditions of life.” This raised question, “Has the whole operation represented but another highly successful one-shot exercise in crisis management, or has it represented incorporation into American society of a new way to organize, systematically and purposefully, the development and use of scientific and technological resources to the furtherance of national goals?” (Science, 9/11/70,1049-56) On Sept. j7 LunaXVIentered near-circular lunar orbit with 110.1km (68.4-mi) altitude. Tass said ground controllers put spacecraft into elliptical orbit with 104.6-km (65-mi) apolune and 14.5-km (9mi) perilune. Rocket firing thrust spacecraft toward moon and braking rockets were fired 295 m (968 ft) from lunar surface. Main braking rockets were shut down 19.8 m (65 ft) above surface and Luna XVI softlanded on moon’s Sea of Fertility at 10:18 am Baykonur time (1:18 am edt ) Sept. 20. Scientists at Bochum Observatory in West Germany monitored spacecraft’s signals and reported TV pictures transmitted during and after landing were of excellent quality. After collecting lunar samples and performing other undisclosed experiments, Luna XVI lifted off from moon. It had spent 26 hrs 25 min on lunar surface. Tass announced that spacecraft’s mission was the “solution of a radically new task—automatic unmanned delivery of lunar ground to earth.” Samples, Tass said, were obtained with earth-operated electric drill that penetrated to 350 mm (13.7 in) and were placed in container by a “manipulator” and hermetically sealed in. Spacecraft’s landing stage was used as launch pad for liftoff from moon on command from earth. After liftoff spacecraft entered “ballistic trajectory of flight to the earth close to the predetermined one.” Luna XVI entered earth atmosphere at 10:00 am Baykonur time (1:00 am edt) Sept. 24 and parachuted onto steppes of Kazakhstan 26 min later, after 11-day 16-hr mission. Capsule containing lunar samples was recovered by helicopter for delivery to Soviet Academy of Sciences. Luna XVI was first unmanned spacecraft to land on moon and return to earth with lunar samples. In last mission in series Luna XV had landed on moon July 21, 1969, but had not returned to earth. (.NYT, 9/13-25/70; B Sun, 9/22/70, Al; SBD, 9/18/70, 78; 9/25/70, 102)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from TERLS carrying Indian payload to study ionosphere. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (SR list)
Areas sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Cold Lake Range, Primrose Lake, Canada, carried GSFC payload to 67.5-km (41.9-mi) altitude to obtain ozone measurements in conjunction with Nimbus IVsatellite overpass. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Payload transmitter stopped transmitting 40 secs after ejection, but prefailure data were of good quality. Launch was first in two-rocket series; second would be conducted Oct. 17. (NASA Rpt srl)
NASA launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets simultaneously—one from Dew Line Station, Bar Main, Barter Island, Alaska, and one from Alaska Rocket Range at Fairbanks—carrying GSFC payloads. Primary objective was to make simultaneous measurements of electric fields over wide range of latitudes crossing auroral zone and extending into polar cap region. Four barium clouds were released from each rocket and were photographed by cameras at six sites in Alaska and one in Canada. (NASA Rpts srl)
NASA launched series of four sounding rockets from Wallops Station—one Loki Dart, one Nike-Cajun, one Viper Dart, and one Areas—to obtain atmospheric data for comparison with data from orbiting Nimbus III and IV satellites. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpts srl)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, testified before House Ad Hoc Subcommittee on Aerospace Museum Study on H.R. 10771, introduced April 30, 1969, to authorize NASA study of advisability of establishing permanent NASA Aerospace Museum in western U.S.: “It is our view that a study for a Western Aerospace Museum should be the responsibility of the Smithsonian Institution, and not of NASA.” NASA would support study. Dr. Low submitted copy of 1967 NASA-Smithsonian agreement on custody and management of NASA historical artifacts. NASA felt arrangement was “working well” and believed construction of National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., “should proceed as expeditiously as possible when funding can be made available. NASA recommended existing museums, such as Goddard Rocket and Space Museum in New Mexico, be considered in study and that existing legislation for museum be taken into account so that legislation establishing second museum would provide for administration of both by Smithsonian. Study was expected to cost $50 000 to $75 000 and take slightly more than one year. (Testimony)
USAF launched by Atlas-Agena booster from afetr first in series of satellites equipped with TV cameras and x-ray sensors to provide early warning of enemy attack from land or sea bases. Satellite entered orbit with 35 840.1-km (22 270-mi) apogee, 35 791.8-km (22 240-mi) perigee, 1426.5-min period, and 0.1® inclination, usaf did not announce launch, but press reported informed sources said satellite would be stationed over Southeast Asia at about 32 000-km (20 000-mi) altitude. (Pres Rpt 71; gsfc SSR, 6/30/70; AP, NYT, 6/20/70,8)
