Use of laser holography as nondestructive test technique for inspecting case-bonded solid-propellant rocket engines would be evaluated for NASA in program under negotiation with Lockheed Space & Missiles Co., Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Technique consisted of viewing stressed test article through hologram produced when article was in unstressed condition. (Av Wk, 2/14/72, 11)
Christian Science Monitor editorial commented on National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council Space Science Board’s report, Human Factors in Long-Duration Spaceflight [see April 4]: “What intrigues us most is that the board insists on the need for mental selfknowledge and control. To successfully undertake long space missions, men must make togetherness work in confined quarters.” Board had noted significantly that “men must learn to recognize when their thinking is manipulated by the fantasies of a brain challenged by feelings of isolation and boredom.” Requirements sounded like “basis for more harmonious living on Space Ship Earth. Perhaps this is space flight’s larger challenge: to expand our range even a little way into the cosmos requires us to transcend human shortcomings through deeper self-knowledge.” (CSM, 4/18/72) April 19:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by Thorad-Agena booster. Satellite entered orbit with 247-km (153-mi) apogee, 155-km (96-mi) perigee, 88.4-min period, and 81.4° inclination and reentered May 12. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 4/28/72, 325)
New York Times editorial criticized Apollo 17 TV coverage: “One might have thought that the Apollo 17 moonwalks would be thoroughly covered by television as they took place. But the published television schedules indicate that the networks have chosen to dish out their usual commercial fare while giving only minimal live coverage to moonwalks that will make history. It is a poor choice from the point of view of public service.” (NYT, 12/12/72, 46) December 12—13:	Review of plans for space shuttle external tank and solid-fueled rocket booster was held at Marshall Space Flight Center for 350 industry and Government representatives. Attendees heard presentations by NASA and North American Rockwell Dec. 12. NASA officials conducted separate briefings Dec. 13.	(Marshall Star, 12/12/72, 1)
U.S.S.R. was dismantling huge booster rocket at Tyuratam launch site [Baykonur Cosmodrome] near Aral Sea, unidentified U.S. intelligence sources told New York Times. Ground support equipment also had been removed. Booster had not been used for manned launch, but it was not known whether it had been used for unmanned mission. (Lyons, NYT, 10/1/72, 9)
Federal Electric Corp. had received 1-yr, $19.9-million extension of contract with nasa, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Contract was for instrumentation and communications support services to Kennedy Space Center for Apollo and Skylab launches. Extension brought total value of contract to $113.9 million. (Av Wk, 7/3/72, 20) July 4:	NASA released mid-year review of items of collateral space technology which had been adapted to improve quality of life on earth. Items included compact, automatic gas analyzer that measured air in lungs to monitor human pulmonary and cardiovascular activity; temperature-activated remote thermistor alarm that sounded at nurse’s station when infant’s breathing stopped in hospital room; electroencephalograph helmet to diagnose hearing defects in children; powered prosthetic hand; portable light indicator for blind persons; ear oximeter to measure oxygen content of blood by noting red and infrared light absorption; analyzer to record intensity of sleep; and computer motion pictures that projected three-dimensional image of heart areas for study by physicians. Items used in industry included compound to prevent fogging of lenses; low-voltage switching circuits; fire-retardant or nonflammable foams, paints, fabrics, and glass fiber laminates; rapid-scan infrared tire tester; land-surveying system using laser and telescope that viewed laser pulse above obstructions; and management system develJuly 4:	NASA’s mid-year review of collateral space technology benefits on the earth described a compact, fully automatic, mobile medical gas analyser (above). The analyser measured composition of air breathed in and exhaled from the lungs to monitor pulmonary and cardiovascular activity in patients, f tula stria! items included an uitrathin, two-volt switching circuit for buildings. Low-volt circuits were displayed at the Second Annual Urban Technology Conference in San Francisco July 24-26, oped by NASA to supply daily updated information in Apollo program. (NASA Release 72-132)
Appointment of Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, Director of Air Force Materials Laboratory, as Director of Science and Technology for Air Force Systems Command was announced by Gen. George S. Brown, afsc Commander. (afsc Release 104.72) September 6:	Marshall Space Flight Center announced plans for series of 20 water-entry simulation tests with solid-fueled rocket casing assembly. Tests would provide valuable data for assessment of parachute water recovery of space shuttle booster and aid in preliminary solid-fueled rocket motor design. Rocket assembly—representing 77% scale model of shuttle booster—was 30 m (100 ft) long, weighed 39 000 kg (43 tons), and was from previously fired motor, (msfc Release 72—120)
John Stack, engineer who had helped develop first high-speed wind tunnel in 1930s, died at age 65 after fall from horse. Stack had joined Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory (predecessor of Langley Research Center) in 1928 and had been head of high-velocity airflow research at Laboratory in 1939, NASA Director of Aeronautical Research from 1961 to 1962, and Vice President for Engineering at Fairchild Industries until his retirement in 1971. He had received numerous awards for his work in supersonic technology, including Robert J. Collier trophy in 1947 for work with X—1 rocket aircraft. (AP, NYT, 6/20/72, 38; frc X-Press, 7/21/72, 2) June 18-July 30: Exhibit of kinetic art of Dr. Frank J. Malina—artist, astronautical engineer, and past Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory (1944^1946)—was held at Univ. of Texas Institute of Texan Cultures in San Antonio. Catalog noted Dr. Malina was “pioneering on the new frontier of man’s adjustment to the explosive impact of science, technology and the exploration of space on the world.” Artist believed “man must understand this world in order to survive in it, and that this understanding must be both intellectual and emotional.” Paintings included impressions of space phenomena. (Catalog)
Tass announced successful completion of Soviet carrier rocket launchings in Pacific and declared restricted area free for sea and air navigation. (fbis-Sov, 12/14/72, A4)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Apollo 16: While space program had been “worth the money,” it was “just a well that this is the next to last manned mission; the most promise henceforth will be in earth-orbital projects. The Soviets appear to be investing much more heavily in those than the United States.” (W Star, 4/15/72, A4) April 15—16:	Wallops Station held open house as part of joint program of Federal activities. Displays included moon rock and Apollo spacesuit. Television set was available for visitors to watch Apollo 16 launch on April 16. (Wallops Release 72-5) Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 175.9km (109.3-mi) apogee and 166.7-km (103.6-mi) perigee. Insertion into trajectory toward moon was achieved at 2:34 get in spite of minor anomalies—leak in instrument unit (iu) temperature control system’s gaseous nitrogen bottle pressure and malfunction of S—IVB auxiliary propulsion system (aps) helium regulators, which caused continuous venting. CSM separation from Lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:05 GET and docking with LM was shown on color TV for 18 min. First S-1VB APS burn was near nominal, but because of helium depletion and potential trajectory disturbances, second bum was not made and S-IVB lunar impact operations were terminated. Tracking of stage ended at 27:09 get when IU signal was lost. S-IVB impacted lunar surface at 75:08 get (4:02 pm EST April 19) at point estimated to be 1.8° north latitude and 23.3° west longitude. Impact was detected by seismometers at Apollo 12, 14, and 15 sites. Unexplained light-colored particles streaming from LM close-out panel during docking were reported by crew at 7:18 GET. Young and Duke entered lm, powered up, and found all systems normal. Grasslike particles, shown on cm TV, were later identified as shredded thermal paint, but degraded thermal protection was not expected to affect LM operations. First midcourse correction (MCC—1) was canceled because spacecraft trajectory was near nominal. Electrophoresis demonstration began on schedule at 25:05 get and appeared to be successful, from crew’s description of reaction of charged particles in liquid. Ultraviolet (uv) photographs of earth from 107 300 km (66 700 mi) and 216 600 km (134 600 mi) were taken as planned. Duke reported “spectacular” view of half earth from 201 000-km (125 000-mi) altitude when he could see sun shining on only half of planet. During MCC-2, made at 30:39 get, services propulsion system (sps) tank pressure anomaly that had occurred earlier in mission was tracked and minor leak in transducer reference cavity was located. Procedures were sent to crew to account for transducer reading. Visual light flash experiment was started about two hours late, at 49:10 get, because of problem in aligning spacecraft. Duke counted 70 white, instantaneous light flashes that left no after-glow, uv photography of earth at 327 800 km (203 700 mi) was completed as planned. Young and Duke entered lm at 53:50 get for two-hour checkout of LM systems. All system checks were nominal. Scientific instrument module (sim) door jettisoned at 69:59 get. csm—lm undocking and separation maneuver was conducted on schedule at 96:14 get. When Young and Duke came from behind moon in lm, Duke told Mission Control his helmet was full of orange juice. Duke’s microphone apparently had become entangled with tube through which he drank juice stored in his spacesuit. “Every time I turn my head I get orange juice. It’s delicious . . . hut it’s better in your mouth than floating around the cockpit. I’ve already had an orange shampoo.” When Mattingly came from behind moon in csm he reported he had not conducted circularization burn because of malfunction in SPS yaw gimbal servo loop. While flight controllers evaluated problem, LM-powered descent-initiate maneuver was delayed, and LM and CSM maneuvered into station-keeping mode prepared to dock or continue landing procedures. Analysis of problem identified malfunction in secondary circuit that would not preclude lunar landing. Second separation maneuver by CSM with RCS burn was performed and LM began descent to moon on 16th revolution. LM Orion touched down in moon’s Descartes region 230 m (755 ft) northwest of planned target point at 104:30 GET (9:23 pm EST April 20). “Wow, down. Old Orion is finally here, Houston. Fantastic,” Duke exclaimed. “All we’ve got to do is jump out the hatch and we’ve got plenty of rocks.” Duke and Young said site was rolling country surrounded by mountains and covered with big boulders. Sunlight was so bright it washed out moon’s colors and made lunar surface appear white. Since LM had stayed in lunar orbit six hours longer than planned it was powered down to conserve electrical power and first extravehicular activity (EVA-1) was rescheduled to follow sleep period. EVA-1 began at 119:05 get (11:59 am est April 21). Young climbed down ladder and stepped onto lunar surface. “Okay, Cayley Plains,” he said, “Apollo 16 is gonna change your image.” Duke followed and astronauts began deploying experiments. Because of problems with LM antenna astronauts’ first steps on moon—for first time—were not beamed back to earth. Once Young and Duke set up portable antenna, TV signal and communication with ground controllers were received clearly on earth. TV pictures showed bleak, pale surface resembling Apollo 15 site, with flat-topped Smoky Mountain to north and Stone Mountain to south. Astronauts said site was rockier, more hilly, and more cratered than previous landing sites. Soil was firm, with rocks scattered over 30% of the surface and small craters covering 70%. During deployment of Apollo lunar surface experiments package (alsep) Young tripped over heat flow experiment (hfe) cable, pulling it from connector after Duke had drilled first bore hole. Mission Control later developed way to repair $1.2-million experiment, but procedure was not used because it would have been too complex and too time consuming and included some risk to other ALSEP components. U.S. flag and remaining ALSEP components were deployed successfully and functioned nominally. Crew deployed lrv and found ampere readings for battery No. 2 off-scale low and rear steering inoperable. About 40 min later, after loading, all meters and rear steering operated properly and LRV performed nominally throughout remainder of EVA. Young and Duke explored Flag, Spook, Plum, and Buster Craters and collected 20 kg (44 lbs) of samples, including number of white rocks. One crystalline rock coated with bluish glass appeared to have same texture as anorthosite “Genesis rock” collected on Apollo 15 mission; another was pure white. Some were flecked with green and black glass, some were black and gray, and one weighed about 6% kg (14 lbs). EVA-1 terminated at 126:16 get after 7 hrs 11 min 11 sec. After resting inside LM and reviewing plans for second EVA, astronauts left LM at 142:51 get (11:33 am est April 22). They explored Survey Ridge and Stone Mountain and said ridge was pockmarked with small, subdued craters, most about one meter {three feet) wide and some containing smaller craters within main crater. Area around South Ray Crater was strewn with sharp boulders and resembled crater in Nevada where astronauts had trained. Young and Duke turned on lrv TV so viewers could watch them walking and collecting samples high up on slope of Stone Mountain. They reported seeing more of previously discovered white soil under gray surface layers and said soil was very loosely consolidated. While ascending ridge and traversing very rocky terrain, LRV rear wheels failed to respond at full throttle, lrv continued to move, hut front wheels were digging in. Troubleshooting procedures identified mismatch of power mode switching. After change in switch configuration lrv worked properly. Astronauts took core samples and collected rocks that appeared to be volcanic, a greenish rock shaped like a snake’s head, and pure crystalline rocks. EVA was televised in color with lrv camera and was extended 20 min. During crew’s return to LM, 5-cm (2-in) portion of Young’s portable life support system (plss) antenna broke off, causing 15- to 18-db drop in signal strength. EVA—2 ended at 150:14 get after 7 hrs 23 min 26 sec. Third eva began 30 min early at 165:45 get (10:27 am est April 23)	to allow additional time near North Ray Crater and two other stations. Astronauts chipped off samples from enormous basalt rock the size of a house. All planned activities were accomplished, but astronauts had trouble configuring cosmic ray detector for stowage and return to earth, lrv covered 9% km (6 mi) and reached 17 km per hr (11 mph) going down 15° slope. TV coverage was excellent throughout eva. Total EVA-3 time was 5 hrs 40 min 14 sec—bringing total eva time to 20 hrs 14 min 54 sec and total distance traversed to 27.1 km (16.8 mi). While LM was on moon, Mattingly, orbiting moon in Casper, completed lunar and astronomic photography and prepared for rendezvous. He radioed information to geologists at Mission Control to help them plan EVA—3 exploration of Stone Mountain and determine best way to approach North Ray Crater. He located radioactive hot spot on eastern edge of Ocean of Storms south of Apollo 14 landing site and gamma spectrometer identified thorium, potassium, and uranium. Mattingly also discovered, on far side of moon, volcanic lava flows that resembled maria flows and spilled out over northeast rim of crater high in mountains near lunar equator. Two areas resembled volcanic flows around Flagstaff, Ariz., where crew had trained. Many large basins on moon’s far side appeared to be covered with same kind of material that covered area around Apollo 16 site. Young and Duke depressurized LM, discarded excess equipment, repressurized lm, and lifted off lunar surface with 96.6 kg (213 lbs) of lunar samples at 175:44 get (8:26 pm est April 24). Liftoff was photographed in color by camera on LRV left on moon and was seen by millions of TV viewers. Spacecraft docked successfully and LM crew transferred samples, film, and equipment to CSM. For first time docking was not seen on TV, because LM steerable antenna was inoperable. LM jettison was delayed one day so that astronauts could rest. After LM jettison at 195:12 GET, LM lost altitude and began tumbling, apparently because circuit breaker in attitude-and-translation-controller assembly’s primary guidance and navigation system had accidentally been left open. LM ascent stage remained in lunar orbit and was expected to impact lunar surface in about one year. Boom that carried instrument to measure atmosphere of moon was jettisoned because it would not retract and might have broken off. Orbit-shaping maneuvers were canceled to avoid firing of SPS because of degraded backup SPS thrust vector control. Scientific Subsatellite was launched at 196:14 get (4:56 est April 24)	into lunar orbit with 123.3-km (76.6-mi) apolune and 97.9-km (60.8-mi) perilune. Hexagonal, 40-kg (90-lb) satellite 77 cm long and 36 cm in diameter (30 x 14 in) carried three experiments. Subsatellite extended three 1%-m (5-ft) booms, two with magnetometer sensors to measure interplanetary and earth magnetic fields near moon and third for stabilization. Spacecraft also carried particle shadows and boundary layer experiment to collect data on plasmas and solar flares and S-band transponder to detect variations in lunar gravity caused by mascons. Expected lifetime was 6 to 9 mos—shorter than 12 mos planned because shaping burn to optimize orbit had not been performed—but Subsatellite crashed into moon May 29. Transearth injection maneuver at 200:33 get put CSM on trajectory for earth after 114 hrs 5 min (65 revolutions) in lunar orbit. April 25-27:	Good-quality TV pictures of receding moon from inside CM and of lunar surface from LRV on moon were transmitted between 227 and 229 get. At 243:35 get (3:43 pm est April 25) Mattingly left CSM for inflight EVA to retrieve panoramic and mapping camera film cassettes from SIM on SM. Mattingly made two trips, during which he observed condition of instruments, reported that insulation paint near rocket nozzle was blistered, and deployed and exposed microbial ecological evaluation device (meed) experiment for 10 min. He reentered CSM after 1 hr 24 min. Scheduled TV press conference began at 268:13 GET and ended at 268:31 GET. Astronauts briefly described moon’s far side, including crater Guyot, which seemed to be so full of material that it overflowed and spilled down side of the crater. CM separated from SM at 290:08 GET, 15 min before entry interface at 121900-m (400 000-ft) altitude. Drogue and main parachutes deployed normally and CM splashed down and flipped upside-down in mid-Pacific about 5 km (3 mi) from recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga at 2:44 pm EST April 27, after 11-day 2-hr (265-hr 51-min) mission. After flipping spacecraft upright by inflating air bags, astronauts, wearing fresh flight suits, left CM and were carried by helicopter to biomed area on recovery ship for postflight examinations. After being declared in excellent condition, astronauts were flown on following day to Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii, and to Ellington afb, Tex. Young had lost 3% kg (7% lbs); Mattingly, 3 kg (6V2 lbs); and Duke, 2% kg (5% lbs), but all were “euphoric, hungry and thirsty, and walking well.” CM was retrieved and placed in dolly on board recovery ship. Lunar samples, data, and equipment were flown to Ellington afb and cm was off-loaded at San Diego. Mission achieved primary Apollo 16 objectives: to make selenologi-cal survey and sampling of materials in preselected area of Descartes region; emplace and activate surface experiments; evaluate capability of Apollo equipment to provide extended lunar surface stay time, increased EVA operations, and surface mobility; and conduct inflight experiments and photographic tasks from lunar orbit. Launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performance were near nominal except for lack of rate feedback in thrust vector control and yaw oscillations that delayed lunar landing, caused revision of lunar surface activities, and necessitated end of mission one day earlier than planned. All anomalies were quickly analyzed and resolved or compensated for by workaround procedures developed to permit mission to continue. Flight crew performance was excellent. Minor errors made by crew were attributed to fatigue and did not preclude mission success. Mission was officially judged a success. Accomplishments included largest payload (34 518 kg; 76100 lbs) placed in lunar orbit, first cosmic ray detector deployed on lunar surface, first use of far-UV camera on lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time (71 hrs 14 min), longest lunar surface EVA (20 hrs 15 min), and largest amount of lunar samples brought to earth (96.6 kg; 213 lbs). In addition, astronauts returned 3793.5 m (12 446 ft) of exposed film used on lunar surface and in lunar orbit. Apollo 16 was 13th Apollo mission to date, 10th manned Apollo mission, and 5th successful manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 15 had been conducted July 26-Aug. 7, 1971. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight. Manned Spacecraft Center was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, Marshall Space Flight Center for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Kennedy Space Center for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under overall direction of Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-64K; NYT, 4/16-30/72; W Post, 4/16-28/72; W Star, 4/16-28/72; B Sun, 4/18/72, Al; AP, New Haven Register, 4/21/72) April 16:	Soviet poet Yevgeny Yevtushenko—first Soviet dignitary to accept invitation to watch Apollo launch—described his reaction to launch to press at Kennedy Space Center. “It was beautiful, it was poetry. It was a great impression.” Yevtushenko said he had been even more impressed on his midnight visit to the floodlit launch pad with astronaut David R. Scott, “It’s really a beautiful show, this white tender body of a rocket, supported by the clumsy but sometimes tender hands of the red gantry tower. I absolutely had the feeling of one big brother embracing his sister before a long way, a long road. It was wonderful. Silence, not people. No press. Nothing. The sky, the ground, the rocket. It was so beautiful.” (Witkin, NYT, 4/17/72, 24)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Chairman Daniel J. Haughton told annual meeting of shareholders in Van Nuys, Calif., that he expected higher net earnings on lower sales volume in 1972. He predicted that Lockheed would receive substantial orders for L—1011 TriStar transport in coming years. (Pearlstine, WSJ, 5/2/72, 17; Lockheed pio) May 3—11:	Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space met to plan program for parent Committee. Italian space expert Franco Fiorio asked 28 members present if scientists from smaller countries would be allowed to stand in line and buy tickets to board Soviet or U.S. manned space laboratory. Dr. Fernando Mendonca of Brazil said advances in space technology were providing data that could help speed economic development in poorer countries but U.N. itself had neither technical manpower nor finances to assist these countries in using data. During debate over remote sensing by satellite, Sweden tried to open discussion of what U.N. could do to protect economic interests of small nonspace power from possible commercial exploitation by countries collecting data from satellites. Only Argentina supported Swedish view; majority, including U.S. and U.S.S.R., said such discussions were premature. Arnold W. Frutkin, NASA Assistant Administrator for International Affairs, renewed U.S. pledge that data from satellites would be shared with other countries without discrimination. All members of Subcommittee were invited by NASA to inspect data processing center at Goddard Space Flight Center but only six countries accepted. (Teltsch, NYT, 5/14/72, 15) May 4:	Areas ozone sounding rocket launched by NASA from Wallops Station carried Goddard Space Flight Center payload to 60-km (37.3-mi) altitude to measure performance of new parachute deployment technique and measure payload pendulation below parachute. Technique provided greater parachute opening shock and was expected to reduce parachute fouling experienced with older techniques. Parachute and payload performed nominally and experimental objectives were met. (nasa proj off)
President Nixon transmitted to Congress 26th annual report on U.S. participation in work of United Nations. He noted in transmission message that 26th U.N. General Assembly had endorsed two treaties sponsored by U.S., Convention on the International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects and Convention on the Prohibition of Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction. International Civil Aviation Organization conference had adopted Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Civil Aviation. {PD, 9/11/72, 1351-2) September 8—9:	Twenty-fifth anniversary of NASA Flight Research Center at Edwards, Calif., celebration included open house and Sept. 8 ceremony honoring original 14 employees who had participated with Air Force in successful 1947—1951 X-l rocket aircraft program to exceed speed of sound in level flight. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, presented plaques to seven original employees who attended. Since creation in 1947 as Muroc Flight Test Unit of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, predecessor of NASA, frc had participated in advanced aircraft research programs that had extended boundaries of manned aeronautical flight from subsonic speed to 7200 km (4500 mi) per hr achieved by X—15 aircraft between 1959 and 1968. Other frc programs included rocket-powered D-558 II Skyrocket, first aircraft to fly twice the speed of sound; X-5, forerunner of F—111, F—14, and B-l aircraft; lunar landing research vehicle, prototype of Apollo lunar landing trainer; and XB-70 aircraft that had takeoff weight of more than 226 800 kg (500 000 lbs) and mach-3 cruising speed, frc programs were continuing effort to improve safety, utility, and flying qualities of general-aviation aircraft; M2, HL-IO, and X-24A lifting-body flights to validate concepts for future manned spacecraft and aircraft; YF-12 program to acquire inflight data for future supersonic military and commercial aircraft; supercritical wing program to evaluate new NASA-developed wing’s ability to permit modified F-S aircraft to cruise economically at higher speeds; and digital fly-by-wire aircraft program to evaluate use of electronic flight control system to control aircraft completely. Fly-bywire system was being considered for space shuttle use. (NASA Release 72-173; frc Release 15-72; frc X-Press, 9/15/72) September 9:	Tass reported results of Venus 8 probe that had landed capsule on Venus July 22 after four-month flight. Wind had moved descending capsule horizontally in same direction as planet’s rotation on its axis. Wind speed had declined from 48 m (160 ft) per sec at 45-km (28-mi) altitude to 2 m (6 ft) per sec at 11 km (7 mi). Key question during landing was whether sunlight reached Venusian surface or was absorbed completely by atmosphere and clouds. Preliminary data on changes in illumination at different altitudes showed that Venusian atmosphere considerably weakened sunlight but some sunlight did reach surface. Atmosphere consisted of 97% carbon dioxide, less than 2% nitrogen, and less than 0.1% oxygen and contained 0.01-0.1% ammonia at altitudes between 33 and 46 km (20 and 30 mi). Surface in landing area resembled earth granite rock in radioactive composition with 4.0% potassium, 0.0002% uranium, and 0.00065% thorium. (fbis-Sov, 9/13/72, L7)
Langley Research Center awarded $9 400 000 contract to LTV Aerospace Corp. Vought Missiles & Space Co. for 15 Scout launch vehicles, to be delivered one per month beginning in November 1973. Rocket motors for boosters would be furnished under separate $3 819 000 contract with ltv Aerospace Hampton Technical Center. (LaRC Release 72—7)
Science commented on June 6 defeat of Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) as candidate for reelection to Congress: Since 1961, when Miller became Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics, “Apollo program has reached fruition and starts have been made on Skylab and the shuttle. Miller was NASA’s foremost advocate in the House and took pride in announcing every latest achievement of the space program.” Miller’s committee had been “influential in having NASA expand its investment in . . . scientific satellites.” Science cited Miller’s age, 81, as “decisive factor” in his loss of election. (Science, 6/16/72, 1219)
Spaceflight magazine reviewed Vanguard—A History, by Constance M. Green and Milton Lomask. Book presented “fine coverage of the project [first U.S. satellite program] which should be of interest at all levels. The subject is still controversial and though the present treatment will not meet with full approval everywhere, they have shown that without Vanguard a manned landing on the Moon in 1969 would have been highly unlikely.” (SF, 2/72, 77) March 1:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Air Force Eastern Test Range by Titan IIIC booster at 4:39 am est. Satellite entered orbit with 35 964-km (22 347-mi) apogee, 35 418.5-km (22 008-mi) perigee, 1429.9-min period, and 0.2° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 3/2/72, 15)
U.S.S.R. launched eight Cosmos satellites from Plesetsk with single booster. Cosmos 528 entered orbit with 1469-km (912.8-mi) apogee, 1368-km (850.1-mi) perigee, 114.1-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 529 entered orbit with 1469-km (912.8-mi) apogee, 1404-km (872.4-mi) perigee, 114.5-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 530 entered orbit with 1469-km (912.8-mi) apogee, 1335-km (829.5-mi) perigee, 113.8-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 531 entered orbit with 1471-km (914.0-mi) apogee, 1423-km (884.2-mi) perigee, 114.7-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 532 entered orbit with 1469-km (912.8-mi) apogee, 1302-km (809.0-mi) perigee, 113.4-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 533 entered orbit with 1470-km (913.4-mi) apogee, 1318-km (819.0-mi) perigee, 113.6-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 534 entered orbit with 1469-km (912.8-mi) apogee, 1351-km (839.5-mi) perigee, 113.9-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 535 entered orbit with 1470-km (913.4-mi) apogee, 1386-km (861.2-mi) perigee, 114.3-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Last U.S.S.R. eight-payload launch had been on July 20. Western specialists speculated that launches were part of global military communications satellite program, (gsfc SSR, 11/31/72; SBD, 11/2/72, 2; Shabad, NYT,11/2/72,11)
NASA launched Black Brant VC from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carrying Univ. of Minnesota fields and particles experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
West German government was preparing blueprint for aerospace development for remainder of decade, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Basic document for government financing and support would establish priorities in military and civil aerospace development and provide government and industry with “idea of how much room remains for maneuver in regard to implementing new projects.” Theme would be “multi-national cooperation.” (Av Wk, 4/24/72, 32-41) April 24-25: American Physical Society held annual spring meeting in New York. Team of Columbia Univ. scientists reported observations made with 1971 rocket experiment to study x-rays from Crab Nebula had supported view that pulsars were hurling high-energy particles, or cosmic rays, into space constantly at close to speed of sound. Experiment had shown that rays were polarized. X-rays from space could not penetrate atmosphere. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/26/72, 11) project, membership would receive unclassified resume explaining proposed study. If 10 or more members from at least 2 scientific institutions considered project inappropriate, they could present case to NAs’s governing body. Resolution on foreign policy asked President Nixon and . Congress to develop and apply science and technology in industry, agriculture, and health for furtherance of human welfare and called for de-emphasis on reliance on military force, direct or indirect. nas James Craig Watson Medal of Science was presented to Dr. Andre Deprit, NRC postdoctoral resident research associate at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. Citation was for “adaptation of modern computing machinery to algebraic rather than arithmetical operations.” Award consisted of gold medal and $2000 honorarium. (Program; Schmeck, NYT, 4/27/72, 27; W Star, 4/23/72, D3) April 25:	Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences approved H.R. 14070, $3.420-billion FY 1973 nasa authorization bill after inserting amendment that decreased by $9 million authorization of $3,429 billion passed by House April 20. As approved by Senate Committee, authorization was $41 million above original NASA budget request of $3,379 billion and $12.5 million above amended budget request of $3,420 billion. Bill, reported to Senate May 3, allocated $2,613 billion for research and development (r&d), $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $729.5 million for research and program management. House recommendation of $211.9 million for aeronautical research and technology was reduced to NASA request level of $163.4 million. In Senate report, Committee praised increase in aeronautical R&D motivated by 1971 Civil Aviation Research and Development (card) Policy Study of NASA and Dept, of Transportation, but said it doubted additional funding of $48.5 million approved by House could profitably be spent during FY 1973. Committee disapproved cancellation of development of 333 600-newton (75 000-lb)-thrust rocket engine in Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application (nerva) program and recommended new authorization of $8.5 million as requested by NASA, plus allocation of $16.5 million in unused FY 1972 funds, for engine’s development in FY 1973. Senate bill restored $4 million deleted by House from funds for High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) and allocated total of $156.6 million—NASA-requested level—for Physics and Astronomy program. Bill added $12.5 million to NASA request of $194.7 million for space applications and stipulated $5 million out of total of $207.2 million be used for small applications technology satellite project. But it disapproved $4 million House had added for Earth Observatory Satellite project. Committee recommended that NASA present space shuttle as separate program item on FY 1973 budget request, restructure manned space flight budget for “better visibility of total effort,” and formulate vigorous program to study development of terrestrial uses of solar energy. (S Rpt 92—779; Com Off)
NASA announced selection of 10 scientists and their proposals for Skylab ground-based astronomy program to acquire corollary solar data from ground simultaneously with Skylab observations from earth orbit. In related program, Apollo Telescope Mount principal investigators had offered guest investigator opportunities to all interested astronomers worldwide. Principal investigator and guest investigator would arrange for access to selected atm data of mutual interest, and guest investigator would publish scientific paper on analysis of atm data he received. Guest investigators would be approved by NASA but would have no automatic claim on NASA funding. Some astronomers interested in program had proposed that rocket and balloon flights be conducted in addition to ground-based observations. Acquisition of simultaneous solar data from many of these observations, with Skylab data, was expected to greatly enhance development of models of solar atmosphere. (nasa Release 72—39)
GTE International, Inc., subsidiary of General Electronics Corp., announced it had received contract valued at about $4 million from Western Union International, Inc., for construction of satellite communications earth station in People’s Republic of China. Station would be ground link for first direct communications satellite between China and Europe, (gte Release) Primary objective of Explorer 48 was to measure spatial and energy distribution of primary galactic and extragalactic gamma radiation— within sas program to make investigations of celestial sphere from above earth’s atmosphere and search for sources inside and outside our galaxy, radiating in x-ray, gamma ray, ultraviolet, infrared, and other regions of electromagnetic spectrum. Gamma ray telescope was first satellite version of evolution of digitized spark-chamber telescopes that had begun with balloon-borne instruments. Advanced detector could establish gamma ray event and reject events that simpler instruments might identify erroneously. It could study gamma rays exceeding 20 mev in energy, in region of electromagnetic spectrum able to penetrate galactic and extragalactic matter. On Nov. 19 half of experiment’s high-voltage supplies were turned on and experiment was pointed toward earth. Real-time data acquisition indicated proper functioning of experiment, with detection of earth albedo gamma rays. Remaining high-voltage power was turned on Nov. 27. Experiment and spacecraft control section were functioning normally. Spacecraft was cylinder 59 cm in diameter and 51 cm high (23-in dia by 20). When deployed, four solar paddles—27 cm wide and 135 cm long (10.5 by 53 in)—provided raw power. Unique was separate development of spacecraft control section and experiment package, which had permitted flexible concurrent development of experiments and minimized costs by fabrication of standardized control section. NASA provided booster and satellite; Italian team was responsible for cost-reimbursable launch preparation. Goddard Space Flight Center and Applied Physics Laboratory crew performed ground test and checkout. Satellite was designed and built at gsfc, which managed project. Langley Research Center managed Scout. (NASA proj off; NASA Release 72—204; gsfc proj off) November 16:	Briefing on results of low-cost-design concept completed by Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. under NASA contract was held at Marshall Space Flight Center. Study had been conducted under NASA Low Cost Evaluation Project begun in May by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator. Information from panels was to be correlated and incorporated into program planning and execution. (msfc Release 72-147)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Harvard College Observatory solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
nasa Associate Administrator Dale D. Myers—following detailed presentation on space shuttle decision announced by Administrator James C. Fletcher [see above]—moved to testimony on Apollo program, during Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences hearings on NASA FY 1973 authorization. In new Apollo 16 lunar surface experiments, far-ultraviolet camera/spectograph would photograph celestial objects or areas emitting or absorbing energy from atomic hydrogen. Data would provide information on “composition, density, distribution, and motion of interplanetary, interstellar, and intergalactic gas clouds which will . . . enhance our understanding of the structure and evolution of the galaxy.” Data, recorded on film and returned from lunar surface by astronauts, would be “first attempt to evaluate the Moon as a platform from which to make future celestial observations.” Second new experiment, cosmic ray detector, would acquire data on origin and source mechanism of high-velocity cosmic rays and solar particles beyond effects of earth’s atmosphere and magnetic field. (Transcript) March 15:	NASA Associate Administrator jar Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers, Administrator James C. Fletcher, and Deputy Administrator George M. Low (left to right) explained space shuttle plans at a press conference following the announcement that the shuttle booster stage would be powered by recoverable, reusable, solid-fueled rockets. In the artist’s drawing, the rockets are dropping away for recovery. NASA TF-8A aircraft, equipped with supercritical wing and piloted by Thomas C. McMurtry, completed 29th flight from Flight Research Center. Purpose of flight was to check out new instrumentation and angle-of-attack and airspeed calibrations. Fixed rakes and rotating survey probes were checked out and angle-of-attack calibrations were obtained at 13 700-m (45 000-ft) altitude from mach 0.9 to 1.1. (nasa proj off)
NASA launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from White Sands Missile Range. First rocket carried American Science and Engineering, Inc., solar physics experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Scientific objectives were not met. Second rocket carried Naval Research Laboratory solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Canadian-built Black Brant VC rocket was launched from Natal, Brazil, carrying West German and Brazilian payload. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (Reuters, W Post, 3/10/72, F3)
Dr. Wernher von Braun’s resignation from NASA May 26 was “reminder of how many others who forged the American space effort in the last 15 years have left the scene,” New York Times commented. Mercury Astronaut John H. Glenn, Jr., was “Ohio businessman with political ambitions”; Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman was Eastern Airlines Vice President; Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong was Univ. of Cincinnatti professor; former NASA Administrator James E. Webb, “who built the Apollo team,” was lawyer-consultant in Washington, D.C.; Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, “administrator in charge at the time of the moon landing,” was General Electric Co. Vice President. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, “who gathered the manned space flight team while Dr. von Braun was building the rockets,” had “recently stepped down as director of the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston.” Others of “space’s first generation have scattered to industry or are close to retirement.” Of original 118 German-born engineers who came to U.S. with Dr. von Braun, only 35 remained at Marshall Space Flight Center. Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, “another of the Peenemuende V-2 rocket Germans,” was msfc director. Six of original team—including Dr. Kurt H. Debus, director of Kennedy Space Center—were still with NASA at other Centers. Of others of team, 22 were in industry, 12 were deceased, 16 had returned to Europe, and 26 had retired. (Wilford, NYT, 5/27/72)
Apollo 17 spacecraft atop Saturn V booster, scheduled for launch toward moon Dec. 6, was rolled to Launch Complex 39, Pad A, at Kennedy Space Center. Roll-out was watched by about 5000 persons, including Apollo 17 astronauts. (Benedict, M Her, 8/29/72)
New York Times editorial praised Apollo program in which U.S. had “attained one of its finest hours.” Astronauts had gone to moon in “spirit of peace and selflessness.” They had been “seeking knowledge, not gold or slaves or other wealth. They went there consciously as representatives of all mankind, not as imperialists seeking to bring the moon under the Stars and Stripes. What they learned has been made available to all peoples and all nations without any request for a quid pro quo. In the atmosphere created by Project Apollo—with its constant reminder that what united men is stronger than what divides them—it was easier to reduce cold war tensions, to end the original space race, and to begin genuine international collaboration in cosmic exploration. Project Apollo has helped consecrate the moon and space to the cause of peace and cooperation among all men. This has been a glorious adventure in whose successful outcome the people of America and of the world can properly take pride.” (NYT, 12/17/72)
NASA launched two Nike-Tomahawk sounding rockets from Poker Flat Rocket Range, Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center fields and neutral winds experiments. Rockets and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Air Force launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg Air Force Base by single Titan IIID booster. First satellite entered orbit with 340-km (211-mi) apogee, 150-km (93-mi) perigee, 89.3-min period, and 96.9° inclination and reentered Feb. 29. Second entered orbit with 550-km (342-mi) apogee, 470-km (292-mi) perigee, 94.8-min period, and 96.5° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 1/24/72, 100)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying Univ. of Wisconsin x-ray astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Strypi 4 sounding rocket from Kauai, Hawaii, carrying National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration artificial aurora experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “The Apollo missions are still high adventure. And if the firing sequence is now familiar, there was still suspense yesterday as the huge Saturn V rocket engines lifted another brave crew of American astronauts .... But as the thunder faded away . . . there was the same old question every recent space probe has inspired: What is to be the future of U.S. space research when the Apollo missions are completed?” (P Bull, 4/17/72) New York Times: “The Apollo effort began in 1961 in an aura of cold war Soviet-American rivalry. But yesterday the Moscow television news gave the Apollo 16 launch equal time with events in Vietnam. Soviet-American space cooperation—perhaps a prelude to truly international team-work—could help greatly in easing world tensions. It would be an unexpected but welcome by-product of the Apollo program.” (NYT, 4/17/72, 33)
Areas sounding rocket launched by NASA from Antigua, West Indies, carried Goddard Space Flight Center payload to 55.8-km (34.6-mi) altitude to measure ozone in upper atmosphere in conjunction with overpass of Nimbus 4 satellite and to validate new parachute deployment system further [see May 4]. Payload was ejected successfully, parachute inflated properly, and good ozone data were acquired. (NASA Rpt srl)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in letter to New York Times, criticized interpretation of shuttle economics in Jan. 25 Times article: “nasa has a good record on cost estimating, as demonstrated by bringing in the Apollo program below the original estimates. Even if a contingency amount of $1 billion should be required to overcome unforeseen problems beyond those provided in the $5.5 billion estimates, the combined total for development and initial investment will be substantially below the $10 billion to $14 billion estimate in the Times.” (NYT, 2/7/72)
Task Force on Energy of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development published Energy Research and Development. Report called for immediate implementation of “greatly increased national energy research and development effort” with adequate funding and technical manpower; national energy r&d effort as part of overall policy with White House as focal point; establishment of operating agency to manage Government-supported R&D; increased r&d for environmental protection and energy conservation; and establishment of priorities in basic research, materials research, and solar, geothermal, and nuclear energy research. (Text) During 1972: U.S. orbited 39 spacecraft in 30 launches—including Apollo 16’s 4 payloads and Apollo 17’s 3. U.S.S.R. orbited 89 payloads in 74 launches. Italy launched one satellite for NASA on NASA booster. And Japan launched one spacecraft on its own booster. U.S. total included 16 payloads orbited by Dept, of Defense in 13 launches and 23 by NASA in 17 straight flawless launches—NASA’s first perfect annual launch record. nasa’s Apollo program came to successful conclusion with Apollo 17, most productive of all NASA lunar landing missions and most scientifically rewarding. Apollo 17, sixth successful manned landing mission, set records for longest manned lunar landing flight (301 hrs 51 min), largest lunar sample return (115 kg; 250 lbs), longest total extravehicular activity time (22 hrs 5 min), and longest time in lunar orbit (147 hrs 48 min). Earlier in year Apollo 16 also produced valuable data from surface and lunar orbit investigations. Unmanned NASA program was highlighted by Pioneer 10, first spacecraft to fly beyond Mars orbit, first to penetrate Asteroid Belt, first intended to look at Jupiter close up, and first destined to escape solar system. At year’s end Pioneer 10 had passed safely through three fourths of Asteroid Belt. Mariner 9, launched in 1971, had circled Mars 698 times, photographing Martian moons and completely mapping planet’s surface before Oct. 27, 1972, shutdown. Findings revised previous concepts of Mars, showing planet to be geologically active, with volcanic mountains higher than any mountain on earth, with a crevasse three to four times deeper than Grand Canyon, and with indications that free-flowing water might once have existed on Mars. Erts 1, first Earth Resources Technology Satellite, laid groundwork for glohal inventory of earth’s resources and environment. Copernicus (Oao 3) Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, with largest telescope placed in space, set new standards of pointing accuracy and opened new channels of information on far reaches of universe. Nimbus 5 meteorological satellite demonstrated new techniques for daytime and nighttime temperature readings through clouds at all levels in atmosphere. Other unmanned missions included Explorer 47 (imp) to study earth-sun interactions from orbit halfway to moon, Explorer 48 (sas; launched for NASA by Italy) to survey gamma ray sources, Noaa 2 weather satellite for National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and Triad 01—IX Transit satellite for Navy. Two dozen spacecraft orbited in earlier years continued to return data on solar system and universe beyond. All components of Skylab manned orhital research satellite were assembled at Kennedy Space Center for 1973 launch. Three flight crews and two backup crews began training. Final space shuttle design was selected and prime contract for shuttle orhiter development was awarded, as well as main engine contract. Contractors had progressed U.S. AND U.S.S.R. SPACE PROGRAMS, 1957-1972 Selected Cumulative Totals Through December 1972 World Total Successful launches into orbit or beyond........... Spacecraft launched (including multiple payloads on single boosters)................................ Spacecraft still in orbit.......................... Lunar missions (that reached or passed moon)....... Planetary and interplanetary probes................ Manned space flights............................... Number of crewmen who have flown in space..... Total manned space-flight duration............ Total man-hours in space...................... Total extravehicular activity (eva) Duration on moon..................... Man-hours on moon.................... Total time lived on moon...................... International launches **.......................... Launched for other nations.................... Launched for international organizations or Launched by other nations with U.S. aid....... Launched by other nations for U.S............. 3526 hrs		2097	hrs 9500 hrs		4403	hrs 96 hrs 2	min	1	hr 12 min 177 hrs 7	min	1	hr 12 min 80 hrs 39	min	0 161 hrs 18	min	0 301 hrs		0 1216 (incl. 20 by other nations) 1472 (incl. 21 by other nations) 600 (inch 34 belonging to other nations) * Does not include spacecraft launched for other nations. ** In addition to experiments carried for other nations and to launches of cooperative sounding rockets. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 well into system definition, design, and early development. Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base were selected as shuttle launch and landing sites. M2-F3 lifting body completed 27th and last scheduled flight in joint NASA and Air Force program begun July 12, 1966. During 14 lifting-body flights in 1972, maximum speed of 1718 km per hr (1066 mph) and maximum altitude of 21 800 m (17 500 ft) were attained. In aeronautics, Flight Research Center celebrated 25th anniversary of its creation in 1947 as Muroc Flight Test Unit of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. NASA TF-8A jet aircraft with supercritical wing was flown in configuration planned for future flights. Digital fly-by-wire computerized control system was demonstrated in series of flights from frc. System, for potential use in space shuttle, enhanced aircraft handling and reduced pilot workload. NASA awarded contract to refine design of quiet, jet, propulsive-lift, experimental aircraft QUESTOL in major effort to develop technology for short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft to relieve airport congestion. Progress was made in quiet jet engine, techniques to reduce aircraft emissions, composite materials, avionics, aerodynamics including supercritical and antisymmetrical wings, general-aviation safety, supersonic and hypersonic research, and research in basic materials and structures. In sounding rocket program, more than 80 successful flights were made to study atmosphere, ionosphere, auroras and airglow, geomagnetic storms, meteor streams, and trapped radiation fluctuations; to make astronomical observations in x-ray, ultraviolet, and radio regions of electromagnetic spectrum; for special projects; and for support. NASA flew 61 balloon flights in its program to study near-earth phenomena, including balloon that lifted 545 kg (1200 lbs) of scientific equipment to 45 000-m (148 000-ft) altitude. U.S.S.R. launches decreased from record 83 in 1971 to 74. The 89 payloads included 72 Cosmos satellites, 3 Intercosmos, 1 Luna, 3 Meteor, 2 Prognoz, 3 Molniya I, 3 Molniya II, 1 Venus, and secondary payload Sret 1 (launched for France). Japan launched Denpa Radio Explorer Satellite. (NASA Releases 73—48 and unnumbered of 12/27/72; NASA Lifting Body Off; gsfc Sounding Rocket Br.; gsfc SSR, 11/31/72; 12/31/72; A&A 1972; Myers testimony, 2/27/73)
nasa-aec Nuclear Rocket Development Station at Jackass Flats, Nev., was “first ghost town of the space age,” New York Times reported. Since announcement (in Administration’s FY 1973 budget request on Jan. 24) of termination of nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) project, 259-sq-km (100-sq-mi) area had been littered with “$200-million worth of deserted engine test stands, enormous assembly bays with birds nesting in the rafters, empty administration buildings, and aluminum and steel chards of pumps, turbines and motors.” Only 200 employees made 290-km (180-mi) round trip between station and Las Vegas each day. “Eight years ago 56 buses provided commuting service for the station’s 3,000 workers; today there are only three.” (Lyons, NYT, 3/26/72, 57) Parade magazine printed letter to Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, from Chairman Raymond L. Bisplinghoff of Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board, National Academy of Engineering: “The board members would like to reaffirm their continuing belief that a shuttle-like vehicle is the key to a forward moving and economical space program beyond 1980.” (Parade, 3/26/72)
Unidentified satellite launched by Air Force from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 8:30 am pdt by Titan IIIB-Agena booster failed to achieve orbit. (Av Wk, 6/5/72, 14)
NASA officials at Manned Spacecraft Center celebrated successful completion of last Apollo mission, following splashdown of Apollo 17. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director since 1969, said mission “goes into the record books as the most perfect mission, the most sophisticated science mission ever conducted.” Apollo 17 “closes a golden chapter in the age of space exploration. In a way, it brings a close to what has been a very romantic era in space exploration. But . . . the book is still being written. The next chapter will open the age of exploiting and utilizing space for other benefits.” Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, said, “All great things must come to an end so we can move on to even greater things.” Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., msc Director, said he had “never seen a more perfect mission” than Apollo 17. Apollo program had been greatest engineering feat of all our lifetimes.” Before Apollo, “my mind, like most of us, was bound to earth. It’s certainly not that way anymore.” nasa spokesman at msc told press Apollo 17 was “the last, longest, and most successful of seven manned lunar landing missions.” (Wilford, NYT, 12/20/72, 1; AP, B Sun, 12/20/72, 1; upi, W Star & News, 12/20/72, A4)
The first fully automatic landings by a manned helicopter at a predetermined spot were announced by NASA, A Langley Research Center team had made the landings at Wallops Station the second week in February in a research program to permit helicopters and future vtol aircraft to fly under conditions of poor visibility. highlight in 1971 astronomy program had been observations made by x-ray astronomy satellite Vhuru (Explorer 42), which was making map of universe in x-ray wavelengths. One hundred sixteen x-ray sources had been studied. “Space” science, Dr. Naugle said, was no different from research man had been doing on earth . . . since he became man: “Man does love to wonder—to explore and understand his environment. The ability to wonder—the desire to extend one’s horizon—is a measure of the mental health and vigor of an individual or a society. The ability of a nation to educate its youth and provide them with the necessary tools to explore our environment, whether it be the innermost secrets of the nucleon or the outermost regions of the universe, is one measure of that Nation’s vigor and its capability to better understand, and in turn guide and control, its destiny.” (Transcript) * House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight began hearings on H.R. 12824, FY 1973 NASA authorization bill. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, described Apollo 15 mission (July 26-Aug. 7, 1971) as “most rewarding mission so far.” Mission “demonstrated the operational maturity of the [Apollo] program .... Because of its greatly increased capability for astronaut mobility, surface exploration, sample return, and orbital science, Apollo 15 added as much new data as that gathered by the three previous missions combined.” Mission had marked first use of Lunar Rover and of orbital science experiments to collect lunar-wide information. “The scientific returns from lunar orbit and surface have significantly increased our accumulated knowledge of the moon and by extrapolation of the data from this vacuum-packed laboratory, knowledge of the solar system, including our earth.” Upon completion of Apollo program with Apollo 17 in December, “we will have accumulated a vast treasure of lunar data. Many exciting scientific results have already been published; however, an adequate assessment of the total body of data will require scientific effort for years to come. “As Apollo draws to a close, we are concentrating our activities in earth orbit—the primary field of manned space flight during this decade.” Skylab was “first step in this direction” and “one of the most significant benefit-oriented programs of the space age.” Skylab was four times larger than Soviet Salyut spacecraft and weighed 77 180 kg (170 000 lbs) with total 344 cu m (12 150 cu ft) pressurized volume. Skylab typified variety of activities that could be accomplished in space. “Several years ago we began to look at this total space arena in a different way. . . . While we were driving toward our goal of a manned lunar landing ... a distinction was made . . . between manned and unmanned flight programs.” Distinction “really does not exist” in nasa’s program for 1970s. “The transition is already underway in Skylab.” Survey of total space activity had also led to shuttle concept. “We started with a fully reusable system . . . using winged flyback booster and orbiter stages with all fuel carried in internal tanks.” Studies confirmed feasibility. Estimated development costs were close to $10 billion, but cost per flight, at $4.1 million, “made it extremely attractive.” Problem was lack of funds. NASA “learned that there were cost advantages in using an expendable liquid hydrogen tank for the orbiter.” This became baseline with booster configuration unchanged except for modification. While process reduced development costs, expendability of tanks increased flight costs. NASA found “additional savings could be made if we placed both the hydrogen and the oxygen tanks outside the orbiter.” In efforts to economize on booster development, NASA first considered “flyback booster incorporating F—1 engines and phasing orbiter systems” and later “unmanned ballistic boosters.” Leading candidates were recoverable and reusable pressure-fed liquid-propellant booster and booster with solid-fueled rocket motors. Contractors were completing studies, and decision would be made shortly. Mathematica report of study for NASA in May 1971 had shown shuttle with flyback manned booster was cost-effective when averaging 39 flights a year. Myers submitted new edition of report, incorporating refined data and changes in shuttle configuration, which showed shuttle cost effective with traffic as low as 30 flights per year. “I believe that practically all of this country’s future earth-orbital space activities will use the Shuttle’s capability in exploiting the potential benefits of space and providing the taxpayer as large a return of his space investment as possible.” (Transcript)
U.S.S.R. said it would conduct missile-carrier tests in Pacific through Dec. 31. It warned ships and aircraft to steer clear of area about 2400 km (1500 mi) east of Japan. (Tass, FBis-Sov, 11/24/72, Al; AP, B Sun, 10/24/72, 6) November 24:	Twenty-fifth anniversary of first launch of Aerobee sounding rocket on Nov. 24, 1947, from White Sands Missile Range. Launch had been unsuccessful; rocket carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. payload had veered off course and had been destroyed. But since then arrowshaped Aerobee had been busiest booster in U.S. space program, with launch rate of almost one per week and few failures out of 900 launches to date. Aerobees carrying scientific payloads to altitudes as high as 480 km (300 mi) had been launched by NASA, Air Force, Navy, and Federal scientific groups. Launches were mainly from NASA’s Wallops Station, White Sands Missile Range, and Fort Churchill Range in Manitoba, Canada. Aerobee—most widely used rocket in astronomy—had carried delicate instruments through blanket of air and dirt surrounding earth to area of greater visibility. Instruments launched June 13, 1969, by NASA on Aerobee 150 from Natal, Brazil, had detected x-ray star only 16 km (10 mi) wide that weighed as much as sun. Scientists at Univ. of California who conducted experiment had said stellar object might be first direct evidence of neutron star and first time size of x-ray source from deep space could be determined. Other scientific payloads aboard Aerobees had measured Crab Nebula, collected micrometeoroids, taken temperatures aloft, and recorded air densities. In 1952 Air Force Aerobee carried two monkeys and two mice in biomedical experiments. Rocket originally weighed 700 kg (1600 lbs), was 5.8 m (19 ft) long, and carried payloads under 45 kg (100 lbs). Over years Aerobee had grown to be 15 m (50 ft) long, powered by four clustered, liquid-fuel engines and solid-fuel booster. Largest Aerobee could blast 400-kg (900-lb) payload to altitude of 200 km (125 mi). (Lyons, NYT, 11/26/72, 39; A&A 1915-1950)
Marshall Space Flight Center engineers John R. Rasquin and M. F. Estes had received copies of patent issued to NASA for Rasquin-Estes invention—adaptation of magnetomotive hammer to diamond-making process —MSFC announced. Hammer, developed for Saturn V program, had been used to remove distortions from rocket tank sections misshapen by welding. In process developed by Rasquin and Estes, hammer was mounted on copper plate atop hardened steel horn. Hammer created shock wave in horn with sufficient energy to produce pressure and temperature necessary to change graphite to diamonds. (MSFC Release 72-1)
President Nixon’s January decision to proceed with development of reusable space shuttle keyed transition in U.S. space program from space exploration to space exploitation for practical and immediate benefits to mankind. While budget restrictions and national emphasis of technology applications to improve conditions on earth brought early end to Apollo program, U.S.-U.S.S.R. space agreement opened new era of international space cooperation. Agreement inspired intensive planning for 1975 joint rendezvous and docking mission of Soviet Salyut and U.S. Apollo spacecraft in orbit. Apollo program—major drive of U.S. space program since 1961, triumphantly concluded in 1972—had begun to give clear picture of moon, how it had evolved and its relationship to sun and earth, and would contribute to understanding of how earth had evolved. Apollo program had also given man new awareness of earth and had given Americans self-confidence in ability to achieve gigantic goal. During 1972	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1972 Picture of a manned spaceship ... (courtesy of NASA) During 1972: Conclusion of the Apollo program was commemorated by Scott Long’s cartoon, published in the Minneapolis Tribune Dec, 6, The maimed lunar explorations had given man a new awareness of the earth and the need to preserve it, as well as a wealth of information on the moon and possible origins of the earth and solar system. New space program for 1970s was designed to be funded at constant budget level over several years—yet to maintain space flight capability, contribute to national security, increase opportunities for new scientific knowledge, encourage international cooperation, address problems of society and environment, and continue U.S. leadership in aeronautics. Reusable shuttle was expected to give “routine access to space” by cutting complexity and cost of launches and multiplying uses of satellites. It could be used for both manned and unmanned missions and, in military use, could serve national security. Revision of NASA FY 1972 program to phase in new programs while holding expenditures to $3.4-billion budget level required basic changes in planning. Further stretch-out of period over which NASA long-term objectives in space and science could be achieved was necessary. Shuttle configuration costs were pared to about half of original cost estimate; plans for Grand Tour missions to explore all five outer planets in late 1970s were cut back to focus on Jupiter and Saturn with less expensive spacecraft; and NASA and Atomic Energy Commission’s nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program was terminated. Emphasis on aeronautics was increased at urging of congressional committees, but $44.9 million of $50.5-million NASA FY 1973 appropriation for aircraft noise suppression program, engine retrofit studies, and quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft program was impounded by Office of Management and Budget. Tight NASA funding and end of Apollo program brought reductions in personnel, especially at manned space-flight Centers. NASA total in-house personnel decreased by 1181 from Dec. 31, 1971, to 27 801 persons Dec. 31, 1972, with further cuts scheduled for 1973. Marshall Space Flight Center employment was reduced by 258, to 5501 persons; Manned Space Center 159, to 3882; and Kennedy Space Center 123, to 2518. Employment in aerospace industry throughout the Nation also declined slightly, from 924 000 workers at end of 1971 to 917 000 at end of 1972, despite infusion of space shuttle program. Aerospace industry remained largest manufacturing employer, however, and industry sales increased for first time since 1968. To emphasize transition from Apollo to Skylab and shuttle activities, NASA established new Mission and Payload Integration Office within Office of Manned Space Flight. Space Station Task Force became Sortie Lab Task Force. Apollo Program Office became Apollo/ASTP Office to prepare for 1975 U.S.—Soviet mission. Office of Advanced Research and Technology (oart) was renamed Office of Aeronautical and Space Technology (oast) to emphasize increasing NASA aeronautical activity. Office of Applications had been separated from Office of Space Science at end of 1971 to increase emphasis on use of space technology for benefits on earth. Charles W. Mathews, Deputy Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight since 1968, headed new Office of Applications. Dr. Wernher von Braun retired as NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning to become Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development at Fairchild Industries, Inc., after more than quarter of century as leader of space rocket development in the U.S. His NASA career had begun in 1960 when his Army Ballistic Missile Agency team—which had launched first U.S. satellite, Explorer I in 1958—was transferred to form nucleus of Marshall Space Flight Center. Dr. von Braun had served as MSFC Director from 1960 to 1970, where Saturn V launch vehicle for Apollo moon missions was his major engineering achievement. In technology utilization, NASA continued to distribute information about aerospace technology to private and public sectors of national economy at ever-increasing rate. NASA-developed technology was being used in medicine, nondestructive testing, and engineering design. NASTRAN computer program to analyze structures under stress was used by more than 70 industrial firms, universities, laboratories, and government agencies to solve structural engineering problems. Technology and interpretive systems developed by NASA in cooperation with other agencies prepared way for worldwide environmental pollution and monitoring network. NASA FY 1973 appropriation of $3,408 billion was equivalent to budget request and $110 million above FY 1972 appropriation of $3,298 billion. Increase reflected funds for design and development of space shuttle. (A&A 1972; Fletcher testimony, 2/28/73; aia Aerospace, 3/73; NASA Pocket Statistics, 3/72, 1/73)
NASA launched two Aerobee 170 sounding rockets from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex. First carried Massachusetts Institute of Technology astronomy and soft x-ray experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily, but scientific objectives were not met. Second rocket carried Univ. of Wisconsin astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Kiruna, Sweden, carrying Swedish auroral aeronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Andoeya, Norway, carrying Norwegian auroral energy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
U.S.S.R. launched eight Cosmos satellites from Plesetsk with single booster. Cosmos 504 entered orbit with 1497-km (930.2-mi) apogee, 1323-km (822.1-mi) perigee, 113.9-min period, and 74° inclination. Cosmos 505 entered orbit with 1498-km (930.8-mi) apogee, 1354-km (841.4-mi) perigee, 114.3-min period, and 74° inclination. Cosmos 506 entered orbit with 1498-km (930.8-mi) apogee, 1384-km (860-mi) perigee, 114.6-min period, and 74° inclination. Cosmos 507 entered orbit with 1497-km (930.2-xni) apogee, 1414-km (878.6-mi) perigee, 114.9-min period, and 74° inclination. Cosmos 508 entered orbit with 1497-km (930.2-mi) apogee, 1445-km (897.9-mi) perigee, 115.3-min period, and 74° inclination. Cosmos 509 entered orbit with 1500-km (932.1-mi) apogee, 1475-km (916.5-mi) perigee, 115.6-min period, and 74° inclination. Cosmos 510 entered orbit with 1512-km (939.5-mi) apogee, 1496-km (929.6-mi) perigee, 116-min period, and 74° inclination. Cosmos 511 entered orbit with 1547-km (961.3-mi) apogee, 1496-km (929.6-mi) perigee, 116.4-min period, and 74° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 7/31/72; Sov Aero, 7/24/72, 30)
Wall Street Journal article asked if U.S. supersonic transport revival was imminent: “Administration planners insist the U.S. will eventually build a supersonic transport, NASA researchers work up advanced ‘second generation’ designs, differing from the downed Boeing version. Backers claim progress against the sonic boom problem, plus the promise of developing a more profitable plane.” (WSJ, 9/1/72, 1) September 2:	Navy Triad OI—IX Transit satellite was launched by NASA for Navy from Vandenberg Air Force Base by four-stage Scout booster. Orbital parameters: 838-km (520.7-mi) apogee, 743-km (461.7-mi) perigee, 100.6-min period, and 90.1° inclination. Objective of mission was to simplify navigation procedures by correcting long-term drift in satellite oscillator, reducing data-gathering time for navigation fix, demonstrating capability of experimental disturbance compensation system (discos), obtaining performance data on radioisotope thermoelectric generator (rtg), evaluating environmental survey panel and thermal coating experiment, and providing operational satellite for Navy Navigation Satellite System. discos forced satellite to adhere to highly predictable orbit uninfluenced by forces of external atmospheric radiation. System, developed by Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory and Stanford Univ., compensated for external forces by providing equal and opposite thrust force. Success of discos might lead to navigation satellites with orbits so precise and unchanging that their paths could be published in reference tables that would facilitate calculation of navigational fixes. Triad, 01—IX weighed 93.9 kg (207 lbs), was 1.7 m long and 0.8 m wide (5.5 x 2.5 ft), and was powered by Atomic Energy Commission RTG that would provide 30 w of power for five years. With three components—spacecraft, Discos, and rtg—extended separately in orbit, overall length was 3.7 m (24 ft). Satellite was transmitting data on nominal frequencies of 400 and 150 mhz. After six-month experimental phase satellite would be available to all Transit system users. NASA would be reimbursed by Dept, of Defense for cost of launch vehicle and services, (gsfc SSR, 9/30/72; dod Release 632-72; NASA Scout Prog Off; Pres Rpt 73)
Retirement of Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees as Marshall Space Flight Center Director and appointment of Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, to succeed Dr. Rees in January 1973 were announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator. Dr. Rees, with Dr. Wernher von Braun, had pioneered U.S. space and rocket activities. He had succeeded Dr. von Braun as msfc Director in 1970. Dr. Petrone had been Apollo Program Manager at Kennedy Space Center before becoming Apollo Program Director at NASA Hq. in 1969. Dr. Fletcher commended Dr. Rees for “successful completion of the Marshall Center’s role in the Apollo program. The performance of the Saturn launch vehicle . . . has been magnificent. The development of the Lunar Roving Vehicle and its performance ... is a tribute to his leadership.” (nasa Release 72-244)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying Univ, of Colorado experiment to measure solar ultraviolet light. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying Univ. of Wisconsin soft x-ray experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched two Nike-Javelin III sounding rockets carrying Naval Research Laboratory cesium cloud experiments from Wallops Station at 5:04 am and 5:06 am est. Huge pinkish-white clouds were formed and were visible along East Coast. Launches were last in series of five that began March 25 to study atmosphere in 97-km (60-mi) region. (WS Release 72-4; WS pao) April 4:	U.S.S.R. launched Molniya 1—20 comsat and France’s Sret 1 (Satellite de Recherches et d’Environment Technique; Satellite for Environmental and Technical Research) from Baykonur on one RD— 107B booster. Molniya 1-20 entered orbit with 39 911-km (24 799.6-mi) apogee, 442-km (274.7-mi) perigee, 717.7-min period, and 65.5° inclination. Satellite would ensure “operation of a remote telephone-telegraph radio-communication system, as well as . . . the transmission of Soviet central television programs to stations of the Orbita network.” Sret 1 entered orbit with 39 250-km (24 388.8-mi) apogee, 458-km (284.6-mi) perigee, 704.6-min period, and 65.6° inclination. The small, 15-kg (33-lb), autonomous satellite would study characteristics of solar batteries for space operations and degeneration of solar cells from cosmic ray exposure in Van Allen Belts. It was first of three sret satellites planned for launch in French-Soviet cooperative program. sret 2 would be launched in late 1974 or early 1975 and sret 3 one year later, (gsfc SSR, 4/30/72; Sov Aero, 4/10/72, 108; fbis—Sov, 4/5/72, LI)
President Nixon sent $246.3-billion FY 1973 budget request to Congress— increase of $9.6 billion over FY 1972. National total included research and development budget of $17.8 billion (increase of $1.4 billion), with $3,740 billion requested for civilian and military space R&D. Total request for NASA new obligational authority (noa) of $3,379 billion (1.3% of total U.S. budget) was $83 million more than FY 1972 NOA of $3,296 billion. NASA expenditures were budgeted to increase by $11 million, against decline of $200.9 million in FY 1972. Increase to $3,192 billion reflected funds for design and development of space shuttle engine and airframe. Of budget request, $2.6 billion would go for R&D, $77.3 million for construction of facilities, and $701 million for research and program management. Apollo funding decrease of $472.5 million, to $128.7 million, reflected completion of Apollo program with Apollo 16 and 17 scheduled for launch during calendar year. Manned space flight operations—including $540.5 million for Skylab, $200 million for space shuttle, and $23 million for orbital systems and experiments—would increase from $682.8 million in FY 1972 to $1,094 billion in FY 1973. Space life sciences would receive $25.5 million and development, test, and mission operations would receive $305.2 million, including funds for detailed design and development of shuttle airframe and engine. Advanced missions would receive $1.5 million, to bring total for manned space flight (including Apollo) to $1,224 billion, down $61 million from FY 1972. Funding for NASA space science and applications programs would increase $123.7 million, from $740.4 million in FY 1972 to $864.1 million in FY 1973. Increases would go to physics and astronomy program for High Energy Astronomy Observatory ($59.6 million in FY 1973) and orbiting explorers ($32 million) ; to lunar and planetary exploration (up $29.7 million, to $321.2 million, with $229.5 million for Viking project, $31.6 million for Mariner-Venus/Mercury 1973, and $18.7 million for supporting research and technology advanced studies) ; and to launch vehicle procurement. Funding for Pioneer planetary exploration program would decrease from $12.8 million in FY 1972 to $10.2 million. Increase of $7.2 million in applications programs, to $194.7 million in FY 1973, included $48.4 million for earth resources survey, $61.2 million for ATS, and $28.3 million for Nimbus. Total requested for NASA aeronautics and space technology programs increased from $212.8 million in FY 1972 to $249.3 million. Aeronautical research and technology funding would increase from $110 million in FY 1972 to $163.4 million, including $27.5 million for quiet, experimental, short takeoff and landing (questol) aircraft and $3 million for vertical takeoff and landing (vtol) research/ experimental vehicle programs. Nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) development was terminated in favor of reoriented program to define smaller nuclear rocket system. Tracking and data acquisition funding would fall $4.9 million, to $259.1 million. Dept, of Defense FY 1973 budget of $83.5 billion was all-time high, $6.3 billion above FY 1972 budget authority, 30% of total Federal outlays for FY 1972, and 6.4% of Gross National Product—-but percentage of gnp had dropped from FY 1972’s 7%. dod total included $8.6 billion for research, development, technology, and engineering, $1.1 billion increase over FY 1972. Of requested Rdt&e total, military astronautics—with major programs including military comsats, first spaceborne ballistic missile early warning system, continued flight experiment programs, and applied research and technology programs— would receive $454 million (up $49.4 million). Military sciences would receive $572.7 million (up $34.9 million). Aircraft rdt&e would receive $1,948 billion (down $36.8 million) and missiles rdt&e $2,383 billion (up $437.8 million). Major DOD increases were programmed for undersea long-range missile system (ulms) to supplement and eventually replace Poseidon-Polaris fleet ($942.2 million, up $802 million), B-l advanced strategic bomber ($444 million, up $74 million), F-15 air superiority fighter ($910 million, up $490 million), airborne defense warning and control system (awAcs) ($470 million, up $331 million), and Safeguard antiballistic missile program ($1,483 billion, up $366 million). Some $299 million was requested for advance procurement of components for new nuclear-powered CVAN-70 aircraft carrier. Increases were also programmed for prototype development of vertical or short takeoff and landing aircraft for Navy, stol transports for possible C-130 replacement, Air Force SCAD strategic bomber penetration decoy, and engines for future transport and fighter aircraft. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration FY 1973 budget included $39.9 million for meteorological satellite operations, $6.8 million more than FY 1971 allocation of $33.1 million. Funding would complete financing of fourth satellite in ITOS series, continue financing of fifth and sixth ITOS satellites and one Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (goes), and initiate procurement of seventh itos. Dept, of Transportation budget request of $8.56 billion was decrease of $91.5 million over FY 1972. dot funding would start 10-yr, $10-billion program to improve urban mass transportation and reduce highway congestion. Federal Aviation Administration would continue efforts to reduce aircraft noise, ensure that advanced aircraft engines did not adversely affect atmosphere, and design safer and more productive airport system. Atomic Energy Commission FY 1973 budget request of $2.56 billion, up $247 million over FY 1972, would be used for development of liquid-metal fast-breeder power reactor and for controlled thermonuclear fusion research. National Science Foundation FY 1973 budget request of $653 million would cover basic scientific research, experimental program to test incentives to stimulate non-Federal R&d investment, program to analyze effect of R&D on national economy, continuation of research applied to national needs in advanced technology and environmental problems, program to improve research management at institutions of higher learning, and funding for astronomy to permit development of very large array of antennas for radio astronomy, (omb, Budget of US Govt, FY 1973; omb, US Budget in Brief; omb, Special Analysis; NASA budget briefing transcript; dod budget briefing transcript; dot budget briefing transcript; aiaa Release 72-3; nsf Release 72-106; Kelly, W Star, 1/24/72, A14; Av Wk, 2/14/72, 14)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carrying Univ. of Michigan auroral aeronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Lewis Research Center announced award of two-year, $2-million-plus extension to contract with Martin Marietta Corp. for integration of Centaur upper-stage rocket and Titan III booster. Contract included proof test-flight of new launch vehicle combination in early 1974 and launch of Helios spacecraft later that year. (LeRC Release 72—93)
President Nixon announced appointments to General Advisory Committee to Atomic Energy Commission: National Bureau of Standards physicist Dr. Evans V. Hayward; Stanford Univ. physicist Dr. Hubert Heffner; Dr. Michael M. May, Director of Lawrence Radiation Laboratory of Univ. of California at Livermore; and physicist Dr. Walter H. Zinn, former director of Argonne National Laboratory. (PD, 10/9/72, 1492) October 8: Earth passed within 113 000 km (70 000 mi) of comet Gia-cobini-Zinner’s orbit as U.S. and Canadian scientists on NASA’s Convair 990 observatory aircraft Galileo studied comet fragments. Aircraft was flying at 12 000-m (40 000-ft) altitude oyer Bering Sea. Experiment to use light spectra to identify percentages of sodium, calcium, magnesium, and iron in Giacobini meteors was part of 12-day scientific mission during which Galileo was flown from Alaska as experimental station. Main objectives of flight series were to observe meteor showers, measure polar winds in upper atmosphere, observe barium ion cloud experiment, and measure auroras. Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Dudley Observatory experiment to 109.4-km (67.9-mi) altitude to collect and identify cosmic dust particles from Giacobini meteor shower. Launch was first in series of three. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained, (arc Release 72-98; frc X-Press, 10/27/72, 2; NASA Rpt srl)
First European Conference on Space and Youth was sponsored in Paris by National Assn, of Aerospace Clubs of France and International Coordinating Committee (cic) for out of school scientific activity. Delegates from aerospace groups in 23 European nations were invited to conference to plan first program of intra-European cooperation for youth in aerospace field. Meeting established conference as annual event and approved resolutions on future cooperation in technical meetings, exchange of materials, establishment of secretariat, and origination of joint youth rocket projects. (Government Executive, 4/72, 28-9)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Univ. of Colorado astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA and Dept, of Interior dedicated Merritt Island National Wildlife Refuge at Cape Kennedy. Under agreement signed by NASA Associate Deputy Administrator Willis H. Shapley and Assistant Secretary of the Interior Nathaniel P. Reed, all land not used for rocket launch and launch support at Cape Kennedy would be used for wildlife management. Citrus grove and fish camp leases formerly managed by NASA for Army Corps of Engineers would be administered by Interior Dept.’s Bureau of Sport Fisheries and Wildlife. Agreement added to existing refuge 16 200-hectare (40 000-acre) property at northern tip of Kennedy Space Center that included Indian burial ground, 1830 Army fort, and Civil War sugar mill. {Today, 6/3/72; M Her, 6/4/72)
Tenth anniversary of Oso 1 Orbiting Solar Observatory, first U.S. satellite devoted entirely to studying sun. Satellite had carried 13 experiments to collect data on solar radiation in ultraviolet, x-ray, and gamma ray regions. After one year of operation it had provided more data on behavior and composition of sun than any single ground-based observatory and all previous rocket, balloon, and satellite flights combined and had measured 75 solar flares and subflares. Oso 1 had stopped operating Aug. 6, 1963, exceeding 6-mo design lifetime by almost 11 mos. (gsfc pao; A&A 1963)
Col. H. J. Odenthal (usaf, Ret.), pioneer airman who once assisted in rescue of Orville Wright after his aircraft had crashed, died at age 84. Col. Odenthal had helped organize Signal Corps air photographic and mapping division and had been awarded Croix de Guerre for his mapping flights in France during World War I. (Barker, W Post, 1/23/72, B16) January 22—25:	Intelsat-IV F—4 comsat was launched by NASA for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium (intelsat) . Launched from Eastern Test Range at 7:12 pm est by Atlas-Centaur booster, satellite entered elliptical transfer orbit with 36 523-km (22 694.3-mi) apogee, 5984-km (3718.3-mi) perigee, and 28.2° inclination. Primary objective was to place satellite in transfer orbit accurate enough for onboard propulsion systems to transfer it to planned synchronous orbit for commercial communications over Pacific. Apogee-kick motor was fired at 7:32 pm est Jan. 24 and Intelsat-IV F—4 entered circular orbit with 35 787-km (22 237-mi) apogee, 25 625km (22 136.4-mi) perigee, 23-hr 52-min period, and 0.7° inclination over Pacific at 165° east longitude. It would drift 1.1° per day to reach station at 174° east longitude in early February. Satellite’s first major mission would be coverage of President Nixon’s visit to People’s Republic of China in February.	, Intelsat-IV F-4 was third comsat in Intelsat IV series. Satellite was 238 cm (93.7 in) in diameter and 528 cm (208 in) high and weighed 1402 kg (3090 lbs) at launch. It had 12 transponders, providing 12 TV channels and 3000—9000 telephone circuits, and was capable of multiple-access and simultaneous transmissions. Expected lifetime was seven years. Intelsat-IV F-3 had been launched Dec. 19, 1971, and was operating satisfactorily over Atlantic. (NASA proj off; gsfc SSR, 1/31/72; nasa Release 72-16) January 22:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, discussed NASA plans for continuing fruitful space program in interview published by Christian Science Monitor: “For the next few years, we may have fewer of the more spectacular explorational missions .... We will focus more on . . . communications satellites, weather satellites, earth resources survey satellites.” Next Applications Technology Satellite (ats) would demonstrate direct TV broadcasting in region of Rockies and Alaska, using large satellite with big antenna that could beam programs directly to augmented receivers in individual homes. Demonstration—-in cooperation with Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare—would work through educational network rather than directly to homes, however. Comsats were “not quite so exciting an aspect of space technology” in U.S. but, “worldwide, there has been more interest in this than in almost any other aspect of our program.” Interest equaled that of ERT satellite. “Countries with vigorous mineral exploitation and agricultural development are interested in ERT satellites .... Countries with underdeveloped communications and education, such as India, are keenly interested in the broadcasting satellites.” In weather satellite field, new sophisticated instruments “give hope that we can get a really world weather observing network going.” Infrared sensors, microwave sensors, and high-resolution optics that obtained temperature profiles throughout atmosphere by looking “through holes in cloud systems” should help “to get points all over the globe where we now get only pieces of the picture.” NASA would try processing materials in zero g during Skylab program. “If it works with men doing it, there are cheaper ways we could do it without men. It may be one of those things that will be worth doing when we can get routine access to space with the shuttle.” In response to question, Dr. Fletcher said second Skylab would be “a very good thing for the country. But I’m not sure the budget needed for both a Skylab and the shuttle would be salable. The shuttle is more important in the long run. Not to do more of the Skylab sort of thing will be bad for prestige. The Russians will be doing much more than we will. I’m sure there will be criticism from Congress and the public.” But with shuttle and current budget level, “we could do virtually all those things we have talked about doing in this century. We could go back to the moon and establish crude bases .... We could establish a permanent space station. We just might be able to send men to Mars and get them safely home.” Apollo industrial base had already been destroyed, Dr. Fletcher said. “We could assemble a nucleus of people who know these things within NASA. But that’s about all.” As NASA turned toward space shuttle, “We hope and expect that many of the people who worked on Apollo will be in that program, so we won’t lose all the basic space flight know-how.” In international cooperation, France had asked to participate in Skylab mission and U.S.-U.S.S.R. meetings to establish compatible space docking system had progressed. “It looks as though we can do it technically. With existing hardware, we could do a docking in something like 1974 to 1975.” Scientific community was “still debating whether it would prefer an intensive Jupiter and Saturn explorational program or some form of grand tour to other planets as well,” Dr. Fletcher said. There was “no slackening of interest in Grand Tour” on NASA’s part. (CSM, 1/22/72)
Air Force launched two satellites in Dept, of Defense Space Test Program (stp) from Vandenberg Air Force Base by single two-stage Atlas-Burner II booster. Stp 72-1 entered orbit with 749-km (465-mi) apogee, 729-km (453-mi) perigee, 99.5-min period, and 98.4° inclination. Objectives were to measure background gamma radiation over entire earth; measure flux and spectra of low-altitude charged particles; determine effects of space environment on thermal control coatings; measure ultraviolet radiation and hydrogen and helium atoms and ions; and observe extreme- and far-ultraviolet radiation originating in interaction of solar wind with interplanetary medium or from galactic sources. Spacecraft was 566-kg (1248-lb) cylinder 2.1 m long and 1.4 m in diameter (7 by 4.5 ft), carrying antenna booms that extended 2.7 m (9 ft) from each end, gamma ray spectrometer, and low-altitude particle-measuring sensor. Radcat entered orbit with 751-km (467-mi) apogee, 729-km (453-mi) perigee, 99.5-min period, and 98.4° inclination. Spacecraft—cylinder 3 m long with 1.2-m diameter (10 by 4 ft) and weighing 220 kg (485 lbs)—would provide passive optical and radar calibration target. stp program was managed by Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso). (Pres Rpt 73; LA Times, 10/3/72)
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics would sponsor U.S. aerospace industry trade exhibit in Moscow in early spring 1973, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Exhibit would center on air traffic control equipment but probably would include other aviation and avionics gear. U.S.S.R. was expected to purchase $10 million to $20 million worth of equipment but total orders might exceed $1 billion. (Av Wk, 12/18/72, 30) December 19:	Following successful splashdown—after Dec. 7 launch on longest lunar mission—Apollo 17 astronauts were greeted aboard recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga by 12 Congressmen. President Nixon telephoned his personal congratulations on successful completion of mission. Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) said Apollo program results would “give us such scientific values that we will be required to have another lunar program before the end of the century.” (AP, NYT, 12/20/72, 30; PD, 12/25/72, 1789)
Science article commented on renaming of Jet Propulsion Laboratory in honor of retiring California Congressman: Rep. H. Allen Smith’s closest association with aerospace had come in late 1940s when he was security manager for Lockheed Aircraft Corp. “During his years in the House, Smith distinguished himself as a quiet, unwavering conservative dedicated to economy in government.” He had voted against supersonic transport “and on at least three occasions opposed the space authorization bill, the ultimate wellspring of JPL’s money.” No one had asked JPL, California Institute of Technology, or NASA what Ihey thought of redesignation. Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.) had approved but “was not in a position to object gracefully.” Rep. Miller, too, was retiring and House Committee on Public Works had decided to affix his name to Federal building in Oakland, Calif. Article suggested solution might be “for JPL to acknowledge its new name with a small sign behind a fast-growing evergreen and let time take its course.” (Gillette, Science, 12/15/72, 1178) December 16—January 22, 1973: West Germany’s Aeros Aeronomy Satellite was successfully launched by NASA from Western Test Range at 3:25 PST by four-stage, solid-fuel Scout D vehicle. Spacecraft was placed in planned orbit with apogee of 864.4 km (537.1 mi); perigee, 218.1 km (135.5 mi) • period, 95.47 min; and inclination, 96.95°. Primary objective was to place 127-kg (277-lb) payload in nearpolar orbit to measure main aeronomic parameters of upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation in wavelength band of main absorption. By Jan. 22, 1973, all five experiments were performing satisfactorily and spacecraft housekeeping operations were normal, except that problem with synchronization of data rate to spin rate might degrade data from NASA’s neutral atmosphere temperature experiment Satellite, cylinder 71 cm high and 91 cm in diameter (28 by 36 in) with four telemetry antennas, would contribute to understanding of thermal, chemical, and dynamic processes governing atmospheric behavior. Instruments included mass spectrometer, retarding potential analyzer, impedance probe, extreme-ultraviolet spectrometer, and NASA’s neutral atmosphere experiment. December 16:	Apollo 17 surface science press briefing was held at Manned Spacecraft Center as astronauts headed toward home from moon. Stanford Univ. seismologist Dr. Robert L. Kovach described results to date from lunar seismic profiling experiment. Experiment had recorded impact of lunar module (lm) on lunar surface 9 km (5.6 mi) southwest of landing site “right on target where we wanted it.” Kinetic energy at impact was comparable to “1 ton of tnt going off.” Signal was “very clearly recorded on the geophone array and we’ve acquired an extremely important data point; . . . we’re effectively getting a depth sample down to 3 to 4 kilometers [1.9 to 2.5 miles] in the Moon. And ... we should get some very important information about the underlying highland type materials.” Data point was “in critical distance range to answer one of the mysteries . . . of the shallow Lunar interior. We’ve been very much concerned about the enormous change in physical properties by terrestrial standards, . . . velocity changes by enormous percentage over a very small pressure range.” Data point should provide “answers as to just how these properties are changing.” First two explosive charges deployed had not shown significant differences in subsurface of Apollo 17 landing site and those of Apollo 15 and 16 but Apollo 17 site appeared to be “underlined by definitely more competent materials and they quite probably could be volcanic flows.” Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for passive seismic experiment, said Apollo 17 data, when compared with previous data, suggested possibility of new interpretation of lunar structure. “We do find evidence for lunar crust as we did in the past, but we may have to thin it considerably.” Velocity of seismic waves in crustal material and velocity of material underlying crust might also have to be lowered. “We’re not dealing with pure anorthosite anymore. We’re dealing perhaps with gabbros . . . and so we have ... to review all of the data and to reconsider our interpretations some, not just the seismologist, but the geochemist and geologist, as well.” Dr. Marcus E. Langseth of Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, principal investigator for heat flow experiment, said Apollo 17 experiment had “more than doubled” lunar heat flow data to date. “We’ve got a very successful emplacement in the operation of our instrument. It has been perfect.” Lunar surface temperature recorded Dec. 14 had been about 360 K (189°F). At about 15 cm (6 in), it had dropped to 280 K (45°F). At about 65 cm (26 in) temperature dropped to 254 K (—2°F). “Below that depth, the temperature begins to increase again. It’s about 257 degrees [3°F] at the bottom of the probes.” Data indicated that heat flow at Apollo 17 site would resemble that observed at 15 cm (6 in). If so, it would “give support to the kind of growing model of a warmer interior to the Moon” and “would require that there be a total gradient abundance of radioactive isotopes in the Moon as compared to Earth. So, there would be implication here for fundamental difference in composition, between the Moon and the Earth.” Dr. Langseth also reported data from traverse gravimeter experiment had supported thesis that “high gravity anomalies associated with the mare basin—the so called mascons”—probably had been created by slab of basalt or lavas which had flooded into previously excavated basins. Dr. William R. Muehlberger of Univ. of Texas, principal lunar geology investigator, said Apollo 17 had provided “most exciting few days of my scientific career. This mission is truly the fitting climax to the whole Apollo program. The landing site held great promise that we were going to get a good chance to unravel much of the earlier lunar history as well as the sample and study of what appeared to be very young vulcanism .... And I think this promise was fulfilled.” Orange materials at Shorty Crater had been “a spectacular plus.” Scientists hoped “returned material will tell us that that was young vulcanism in volcanic alteration of Shorty Crater. There’s still a possibility it could be an impact crater, however.” Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of MSC Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., discussed Dr. Latham’s suggestion that lunar crust might be thinner than originally expected: “I will certainly defend the proposition that the crust is made of a very aluminum plagioclase-rich rocks, . . . anorthosite gabbro or gabbroic anorthosite, . . . far from a basalt. I think that the chemistry of the surface rocks, . . . and the returned rocks bear this out and if the crust is thin, it reduces the likelihood that it is any different composition than what we see at the surface.” (Transcript)
Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 11:41 am pdt by Thorad-Agena booster. Satellite entered orbit with 259-km (161-mi) apogee, 154-km (96-mi) perigee, 89,2-min period, and 96.4° inclination. Satellite reentered June 4. (Pres Rpt 73; Av Wk, 6/5/72, 14)
Swiss federal aircraft factory in Emmen had developed hot-water rocket for assisted aircraft takeoffs, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Pohwaro (pulsated, overheated, water rocket) had been tested on Swiss air force Dassault-Breguet Mirage 3 and Pilatus Porter aircraft. (Av Wk, 5/8/72, 9)
Air Force qualification of parachute decelerator system for NASA’s Viking Mars lander, scheduled for 1975 launch, was announced by Air Force Systems Command. Qualification had followed July 11 and 26 and Aug. 13 and 19 tests by Martin Marietta Corp. at Roswell and White Sands, N. Mex. Tests had included supersonic, transonic, and free-fall environments. In Aug. 19 test, decelerator had been dropped from balloon at altitude of 27 000 m (88 000 ft). Previous tests had used rocket motors ignited after balloon had taken test system to desired altitude. In each test, decelerator deployed to slow down simulated softlanding instrument package, (afsc Release 105.72; Martin Marietta Corp pio)
Second in series of very-high-altitude flight tests of Viking parachute system was conducted over White Sands Missile Range. Helium-filled balloon lifted simulated Viking entry vehicle from Roswell, N. Mex., to 11 200-m (36 880-ft) altitude where payload was dropped and rocket motors ignited, boosting payload to 41 000-m (135 000-ft) altitude. Parachute deployed as planned and payload landed at wsmr about 56 km (35 mi) northwest of Holloman Air Force Base. Objective—to check parachute system at transonic conditions and at lowest parachute loading conditions expected over Mars—was met. Successful completion of three tests—one supersonic, one transonic, and one subsonic— would qualify Viking parachute system for use on Mars mission scheduled for launch in 1975. [See July 11, Aug. 13 and 19, Dec. 14.] (nasa Release 72-118; NASA proj off)
Unidentified Administration officials told New York Times there was evidence that People’s Republic of China had deployed strategic missiles capable of reaching Moscow. Missiles were said to have 5600-km (3500-mi) range, carry 3-megaton warheads* and be installed in well protected launching sites. Times said officials had declined to reveal source of evidence but paper surmised source to be reconnaissance satellite. (Beecher, NYT, 11/8/72, 67) November 7-8:	Goddard Space Flight Center sponsored symposium “Significant Accomplishments in Technology” at Greenbelt, Md. Fifty-two papers covered spacecraft and vehicle technology, sensor technology, ground operations, and communications and navigation. Robert J. Goss of gsfc reported design changes had increased Thor-Delta launch vehicle performance while maintaining reliability and low cost. Payload that could be placed in synchronous transfer orbit would have increased from 45 kg (100 lbs) in 1960 to 680 kg (1500 lbs) when H-l booster was operational in 1974. Joseph Arlauskas of gsfc described multispectral scanner in orbit on Erts 1, launched July 23, that permitted simultaneous imaging in three visible bands and one nearinfrared, to provide data for management of environmental resources. gsfc also sponsored symposium “Significant Accomplishments in Science” on high-energy and solar astronomy; optical and ultraviolet astronomy; planetary, lunar, and cometary studies; earth observations; and earth physics. Dr. John A. Philpotts of gsfc reported that three years study of lunar samples from Apollo and U.S.S.R. Luna missions showed essentially three kinds of rocks: iron-rich basalts in mare basins, KREEP basalts in Mare Imbrium and Oceanus Procellarum, and anorthosites in highlands. He thought there was enough material in hand “to work out the origin of these . . . rocks, and from that, the evolution of the moon and its relation to other solar system materials.” (Proceedings, NASA SP-326, SP-331) November 8:	Operational control of Noaa 2 Improved Tiros operational weather satellite, launched by NASA Oct. 15, was officially transferred to National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Environmental Satellite Service, (nasa Release 72-221)
nasa announced start of development of space experiment to test equivalence principle of Einstein’s general theory of relativity. Principle asserted that pull of gravity and oppositely directed mechanical acceleration could not be distinguished in small region of space. Thus, when two identical clocks were in areas with different gravitational pull, clock rates would appear to be different, although rates themselves would not change. Gravitational Redshift Space Probe Equipment would be launched from Wallops Station on Scout-D rocket in late 1974.	“Gravitational redshift” was term for decrease or shift toward red spectrum as a light wave escaped from strong gravitational field of sun or other massive body toward weaker gravitational field. Clock in experiment would follow 3%-hr elliptical flight trajectory over Atlantic and would always be in weaker gravitational field than identical clock at Bermuda ground station. Frequency of clock in probe, as observed by telemetry, should appear greater than frequency of clock on ground and rate should appear to increase as strength of gravitational field decreased up to 18 000-km (11000-mi) altitude and decrease as it returned to stronger field at lower altitudes. Difference between experimental and ground-based clock rates would be compared with shifts predicted by Einstein’s theory. Hydrogen maser clocks for experiment would be developed by Smithsonian Astro-physical Observatory under direction of Marshall Space Flight Center. (nasa Release 72-105)
Aerospace Employment Project to transfer idled talents from aerospace industry to other endeavors in public sector began phase-out. Project had started in 1971 under $1.3-million contract from Dept, of Labor, Dept, of Housing and Urban Development, National League of Cities, and U.S. Conference of Mayors. Project had found reemployment for 297 out of 371 candidates—194, or 65%, in city, county, or state government work. (NYT, 7/16/72, 15) September 1:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base on Titan IIIB-Agena booster into orbit with 381-km (237-mi) apogee, 142-km (88-mi) perigee, 89.7-min period, and 110.4° inclination. Satellite reentered Sept. 30. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 9/6/72, 3)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Manned Spacecraft Center atmospheric composition and photography experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list) June 22:	Press conference on preliminary results of Apollo 16 experiments was held at Manned Spacecraft Center. Dr. Fairouk El-Baz of photo-geology team described metric camera photo of old, three-ring basin about 960 km (600 mi) in diameter on far side of moon. Eastern part of ring coincided with “what the Soviets had called some 10 years ago right after the Luna 3 photographs . . . the Soviet Mountains.” NASA had concluded from Lunar Orbiter and Apollo 8 photos that formation was not mountains but “the coincidence of very bright rays from two relatively young craters,” and U.S.S.R. had conceded to elimination of Soviet Mountains from lunar dictionary. Apollo 16 photos showed, however, that “what we have here is really the Soviet Mountains rediscovered, so to speak, that is part of a middle ring of a very old basin.” Dr. EI-Baz said that, pending approval of International Astronomical Union, large basin would be named Arabia in honor of Arab contributions to astronomy, eastern range of middle ring of basin would be called Soviet Mountains, and long western range of middle ring discovered by Apollo 16 would be called American Mountains. Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for passive seismic experiment, said May 13 meteorite impact on moon “may well turn out to be the most important single seismic event the Apollo Network will record in its life unless the good fairy sends us another fragment of rock. It provided very important confirmation of the structure that we have proposed based on the S-IVB impact.” Seismometers had also recorded other meteorite impacts and dozens of moonquakes. “We’ve been able to establish at least the presence of 20 different moonquake source locations. They . . . have the familiar pattern which can be correlated with lunar tides and hence are triggered by lunar tides.” Most puzzling question was what energy source within moon caused moonquakes. “We don’t have the answer to that. We do have the puzzling fact that the two source zones we’ve located are nearly 900 kilometers [560 miles] deep . . . the depth at which our very tentative evidence places a reflector. . . . there seems something special about that depth. All of the Moon above that depth within our network area, at least, must be . . . solid. Very high frequency seismic waves can propagate through it. Such high frequencies are eliminated from terrestrial earthquake signals by a partially molten low velocity zone.” If part of moon were molten, “it’s either in very, very small isolated pockets or at greater depth than 1000 kilometers [620 miles].” Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of msc Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said about 90% of Apollo 16 lunar samples consisted of aluminum-and calcium-rich material. “The aluminum and calcium concentration . . . approach the composition of pure plagioclase ... a name component of . . . anorthosite. They are very typical of what one finds in the highlands anywhere on the moon where we have any chemical data. Now, the negative side of that conclusion is that these rocks are not as had been thought prior to the mission, a kind of volcanic rock that is rich in silica ... a viscous volcanic rock. It’s quite definite that the so-called Cayley formation ... is not a volcanic formation and I think we can generalize with some confidence that... it probably is not a volcanic formation in the other places on the moon where it has been identified or mapped in, either. There are a few rocks . . . which are distinctly different” from the rest in lower aluminum concentration, 15 to 18 percent, and higher magnesium-iron concentration with composition that could be that of volcanic rocks. They were also high in potassium and phosphorus. From Apollo data scientists had identified four major types of rocks: grey breccias that contained black and white clasts (rock fragments); black feldspar rock that appeared under microscope to be igneous because it was tough and dense; very white cataclasites of crushed plagioclase-rich material; and crystalline rocks. One rock in Apollo 16 samples, “rusty rock,” was covered by red, rust-like coating. Identification of rust, so far, was only visual; x-ray and mineralogical tests had not yet been made. “It may turn out to be ... a more exotic type of iron compound than simple rust. It’s quite definite that this ... is something that’s rusting; it’s something that took place on the Moon . . . not ... in the spacecraft on the way back or from handling the rock. The coatings are dispersed through the inside of the rock and too thick and too diverse to have been formed in the spacecraft.” (Transcript)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. payload to measure brightness of sun. Rocket performed satisfactorily but scientific objectives were not met. (SR list)
U.S.S.R. had offered to launch a Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite (heos) for European Space Research Organization (esro) free of charge as part of general agreement on satellite research, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. First two heos satellites had been launched Dec. 5, 1968, and Jan. 31, 1972, by nasa with Thor-Delta booster for charges of $4.5 million and $6 million, esro officials had estimated cost of planned launch at $7.5 million. (Av Wk, 11/27/72, 28)
Twenty-First Annual Report of the Activities of the Joint Committee on Defense Production, Congress of the United States was transmitted to Congress. Report said U.S. might soon be entirely dependent upon U.S.S.R. and Japan for titanium used in jet aircraft construction. Last titanium plant in U.S.—Reactive Metals, Inc., in Niles, Ohio—had closed Dec. 13. It was third plant to go out of business in 1971 because of lack of titanium market, oversupply of titanium sponge, increased foreign competition, and critical financial losses. U.S. Bureau of Mines later reported that two U.S. titanium plants reopened during February 1972.	(Text; Bureau of Mines pio) February 22:	Apollo 16 press conference was held at NASA Hq. Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Manager, said Apollo 16 lunar landing site would consist of volcanic highland material. “The highlands which we are landing on . . . are composed of two types of units. One type is material formed early in lunar history and subsequently fragmented and redistributed by the numerous meteorite impacts which have scarred the lunar highlands. These units are predominantly ejecta deposits now. And on Apollo 15 with the genesis rock we hopefully have sampled some of these early deposits. The second major unit ... is materials which have modified these early deposits by flooding them or building up on top of them predominantly by volcanic processes. The primary objective of Apollo 16 is the exploration and sampling of this lighter type of highland terrain with hopefully a fragment or two of the old original stuff brought in by impact from . . . the old original crust which is probably still exposed down in the lower southern hemisphere.” Dr. M. E. Langseth of Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory explained changes in drill design, with joints to permit core samples to be brought out more readily. Dr. H. J. Moore of U.S. Geological Survey described orbital science experiments, including photographic system to determine moon’s geometric shape. Apollo 16 cm would also photograph floor of Alphonsus Crater—where Ranger 9 impacted March 24, 1965—to provide positive identification of Ranger 9’s impact. Apollo 16 lunar module pilot Charles M. Duke, Jr., said astronauts would begin lunar surface extravehicular activity (eva) as soon after landing on moon as they could complete postlanding checkout. They would conduct 7-hr EVA, and reenter LM about 17 hrs after previous sleep period. Crew would conduct three evas On first, primary objective was to deploy Apollo lunar surface experiments package; on second, to sample as high on Descartes and Stone Mountains as possible; and, on third, to reach North Ray Crater. (Transcript)
Houston Post editorial described Apollo 17 nighttime launch: “The starstudded sky exploded so violently and in such huge dimensions that it seemed as though a vast reflecting curtain, blended with the night, had been hung directly behind the Apollo 17 launch rocket with the specific role of casting all that fire and light right back over the audience. The climax was reached at the beginning. The drama dwindled swiftly to the view of a bright star fading farther and farther away as it headed toward the moon. An author could write tomes about the space program, but he couldn’t write one line about the nighttime launch of an Apollo and get away with it.” (H Post, 12/10/72) December 11:	Soviet news agency Tass announced “the perfect execution” of Apollo 17 lunar landing “at 22 hours 55 minutes Moscow time in the north-eastern part of the visible side.” Announcement was made five minutes after landing. [See Dec. 7-19.] (fbis-Sov, 12/12/72, Gl; Agence France-Presse, NYT, 12/12/72)
NASA launched two Booster Areas I sounding rockets from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carrying Univ. of Houston experiments to investigate auroral zone disturbances and study auroral phenomena at altitudes previously unstudied. Data would supplement data from three Canadian Black Brant sounding rockets launched by Canadian National Research Council during substorm movement. Rockets reached 53.1- and 60-km (33- and 37.3-mi) altitudes and functioned satisfactorily, with each set of instruments providing data for one hour. (NASA RptS SRL)
Documentary film “Moonwalk One” was reviewed by New York Post. Film traced Apollo 11 lunar landing and first moonwalk by Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong “from Stonehenge to Africa, Cape Kennedy to Houston, to the sun and its mighty flame-storms to camper-sightseers on the Florida shore, to the moon itself and the return.” It was “documentary so vast and so beautiful and fascinating that its opening outside the big commercial theaters is a shocking sin of omission.” Film, made by Francis Thompson Inc., was highlight of “New American Filmmakers Series” at Whitney Museum in New York. (Winsten, NY Post, 11/14/72) November 14^17:	Dept, of Transportation held conference at its Systems center in Cambridge, Mass., to discuss plans for stratospheric observations, laboratory experiments, and computer simulations in program to assess impact of supersonic air traffic on climate and life. Emphasis was on argument by Dr. Harold S. Johnston of Univ. of California at Berkeley and Dr. Paul J. Crutzen of Univ. of Stockholm that nitrogen oxides from supersonic transport exhaust could seriously deplete stratosphere ozone that absorbed much of harmful ultraviolet rays. Some scientists and engineers attending conference had agreed with theory but many had said it was essential to prove theory wrong. Dr. Harold F. Blum of State Univ. of New York at Albany had said that if additional UV got through stratosphere increase in skin cancer would occur, but he could not estimate amount of increase. Dr. Alan J. Grobecker, sst assessment program manager, said if chain reaction in which nitrogen oxides continuously removed ozone according to Johnston-Crutzen theory was very slow effect might escape notice. sst program studies would include use of high-flying U-2 and Concorde supersonic transport aircraft to make stratospheric observations and quick-freeze samples of air in stratosphere for laboratory analysis. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/19/72, 50; dot pio) November 15:	Apollo 17 astronauts began three-week preflight quarantine at Cape Kennedy while launch crews started final major rocket and spacecraft tests for scheduled Dec. 6 launch. Isolation was to minimize exposure to disease or illness that could delay mission. Week-long rocket and spacecraft tests would duplicate every phase of final countdown. Countdown would start Nov. 30. (AP, B Sun, 10/16/72, A9)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced issuance of requests for proposals on space tug systems. Tug—space shuttle 3rd stage—would extend capability of shuttle booster and orbital stages by adding propulsion for higher orbit. Propulsion would be provided by temporary use of existing rocket stage adapted for launch from shuttle cargo bay or by use of interim tug. Studies of rocket stage use were under way. rfps had been issued for possible interim tug development. Three $750 000 contracts would be awarded—two for work on cryogenic tug using liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propellants and one for study of tug using storable propellants. Proposals were due Dec. 22, with contracts to be awarded during first quarter of 1973. Air Force would assist in funding cryogenic tug studies and in selection of contractors and study management. Interim tug would be developed for use in space shuttle’s first flight scheduled for late 1970s. (msfc Release 72-155)
Spaceflight reported development of high-pressure topping-cycle, liquidoxygen and liquid-hydrogen rocket engine with thrust of 196 to 245 kilonewtons (44 000 to 55 000 lbs) by Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm in Ottobrunn, West Germany. Engine was planned for second stage of European Launcher Development Organization’s Europa III launch vehicle. (SF, 8/72, 301)
NASA officials met with 25 national winners in Skylab student project competition at Marshall Space Flight Center to discuss design of students’ space experiments and demonstrations. During visit students toured msfc laboratories and Alabama Space and Rocket Center. (nasa Release 72-94; msfc pao) May 9:	Sen. Walter F. Mondale (D-Minn.) said in Washington, D.C., that arguments for space shuttle development had become “classic case of bureaucratic deception and waste.” He would offer amendment to cut off all shuttle funds. (NYT, 5/11/72)
NASA had asked private industry to help assess space shuttle boosterrecovery system, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Large parachutes would lower 90-metric-ton (lOO-U.S.-ton) spent booster stages to ocean. Six proposals for study of parachute deceleration system had been received, (msfc Release 72-70)
Milton W. Rosen, Senior Scientist in NASA Office of dod and Interagency Affairs, became Deputy Associate Administrator (Engineering) in Office of Space Science. Rosen had joined NASA in 1958 after 18 yrs with Naval Research Laboratory, where from 1947 to 1955 he was head of Rocket Development Branch. Rosen had proposed and developed Viking Upper-Air-Research Rocket and in 1955 proposed Vanguard Earth Satellite Project. He served as Technical Director during its development. (nasa Ann; NASA Release 72-237)
Gerhard B. Heller, Director of Space Science Laboratory at Marshall Space Flight Center, died in Nashville, Tenn., at age 58 of injuries received in automobile accident. Heller had begun career in 1940 at Peenemuende Rocket Center in Germany. He had come to U.S. with Dr. Wernher von Braun’s rocket group after World War II and worked with Army Ordnance Corps until transfer of group to msfc in 1960. During nasa career Heller had pioneered in thermal control of earth satellites. He had served as director of Space Sciences Laboratory’s Thermophysics Div. before becoming Laboratory director in 1969. (msfc Release 72-128)
India’s Minister of State for Home Affairs K. C. Pant, told Indian Parliament, Lok Sabha, that India had developed large number of high-precision and sophisticated components and assemblies needed for control and guidance system of satellite launch vehicle and had flight-tested some components. Sriharikota launch site had become operational, but use of facilities at Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (terls) would continue, (fbis—India, 4/14/72, P2; State Dept pio)
Super Areas sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Wallops Station, carried Pennsylvania State Univ. experiment to 66.8-km (41.5-mi) altitude to measure electrical conductivity in upper atmosphere with parachute-borne payload and to flight-certify payload and vehicle for later launches. Although some data were missed because of lower apogee than planned, flight was judged successful. (NASA Rpt SRL)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Dudley Observatory experiment to 108.7-km (67.5-mi) altitude. Launch was second in series of three to collect and identify cosmic dust particles from Giacobini meteor shower [see Oct. 8]. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained, (nasa Rpt srl)
Col. Thomas G. Lamphier (usa, Ret.), veteran pilot and former Deputy Administrator of Veterans Administration, died in San Diego, Calif., at 82. He had helped Charles A. Lindbergh plan routes for first U.S. passenger airline in 1928 and had served as Vice President of first airline—Transcontinental Air Transport—after retirement from Army in 1929. Col. Lamphier had testified in defense of Gen. William (Billy) Mitchell at general’s court martial for insubordination in 1925. (AP, NYT, 10/12/72, 46) October 9—15:	International Astronautical Federation held 23rd Congress in Vienna. Dr. H. Guyford Stever, Director, of National Science Foundation, stressed Congress theme “Space for World Development” in opening address: “This is the year of ever-increasing cooperative interests in space ventures, including the joint, manned space effort by the Soviet Union and the United States. Thanks to the genius of our early pioneers, . . . results of an era of experimentation now show us clearly the promise which the orderly and determined use of space and space vehicles has to offer.” (Text; Congress Release, 10/9/72) Soviet attendance at Congress was limited to 21 including Cosmonauts Anatoly V. Filipchenko and Valery N. Kubasov. More than half of scheduled Soviet participants failed to arrive or to send papers. Proxy readings of Soviet papers that were included eliminated most opportunities for clarification and discussion by panelists. Lack of Soviet participation had been attributed by Western scientists to U.S.S.R.’s downgrading of iaf in wake of increased space cooperation with U.S. and France and to Soviet budgetary hold-down. (Av Wk, 10/16/72, 16) Dr. George E. Mueller, President of System Development Corp. and former NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said in interview following opening session that it would be technically feasible to put crews of mixed nationalities on Mars within 20 to 30 yrs. “Even the money is there. It’s getting it allocated for the project that’s difficult.” He envisioned crew of 12 or more in giant spacecraft possibly powered by nuclear energy taking 12 to 18 mos to reach Mars. Special shuttle would be needed to carry supplies. “Such an expedition will require lots of resources . . . best . . . supplied by the world as a whole.” (Reuters, B Sun, 10/10/72) Dr. James H. Bredt of Advanced Missions Program Office in NASA Office of Manned Space Flight described new space processing experiments for Skylab missions in 1973. Experiments would broaden scope of experiments to correspond to program’s increased area of interest, to gain experience with new techniques in order to develop advanced equipment for future missions, and to enable materials scientists and engineers to demonstrate value of space laboratories for applied materials research. Apparatus and experimental samples would be delivered to Kennedy Space Center for installation in spacecraft during first week of December. Experiments were to be performed by third and final Skylab crew in November and December 1973. Analysis of samples would begin immediately after their return to earth, and principal investigators probably would present preliminary reports of results at 25th iaf Congress. (Text) Frank J. Malina, Chairman of International Academy of Astronautics’ Manned Research on Celestial Bodies (marecebo) Committee, told 5th Lunar International Laboratory Symposium Oct. 10 that 1964 estimate of 1975-1985 decade for initiation of permanent lunar laboratory might have been “too optimistic.” Men and machines had provided “great deal of hard working knowledge on the Moon and on men working there,” but people and governments needed to be convinced that necessary funding should be provided. (Text) Manned Spacecraft Center Skylab Program Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht discussed mission’s rescue capability during 5th International Space Rescue Symposium. Special kit to be installed in Skylab command and service module (csm) would permit CSM to rendezvous and dock with orbital workshop, using two-man crew. CSM then would be able to accept three stranded astronauts from workshop, undock, and reorbit with five persons on board. Rescue could be effected 48 days after alarm early in mission and as quickly as 10 days late in mission. Reason for variation in time required was that 22 days were needed to refurbish launch umbilical tower after previous launch. (Text) Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp)—joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission scheduled for 1975—was discussed at Oct. 10 press conference. Participants were Cosmonauts Filipchenko and Kubasov; Soviet academician Dr. Leonid I. Sedov; Dr. Wernher von Braun, Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning; and Dr. Krafft A. Ehricke, North American Rockwell Corp. scientist. Dr. von Braun said transition from lower pressured Apollo spacecraft to higher pressured Soyuz would be easy for astronauts, while Soviet cosmonauts would have to spend about two hours in airlock to adjust to Apollo system. Dr. Sedov said U.S.S.R. had not accepted invitation from U.S. for joint mission when first proposed because of sensitive political situation. With successful Moscow summit meetings in May, situation had become “favorable.” (iaf Release, 10/10/72) Scout launch vehicle system was discussed in paper at Congress prepared by R. D. English of Langley Research Center and M. Green of LTV Aerospace Corp., presented by Green. Since inception of program in 1959, Scout vehicle had successfully launched 67 payloads. Studies had been made to ensure that system would provide flexibility for “unique missions to supplement the space shuttle.” (Pamphlet reprint of Text) Dale D. Myers, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said European Launcher Development Organization (eldo) studies of space tug had been discontinued but NASA studies were continuing. “Our present belief is that the required technical advances combined with the budgetary demands that the space shuttle will make . . . will make it impossible to develop within this decade the ‘full capability’ that we feel will eventually be necessary.” NASA was investigating alternate approaches “to providing a Space Shuttle third stage which will give us a reduced but acceptable capability for the delivery of payloads during the early years of shuttle operation.” Alternatives being considered were: to modify existing stage for use as expendable third stage; to make major modifications to existing cryogenic- or storable-propellant stage to enable it to carry payload to geosynchronous orbit and return to shuttle orbit for reuse; or to build new vehicle with less capability than needed, as part of evolutionary program leading to vehicle with required capability. Studies of first alternative were under way; contracted studies within next year were expected to examine latter two alternatives. (Text) Sixth International History of Astronautics Symposium, held Oct. 13, was chaired by Dr. Eugene M. Emme, NASA Historian. In introduction Dr. Emme pointed out that 57 men had flown in space since October 1957, 10 had walked on lunar surface, 22 had flown around moon, and 2 (Astronauts James A. Lovell, Jr., and John W. Young) had traveled to moon twice and made two earth-orbiting flights. Papers presented included “Hungarian Rocketry in the 19th Century” by Istvan G. Nagy, “Origins of Astronautics in Switzerland” by A. Waldis of Swiss Transport Museum, and “Development of the Technology of Rocketry and Space Research in Poland” by M. Subotowicz. Papers read in absentia were “Astronautic Pioneers” (analysis of rocket achievements of F. A. Tsander) by L. S. Dushkin and Ye. K. Moshkin and “Basic Stages of the Development of the Theory of Ramjet Engines” by I. A. Merkulov of Soviet Academy of Sciences. Memoir papers presented included “From galcit to Explorer 1, 1944-57” by Dr. William H. Pickering, Director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory; “From Wallops Island to Mercury, 1945-58” by Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director; and “The Viking Rocket” by Milton W. Rosen, Senior Scientist in NASA Office of Dept, of Defense and Interagency Affairs. (Program; iaf Release) Daniel and Florence Guggenheim International Astronautics Award for 1972 was presented to Dr. Reimar Luest, Director of Max Planck Institute and astrophysicist known for work on solar winds and interplanetary matter. (Program; iaa Annual Rpt, 8/31/72) tunities. Atmospheric pressures of cabins would be adjusted while spacecraft were docked, to avoid necessity of prebreathing pure oxygen before transfer of crewmen from Soyuz to Apollo cabins. Soyuz pressure would be lowered from its normal 101 kilonewtons per sq m to 69 (from 14.7 psi to 10); Apollo pressure would remain at 35 kilonewtons per sq m (5 psi). First joint crew training session was scheduled for summer of 1973, with cosmonauts visiting U.S. for several weeks. Astronauts would train equal time in U.S.S.R. in fall of 1973. Soviet two-fifths scale model of docking mechanism would be tested with U.S. model during Moscow meeting in December 1972. Further consideration of extravehicular crew transfer would be deleted; if any emergency prevented return of crewmen to their own ships, they would land in spacecraft they were visiting. Sufficient propellant would be budgeted for Apollo spacecraft to allow it to maintain attitude control while docked. Exchange of working groups would be more frequent, with meetings at msc in November, in Moscow in December, and at msc in March 1973. U.S. delegation included representatives of prime contractor North American Rockwell Corp. and three of five working groups established in July 6-18 meetings at msc to define mission elements. Working group members included Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford. NASA delegation was headed by astp Director Glynn S. Lunney. Senior member of Soviet delegation was Prof. Konstantin D. Bushuyev, U.S.S.R.’s astp Director, (nasa Releases 72-198, 72—207, 72-211; AP, C Trib, 10/20/72) October 10:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by Titan HID booster at 11:03 am pdt (2:03 pm edt). Satellite entered orbit with 268-km (167-mi) apogee, 159-km (99-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, 96.4° inclination and reentered Jan. 8, 1973. (Pres Rpt 73; Av Wk, 10/16/72, 19; gsfc SSR, 1/31/73)
Last in series of very-high-altitude flight tests of parachute decelerator system for NASA’s Viking Mars lander, scheduled for 1975 launch, was held over White Sands Missile Range by Martin Marietta Corp. under Air Force Research Laboratories direction. Decelerator was dropped from balloon at altitude of 27 000 m (88 000 ft) to check out parachute system at subsonic conditions. In previous tests rocket motors had boosted speed after balloon had carried system to desired altitude. [See July 11 and 26, Aug. 13, and Dec. 14.] (afsc Release 105.72; Martin Marietta Corp pio; NASA Release 72-118) Primary objective was to obtain high-resolution spectra of stars in ultraviolet range between 1000 and 3000 A to investigate composition, density, and physical state of matter in interstellar space and stellar sources. Secondary objective was to evaluate onboard computer, light baffle, inertial reference unit, electronically scanned star tracker, and heat pipes. Spacecraft carried two experiments—Princeton experiment package (pep), 80-cro (32-in) Cassegrainian telescope and photoelectric spectrometer; and Univ. College London (ucl) x-ray experiment containing three telescopes and collimated proportional counter. All spacecraft operations were carried out as planned, with spacecraft checkout completed Aug, 24, experiment checkout completed Aug. 26, and stabilization and control system checkout completed Aug. 28. By 2:00 pm edt Aug. 29 Oao 3 had completed 120 orbits with systems operating almost perfectly, pep was viewing bright star Zeta in constellation Ophiuchus and obtaining excellent data. UCL experiment was undergoing calibration and alignment and would begin observing x-ray sources in September. Fourth OAO launched by NASA, Oao 3 at 2200 kg (4900 lbs), 2 m wide and 3 m high (7 x 10 ft), was heaviest and most complex automated spacecraft developed by U.S. It had new gyro inertial reference unit with four star trackers, electrically scanned star tracker, precision digital solar-aspect sensor, and onboard computer that could handle 16000, 18-bit words and store 1024 ground commands. OAO-B had crashed Nov. 30, 1970, when shroud failed to separate after launch. Oao 2 (launched Dec. 7, 1968) was still returning valuable data. Oao 1 (launched April 8, 1966) had failed because of high-voltage arcing in star trackers and malfunction in power supply system. OAO program was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under direction of NASA Office of Space Science. (NASA proj off; NASA Release 72-156)
Signing of space cooperation agreement in Moscow was announced by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew at Washington, D.C., press briefing attended by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator; Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser; Glynn S. Lunney, Assistant to Apollo Program Manager for Operations, Experiments, and Government Furnished Equipment at Manned Spacecraft Center; and Apollo 9 Astronaut James A. McDivitt, Special Assistant for Organizational Affairs to msc Director. Dr. Fletcher said: “We . . . are very pleased that the President has been able to meet with the officials of the Soviet Union and to provide what we think is by far the most meaningful cooperation in space achieved ever by these two nations.” Dr. Fletcher described rendezvous and docking of Apollo space craft and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft as “perhaps the most dramatic” commitment under cooperation agreement. Spacecraft were at present incompatible “because they have different atmospheres. Theirs is a normal atmosphere, ours is a low pressure oxygen . . . atmosphere and there are certain communications and electronics incompatibilities.” Spacecraft would be made compatible by docking module, new device constructed by NASA to link spacecraft. Apollo spacecraft would be launched on Saturn IB rocket. “Then we will make a maneuver at 100 miles [160 kilometers] or so altitude, ... go in and pick out the docking adaptor from the Saturn and then continue on in orbit. Meanwhile the Soviets will launch their Soyuz . . . [and] rendezvous or at least move their altitude to something like 150 miles [240 kilometers]. We won’t be at the same altitude, but hopefully we will be far enough north so too much maneuvering will not be required.” Rendezvous would be performed primarily with U.S.-developed guidance and instrumentation. Then spacecraft would dock with “new kind of . . . mechanism we call androgynous, because it doesn’t consist of a prop and a drogue. ... It is an inverse docking mechanism sp they can dock with us or we can dock with them either way.” System “will apply not only to this . . . mission, but all succeeding spacecraft ... so that we do have the capability, over a long period, of rendezvousing and docking with each other’s spacecraft.” Dr. Fletcher said original plan to attempt rendezvous and docking with Soviet Salyut space station had been canceled when U.S.S.R. “found that was a very complicated mission because it involved not just two launches, their Soyuz and our apollo, but a third of their Salyut.” Universal docking system using docking adaptor between Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft had been selected because “there has been concern for many years that we did not have a rescue capability ... in space [so] that we each would have the option of rescuing the other. Future spacecraft beyond 1975, which is the planned date for this mission, will all have the capability.” Total cost of project was estimated at $250 million. Fringe benefits from U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint program were: “It does have the impact of requiring 4,400 people to be employed . . . primarily from the aerospace industry, partly to prepare the command service model and the Saturn IB launch device, hut also to construct the new docking adaptor,” and “it will keep the APOLLO team together . . . through 1975 in preparation for the first launch of the shuttle ... in 1978.” NASA was optimistic that cooperative space effort “may lead to greatly increased cooperation on still other programs.” Joint mission would be “most visible” U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperative effort in history, “since it will involve cosmonauts and astronauts working together on a very complex mission in space while the whole world is watching, presumably on television via satellite relay.” (Transcript)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird announced appointment of l/c Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) as Director of National Security Agency, effective Aug. 1. Gen. Phillips, assigned to NASA in 1964, had been Apollo Program Director at NASA Hq. until Sept. 1, 1969, when he became Commander of Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization. He would replace Adm. Noel A. M. Gayler (usn), who would become U.S. commander in chief in Pacific area. (W Star, 4/27/72, A2) April 28:	Soviet President Nikolay V. Podgorny sent message congratulating President Nixon on successful completion of Apollo 16 mission and safe return of astronauts. He asked President to convey “best of wishes to the members of the spaceship crew, courageous cosmonauts John Young, Charles Duke and Thomas Mattingly.” (fbis-Sov, 4/28/72, G2)
NASA launched Black Brant VB sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Goddard Space Flight Center payload to test rocket configuration that would be used in support of Skylab mission. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 200 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center payload to test flight performance. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
New York Times, in editorial on Apollo 16's technical problems, praised entire Apollo effort: “Whatever the outcome of the present Apollo expedition . . . enough has already been accomplished by these vehicles to assure them an imperishable place in the history of technology and science. Each Apollo rocket . . . has been the most complex and complicated machine ever made by man. Each has been composed of millions of parts, all or almost all of which have had to work perfectly for the voyage to succeed.” Apollo was “most impressive example of what American engineering can do at its best, and an implicit rebuke to the more routine areas of technology where far lower standards are too frequently the rule.” (NYT, 4/18/72)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Massachusetts Institute of Technology astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list) and development effort to level “at least equal to that of the Soviet Union.” Convention adopted 1972-1973 Statement of Policy Sept. 19. Statement said new environment created by Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (salt) “places a high premium on added protection for our current strategic bomber force, on improved ballistic missile technology as an antidote to numerical inferiority, on more accurate and consistent surveillance capabilities, and on more secure and dependable communications.” Nothing in salt agreements impeded size and momentum of U.S.S.R.’s research and development effort. Soviet effort “for the past several years has surpassed that of the United States by a wide margin. Tlje possibility of technological surprise has not diminished under salt, unless the United States undertakes and maintains a military research and development program that is comprehensive, consistent, and competitive.” If U.S. emphasized efforts on qualitative force improvement, enhanced forces survivability, and improved conventional weapon delivery, “risks involved in the SALT agreements can likely be kept within tolerable limits.” AFA awards presented during convention included Theodore von Karman Award to l/c Donald G. Carpenter, Commander of 18th Surveillance Squadron, Air Defense Command, for “advancing the nation’s space defense capability.” David C. Schilling Award was presented to 1st Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron, Beale Air Force Base, Calif., for “pioneering operational long-range flight while performing vital defense missions with the SR—71 aircraft.” Award was accepted by Col. Jerome F. O’Malley, Commander of 9th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing. (AF Mag, 11/72, 809, 54-5, 60-1) September 18:	New York Times published interview with Harris M. Schurmeier, Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s manager of proposed 1977 Jupiter-Saturn mission. Two 680-kg (1500-lb) spacecraft launched by Titan IIIE-Centaur boosters would swing past Jupiter in 1979 and, gaining velocity from pull of Jupiter’s gravity, speed past Saturn by 1981. Mission would cost between $250 million and $350 million— less than half cost of Grand Tour mission proposed earlier. Since mission would provide first close-up observation of Saturn, some 200 scientists had already submitted proposals for experiments. Proposals were being evaluated and spacecraft design would begin by end of 1972. (Wilford, NYT, 9/18/72, 15)
France and U.S. had agreed on three-year project FAMOUS (FrancoAmerican Midocean Undersea Study) to explore rift valley 2.4 km (1.5 mi) beneath Atlantic for volcanic activity that was slowly pushing America away from Europe and Africa, New York Times reported. Paper compared project, outgrowth of 1970 Franco-American Agreement on Scientific Cooperation, to Apollo program. Training and employment of international crews had anticipated U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation. Similarities to Apollo were “use of special vehicles [deep-submergence craft] to carry men across otherwise inaccessible terrain, the development of special geologic tools and the training of participants in accessible areas thought to bear some resemblance to the forkidding target sites.” Crews would begin training in August in Gulf of Maine. (Sullivan, NYT, 7/5/72, 12)
Success of first 27 test flights of new Maverick missile had enabled Air Force Systems Command to end demonstration phase of Maverick flight testing ahead of schedule, AFSC reported. Maverick Program Director Col. James A. Abrahamson (usaf) had canceled 13 additional tests originally scheduled under contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. (afsc Release 256.71) January 12—14:	Secretariat for Electronic Test Equipment—organization funded by NASA, Dept, of Defense, and Federal Aviation Administration to collect and disseminate test equipment information for Government agencies—held electronic test equipment conference at Kennedy Space Center. NASA presentations described design, development, procurement, and deployment of automatic test equipment for Apollo program, sete was administered by New York Univ. under direction of David M. Goodman of New York Univ. School of Engineering and Science, (ksc Release 8-72; ksc pao)
Mariner Mars ’71 primary mission—to explore Mars from Martian orbit for period sufficient to observe planet’s surface and view selected areas during dynamic changes, photograph planet, and obtain infrared and ultraviolet data on atmosphere and surface characteristics—was adjudged successful by NASA. Mariner 8 launch May 8, 1971, was not successful because of malfunction of Atlas-Centaur booster. Mariner 9 was successfully launched May 30, 1971, and reached Mars Nov. 13, 1971. All Mariner 9 instruments operated successfully and were continuing to transmit data. When Mariner 8 was lost, mission plan for Mariner 9 had been altered to meet primary mission objectives in best way. Plan had been altered second time when dust storm on Mars delayed systematic mapping of planet. (NASA proj off)
Dismantling of Saturn Launch Complexes 34 and 37, sites of Saturn I and IB launches at start of Apollo program, was begun at Kennedy Space Center by Southern Contractors Service. Firm had hid $15 051 for structures built at cost of $147 990 581. Dismantling would he completed within seven months. NASA spokesman had said total of $53 856 403 had been saved in equipment and structures from complexes, “one of the highest returns ever” for such a program. NASA Centers would receive salvaged equipment for active programs. Equipment valued at $5 891 866 would he given to Atomic Energy Commission; Depts. of Commerce, Interior, and Agriculture; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; and universities with Government research grants. Launch control rooms in Launch Complex 34 and 37 blockhouses would be retained in launch configuration for historical and public information purposes. Historical marker outside would inform visitors of past events. Seven Saturn I and IB vehicles had been launched from Complex 34 culminating in Apollo 7, first manned command and service module launch, Oct. 11, 1968. Complex also had been scene of tragic Jan. 27, 1967, fire that took lives of three astronauts. Eight Saturn I and IB vehicles had been launched from Pad 37B, terminating with Apollo 5, first Apollo lunar module launch, Jan. 22, 1968. (M Her, 4/29/72; ksc Release 88-72; ksc Hist Off; ksc memo to NASA Hist Off)
North American Rockwell Corp. Downey Div. announced receipt of $5 500 000 contract from Air Force Systems Command’s Space and Missile Organization (samso) to build one-of-a-kind satellite for late 1973 launch. Spacecraft would be orbiting base from which quartet of instruments would gather scientific data for several Government agencies. (NR Release) September 22-25:	NASA launched Explorer 47 (imp-h) Interplanetary Monitoring Platform from Eastern Test Range at 9:20 pm edt by three-stage, long-tank, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. Satellite entered transfer orbit with 237 796-km (147 759.6-mi) apogee, 246-km (152.9-mi) perigee, 7365-min (5.11-day) period, and 28.6° inclination. Primary objective was to provide more detailed understanding of dynamics of regions discovered and broadly surveyed by previous earth-orbiting imps and lunar imp by obtaining scientific data during period of decreasing solar activity. Explorer 47 would continue studies of interplanetary radiation, solar wind and energetic particle emissions, and magnetic fields in earth’s environment from orbit halfway to moon. Apogee kick motor was fired Sept. 25 to place Explorer 47 in circular orbit with 235 639-km (146 419.3-mi) apogee, 201599-km (125 267.8-mi) perigee, 12.3-day period, and 17.2° inclination. Ry Sept. 25, 10 experiments had been commanded on and were operating satisfactorily. Three remaining experiments would be turned on about Oct. 5. Explorer 47 was drum shaped, weighed 378 kg (833 lbs), and carried 13 experiments to measure energetic particles, plasmas, and magnetic and electric fields. Experiments were provided universities, industry, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Atomic Energy Commission, and Goddard Space Flight Center. Explorer 47 was ninth spacecraft in imp series. First—Explorer 18 (imp—a)—had been launched Nov. 26, 1963, and most recent—Explorer 43 (imp—i) . —had been launched March 13, 1971. Four of the eight previously launched spacecraft were still operating, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-185) September 22:	Skylab Orbital Workshop, scheduled to carry three-man crews in earth orbit in 1973, arrived at Kennedy Space Center after two-week barge trip from McDonnell Douglas Co.’s Huntington Reach, Calif., plant. Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) was flown to KSC from Manned Spacecraft Center, where it had been undergoing thermal testing since mid-July. Airlock module (am) and multiple docking adapter (mda) were scheduled to arrive at ksc Oct. 9 and instrument unit Oct. 22. (upi, NY News, 9/23/72; ksc Releases 268-72, 270-72)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Naval Research Laboratory astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Arenosillo, Spain, carried Spanish and Goddard Space Flight Center experiments to 122km (75.7-mi) altitude to study ion composition in D- and E-regions of ionosphere. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained. Launch was fifth of six launches to study ionosphere under July 30, 1970, Memorandum of Agreement between NASA and Comision Nacional de Investigation del Espacio (conie). (nasa Rpt SRL)
India would launch satellite on Soviet booster by end of 1974, Delhi General Overseas Service reported. Construction of facilities to develop and test rockets and satellites was expected to create more jobs, help locate natural resources, and strengthen industrial infrastructure. (FBis-India, 6/12/72, 02)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and other officials testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1972 NASA authorization hearings. Dr. Fletcher said: “I regard the fiscal year 1973 budget . . . as marking the end of a difficult transition period for NASA. For the past 2 or 3 years, NASA, the executive branch, and the Congress have been grappling with questions on the course the Nation’s space program should take in the 1970’s and beyond. The main goals in science, exploration, and applications, and the advanced system and technology required to achieve these goals, have been identified . . . and generally approved .... But there has remained a basic uncertainty . . . the question of cost. Can the Nation afford the space program of the 1970’s? Will the approval of the Space Shuttle and the other programs . . . commit the Nation to a large increase in future spending levels? “This year we can give clear answers to these questions. We can assure the committee, the Congress, and the public that the program we are proposing does not commit the country to higher budget levels in future years, at least measured in current dollars .... The revised plan is, I believe, more realistic and will give the Nation a good, viable, and balanced program in aeronautics and space at a cost it can afford.” Dr. George M. Low, Deputy Administrator, reported substantial progress in two basic cooperative activities with U.S.S.R.—joint work on compatible docking systems and exchanges in scientific areas, including lunar sample exchanges. In response to question, Dr. Low said he thought it likely U.S.S.R. would continue lunar program after U.S. completed Apollo program. “They may even try to land men on the moon in the latter part of this decade. That will be a catching-up process.” To further question, Dr. Fletcher said that in late 1970s U.S.S.R. would be “doing things in the manned space program that are beyond what we would be able to do.” From end of Skylab in 1973 until 1978, “it is likely that they will be carrying on some important activity and we will have no opportunity to respond until 1978” [with space shuttle]. Richard C. McCurdy, Associate Administrator for Organization and Management, submitted statement on NASA’s work force: “When several reductions are made serially, as they have been in NASA over the past several years, the effects compound, and the healing processes, such as the resumption of hiring of younger people, the filling of vacancies via merit promotion ... do not have an opportunity to function.” NASA was “feeling these disadvantageous effects severely.” Most worrying was “dwindling of the supply of new blood.” It was obvious “trend cannot continue without the health and vigor of the organization being undermined.” NASA needed “to embark upon a period of stability” in work force to “return to normal personnel development practices, heal the damage of the past several years, and be prepared to meet the challenges of the 70’s.” With the “prospect of a period of relative stability in the general level of spending” and “clearer view of the NASA forward mission,” such a policy was indicated. Statement submitted by Daniel J. Harnett, Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs and Technology Utilization, described NASA Regional Dissemination Centers’ assistance to users “ranging from small businesses to the largest companies in our Nation’s economy— across a broad spectrum of business sectors including manufacturing services, transportation and communications. The Centers also serve university faculty and students; varied national, state, and local organizations; and governmental entities at all levels.” NASA RDCs had served more than 2000 organizations in 1971, of which over 48% of industrial users were small businesses. m/g Robert H. Curtin (usaf, Ret.), NASA Director of Facilities, submitted statement on facilities. In $77.3-million FY 1973 request for construction of facilities, $27.9 million was for modifications and additions to facilities for space shuttle, $11.2 million for facilities supporting scientific investigations in space, $12.9 million for facilities supporting aeronautical research and technology, and $25.3 million for smaller supporting activities and planning and design. (Transcript)
Dr. John E. Naugle, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Sciences, reviewed space science program before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1973 authorization hearings: Major accomplishment in astronomy in 1971 had been mapping of universe at x-ray wavelengths with first x-ray astronomy satellite, Explorer 42 (Vhuru, launched Dec. 12, 1970). Two dozen scientific articles had been published on observations by satellite; 116 objects emitting x-rays had been studied and positions accurately determined. Analysis of rocket data on one object indicated diameter was less than 20 km (13 mi), yet it emitted much larger amount of x-radiation than did sun. “The discovery of such X-ray sources is of fundamental importance because matter in ordinary states . . . cannot account for such intense radiation.” In 1971 NASA had launched eight missions in physics and astronomy program. Most important was Orbiting Solar Observatory Oso 7 (launched Sept. 29, 1971), “which carried into orbit a set of solar telescopes more powerful than any launched before. One instrument— a coronagraph—revealed visible evidence of three luminous jets of intensely hot solar plasma being hurled out into space at a speed of more than two million miles per hour [some 3 million km per hr]. These luminous jets were 20 times the size of the earth, and represented the energy of 100 million atomic bombs. A peak temperature of 30 million degrees must have been attained in this event. Again . . . matter must have been produced on a scale man cannot produce on earth.” International cooperation continued major role in space science program; five of eight 1971 missions had had significant international participation. During year experiments and prime contractor, TRW Inc., had been selected for “newest and most significant program in astronomy”—High Energy Astronomy Observatory, designed to “unlock some of the most profound and puzzling secrets of modern physics.” Pulsars and quasars had given evidence of new concept of energy generation that produced power at levels unexplainable by modern nuclear physics. (Transcript)
Dr. George M. Low, nasa Deputy Administrator, testified before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on International Cooperation in Science and Space on U.S.—U.S.S.R. agreement on cooperation in space [May 24]. He described events that led to agreement on joint rendezvous and docking mission: Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, then nasa Administrator, had suggested to Soviet Academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov during April 1970 meeting in New York “possibility of cooperation in the area of astronaut safety, including compatible docking fixtures for space stations and shuttles.” National Academy of Sciences President, Dr. Philip Handler, had conveyed NASA’s interest to Soviet Academy President Mstislav V. Keldysh. “In July, Dr. Paine suggested directly to President Keldysh that this possibility be considered.” Dr. Low said if docking mission was successful, “both countries will have increased their chances of rescuing astronauts in distress without commensurate increase in the costs of a standby rescue capability. It is here that the joint test mission is particularly important. It will give us the opportunity to identify and resolve under the best possible conditions the problems we can expect to flow from differences in language, equipment, and operational procedures.” Joint working groups were making significant progress. Space meteorology group was organizing experiments to advance temperature sounding from satellites and microwave measurement of precipitation zones, ice conditions, and sea surface roughness and temperature. Another joint working group had provided for coordination of meridional sounding rocket networks in Eastern and Western Hemispheres and had begun to exchange operational and scientific meteorological data. Working group on natural environment was defining coordinated experiments in remote sensing of the environment related to vegetation, geology, and the oceans. Oceanographic effort would continue satellite and ship measurements over same ocean area. In group on scientific investigation of near-earth space, moon, and planets, “experts from both sides have been working on a common system of lunar coordinates and a program for compiling a complete map of the moon on the scale of 1:5,000,000.” Group on space biology and medicine was “considering certain common standards and procedures to increase the comparability of information.” If U.S. and U.S.S.R. could work together to achieve “intimate and complex common goal” like joint space mission, “we will have built mutual confidence and trust. The symbol of US and Soviet spacemen meeting in orbit before the eyes of the entire world cannot help but ameliorate attitudes, viewpoints and expectations throughout the world.” (Transcript)
NASA launched Javelin sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center fields and particles experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily but scientific objectives were not met. (SR list)
National Academy of Sciences released findings of two-year study of science and its relation to society, made by Physics Survey Committee chaired by Yale Univ. physicist Dr. David A. Bromley. Report, tentatively titled “Physics in Perspective,” was in press at release time. It rated 69 program areas in physics in order of priority and emphasized cost to U.S. science and society and to physics if programs were not adopted. Most “striking” aspect of survey had been “renewed discovery of the over-all power and vitality of U.S. physics,” but “this strength is in danger.” Committee found danger most immediate and obvious in subfields like elementary particle and nuclear physics where major facilities approved in mid-1960s were just becoming operational. Report named 15 programs that had growth potentials warranting high priority for incremental support: macroscopic quantum phenomena including superfluidity and superconductivity, quantum optics, scattering in solids and liquids, heavy-ion interactions, higher-energy nuclear physics, national accelerator laboratory, Stanford linear accelerator, controlled fusion, turbulence, nonlinear optics, lasers and masers, atomic and molecular beams, biophysical acoustics, very large radio array, and x-ray and gamma ray astronomy. Committee concurred with recommendation of Astronomy Survey Committee [see June 1] that High Energy Astronomy Observatory (heao) should be prominent in national effort in astrophysics and astronomy. “Because of the opaqueness of the earth’s atmosphere to both X and gamma radiation, these windows on the universe have only recently been opened through rocket and satellite astronomy. Any reasonable extrapolation from the preliminary soundings that have been possible so far suggests a larger return in fundamental insight into the structure and history of the universe. In the total national physics program, the estimated cost of this facility—$400 million . . . is extremely high. To be considered in proper perspective it must be viewed in the context of the total expenditures of the U.S. space program. In anticipated scientific return—both short- and long-range— it merits high priority in that program.” (NASA—nrc-nae News Rpt, 8-9/72, 1-7)
Two sounding rockets were launched by nasa from Wallops Station. Nike-Apache carried Univ. of Rlinois payload to 185-km (115-mi) altitude in first of three launches to measure ionospheric properties on three anomalous days: (1) “L,” day with very low electron densities in 70- to 80-km (40- to 50-mi) region with 10-day minimal magnetic storm activity proceeding; (2) “Hi,” day with very high electron densities with same altitude and magnetic storm prerequisites; and (3) “H2,” day with very high electron densities in same region with two or three days of major magnetic disturbance and magnetic storm aftereffects. Nike-Apache was fired on L day and measured electron densities, temperatures, and collision frequencies. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Super Areas launched 44 min after Nike-Apache carried Pennsylvania State Univ. payload to 85-km (52.8-mi) altitude to collect data on positive and negative ion conductivities. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpts srl)
Apollo program had been “project of peace, producing knowledge that has been and will be made available to all nations and to all peoples,” New York Times editorial said. “No doubt men and women of many other nations will some day rocket across the cosmic tracks that Apollo pioneered. Americans can be proud that this country led the way, and did so with the goal of making space a zone of peace, not a new arena for fratricidal war among nations.” (NYT, 12/10/72, 10)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from Churchill Research Range, Canada, carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. auroral studies experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Lunar science press conference at Manned Spacecraft Center discussed Apollo 16 data and portent for Apollo 17 mission, scheduled for launch Dec. 6. Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer of State Univ. of New York at Stony Brook reported that analysis of pea-size Apollo 16 rock fragments had shown them ranging in age from 3.98 billion to 4.25 billion yrs. Rocks had crystallized some 300 million yrs after moon’s formation. It was possible that Apollo 17 site would yield “very young rocks . . . , young volcanics. So one may be able to extend the mare type ages . . . and see just how long it took the surface of the moon ... to crystallize before it was a rather hard crust . . . with very little, if any, igneous activity.” Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg of Cal Tech reported Apollo 16 rock No. 65015 seemed to have undergone two distinct melting steps. Bulk of this “two-history rock” had 'crystallized 3.93 billion yrs ago but had retained some crystals that had been formed between 4.40 and 4.48 billion yrs ago. First crystallization probably had been associated with great heat during moon’s formation but scientists had no clue to cause of second melting period and subsequent recrystallization. Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of msc Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said “fundamental conclusion” was evolving from new understanding of moon gained “largely out of the Apollo program.” Scientists “have to now look at each individual planet and somehow or another infer its chemical composition.” They were beginning to see chemically heterogeneous solar system. Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, Apollo 17 lunar module pilot, described Apollo 17 landing site in moon’s Taurus-Littrow area on rim of Serenitatis Basin: “It’s in that general geographic ring that resembles the Apennine front near where Apollo 15 landed. It has, however, some very distinctive characteristics .... There is no clear evidence that we are close to mare. The nearest obvious mare surface is several hundred kilometers [100 km equals 62 mi] to the . . . northwest—in the Mare Serenitatis. We are landing on a plain that seems to overlie a slightly elevated flat surface that predates the mare. And it seems when you look at all of the basins on the moon, that that surface, a correlative surface in other basins, is somehow related to the formation of the basin. There are comparable plains around all of the big circular basins, and there is a flat floor that predates the mare that is cut by graben faulting .... Also in the site we have the . . . north and south massifs. These are large aggregates of peaks and mountains that . . . are part of the range structure of the Orientale basin.” Dark cover over valley floor and portions of highlands was younger than mare and was as little as 0.5 m (1.6 ft) thick. Radar data had shown cover was “finely fragmented mantle material” that was “ubiquitous in all of the low areas and locally is covering portions of the highlands.” Dr. Schmitt said mantle, although of not as high a priority as the crustal examination in the south massif, had “potential of giving us our most fundamental evidence for studying this evolutionary model.” Potential was high that “dark mantle material has sampled some significant portion of the crust. At least it has sampled its source area, and that source area is very probably deep within the moon.” Dr. Schmitt told press that to be able to say that man was “on the verge, if not already there, of understanding the evolution of another planet is something that is really unprecedented in the history of man. And I think that’s the thing that’s the news of Apollo. That is what we have done.” (Transcript)
U.S.S.R. was deploying multiple warheads on its intercontinental ballistic missiles, Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said in speech before Veterans of Foreign Wars in Washington, D.C. (Text) March 7:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, compared nasa FY 1973 budget program with FY 1972 plans in testimony before opening session of House Committee on Appropriations’ Subcommittee on Department of Housing and Urban Development-Space-Science-Veterans hearings on FY 1973 budget: “We have reconfigured our plans so that a substantially higher level of appropriations will not be required in future years to complete the programs in our FY 1973 budget” and to continue “useful and significant . . . new projects in space science, exploration, and practical applications, in advanced technology, and in aeronautics.” FY 1972 program would have required NASA appropriations in future years to approach $4 billion per year. Run-out costs to complete program as planned would have risen to $3.7 billion in FY 1973 and $3.95 billion in FY 1974. Revised program estimated run-out costs at $3.37 billion in FY 1974, $3.3 billion in FY 1975, $3.2 billion in FY 1976, and $3.1 billion in FY 1977. NASA could “by properly phasing-in the start of needed future new programs . . . hold NASA appropriations in future years to approximately the current total appropriations level in current dollars.” Previous program would have committed U.S. to “higher NASA budget in future years, or to the waste from termination of programs in midstream,” but revised plan would “give the Nation a good, viable, and balanced program in aeronautics and space at a cost it can afford.” Dr. Fletcher believed “realistic long-term plan in which the Nation’s commitment is limited to budgets of approximately the current size is the proper posture for NASA from the standpoint of responsible management” and “should go far in alleviating the concerns that have been expressed that in embarking on the new space programs of the 1970’s we are committing the Nation to a program that it cannot afford. “To achieve this posture, we have had to make some basic changes in our planning and accept yet another stretch-out of the period over which our continuing and long-term objectives in space exploration and space science will be achieved.” Principal change has been in space shuttle program. Shuttle now planned would cost $5.5 billion, about half what configuration envisaged year before would have cost. Second significant change was cutback in planned program for exploration of outer planets, reducing plans to explore all five outer planets on Grand Tour missions in late 1970s to new focus on Jupiter and perhaps Saturn, with less expensive spacecraft. Third significant change was termination of nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program, now including in budget request $8.5 million for defining with Atomic Energy Commission smaller nuclear rocket engine and making trade-off studies of preferred propulsion system for missions to distant planets some time in 1980s. Final major change was increased emphasis on aeronautics, in response to strong urgings of committees of Congress. (Transcript)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Andoeya, Norway, carried National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration experiment to 208-km (129-mi) altitude. Objectives were to obtain information on precipitating charged-particle flux associated with quiet auroral form and measure electric-field strengths in and near auroral form. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (NASA Rpt SRl)
During five-day visit to Poland Dr. Edward E. David, Jr., Presidential Science Adviser, informed Polish government in Warsaw that U.S. would name oao-c Orbiting Astronomical Observatory for Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus. Launch of oao-c, scheduled for August, would inaugurate U.S. contribution to worldwide Copernican celebration feting 500th anniversary of Feb. 14, 1473, birth of Copernicus, oao-c would carry 81-cm (32-in) reflecting ultraviolet telescope developed by Princeton Univ. and battery of smaller x-ray telescope developed by Univ. College, Univ. of London, to study uv and x-ray emissions of celestial bodies, oao—c would weigh 2200 kg (4900 lbs) and would be launched into earth orbit with 740-km (460-mi) altitude by Atlas-Centaur booster, (nasa Release 72-141)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body completed 22nd flight at Flight Research Center after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Flight objectives were to check out pilot, Cecil Powell, and to obtain stability and control data at mach 0.70. Both objectives were achieved. Vehicle reached 14 300-m (47 000-ft) altitude and mach 0.70 on flight using two chambers of four-chamber rocket engine, (nasa proj off)
Nike-Javelin III sounding rocket, carrying Naval Research Laboratory cesium cloud experiment, was launched by NASA from Wallops Station at 5:07 am est. Huge yellowish clouds formed were visible along East Coast. Lauch was third in series of five to collect atmospheric data; previous launches had been conducted March 25 and 27. (WS PAO; WS Release 72-4.)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, carried Univ. of Pittsburgh experiment to 141-km (87.6-mi) altitude. Primary objective was to confirm initial observation of nitric oxide in auroral zone and collect additional information on processes that produced nitric oxide in an auroral arc. Secondary objective was to measure density of major atmospheric constituents in D and E regions. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
nasa and European Space Research Organization (esro) were jointly soliciting proposals from scientists for planning experiments that could be carried on Explorer-class spacecraft in late 1970s. Scientists whose proposals were chosen would work in teams to aid in planning mission and help NASA and esro decide whether to conduct missions. Current plans called for one Explorer spacecraft to fly in circular, solar orbit with 2-million-km (1.2-million-mi) radius while dual mother-daughter spacecraft flew close together in elliptical earth orbit. Three spacecraft would be launched by Thor-Delta booster from Kennedy Space Center between 1976 and 1978. Mother-daughter spacecraft would make repeated passes through earth’s magnetic field to measure fine-scale space and time variations while interplanetary spacecraft recorded simultaneous variations of incoming solar wind. (NASA Release 72-100)
Use of energy in cosmic plasma to launch spacecraft inexpensively was discussed in Science by Dr. Hannes 0. Alfven, Univ. of California at San Diego physicist. Energy for space propulsion was being used in “extremely inefficient” way because of low exhaust velocity of rocket gases. Total start weight of spacecraft “must be two or three orders of magnitude larger than the payload.” By plasma ejection, “one can easily reach exhaust velocities of several tens of kilometers per second” so that “the ejected mass may be of the same order of magnitude as the payload and the efficiency very high.” Energy for launch could be supplied from solar wind, tapping voltage of 1000 v if transfer resistance between ends of conductors and solar wind could be “made small.” Or energy could be supplied by transfer from ground through plasma channel in atmosphere. “When Apollo 12 was launched, there were low clouds but no thunderstorm. When the spacecraft had disappeared in the clouds, lightning was observed . . . where the spacecraft had last been seen. This effect was interpreted as due to the exhaust gases which facilitated a discharge of electrostatic charges in the clouds down to the ground. One cannot avoid thinking that it would be preferable to transfer power up to the spacecraft in this way.” If spacecraft at launch was “accelerated by two plasma guns at a large distance from each other, and electric arcs are produced between each . . . and the corresponding electrodes on the ground, it is possible that these arcs can be maintained during the launch through the atmosphere.” (Science, 4/14/72, 167-8)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from White Sands Missile Range carried Univ. of Colorado payload containing six ultraviolet photometers and telemetry transmitter to 123-km (77-mi) altitude. Flight objective was to measure variation with altitude of atomic oxygen at night and to determine spectral distribution of night-glow continuum in altitude region between 85 and 110 km (53 and 68 mi). Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily, (nasa Rpt srl)
Soviet Space Programs, 1966-70 (Senate Document 92-51) was released by Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences. The 670-page report—prepared by Library of Congress under direction of Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Div.— noted that Soviet space program remained “a strong and growing enterprise” unhindered by budgetary strain and undimmed by deaths of three Soyuz cosmonauts in 1971. Current level of Soviet space activity exceeded that of U.S. at its peak in 1966, with perhaps 2% of Soviet gross national product devoted to space (U.S. spent about 1% of its gnp at peak). Although U.S. launch record had been declining steadily since 1966, Soviet launches had continued to climb, at least until 1970. Contrary to assertion that it was concentrating its efforts on unmanned program rather than manned program, U.S.S.R. apparently was still planning manned lunar landing and might spend $49 million on both advanced unmanned and manned lunar programs. U.S. would have committed $35 billion to total Apollo program when complete. In unmanned research satellite program “the level of activity currently runs ahead of the corresponding level of work at NASA.” Compendium of every known Soviet launch that had achieved orbit showed that, along with scientific satellites, Cosmos program consisted of unmanned tests of spacecraft designed to carry cosmonauts, lunar and planetary probes that failed to leave earth orbit, unsuccessful Mars probes, and military research and development and observation satellites that accounted for 80% of Cosmos payloads. According to study, Cosmos series through April 1971 had included at least 16 tests of fractional orbital bombardment system (fobs) and 22 tests of experimental spacecraft designed to inspect and destroy other nations’ observation and navigation satellites. Soviet achievements in near future were dependent on success or failure of G booster (in Saturn V class) or similar booster. Studies of moon with Luna series spacecraft would continue, perhaps with spacecraft launched by advanced booster carrying both rovers and sample returners. Planetary program would continue, probably with flyby mission to Jupiter and landing mission to Mars. Dr. Sheldon stressed that “the Soviet program is not a sham. It may be exploited for political purposes, but it is real and it is pursued in earnest.” (Text)
Physicists were studying possibility that magnetic substorm was created by experiment conducted by Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory and Univ. of Alaska Geophysical Institute. Experiment attempted to trace line in earth’s magnetic field from pole to pole by injecting barium ions into upper atmosphere by rocket. Launch of Sandhawk Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flat near Fairbanks, Alaska, March 6 had caused unusual one-hour auroral display, accompanied by sudden appearance of very-low-frequency (vlf) radio signals, 17 min after barium injection. (Av Wk, 5/15/72, 11; Los Alamos pio)
U.S.S.R., “in apparent attempt to display restraint,” had “suspended space maneuvers with its fearsome SS-9 Scarp rocket,” Washington Post reported. The United Nations “international space log shows that the Soviet Union has desisted from the SS-9 maneuvers in space so far this year, in contrast to earlier years.” Since U.S. had not flight-tested any space systems comparable to U.S.S.R.’s fractional orbital bombardment system (fobs), “the Russians might have reasoned it would have been impolite of them to stage maneuvers this year when the salt [Strategic Arms Limitation Talks] agreement appeared in reach.” (Wilson, W Post, 1/6/12, A2) Communique on results of July 6-18 meetings was signed by msc Director, Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., July 17. Agreements had been reached on launching Soyuz before Apollo, acceptable launch windows, necessary communications equipment, and development of technical requirements for compatible docking system. Areas for further study included possible emergency extravehicular activity, possible adjustment of cabin pressures, use of TV as docking aid, attitude control after docking, specific launch date, and development of public information plan that considered obligations and practices of both countries. [See also press conferences July 13 and 17.] Senior members of Soviet delegation were Chairman Boris N. Petrov of Soviet Intercosmos Council and Konstantin D. Bushuyev, astp Director for U.S.S.R. NASA delegation was headed by Dr. Kraft and Glynn S. Lunney, astp Director, (nasa Release 72-134; Marshall Star, 7/12/72, 1; Text) July 7:	Air Force launched two unidentified satellites from Vandenberg Air Force Base by single Titan HID booster. First satellite entered orbit with 257-km (160-mi) apogee, 173-km (108-mi) perigee, 88.7-min period, and 96.8° inclination and reentered Sept. 13. Second entered orbit with 501-km (311-mi) apogee, 499-km (310-mi) perigee, 94.5-min period, and 96.1° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 7/13/72, 57; 7/18/72, 78)
NASA issued requests for proposals to industry for development of orbiter vehicle and systems integration for space shuttle orbiter’s external propellant tank, solid-fueled rocket booster, orbiter main engine, and orbiter air-breathing engine [see March 15]. (nasa Space Shuttle Fact Sheet, 5/72)
Second press briefing on U.S.-U.S.S.R. space cooperation agreement was held at NASA Hq., following White House briefing. Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said: “This is not the culmination but a very major milestone in the long period of negotiations with the Soviet Union on space cooperation. And in my judgment this is at least one of the most important missions that NASA has and that is to promote international cooperation.” Mission was, as well, “an important part of the new program of NASA for the 70’s.” Rendezvous and docking mission could be accomplished in context of constant NASA budget. “This constant budget . . . and the programs . . . now planned, the Skylab, the shuttle and now the international rendezvous and docking mission show I think the kind of program that we envision for the rest of this decade.” Program had congressional support “at least partially because of the strong international flavor that NASA has in manned space.” Dr. Fletcher said crew for joint mission had not yet been selected. Assistant Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale Myers and Glynn S. Lunney, Assistant to Apollo Program Manager, explained details of plans in response to press questions. (Transcript)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flat Rocket Range, Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Rice Univ. auroral fields and particles experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Air Force launched unidentified satellite by Titan IIIB-Agena booster from Vandenberg Air Force Base into orbit with 391-km (243-mi) apogee, 138-km (86-mi) perigee, 90.0-min period, and 110.5° inclination. Satellite reentered Jan. 23, 1973. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 12/26/72, 245; gsfc SSR, 1/31/73)
Los Angeles Times editorial commented on Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite (launched July 23): “erts gives every sign of being an achievement of enormous potential. It is a demonstration of the value of the U.S. space program in applying technology both to extending the frontiers of knowledge, and in contributing to the improvement of life on earth.” {LA Times, 7/25/72) July 26:	NASA selected North American Rockwell Corp. (NR) Space Div. for negotiation of six-year, $2.6-billion cost-plus-fixed-and-award-fee contract as prime contractor to begin developing space shuttle orbiter. Increment covering first two years was $540 million. NR—selected from four firms submitting proposals—would be responsible for design, development, and production of orbiter vehicle and for integration of all shuttle elements. Shuttle main engine was being developed by NR Rocketdyne Div. under earlier contract. External tank and solid-fueled rocket boosters would be procured by NASA after system engineering for orbiter had progressed sufficiently. Shuttle, first reusable space vehicle, would have delta-winged, airplane-like orbiter able to land on conventional runways. It would have cargo compartment 18 m (60 ft) long and 4.5 m (15 ft) in diameter and would be able to place 29 500 kg (65 000 lbs) into 185-km (115mi) due-east orbit. Reusable solid-propellant booster rockets and orbiter high-pressure, liquid-oxygen and liquid-hydrogen main engines would boost orbiter into space and booster rockets would detach at 40-km (25-mi) altitude and splash down in ocean for recovery and reuse. Orbiter, under own power, would continue into low earth orbit. Shuttle would be able to place satellites in orbit, return satellites from orbit, permit in-orbit repair and servicing of satellites, deliver propulsive stages and satellites to low earth orbit, and make short-duration science and applications missions with self-contained experiments in low earth orbit. Shuttle development schedule called for horizontal test flights beginning in 1976 and manned orbital test flights beginning in 1978, with complete system operational by 1980. Employment generated by orbiter development and shuttle integration was expected to reach 15 000 by 1975-1976 and then would gradually decrease, (nasa Release 72153)
NASA launched Astrobee F sounding rocket from Wallops Station, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center performance test payload. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, had been assigned additional responsibilities as Program Director of Apollo Soyuz Test Project (astp), NASA announced. Dr. Petrone would have overall responsibility for direction and management of U.S. portion of joint earth-orbital mission with U.S.S.R. (NASA Release 72-174)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flat Rocket Range, Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Rice Univ. auroral particles experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. solar physics experiment. Docket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Dr. John Teegan, Chief of Launch Site Medical Operations at Kennedy Space Center, announced his resignation to press at Cape Kennedy. Dr. Teegan, who would return to private practice, said he had resigned because his patients—astronauts-—were too healthy. Astronauts were unusually healthy because they were in excellent physical condition when they were chosen and made it a point to stay that way. “I was educated to care for people who were ill and I want to get my feet wet again in clinical medicine. This chapter in space history was a very valuable experience that few people have had the opportunity to experience.” (Reuters, B Sun, 2/13/72; ksc pao) February 14^-25: U.S.S.R. launched Luna 20 unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur at 8:28 am local time (10:28 pm est Feb. 13). Tass said objective of mission was “further exploration of the moon and near lunar space.” On Feb. 18 Luna 20 entered near-circular lunar orbit with 100-km (62-mi) altitude, 1-hr 58-min period, and 65° inclination. Engine firing on Feb. 19 placed spacecraft in elliptical orbit with 100-km (62-mi) apolune and 21-km (13-mi) perilune. Main retroengine burn for 267 sec on Feb. 21 thrust spacecraft toward moon and Luna 20 free-fell to 760-m (2490-ft) altitude. Spacecraft was then guided by braking rocket to softlanding northeast of moon’s Sea of Fertility at 12:19 am Bay-konur time Feb. 22 (2:19 pm est Feb. 21). Landing coordinates were 3° 32' north latitude and 56° 33' east longitude. Spacecraft began transmitting radio signals and conducting experiments. After drilling lunar rock, collecting lunar samples, photographing lunar surface, and performing other undisclosed experiments, Luna 20 lifted off moon at 3:58 am Baykonur time Feb. 23 ( 5:58 pm est Feb. 22), after 27 hrs 39 min on lunar surface. Tass said samples had been obtained with earth-operated, percussion-rotary drill designed to handle hard and loose rock samples simultaneously. Luna 20 reentered atmosphere Feb. 25 and parachuted to landing at 12:12 am Feb. 25 Baykonur time (2:12 pm est Feb. 24) 40 km (24 mi) northwest of Djezkazgan, Kazakhstan, after 11-day 16-hr mission. Capsule containing lunar samples was recovered despite “extremely unfavorable weather conditions—strong wind, blizzard, and low clouds.” Luna 20 was second unmanned spacecraft to land on moon and return to earth with lunar samples. First had been U.S.S.R.’s Luna 16 (Sept. 12-24, 1970). Luna 17 had landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970, and had released Lunokhod 1 lunar rover. Luna 18 (launched Sept. 2, 1971) had crashlanded on moon Sept. 11, 1971, and Luna 19 (launched Sept. 28, 1971) was still in lunar orbit on photography and mapping mission. (Tass, FBis-Sov, 2/14/72, LI; 2/22-24/72, LI; 2/28/72, LI; SBD, 2/15/72, 226)
Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Arenosillo, Spain, carried Spanish and Goddard Space Flight Center experiments to 85-km (52.8-mi) altitude to study ion composition of D- and E-regions of ionosphere. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily except for short tone-ranging data dropout which was not expected to affect scientific results. Good data were obtained. Launch was made under April 21, 1972, modification of July 30, 1970, Memorandum of Agreement between NASA and Comision Nacional de Investigacion del Espacio (conie) for cooperative sounding rocket project to study ionosphere, (nasa Rpt srl)
Single-stage Nike rocket, carrying 47.2-kg (104-lb) payload, was launched by nasa from Wallops Station to 11 600-m (38 000-ft) altitude to obtain precise records of vibrations and accelerations caused by small variations in burning process of solid-fueled rocket motor. Flight data would be compared with similar measurements made in ground vibration tests and captive firings and was expected to provide improved knowledge of effects of rocket-motor burning on payload dynamics for more efficient payload design. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and payload was recovered as planned. (WS Release 72-2; WS PAo)
NASA officials testified before Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1973 NASA authorization hearings. Roy P. Jackson, NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology, presented program request with increased emphasis on technology for “solving urgent domestic civil air transportation problems of noise and congestion,” continuing concern for “rapidly growing foreign competition” to U.S. leadership in world aircraft markets, greater attention to “countering the erosion of this Nation’s preeminence in military aeronautics,” phase-over in space shuttle technology from exploratory activities to development support, continuing focus on space technology for advanced earth-orbit systems and outer planet exploration, change in emphasis from development of large nuclear rocket to continuing the technology base for nuclear propulsion, with focus on small high-energy system. Budget also included continuing reduction of research staff and emphasis on upgrading existing facilities, with no new facilities requested. In aeronautics, advanced system studies in FY 1971 and FY 1972 had examined application to new subsonic and sonic aircraft designs of projected advances in aerodynamics, structures, propulsion, controls, and avionics; identified technology advances offering greatest economic and competitive position benefits; and defined actions to “bring the advanced technologies to a state of readiness for industry utilization by the late 1970s.” Follow-on studies would be conducted in FY 1973 on “additional noise alleviation possibilities and on terminal compatibility.” Application of supercritical aerodynamics and configuration treatment, engine noise and emission suppression techniques, composite structures, and use of active control systems “were shown to result in a quieter, safer, more economical subsonic/sonic transport having greater productivity than the current wide-body jet transports.” In FY 1973 “aerodynamics effort will concentrate on refinements of supercritical wing and related configuration treatment for transport concepts capable of increased flight efficiency.” David S. Gabriel, Manager of aec-nasa Space Nuclear Systems Office, testified on office’s on-going work after termination of nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application (nerva) program June 30, 1972: “To reach the outer planets in reasonably short trip times during the 1980’s requires more advanced propulsion systems than are currently available. Among the candidate propulsion systems for these missions is a small, approximately 15,000-pound-thrust [66 720-newton-thrust] nuclear rocket engine, more suited to these unmanned outer planet missions than the large NERVA engine. Other candidates include high-performance chemical rockets and solar-and-nuclear-electric propulsion. “For the balance of this fiscal year and during the next, we will compare . . . candidate propulsion systems for a variety of future potential missions of the 1980’s and 1990’s including the outer planet exploration missions.” (Transcript)
Japanese space budget for FY 1973 was approved. Of 24 080 million yen ($80 million), Y19 810 million ($66 million) was for further development of N rocket and satellites by Science and Technology Agency for use by National Space Development Agency. FY 1972 space budget had been Y8630 ($28 million). (SF, 4/72, 121)	'
Smithsonian Institution displayed collection of 60 works by astronomical artist Chesley Bonestell in Aerospace Art Hall of Arts and Industries Building. Artist had been commissioned by Collier’s magazine in 1952 to illustrate series of articles by rocket expert Dr. Wernher von Braun, later NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, and by rocket historian Willy Ley. Articles had resulted in Viking Press books: Conquest of Space, Conquest of the Moon, and Exploration of Mars. Smithsonian exhibition was coincidental with American Museum showing of Bone-stell’s works in New York [see May 16]. (Smithsonian Release; Smithsonian Pio) June 1:	President Nixon returned from state visits to Austria, U.S.S.R., Iran, and Poland and reported to Congress on trip. Commenting on agreements signed with U.S.S.R. during May 22-29 Moscow summit meetings, he said: “Recognizing that the quest for useful knowledge transcends differences between ideologies and social systems, we have agreed to expand United States-Soviet cooperation in many areas of science and technology. “We have joined in plans for an exciting new adventure ... in the cooperative exploration of space, which will begin—subject to Congressional approval of funding—with a joint orbital mission of an Apollo vehicle and a Soviet spacecraft in 1975.” President asked for “fullest scrutiny” of antiballistic missile treaty signed May 26, “because we can undertake agreements as important as these only on a basis of full partnership between the executive and legislative branches of our Government.” {PD, 6/5/72, 975-81)
Engine concepts for space applications were described in Air University Review. Government and industry had spent more than $100 million on high-pressure-engine technology since 1961. Air Force XLR-129 engine program had provided strong technical base for space shuttle engine. Shuttle’s orbiter stage would use advanced-concept staged combustion engine “very similar to that of a turbojet equipped with an afterburner; . . . there are two different stages of combustion.” While first turbojet combustion occurred in main chamber, shuttle engine’s first burning occurred in gas generator or preburner. Preferred engine concept for future spacecraft would be “single engine that could operate as a rocket, a ramjet, a scramjet, and a turbofan.” At liftoff, rocket would be firing and “turbofan might also be operating to supply additional air to improve the performance of the rocket. After the vehicle is moving at a greater speed, the ramjet would start operating, and the turbofan would be removed from the airstream. The pure rocket would continue to operate briefly to aid the ramjet. As the vehicle reaches the outer fringes of the atmosphere, the inlets would be closed, and the pure rocket would be used alone for reaching, maneuvering in, and leaving orbit. To return to base after re-entry into the atmosphere, the ramjet and/or the turbofan might be used separately or they might be used like an afterburning turbofan.” To improve spacecraft performance further, “we would like to get away from having to carry an oxidizer for the rocket portion of the flight.” Future space engines would “mate the tremendous energy available from nuclear explosions with the ability of a rocket to operate at high thrust levels.” Performance of nuclear rocket “more than makes up for its being heavier than a normal rocket.” Nuclear rocket’s specific impulse was about twice that of “even the best chemical rocket.” Nuclear stage also would be useful for seeding space with unmanned applications satellites. (Holder, Siuru, Air IJniv Rev, 9/72)
NASA launched two sounding rockets. Nike-Tomahawk was launched from Poker Flat Rocket Range, Fairbanks, Alaska, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center fields and neutral winds experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. Nike-Tomahawk was launched from Wallops Station, carrying Univ. of New Hampshire energetic particle experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Scientific requirements were not satisfied. (SR list)
New York Times editorial commented on March 19 visit of its science writer John N. Wilford to U.S.S.R.’s Star City, home of cosmonauts. Visit “implied a major change in Soviet policy toward space cooperation. No Western journalist had previously been permitted inside this key center of Soviet manned space activities.” Wilford’s report had suggested U.S.S.R. might be willing to explore moon jointly with U.S. “If so, the idea catches the United States at an embarrassing point in development of its space program. After the scheduled flights of Apollos 16 and 17 . . . this country plans to focus most of its future activity in space on earth-orbiting space stations and development of a space shuttle.” (NYT, 3/23/72) March 24:	Air Force launched unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 12:45 pm pst by Thor-Burner II booster. Orbital parameters: 884-km (549-mi) apogee, 802-km (498-mi) perigee, 101.7min period, and 98.7° inclination. (Pres Rpt 73; SBD, 3/29/72, 156)
Sprint antiballistic missile launched by Dept, of Defense from Kwajalein Atoll and guided by missile site radar on Meek Island successfully intercepted Minuteman warhead over Pacific. Test was 24th in series to check out Safeguard antiballistic missile components, (upi, NYT, 3/19/72, 15) March 17:	Air Force launched unidentified reconnaissance satellite on Titan IIIB-Agena booster from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 9:00 am pst. Orbital parameters: 396-km (246-mi) apogee, 141-km (88-mi) perigee, 89.8-min period, and 110.9° inclination. Satellite reentered April 11. (Pres Rpt 73; Sov Aero, 3/27/72, 91; Av Wk, 3/27/72, 17)
l/g August Schomburg (usa, Ret.), former Commandant of Industrial College of the Armed Forces and former Commander of Ordnance Missile Command at Redstone Arsenal, died at age 63. He had served as consultant to NASA Administrator 1967-1970. (W Post, 1/16/72, Dll) January 15:	Pioneer-F spacecraft to probe Jupiter’s environmental and atmospheric characteristics arrived at Kennedy Space Center to begin final checkout before Feb. 27 launch. Pioneer-F 3rd stage had been erected Jan. 7 and overall vehicle interface test had been conducted Jan. 10. Pioneer-F would mark first use of Atlas-Centaur booster in Pioneer program and first use of Atlas-Centaur with 3rd stage— TE-M-364r^l solid-propellant engine with 66 750-newton (15 000-lb) thrust, (ksc Release 7-72; NASA Release 72-25)
Plans for illuminating night launch of Apollo 17, scheduled for 9:53 pm EST Dec. 6, were released by NASA for photographic fans. Spacecraft would be surrounded on launch pad by 72, 20-kw xenon searchlights and 2, 60-kw xenon searchlight banks that would provide 225 foot-candles of light. Light from Saturn V lst-stage booster engines would not increase illumination until liftoff, when some 7500 foot-candles emitted and reflected would create almost daylight exposure. Searchlight illumination for inflight coverage would not be available beyond first 18 m (60 ft) of flight, (nasa Release 72-208)
Walter S. Sullivan, New York Times science editor, commented in article on conclusion of Apollo program as Apollo 17, final mission launched Dec. 7, neared lunar orbit insertion: “In the spaceflight community one senses sadness at the finality of this mission, but resignation to the inevitable, rather than bitterness. The scientists are already so glutted with data and specimens that some say it will take years of study to formulate the questions that should be asked by experiments on future landings, be they manned or unmanned.” (NYT, 12/10/72)
Catholic Review article by Frank Moriss criticized lack of religious reference on Pioneer 10 plaque: Plaque summarized “our place in the universe, the ingenuity of our escape from our own planet’s gravity, the physical nature of man and woman.” Unrevealed was “that people sending that probe for the most part acknowledge a Divinity. ... It includes everything but God, which is to say it includes only that which is irrelevant in the long run.” (Catholic Review, 3/10/72) March 11—24:	NASA launched European Space Research Organization’s TD-1A (Thor-Delta 1A) astronomical observatory satellite from Western Test Range at 5:55 pm pst (8:55 pm est) by long-tank, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. TD-1A entered sun-synchronous orbit with 539-km (334.9-mi) apogee, 531-km (329.9-mi) perigee, 95.3-min period, and 97.6° inclination. NASA objective was to place spacecraft in earth orbit that would permit successful achievement of scientific objectives and to provide tracking and telemetry support. By March 24 all experiments had been turned on and mission was adjudged successful by NASA. Box-shaped, 472-kg (1038-lb) spacecraft carried seven experiments from six European universities and research organizations to study high-energy emissions from stellar and galactic sources and sun that were not visible to ground-based observatories. TD-1A was first European-built spacecraft with three-axis stabilization system, which would permit directional viewing by experiments and permit solar panels to point at sun for electrical power to operate spacecraft. TD—1A was sixth scientific spacecraft launched by NASA for ESRO in program that began with orbiting of Iris 1 May 16, 1968. Most recent launch in program had been Heos 2 launched Jan. 31. esro would reimburse NASA for Thor-Delta booster, launch, and launch-support services. Spacecraft would be controlled from European Space Operations Center (esoc) and tracked by European Space Tracking (estrak) stations with NASA support, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72—60; esro pio)
First launch of British Skylark sounding rocket to test techniques for high-altitude photography of earth resources was made from Woomera, Australia. Primary objectives were to test stabilization control system and remote sensing hardware. Advantages over conventional methods of high-altitude photography were that single frame was equivalent to 650 frames photographed from 15 000 m (50 000 ft), making assembly of photographic mosaics easier and more accurate, and that entire area could be photographed under identical conditions. Project was developed by United Kingdom’s Dept, of Trade and Industry to assess mineral, agricultural, and other resources inexpensively. (SF, 8/72, 282-286)
Newspaper editorials commented on decision to develop space shuttle. Kansas City Star:	“The next great step in space for the United States seems assured. President Nixon has pressed the go-ahead button and apparently it will be largely a matter of adequate funding by Congress. In view of the record of space accomplishments, there is not much doubt that the planned space shuttle program will be fruitful both from the standpoint of technological success and long-range scientific benefits.” (KC Star, 1/7/72)	" St. Louis Globe-Democrat:	“There are so many potentialities for the shuttle that it is bard to envision all of them. But there is no doubt that if it is completed space travel for the average citizen may become a distinct possibility in the 1980s.” (St Louis G-D, 1/7/72) Christian Science Monitor said “space discovery versus human needs argument should not be seen as an either/or issue. This is so even leaving aside the jobs creation or economic return arguments.” Monitor believed that “a space shuttle program, because it is so practically linked to fulfilling man’s age-old vision of mastering the heavens, will unleash more constructive human energy than it will consume. And this excess will make meeting earthside demands the easier.” (CSM, 1/7/72) Atlanta Journal Constitution:	“The program . . . has the almost immediate benefit of employing some 50,000 highly trained aerospace workers who have faced a dismal job picture as the Apollo program has phased out. And, again, the proposal demonstrates that imagination and vision and a willingness to dare are still part of the American way of doing things.” (Atlanta JC, 1/7/72) Milwaukee Journal:	“The shuttle offers the opportunity to make space flight fairly routine, of taking large numbers of people and supplies in and out of space, of manning earth resource space stations continuously, of monitoring and repairing communications and resource satellites. It is a worthwhile program.” (MJ, 1/7/72) Los Angeles Times said military aspect of space shuttle needed clarification. “Most taxpayers welcomed the decision to end the wasteful competition between NASA and the Air Force on the shuttle and orbiting space station.” NASA had not explained how shuttle’s civil and military functions would be kept separate. “No American wants the Soviet Union to tip the balance of power with its own space program. But it might help avert a new confrontation if the military applications were enumerated along with a statement of whether the American government thinks shuttles are bound by the international agreement barring nuclear weapons from outer space.” (LA Times, 1/7/72) Seattle Times:	“The history of warfare shows that victory usually goes to the one who occupies the high ground. Near-earth space is the ‘high ground’ of modern military planning. In approving a full go-ahead for . . . space shuttle program, President Nixon this week served notice that this nation intends to occupy the ‘high ground.’ ” (Seattle Times, 1/7/72)
nasa launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Univ. of Chicago solar physics experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily but scientific objectives were not met. (SR list)
Bridgeport (Conn.) Post commented on March 1 launch of Air Force reconnaissance satellite. Satellite “is intended to monitor rocket tests of the Soviet Union and Communist China. And it is to remind us all not to get so carried away in the new approaches to the two Communist giants that we will let down our guard against them. . . . informed guesses are that the new spy satellite’s major job is to monitor submarine launching missiles. In its high position, the sensors would be able to observe one third of the globe. Another outpost would complete surveillance of the whole globe.” Despite President Nixon’s visit to China and prospective visit to Soviet Union “spy satellites are needed precautions.” (Bridgeport Post, 3/12/72, 23)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of $1 323 565 contract to Air Products and Chemicals, Inc., to provide liquid hydrogen to East Coast space program users from June 1, 1972, through March 31, 1973. Liquid hydrogen would be distributed to Government agencies and contractors in Saturn V booster and space shuttle activities. Under interagency agreement, NASA contracted for all liquid hydrogen used by NASA and Dept, of Defense in eastern U.S. (msfc Release 72-69)
Newspaper editorials continued comment on Apollo 16 mission, as astronauts headed back to earth from lunar surface. Christian Science Monitor commented on efficiency with which emergencies had been handled: “We very much appreciate the fine job the Apollo 16 crew has done. Nevertheless, for us, the star of the mission has been the impersonal intelligence expressed throughout the Apollo program. This is what underlies Apollo 16’s success and has added another important reference point to our growing knowledge of the moon.” (CSM, 4/25/72) Chicago Daily News: “This expedition, the fifth and next to last of the moon landings, revealed growing confidence and ability to improvise, and an increasing breadth of engineering genius that will carry over into many Earthbound projects. The advance in ‘pure science’—mainly in knowledge as to how the universe is put together—• is impossible to estimate. Somewhere down the line, whatever is learned on the moon trips should add to man’s ability to cope with his environment. Once more, gratitude is due to the courageous astronauts . . . who carried out their assignment so superbly.” (C Daily News, 4/25/72)
Newspaper editorials commented on successful launch of Apollo 17: New York Times: “It is still a breathtaking concept, though five teams of astronauts have successfully accomplished similar feats since Apollo 11 made its historic breakthrough in July 1969. The nearcatastrophe which forced abortion of the Apollo 13 mission provides a useful reminder of the dangers involved despite all the exquisitely painstaking care taken before blast-off.” Astronauts had “special qualities which set them apart. Some day . . . taking a rocket to the moon will be as common as taking a plane to London is today. But the Apollo pioneers who have blazed the way had to have a special degree of competence and courage to embark on this extraordinary journey.” {NYT, 12/7/72)
Langley Research Center awarded 32%-mo, $1 717 200 costplusfixedfee contract to United Aircraft Corp. United Technology Center (utc) Div. to demonstrate technology of high-performance hybrid rocket system, utc would build and test-fire seven rockets about 90 cm (36 in) in diameter and 2.6 m (101.5 in) long with 48 930-newton (11 000-lb) thrust, (nasa Release 72-127)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Univ. of Colorado aeronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Newspaper editorials commented on U.S. space program. Baltimore Sun on post-Apollo space program: “While it is tempting to contemplate what improvements could be financed here on earth from the billions being spent in space, it is well to bear several factors in mind. One is the decline in space spending from a $5.25 billion peak in 1965 to the present plateau of $3.35 billion a year. Another is the Nixon administration’s decision to proceed cautiously on the rush-rush manned Mars expedition advocated by Vice President Agriew three years ago. Still another is the American-Soviet agreement on a rendezvous-and-docking mission for mid-1975, a concept once relegated to political science fiction. Finally, there is the very real prospect that experiments and programs conducted from space shuttles will be of use in improving the environment on earth. More accurate weather forecasting, air pollution studies, better communications—these are some of the more obvious opportunities. These trends surely justify reasonable financial support to continue a desired momentum in space technology.” (B Sun, 12/3/72) New York News on last Apollo mission: “The Apollo program is being phased out before its time, a victim of what we consider false economy, and the horizon is barren of any prospect for manned exploration beyond the boundaries of Earth orbit. Even unmanned probes will be few and far between as things look now.” (NY News, 12/3/72)	_ # Chicago Tribune on future space program: Cost of Skylab, Viking, and space shuttle programs would £e far less than amount put into space since 1958. “The national priorities have been reordered and, we believe, properly so. Future space exploration should be a part of, but should not dominate, our national effort to improve the lot of Americans.” (C Trib, 12/3/72) December 4:	Technicians at Kennedy Space Center’s Apollo 17 launch site loaded helium used to pressurize lunar craft’s descent rocket system. Liquid hydrogen and oxygen were pumped into command module fuel cell system, source of spaceship’s electricity and water supply. Countdown, which began Nov. 30, continued on schedule with liftoff scheduled for 9:53 pm est Dec. 6. (Wilford, NYT, 12/5/72, 1)
U.S.S.R. and India began third phase of cooperative meteorological rocket program with launch of 76th M-100 rocket from Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (terls). Rockets launched during third phase would measure atmospheric temperature, density, and pressure. (Delhi Domestic Service, FBis-India, 6/22/72, 01)
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo program day after Apollo 17 astronauts lifted off moon’s surface: “Over the long term the chief product of Apollo is likely to be in man’s consciousness, not only in scientific thinking. Man’s entire perspective on the universe and on his place in it has been radically changed. Man evolved on the earth, but he is no longer chained to it. Man has walked on another planet and returned to tell the tale. The impact on the future must be enormous. Yesterday’s farewell to the moon was certainly not a farewell to space.” (NYT, 12/15/72, 46)	_	_
Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1971 was presented to l/g Samuel C. Phillips (usaf) for his achievements as Commander of Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization (samso). Trophy was awarded annually by National Geographic Society to Air Force member who made most outstanding contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace. Gen. Phillips had been Apollo Program Director in NASA and was currently Director of National Security Agency, (msc Release 72—197)
International aspects of future space programs were discussed by Crosby S. Noyes in Washington Evening Star and Daily News column. Scientific and engineering aspects of 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz mission were “minimal compared to the psychological switch which the effort represents.” Project had “most profound political implications for the future.” U.S.S.R. participation in space shuttle development might raise “touchy questions” because of “obvious military aspects of the program.” In distant future efforts, including possible manned flights to other planets, “it is . . . evident that international cooperation on a much wider scale will be essential. What the Apollo program has demonstrated is that manned space flight is an impractical proposition for any single nation to undertake. Which may turn out to be the most valuable discovery of all.” (W Star & News, 12/5/72) December 6:	NASA’s M2-F3 lifting body, piloted by Cecil Powell, completed 25th flight from Flight Research Center after air-launch from B-52 aircraft. Objectives of flight were to evaluate command augmentation system; to ohtain stability and control data at mach 1.1, mach 0.8, and mach 0.7; and to check out pitch-reaction augmentation system. All objectives were achieved. M2-F3 reached 19 800-m (65 000-ft) altitude and mach 1.3. (nasa proj off)
NASA anounced retirement of Dr. Wernher von Braun, Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, effective July 1 when he would become Corporate Vice President for Engineering and Development at Fairchild Industries. Dr. von Braun had joined NASA in 1960 when Army Ballistic Missile Agency development team which he headed was transferred to NASA and formed nucleus of Marshall Space Flight Center. Born in Germany, Dr. von Braun became director of German army portion of Peenemuende Rocket Center. Near end of World War II he led group of scientists to West, surrendering to allies. In 1945 he went to U.S. under contract to U.S. Army to direct high-altitude firings of V—2 long-range ballistic missile at White Sands Missile Range. As Director of Development Operations Div. of abma, Dr. von Braun led development of Pershing Army missile and Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missile, whose nosecone reentry test vehicle Jupiter-C was used to launch first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1 (Jan. 31, 1958). Dr. von Braun was msfc Director from July 1960 to February 1970, when he assumed his current position. He had received numerous awards and honors, including Dept, of Defense Distinguished Civilian Service Award, Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, British Interplanetary Society Gold Medal, Herman Oberth Award, NASA Medal for Outstanding Leadership, Galabert International Astronautical Prize, NASA Distinguished Service Medal, American Society of Mechanical Engineers Man of the Year Award, and Associated Press Man of the Year in Science Award. Dr. von Braun said he would leave NASA “with a deep feeling of gratitude for the wonderful and unique opportunities the agency has given me during the last 12 years . . . [and] with the knowledge that NASA has enough well thought out plans to keep it moving ahead for many years to come.” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said Dr. von Braun’s retirement was “a source of regret to all of us. ... For more than a quarter of a century, he has served the United States as a leader in space rocket development. His efforts first put the United States in space” with Explorer 1 and as director of msfc “he directed the development of the world’s most powerful rocket, the Saturn V. All of us at NASA will miss the daily stimulation of his presence, but we are confident that we will continue to have the benefit of his inspiration and counsel in the continuing exploration and use of space.” (nasa Release 72—113; NASA biographical data)
Tenth anniversary of start of Saturn V project at Marshall Space Flight Center. Since inauguration of Advanced Saturn development Jan. 25, 1962, Saturn V launch vehicles had been used successfully to launch eight manned space flights. Apollo 16 Saturn V booster would be 26th Saturn launch vehicle flown from Kennedy Space Center since firing of first Saturn I Oct. 27, 1961. (msfc Release 72-3)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Poker Flat Rocket Range, Alaska, carrying Univ. of Minnesota auroral studies experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily, but scientific objectives were not met. (SR list)
Skylab statistics were released by NASA. Spacecraft, to be launched by two-stage Saturn V rocket in spring 1973, would contain 370 cu m (13 000 cu ft) of working and living space. More than 13 000 individual items weighing total of 5000 kg (11 000 lbs) for long-duration space mission would be stowed, including 910 kg (2000 lbs) of food, more than 2700 kg (6000 lbs) of water, 60 changes of astronaut jackets and shirts and trousers, 210 pairs of shorts, 30 constant-wear garments, 15 pairs of boots and gloves, 55 bars of soap, 96 kg (210 lbs) of towels, 1800 urine and fecal bags, 156 rolls of teleprint paper, 104 film magazines, medical kit, 108 pens and pencils, and vacuum cleaner. (nasa Special Release)
European Sounding Rocket Range (esrange) in Kiruna, Sweden, was handed over officially by European Space Research Organization to Swedish authorities. Ownership had been transferred to Sweden following December decision by esro Council to abandon sounding rocket activities. (SR, 9/72)
Soviet newspaper Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya had published article on “curious stories” from Cape Kennedy, Philadelphia Sunday Bulletin reported. Article had said angry alligator had tripped alarm system protecting rocket at launch site few seconds before launch; Polaris rocket had exploded about 0.8 km (0.5 mi) from launch site causing bush fire that frightened poisonous snakes into buildings; and woodpecker near electronic equipment had caused launch delay. (P Bull, 6/25/72)	'
Newspaper editorials commented on successful conclusion of Apollo 17. New York Times:	“Astronauts Cernan, Schmitt and Evans returned safely to earth yesterday in a splashdown that miarked the brilliantly successful end of one of the most successful series of scientific experiments in history. Less than four years ago men had never been even in the vicinity of the moon. Now about two dozen men have orbited the satellite, and a dozen have walked and ridden on its surface. Hundreds of pounds of lunar rock and soil are now ... on earth, available for study, while instruments planted on the moon give daily reports of lunar conditions, and will do so for years. The moon is now a distant but accessible outpost of earth, better known now than the North Pole was before Admiral [Robert E.] Peary discovered it in 1909. Project Apollo may be ended, but man’s interest in the moon is still very much alive.” (NYT, 12/20/72, 42) Baltimore Sun: “No doubt the success of the $25 billion Apollo program will encourage astronauts of the future to hurtle far past the moon to the solar planets, and perhaps beyond. But the immediate significance of Apollo is much closer to home. We are today much more aware of the fragility of our spaceship earth and of the unique chance mixture of elements that sustain life as we know it. If this vision of 'a rather small but infinitely precious planet can inspire us to take better care of it, Apollo will have produced its greatest dividend.” (B Sun, 12/20/72, A12) Pittsburgh Press:	Apollo program demonstrated “that the U.S. is still a will-do, can-do nation rather than a won’t-do, can’t-do has-been. In the days ahead we must hold fast to this national legacy of pioneering—and continue to nurture among our people the spirit of adventure, the quest for knowledge, the drive to explore the unknown, whether it be in the vast vacuum of space or in the tiny test tube of a laboratory. For therein lies our future, and the future of all mankind.” (Pittsburgh Press, 12/20/72) St. Louis Post-Dispatch:	“So let Apollo’s epitaph be that the program was magnificent but that it is also done. The evils that Apollo was never intended to cure remain and deserve—as they have all along—attention. If money is to be spent on further space projects such as the shuttle and the skylab, let Congress insist first that funds go where they are needed most. And that, as 1972 ends, is not out among the stars but in America. The moon, after all, can wait for its next human visitor. But for the poor, the hungry and the dispossessed, time wasted is misery compounded. The measure of our greatness will be found in how quickly the nation turns to them.” (St. Louis P—D, 12/20/72) Washington Post:	At outset of Apollo program “we spoke glowingly of the challenge but we were principally in a ‘race’—one that the cynical conventional wisdom of the time had it we would lose.” Apollo had ended “with the prospect of the joint Apollo-Soyuz testing mission. Somewhere in all this . . . mixed in with the great political trends and the particular political accidents that have contributed to the altered relations among the world’s super powers, the technology of Apollo itself played a part. You do not have to be a sentimentalist or a hopeless romantic to acknowledge that manned space flight in general and the successful moon landings in particular have had at least a subliminally humbling and unifying impact upon people, that the first astronauts to land on the moon were seen to be proxies for humankind, that their bravery and their achievement were regarded as human triumphs and that the first photographs of earth taken from the moon conveyed a unique and invaluable sense of planetary vulnerability and openness.” (W Post, 12/20/72) Detroit News:	“Today we know that the dream was not an impossible dream. And there will be more dreams to come and new worlds to conquer, all of which is, in essence, the true purpose of civilization, provided all men share the knowledge acquired and thus reap the harvest of benefits.” (D News, 12/20/72) Chicago Tribune:	“Welcome home. . . . The trail you helped to blaze will be used again some day.” (C Trib, 12/20/72)
Four-stage Javelin sounding rocket, launched hy NASA from Wallops Station, carried 5.9-kg (130-lb) National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and Goddard Space Flight Center payload to 852-km (529.4mi) altitude to study upper atmosphere. Onboard instruments measured ion composition and concentration and solar-wind neutral hydrogen atoms during 16%-min flight. Data would be correlated with ground observations. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily. (WS Release 72-1)
Apollo 17 astronauts flew proficiency runs in NASA T-38 jet aircraft from Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., while at Kennedy Space Center five mice were selected to fly on mission experiment. Mice had been selected from 40 small rodents brought from California desert as candidates for mouse-to-the-moon mission. They would remain in orbit around moon when lunar module descended to surface. (AP, B Sun, 12/3/72) December 2—3:	Chicago Daily News editorial commented on impact of Apollo program: “The costly moon race may have helped distort American thinking in a damaging way. If we can go to the moon, so the slogan ran, we can do anything—wipe out poverty, eradicate racism, guide the economy, cure every evil of society. The euphoria created by the burgeoning space program and the crowning successes of the landing may have contributed to the rise of expectations in other fields beyond any solid hope of their realization. Science and technology can do wonders, but social problems do not yield so readily to electronics or telemetry.” (C Daily News, 12/2-3/72) December 3:	Kennedy Space Center technical writers, members of International Alliance of Theatrical and Stage Employees, agreed to accept 44% pay increase, ending threat of strike that might have delayed Apollo 17 launch [see Nov. 5]. (Auerbach, W Post, 12/4/72, A20)
Newspaper editorials commented on Apollo 16 mission as astronauts conducted second extravehicular activity (eva) on lunar surface. New York Times commented on April 20 decision to continue Apollo 16 mission despite technical problems: “Thursday’s dilemma and its solution were particularly useful in reminding all concerned that there are two kinds of errors that can be made in situations of this type.” There was possibility of mission directors “deciding to continue the journey in the face of a danger that brings disaster. Against that is the alternate risk of being overly cautious and aborting a mission unnecessarily, at huge financial and scientific loss.” It was “delicate dilemma” and “tribute to the Project Apollo leadership and organization that to date these voyages have foundered on neither rock.” (NYT, 4/22/72, 30)	' Cleveland Plain Dealer: “Science has been well served. Mankind has made its giant steps. The pure, fresh enthusiasm of Astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., with his ‘Yahoo!’ and his ‘Fantastic!’ is infectious, but it cannot waken again the public’s wonder over the first moonwalk.” Everyone wished Apollo 16 well but “they have seen this show before. What refinements have been added in this latest version are obscurely technical. The Apollo program is aging, and the American public ... is quite willing to see it come to a close.” (Cl PD, 4/22/72)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket launched by NASA from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Dudley Observatory experiment to 108.0-km (67.1-mi) altitude. Launch was third and last in series to collect and identify cosmic dust particles from Giacobini meteor shower [see Oct. 9]. Rocket and instruments performed satisfactorily and good data were obtained. (nasa Rpt srl)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on use of U-2 aircraft to map storm damage in Chesapeake Bay area [see June 2]. Soviet Embassy had purchased residence in area and was improving property. “We just hope every precaution will be taken with the flood-mapping spy plane, so that the new era of sweetness and light between the United States and the Soviet Union will not come crashing down in flames just because somebody at the CIA wants an aerial closeup of the Russians’ new basketball court.” (W Star, 7/10/72) July 11:	Viking parachute system to lower instruments onto Mars surface in 1976 was damaged during first in series of three high-altitude tests over White Sands Missile Range. Parachute was carried to 5900-m (19 500-ft) altitude by large balloon and then boosted upward to supersonic speed by rocket. Damage had occurred when parachute deployed at 43 300-m (142 000-ft) altitude, where dynamic pressure reached 689.5 newtons per sq m (14.4 psf), instead of in thinner air at 45 300 m (148 500 ft) with 598.5 newtons per sq m (12.5 psf) as planned. Objective was to demonstrate capability of parachute system at highest speed and most severe loading conditions expected at Mars. NASA said parachute would have functioned satisfactorily in actual Mars landing. Since launch was only partially successful, it would be repeated in August. [See July 26, Aug. 13 and 19, Dec. 14.] (nasa Release 72-118; NASA proj off; Today, 7/14/72)
Man’s lunar theories were undergoing major revision because of Apollo 17, Wall Street Journal said. Observations by astronauts of orange soil on moon—clue to past volcanic activity—had promoted review of Apollo 14 color photos. Review had disclosed brown and orange discolorations on dome in crater Langrenus. Orange soil meant there might be other relatively young volcanic features. Discovery could result in major revision of thermal theories of moon. {WSJ, 12/19/72) December 20:	Air Force launched unidentified satellite by Atlas-Agena booster from Eastern Test Range. Satellite entered orbit with 40 728km (25 307-mi) apogee, 31 012-km (19 270-mi) perigee, 1440.4-min period, and 9.7° inclination. (Pres Rpt 1973; Sheldon, Sci Policy Research Div, Library Congress; SBD, 12/26/72, 245)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Univ. of Colorado solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list) June 28:	Intelsat-IV F-5 comsat, launched by NASA for Communications Satellite Corp. June 13, was adjudged successful by NASA. Satellite would reach permanent station over Indian Ocean at 61.4° east longitude in late July, (nasa proj off)
President Rickard Nixon and Premier Alexsey N. Kosygin in Moscow signed the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes. The agreement included a prefect to rendezvous and dock an American and a Soviet spacecraft in earth orbit and exchange astronaut and cosmonaut visits in each other's spacecraft during }975. In the photo of the docked model, the first two segments at lower left are the Soviet Soyuz spacecraft, the cylindrical structure in the center is the docking module, and the Apollo command and service module is at the upper right, such other ways as may he mutually agreed. Joint working groups may be created for the development and implementation of appropriate programs of cooperation. “Article 3. The Parties have agreed to carry out projects for developing compatible rendezvous and docking systems of United States and Soviet manned spacecraft and stations in order to enhance the safety of manned flights in space and to provide the opportunity for conducting joint scientific experiments in the future. It is planned that the first experimental flight to test these systems be conducted during 1975, envisaging the docking of the United States Apollo-type spacecraft and a Soviet Soyuz-type spacecraft with visits of Astronauts in each other’s spacecraft. The implementation of these projects will he carried out on the basis of principles and procedures which will be developed in accordance with the Summary of Results of the Meeting Between Representatives of the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences on Question of Developing Compatible Systems for Rendezvous and Docking of Manned Spacecraft and Space Stations of the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. dated April 6, 1972. “Article 4. The Parties will encourage international efforts to resolve problems of international law in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes with the aim of strengthening the legal order in space and further developing international space law and will cooperate in this field. “Article 5. The Parties may by mutual agreement determine other areas of cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes. “Article 6. This Agreement shall enter into force upon signature and shall remain in force for five years. It may be modified or extended by mutual agreement of the Parties.” Plans for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission were outlined in Fact Sheet issued by White House Press Secretary in Moscow: “Under today’s agreement both sides commit to the development of a complete project schedule, and to meeting that schedule. Arrangements will be made for the necessary contact and understanding between specialists. . . . Training exercises will be conducted in [each] country for the other country’s flight crew and ground operations personnel.” Working groups would meet in July to plan engineering aspects of mission. Persons directly participating in flight operations of test mission would be included in working groups two years before mission. During mission each country’s control center would be expected to control its own craft, but on decisions affecting joint elements of program—including countdown coordination—consultations would occur with other country. “There will be preplanned contingency courses of action. Television down-link will be transmitted to the other country’s control center, and voice communications between vehicle and ground will be available to the other country’s control center on a pre-planned basis.” Flight crews would be trained in other country’s language at least well enough to understand it and act in response during normal and contingency courses of action. Apollo command and service module (csm) and Saturn IB booster would be used. Additional cost of mission to U.S. would be about $250 million. Project Directors would be Glynn S. Lunney, Assistant to Apollo Program Manager for Operations, Experiments, and Government Furnished Equipment at Manned Spacecraft Center, and Soviet Academician K. D. Bushuyev. (Texts)
nasa announced organizational changes within Office of Manned Space Flight to fit post-Apollo/Skylab activities. New Mission and Payload Integration Office had been established, Space Station Task Force became Sortie Lab Task Force, Advanced Missions Office was redesignated Advanced Programs Office, and Apollo Program Office became Apollo/astp Program Office. Functions of Engineering and Operations Directorate in omsf had been reassigned to Advanced Programs Office. Mission and Payload Integration Office would plan and coordinate requirements between payload sponsors and shuttle and sortie lab organizations. Sorties Lab Task Force would manage NASA planning and definition activities to produce manned module for research and applications activities with space shuttle. Current project emphasis was on technical definition and planning for hardware development phase. Parallel definition studies were being made by NASA and European Space Research Organization. If Europe undertook development of sortie lab, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dale D. Myers had said, NASA Task Force would coordinate NASA and esro activities. Philip E. Culbertson was Director of Mission and Payload Integration Office and Acting Director of Advanced Programs Office. Douglas R. Lord was Director of Sortie Lab Task Force, and Dr. Rocco A. Petrone was Director of Apollo/ASTP Project for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission in 1975. (nasa Release 72-232)
Nearly half billion dollars worth of equipment, mostly junk, had been left on lunar surface during six Apollo landings, Chicago Tribune reported. List included rocket engines, electronic devices, golf ball driven by Apollo 14 commander Alan B. Shepard, Jr., feather left by Apollo 15 commander David R. Scott (who had dropped feather and hammer simultaneously during televised extravehicular activity to show that they both fell at same rate in vacuum), and 12 prs of hoots costing $4000 a pair. Boots included those that Apollo 11 Commander Neil A. Armstrong had used to make first footprints on moon. Technological items left on moon included 5 S—IVB rocket engines costing $20 million each, 6 $40-million lunar modules, 3 lunar rovers at $2 million each, TV and photography equipment costing $5 million, 12 backpacks costing $3.6 million, and assorted tools valued at $600 000. Still operative on moon were five nuclear-powered scientific stations costing $25 million each and three laser reflectors costing total $2 million. (Kotulak, C Trib News Service, C Trib, 12/16/72) December 17: Apollo 17 orbital science briefing was held at Manned Spacecraft Center while astronauts continued flight homeward from moon. Data from laser altimeter and S-band gravity experiments were described by Dr. Wilbur R. Wollenhaupt, Chief of msc Experiments Support Section and S-band transponder coinvestigator. Profiles of near-side lunar basins appeared to be flat and depressed with surrounding terrain. Far side appeared mountainous. Copernicus Crater was deficiency region; Sinus Aestuum, Mare Serenitatis, and Mare Crisium were high regions; and Littrow landing site was low. Harold Masursky of U.S. Geological Survey, member of Apollo Orbital Science Photographic Team, said panoramic camera aboard Apollo 17 had “acted better than on the two previous flights [Apollo 15 and 16], and we essentially accomplished the tasks assigned to it.” During Apollo 17 mission “we saw the successful rectification of the 15 and 16 panoramic photographs, and they looked very good indeed. So, hopefully, we will have the rectification of 17 done shortly and put out a series of photomosaics, putting the high-resolution panoramic frames together into what we think will be the best series of maps that we have developed for the Moon.” Correlation of photography with gravity tracking and laser altimetry had produced “a great deal of data” to confirm earlier interpretations from Apollo 15 that lunar front side was low and that “largest area of mare material on the front side is an ocean basin floor, . . . not a result of the impact as the large gravity anomalies indicate in the impact basin.” Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientist Walter E. Brown reported lunar sounder experiment had “behaved about as we expected except that there were a couple of surprises.” Experimenters had expected that “over the Mare, the smooth areas, . . . we’d have a reasonably smooth, well-behaved echo, and over the mountainous area it might bounce around a little bit.” Sounder data had shown “it was fairly smooth over the mountains and it bounced around over the Mare.” Until mission film was returned, “we won’t know . . . just exactly what is going on, but it’s . . . extremely interesting.” Dr. Frank J. Low of Univ. of Arizona and Rice Univ. said scanning radiometer experiment performance “was essentially perfect.” It produced coverage of about one third of the surface area of the moon and made some 100 million independent temperature measurements. With “beautiful Atlas of thermal measurements generated by this magnificent flight,” scientists had “foundation of a new technique for exploration of planetary surfaces without atmospheres.” Johns Hopkins Univ. scientist William E. Fastie said far-ultraviolet spectrometer had “performed perfectly . . . and all of the observations that were intended were accomplished.” Experiment had detected neither major nor minor constituents of atmosphere. “And, pending further analysis, we have . . . identified only one trace constituent of the lunar atmosphere. The immediate conclusion ... is, that the Moon is not outgassing, because the only other possible gases that could be in the lunar atmosphere are neon and argon, and neither of them are the primordial atmosphere of the Moon.” Mood of briefing was conveyed by Apollo orbital science program scientist Floyd I. Roberson: “I think we’ve got a lot of tools in our hands now and we sit up here and we’re all tired and we talk about the results of our experiments and maybe we don’t convey the excitement that’s upon us. But, we really feel that this is a beginning as far as lunar science is concerned, as far as the Apollo data is concerned, and we’re really going to get there now.” (Transcript)
nasa launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center payload to measure spectrum of planetary atmosphere. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director, appraised scientific contributions of Apollo program in testimony during House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight hearings on nasa FY 1973 authorization bill. “. . . Apollo 11 crew crossed over four hundred thousand kilometers (250,000 miles) of space to touch another planetary body. Four teams of astronauts, from Apollos 11, 12, 14 and 15 . . . have now made the epic journey and walked the lunar surface. They have returned some 176 kg (388 lbs.) of lunar rocks and soils for analysis in earth-based laboratories and have established scientific stations on the moon that are continuously transmitting scientific and engineering data back to earth.” Apollo data, with information expected from continued sample analysis and lunar data analysis in the post-Apollo period, “surely will be of practical value to man, even helping him to cope with current environmental problems on earth.” NASA sample analysis program had “required unprecedented advancement in instrumentation and techniques to perform multiple element and isotope analyses with extreme precision on minute amounts of sample.” Improved high-resolution instruments made “detailed investigations of surface features and internal structure of materials.” Other related important breakthroughs had been computer hardware and software for processing and reducing large amounts of analytical data in a very short time. “These advances, in large part stimulated by NASA-funded meteorite studies, were absolutely essential, because of the scientifically unique, but limited, lunar materials. . . . these high precision research methods can now or will soon be routinely utilized in industrial processes and laboratories.” They could also “be immediately applied to a variety of environmental and biomedical problems by providing the capability to check and monitor levels of pollutants and toxic elements in our atmosphere, water, and foods.” Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider outlined program’s progress: “During the coming fiscal year testing and checkout will be completed and operation of Skylab will have started. Within 2 years, the first Skylab . . . will have become part of history, having contributed new knowledge in many fields.” Skylab offered “an earth observation capability never before available” to U.S. manned spacecraft. During eight-month mission, Skylab would fly over entire U.S. except Alaska, over much of Europe, all of Africa, Australia, China, and almost all of South America—covering 75% of earth’s surface and passing over each point every five days. By end of 1971, 288 investigations requiring Skylab data had been submitted, 249 U.S. and 39 foreign. Of these, 164 had been identified for further study. Skylab was “first manned space flight program designed specifically to carry activities and equipment explicitly aimed at improving man’s life on earth. It will contribute significantly to the increase of knowledge of pure science and is also an experimental space station; a forerunner of permanent space stations of the future.” Earth-oriented sensors would test technology for synoptic surveys of many environmental and ecological systems. Solar and astronomical observations and other science experiments would expand knowledge of solar system, universe, and near-earth space. Biomedical experiments would inform how man’s well-being and ability to function were affected by living in space. Harry H. Gorman, Deputy Associate Administrator for Management in Office of Manned Space Flight, testified on $305-million FY 1973 budget request for development, test, and mission operations in manned space flight research and development program: “This is the first year in which this activity is presented as a separate item. . . With near-completion of Apollo program, “we believe it iinportant to separately identify and control this basic capability which has been built up. . . . This work is essential to the support of the Nation’s space programs for the 1970’s and beyond.” Requested funding would provide for contractor support of in-house capabilities for Apollo and Skylab programs; for definition, design, development, and subsystem testing activities in shuttle program; and for pre-definition and definition of future programs, including High Energy Astronomy Observatory, Stratoscope 1 and 2, and Earth Observation Satellites. (Transcript)
Areas sounding rocket was launched by NASA from Antigua, West Indies, to 52.3-km (32.5-mi) altitude. Primary objective was to obtain ozone measurements in upper atmosphere in conjunction with overpass of Nimbus 4 satellite and with Nike-Cajun ozone launch (May 17). Secondary objective was to validate further performance of new parachute deployment system tested May 4. Payload was ejected near apogee and descended successfully by parachute; good ozone data were acquired, (nasa Rpt SRL)
Mrs. Esther H. Goddard, widow of rocket pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard, received honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degree from Clark Univ. at inaugural meeting of Friends of the Goddard Library. (Clark Now, Winter 1972) December 1:	Intercosmos 8 was launched by U.S.S.R. from Plesetsk into orbit with 590-km (366.6-mi) apogee, 199-km (123.7-mi) perigee, 92.4-min period, and 70.9° inclination. Tass announced satellite would continue global research of ionosphere, including temperature and concentration of electrons, in cooperative program of socialist countries to study different cosmic ray particles and micrometeoroids which influenced weather, climate, radio communications, and biological processes on earth. Tass reported onboard scientific equipment and systems were functioning normally. Intercosmos 8 carried equipment designed and built in Bulgaria, German Democratic Republic, Czechoslovakia, and U.S.S.R. Satellite reentered March 2, 1973. (gsfc SSR, 12/31/72; 3/31/73; fbis-Sov, 12/1-2/72, LI; SBD, 12/2/72, 58)
Newspaper editorials continued comment on Apollo program. Christian Science Monitor:	“Such technological feats as going to the moon do not absolve people of responsibilities on earth. It may be only an irony but the last Apollo splashdown, amazingly within a mile of its target, occurred while the United States again renewed bombing of North Vietnam in that excruciating war. Millions in America and elsewhere are hungry or unhappy. Great leaps in human relationships comparable to those in space are called for. Nonetheless, though we do not yet fully grasp the impulse that led to the moon venture, and though it but the more reveals what remains unresolved in the human lot, we are aware that Apollo 17 has written finis to something marvelous in mankind’s annals.” (CSM, 12/21/72) Pasadena, Calif., Star-News editorial praised Apollo Program: “The American knowhow and resources, which have made the Apollo missions and space travel so successful, have confirmed for the world our scientific leadership and perfection. This has resulted in more pride and esteem for our nation than all the foreign aid, diplomacy or pats on the back that Uncle Sam has bestowed in his lifetime.” (Pasadena Star-News, 12/21/72)
Crowd estimated at more than half million would witness nighttime launch of Apollo 17, which experts believed would be visible within 800-km (500-mi) radius, Associated Press reported. Lester T. Keene of Kennedy Space Center Data Systems Div. had said exhaust from Saturn V rocket would be equivalent to brilliance of sunlight. Peak visibility would be reached about 2 min 30 sec after launch, when Saturn V was at 68-km (42-mi) altitude and 90 km (56 mi) northeast of Cape Kennedy, and before shutdown of lst-stage engines that burned fuel producing orange flame. Pale blue flame of 2nd stage would not be seen for as great distance. (B Sun, 11/21/72, A8)
National Science Foundation released Federal Funds for Research, Development, and Other Scientific Activities, Fiscal Years 1970, 1971, 1972 (nsf 71-35). Federal obligations for research and development (r&d) in 1970 totaled $15.3 billion excluding plant; slight rise to $15.4 billion was expected for 1971. Figure was decrease of 5% in constant dollars. Basic research obligations were expected to rise from $2.1 billion in 1970 to $2.2 billion for 1971 and $2.4 billion for 1972. Federal support for basic research declined in 1970 but was expected to reach new record highs for 1971 and 1972. Bulk of Federal basic research, 81%, was funded by NASA; Dept, of Health, Education, and Welfare; National Science Foundation; Atomic Energy Commission; and Dept, of Defense. NASA had led in basic research support since 1961, with 29% of total in 1971. Applied research obligations totaled $3.5 billion in 1970 and were expected to rise to $3.8 billion for 1971, increase of 8%. Total was expected to reach $4.2 billion in 1972—all-time high in current dollars. dod, hew, and NASA continued to dominate Federal applied research effort and would account for 78% in 1971. Obligations for development totaled $9.7 billion in 1970 and would decline 3%, to $9.4 billion, in 1971. In 1972, Federal development total was scheduled to rise to $10.0 billion, or 1966 level, dod, nasa, and AEC were most prominent in Federal development effort in 1960-1972, accounting for 92% in 1971. dod funded 63%; nasa share had declined since 1965 to expected 19% for 1971. Although total Federal R&D obligations were expected to increase 9% from 1970 to 1972, nasa and aec decrease continued. NASA estimate for 1972, however, was smallest reduction since downward trend began in 1967. Report noted increases in key programs—Skylab, space shuttle, Viking Mars explorations, and unmanned missions to outer planets—had almost offset decreases in Apollo program. (Text)
Nike-Javelin III sounding rocket, carrying Naval Research Laboratory cesium cloud experiment, was launched by NASA from Wallops Station at 5:08 am est. Launch was second in series of five to collect atmospheric data; first launch had been conducted March 25. (WS pao; WS Release 72-4)
Noaa2 (itos-d) National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorological satellite was successfully launched by NASA from Western Test Range at 10:19 am pdt by two-stage, long-tank, thrust-augumented Thor-Delta 0300 booster with three strap-on rockets. Orbital parameters: apogee, 1453.9 km (903.4 mi); perigee, 1448.2 km (899.9 mi); period, 114.9 min; and inclination, 101.8°.
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying American Science and Engineering, Inc., x-ray astronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list) April 2:	Interview of Roris N. Petrov, Chairman of Soviet Academy of Sciences’ Council for International Cooperation in Investigation and Utilization of Outer Space, on U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint space mission was published in New York Times. Interview, described as “first full public discussion of the negotiations from the Soviet point of view,” had been obtained in Moscow by Times science writer John N. Wilford. Petrov had emphasized that “tangible progress” had been achieved and he was “optimistic” about prospects of joint space flight, technically feasible in “the middle of the nineteen-seventies.” Government approval would “depend much” on April meetings in Moscow between NASA and Soviet Academy officials and May meeting in Moscow of Working Groups on rendezvous and docking. Petrov said compatible docking system would allow “docking of spaceships of our countries with the humane aim of rendering help to crews of spaceships and space stations in distress. These systems would also allow joint experiments during the flights in space.” Petrov said negotiations had occurred in “atmosphere of mutual understanding and businesslike discussion” that “gives us the hope that all the difficulties connected with . . . such a sophisticated scientific and technological undertaking could be overcome.” (NYT, 4/2/72)
Newspaper editorials commented on close of Apollo program with Apollo 17 launch. Los Angeles Times: “Thanks to the marvels of satellite communications, 3,000 European doctors were able recently to ‘attend’ a medical meeting in San Antonio via television. A computer designed for the space agency is helping Detroit design safer steering linkages in cars and trucks. A technique for clarifying spacecraft photos of the moon is being used by hospitals to provide much sharper x rays. The thousands of men and women who have participated in the Apollo program, and the American people who supported it, have all cause for great pride in Apollo. It has been one of the best investments this country ever made, one of the most rewarding adventures it ever undertook.” (LA Times, 12/6/72) Christian Science Monitor: “To the layman, what has been learned about the moon and space has been an extension of our knowledge of the universe, not a radical departure. In this light, it is comforting to think that the Apollo program, remarkable though it has been historically, may illustrate that even the farthest reaches of today’s unknown may prove to be no more than the captive of tomorrow’s familiar.” (CSM, 12/6/72)	_ New York Times: “Even as the world awaits this final launch, debate continues about the wisdom of the entire Apollo project. Some consider the moon landings the most brilliant scientific achievement in history; others still look at the whole venture as a waste of resources needed for urgent requirements here on earth. Yet one fact about the venture is beyond dispute: in the years 1969-72 men landed on another celestial body for the first time and showed they could live and work in the bizarre and literally inhuman conditions on that foreign planet. Long after most other developments of the twentieth century are forgotten, future generations will recall this as the century in which men broke the bonds of terrestrial gravity and began their cosmic destiny.” (NYT, 12/6/72, 42) Spacecraft—carrying Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan (commander), Ronald E. Evans (command module pilot), and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt (lunar module pilot and geologist)—was launched at 12:33 am EST Dec. 7, with illumination from S-IC 1st stage creating brilliance of morning sun. Liftoff, witnessed by crowd estimated at 500 000 and by nationwide and foreign TV viewers, was visible to naked eye as far as South Carolina to north and Cuba to south. Spacecraft and S-IVB combination entered parking orbit with 170-km (105.6-mi) apogee and 168-km (104.4-mi) perigee. Following checkout, spacecraft was inserted into trajectory lor moon at 3:13 ground elapsed time (get) as planned, csm separation from lm/S-IVB/iu at 3:42 GET and docking with lm at 3:57 get were shown on TV. During docking possible ring latch malfunction was indicated. Troubleshooting revealed latches 7, 9, and 10 were unlocked. Latch 10 was locked by pushing on handle; latches 7 and 9 were locked and manually fired to lock handles. Following hatch replacement, csm/lm combination was ejected from S-IVB stage at 4:45 get. S-IVB lunar impact maneuver targeted stage to strike moon’s surface Dec. 10. Midcourse correction (MCC-1) was not necessary because of nominal trajectory. MCC—2 maneuver was performed on time at 35:30 get, changing velocity 3 m per sec (9.9 fps). Cernan and Schmitt entered LM at 40:10 get and discovered docking latch 4 improperly latched. Evans moved latch handle 30°^t5°, disengaging hook from docking ring. Mission Control and flight crew decided to wait until second LM entering at 59:59 get for further action on latch. Remainder of LM housekeeping was nominal and LM was closed out at 42:11 GET. Heat flow and convection demonstrations were conducted as planned; results were satisfactory. MCC-3 and -4 were not required because of near-nominal trajectory. LM housekeeping was resumed at 59:59 get and completed at 62:16 get with all systems nominal. Evans, following ground instructions, stroked docking latch 4 handle and succeeded in cocking latch. Latch was left in cocked position for csm-lm rendezvous. Planned trajectory was modified continually because of late liftoff; coast toward moon was accelerated to ensure arrival of spacecraft at lunar orbit insertion (loi) at scheduled GMT time. GET clock was updated 2 hrs 40 min at 65:00 get to place all events on original flight plan schedule. Crew began one-hour visual-light-flash phenomenon observation at 68:19 GET and reported seeing bright to dull light flashes. Cernan reported continuing gas pains during private consultation via separate radio link with Dr. W. Royee Hawkins, Manned Spacecraft Center Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations. He was told to continue taking antigas pills and to alter diet. Crew jettisoned scientific instrument module (sim) door at 84:12 GET and said SIM bay looked good. S-IVB 3rd stage impacted on lunar surface at 89:39 GET (3:32 pm EST Dec. 10) at 4° 12' south latitude and 12° 18' west longitude. Impact was recorded by Apollo 12, 14, 15, and 16 seismometers. Evans described crew’s excitement at reaching vicinity of moon: “We’re breathing so hard, the windows are fogging up.” Schmitt interrupted running commentary on lunar topography with shout: “Hey I just saw a flash on the lunar surface!” When assured by Mission Control that impact of possible small meteor would have been masked on seismometers by S-IVB 3rd-stage impact, Schmitt groaned: “Just my luck.” Cernan—who had orbited moon during May 18-26, 1969, Apollo 10 mission—described sight as “still just as impressive.” Descent orbit insertion (DOI-1) was performed at 90:31 get. CSM and LM undocked and separated on schedule at 107:48 get. Circularization maneuver placed csm in orbit with 129-km (80.2-mi) apolune and 100-km (62.1-mi) perilune. DOI-2, at 109:50 get, inserted lm into orbit with 111-km (69.0-mi) apolune and 11-km (6.8-mi) perilune. Powered descent was initiated and Challenger touched down on Taurus-Littrow site at 113:02 get (2:55 pm est Dec. 11). Cernan descended lm ladder four hours later, at 117:02 get, and said: “As I step off at the surface at Taurus-Littrow, I’d like to dedicate the first step of Apollo 17 to all those who made it possible.” Schmitt, first geologist to walk on moon, followed and asked, “Hey, who’s been tracking up my lunar surface?” Cernan said surrounding hills looked like “wrinkled skin of an old, old, 100-year-old man.” Astronauts deployed lunar roving vehicle. Cernan made short test drive and said, “Hallelujah, Houston! Challenger’s baby is on the roll.” As Cernan and Schmitt set up TV equipment, Cernan called to Schmitt: “Hey, Jack, just stop. You owe yourself 30 seconds to look up over the South Massif and look at the Earth.” Schmitt replied: “What? The Earth? You seen one earth, you’ve seen them all.” Cernan unfurled U.S. flag on lunar surface while Schmitt took his picture. Cernan said, “It’s got to be one of the most proud moments of my life.” Flag had “flown in the mocr [Mission Operations Control Room] since Apollo 11. And we very proudly deploy it on the Moon, to stay for as long as it can, in honor of all those people who have worked so hard to put us here and to put every other crew here and to make the country, the United States and mankind, something different than it was.” While preparing to traverse to Apollo lunar surface experiment package site, Cernan inadvertently knocked extension off of lrv right rear fender and repairs were made with tape. Astronauts crossed to alsep site, where they deployed alsep. Color TV camera beamed live telecast to earth. LRV fender again fell off during traverse to Steno Crater, lunar station 1A. Crew deployed surface electrical properties experiment and explosive packages during 7-hr 12-min lunar surface exploration. First eva ended at 124:13 get. Second eva began 1 hr 20 min late, at 140:35 get (6:28 pm est Dec. 12). Cernan and Schmitt, on instructions from Mission Control, improvised replacement for lost lrv fender extension. Four chronopaque maps were taped together and held in place by two portable utility lamp clamps. “Call me the little old fender maker,” Cernan said. Cernan and Schmitt visited lunar stations 2, 2A, 3, 4, and 5. They deployed explosive packages, obtained photos, and collected and documented soil samples. At station 4, Shorty Crater, Schmitt shouted: “There is orange soil! It’s all over! Orange!” Cernan confirmed finding: “Jack that is really orange. It’s been oxidized.” Schmitt dug trench and extracted sample which he described to Mission Control: “An essential portion of the zone . . . actually has a crimson hue, or red hue. Outside of that it’s orange. And outside of that, it’s gray.” Scientists on ground immediately speculated that soil might have originated from volcanism on moon as recently as 100 million yrs earlier. If so, it would contradict “dead moon” theory that moon had always been cold and inert. Dr. Robin P. Brett, head of MSC Geochemistry Branch, told press, “What we have been witnessing may be one of the most significant finds of Apollo geology.” Schmitt revisited ALSEP site to verify that lunar surface gravimeter had been leveled properly. EVA-2 ended at 148:35 get (2:05 am EST Dec. 13), after 7 hrs 37 min. Total distance covered during second eva was 19 km (12 mi). Third eva began 50 min late at 163:35 GET (5:26 pm est Dec. 13). Cosmic ray detector was retrieved before start of traverse to prevent exposure to low-energy solar protons from small solar flare. Cernan and Schmitt took black and white and color photos and collected 66 kg (145.9 lbs) of samples. Samples included blue-gray breccias, finegrained vesicular basalts, crushed anorthositic rocks, and soils. EVA-3 ended at 170:48 get {0:41 am est Dec. 14), after 7 hrs 16 min. During EVA—3 Evans, orbiting in CSM 113 km (70 mi) above lunar surface, identified series of volcanic domes in Aitken Grater, on moon’s far side. Before entering Challenger for last time, Cernan and Schmitt stepped before TV cameras. Cernan said: “To commemorate not just Apollo ITs visit to the Valley of Taurus-Littrow but as an everlasting commemoration of what the real meaning of Apollo is to the world, we’d like to uncover a plaque that has been on the leg of our spacecraft.” He read inscription: “Here man completed his first exploration of the Moon, December 1972 A.D. May the spirit of peace in which we came be reflected in the lives of all mankind.” Dr, James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, congratulated astronauts from Mission Control at msc and conveyed Godspeed message from President Nixon. As astronauts boarded LM, Cernan said: “I believe history will record that America’s challenge of today has forged man’s destiny of tomorrow. And, as we leave the moon at Taurus-Littrow, we leave as we came and, God willing, as we shall return, with peace and hope for all mankind. God speed the crew of Apollo 17T Total time for three EVAs was 22 hrs 5 min 4 sec, during which Cernan and Schmitt traveled 35 km (22 mi) in LRV, collected 115 kg (250 lbs) of samples, and took 2120 photos. Good-quality TV transmission was received throughout evas. Astronauts depressurized lm and discarded excess equipment, im lifted off lunar surface at 188:02 get (5:55 pm EST Dec. 14). TV cameras in CSM provided excellent picture in Mission Control as lm approached. Cernan in lm said, “Good to see you .... It’s been a good trip.” Evans replied, “Good to have you all back up here.” Observing that “America and Challenger are . . . good tight Navy formation,” Cernan told Evans, “Command module looks as good as the day they put it on the pad.” Evans answered, “And, you know, so does Challenger.” CSM and lm docked in lunar orbit at 190:17 get and Cernan and Schmitt transferred to csm with samples and equipment, lm ascent stage was jettisoned as planned. Impact of stage on lunar surface at 195:57 get was recorded by four Apollo 17 geophones and Apollo 12, 14, 15, and 16 alseps. Explosive packages were detonated and events were picked up by lunar seismic profiling geophones. Flash and dust from EP 7 explosion were seen on TV. Insertion into trajectory for earth began at 236:42 get, after csm’s 147 hrs 48 min in lunar orbit. December 17-19:	Spacecraft left moon’s sphere of influence at 250:40 get, traveling at 1173 m per sec (3851 fps). Evans left CSM at 257:34 get (3:27 pm est Dec. 17) for 1-hr 7-min inflight eva to retrieve lunar sounder film and panoramic and mapping camera cassettes in three trips to sim bay. TV pictures relayed to Mission Control showed him cavorting in weightlessness in stiff white pressure suit and attached to 7.6-m (25-ft) line. Following space walk, astronauts settled down for final two days of mission. cm separated from sm at 304:04 get, 15 min before entry interface at 121 920 m (400 000 ft). Drogue and main parachutes deployed normally and cm splashed down in mid-Pacific 6.4 km (4.0 mi) from prime recovery ship U.S.S. Ticonderoga at 304:31 GET (2:25 pm est Dec. 19). Recovery helicopter dropped swimmers, who installed flotation collar and attached life raft. Astronauts were transported to recovery ship for postflight examination. They would be flown to Houston via Samoa the following day. CSM was retrieved by recovery ship for transport to San Diego, Calif. Apollo 17 achieved primary objectives—to make selenological survey and sampling of materials and surface features in preselected area of Taurus-Littrow region, emplace and activate surface experiments, and conduct inflight experiments and photography. Launch vehicle and spacecraft system performances were near nominal throughout mission. Only minor discrepancies occurred, with no effect on safety or mission objectives. Flight crew performance was good. Mission was judged officially to be “a great success.” Accomplishments included sixth manned lunar landing and return, first geologist-astronaut on lunar surface, longest lunar surface stay time (74 hrs 59 min 38 sec), longest single lunar surface eva (7 hrs 37 min 22 sec), longest total lunar surface EVA time (22 hrs 5 min 4 sec), longest total lunar distance traversed with LRV (35 km; 22 mi), longest Apollo mission (12 days 13 hrs 51 min), most samples returned (115 kg; 250 lb), and longest time in lunar orbit (147 hrs 48 min). Apollo 17 was 14th and last scheduled mission in Apollo series and 11th manned Apollo mission. Apollo 16 had flown April 16-27. Highlights of Apollo program had been first manned orbit of moon by Apollo 8 (Dec. 21-27, 1968), first landing of men on moon during Apollo 11 (July 16-24, 1969), and first use of lunar roving vehicle on moon during Apollo 15 (July 26-Aug 7, 1971). Apollo program was directed by nasa Office of Manned Space Flight. Manned Spacecraft Center was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, Marshall Space Flight Center for Saturn V launch vehicle, and Kennedy Space Center for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under overall direction of Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-220K; msc Transcript 07629; NYT, 12/8-20/72; W Post, 12/8-20/72; nasa pio) December 7:	President Nixon sent message to Apollo 17 crew following successful launch: “With the final mission of the Apollo lunar exploration series man completes another step in his quest for knowledge of his universe and of himself. Those who come after will stand on the shoulders of the men of Apollo and their dedicated support team. I wish you good luck and Godspeed.” {PD, 12/11/72, 1734-5)
Nimbus 5 (Nimbus-E) meteorological satellite was successfully launched by NASA from Western Test Range at 11:56 pm EST by two-stage, thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. Satellite entered near polar orbit with 1101.3-km (684.3-mi) apogee, 1089.5-km (677.0-mi) perigee, 107.2-min period, and 99.95° inclination. Solar array lock-on and three-axis stabilization were achieved as planned. Activation was proceeding. Nimbus 5 carried new and improved instruments to extend observation into cloudy areas and higher altitudes, making first vertical temperature and water vapor measurements through clouds of earth’s atmosphere. Assigned primary objectives were to improve and extend capability for vertical sounding of temperature and moisture in atmosphere with particular regard to altitude coverage and cloud interference, providing nearly total global coverage for first time, and to demonstrate improved thermal mapping for 10 wks. As secondary objectives spacecraft would determine feasibility of using passive microwave remote sensing techniques to obtain earth observational data and would demonstrate capabilities of improved selective chopper radiometer (scr), provided by United Kingdom, to obtain atmospheric soundings. Butterfly-shaped 769-kg (1695-lb) satellite carried six meteorological and earth resources experiments: scr; infrared temperature profile radiometer (itpr) ; Nimbus E microwave spectrometer (nems) ; electrically scanning microwave radiometer (esmr) ; surface-compositionmapping radiometer (scmr) ; and temperature-humidity infrared radiometer (thir). Nimbus 5 was sixth of seven spacecraft designed to provide atmospheric data for improved weather forecasting. With added sophistication program had grown to include wide range of earth sciences. Sensors aboard Nimbus 5 would map Gulf Stream off east coast of U.S. and Humboldt Current off west coast of South America. By knowing locations of streams, shipping interests could make substantial saving. Nimbus 5 would also provide information about El Nino— change in Humboldt Current. El Nino had been causing great economic damage by warming coastal waters, killing nutrients and fish. Nimbus 2 (launched May 15, 1966, with design life of 6 mos) had returned data for 32 mos, for detailed study of effect of water, carbon dioxide, and ozone on earth’s heat balance. Vertical temperature measurements of Nimbus 3 (launched April 14, 1969) had been termed by meteorologists as one of most significant events in meteorological history, providing worldwide atmospheric information. Six of nine experiments on Nimbus 4 (launched April 8, 1970) could still provide atmospheric data. Nimbus program was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under NASA Office of Applications direction, (nasa proj off; gsfc proj off; NASA Release 72-234)
Apollo 17 Astronauts Eugene A. Cernan, Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, and Ronald E. Evans participated in final prelaunch test aboard spacecraft. Astronauts wore spacesuits for simulated liftoff of Saturn V rocket. Following test, launch crew began to ready command module “America” and lunar module “Challenger” for start of actual countdown scheduled for Nov. 30. (AT, B Sun, 11/22/72, A5)
NASA launched Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket from Andoeya, Norway, carrying Norwegian particles and fields experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Half-hour documentary film “The Worlds of von Braun” was televised by wmal-tv in Washington, D.C. Documentary, filmed at NASA Wallops Station, included footage never before televised, from NASA, U.S.S.R., and moon. In film, Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, discussed his careers as World War II rocket expert and with NASA in interview with wmal-tv Public Affairs Director James Clarke. Washington Post TV critic Victor Cohn said of film: “Wernher von Braun is a compelling man and a true believer . . . and the joy is that of seeing any man so thoroughly absorbed in a discipline that he absorbs you, even at the distant end of a TV tube.” (nasa Special Ann, 1/4/72; W Post, 1/7/72, Bl)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N.Mex., carrying Univ. of Colorado solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Japan launched Denpa (Radio Wave) Radio Explorer Satellite (rexs) from Kagoshima Space Center by Mu-4S booster at 11:40 am local time (10:40 pm edt Aug. 18). Recause of unusually strong winds, satellite entered highly elliptic orbit with 6302-km (3915.9-mi) apogee, 239-km (148.5-mi) perigee, 157.2-min period, and 31° inclination. Denpa carried ionospheric plasma probes, electromagnetic and plasma-wave receivers, cyclotron instability experiment, electron flux analyzer, and fluxgate magnetometer. Instruments functioned satisfactorily immediately after launch, but satellite later experienced power failure that prevented transmission of data. The 75-kg (165-lb) satellite, 68 cm (22.3 ft) long, was fourth satellite to be launched by Japan and second to carry scientific payload. Shinsei (launched Sept. 28, 1971) had carried instruments to study cosmic and electric waves. Tansei (launched Feb. 16, 1971) and Ohsumi (launched Feb. 11, 1970) test satellites had returned performance data, (gsfc SSR, 8/31/72; FBis-Japan, 7/20/72, C7; Spacewarn, 8/8/72, 8; NASA Int Aff; Japanese Embassy pio)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Harvard College Observatory solar physics experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
NASA launched Black Brant VC sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying Univ. of Colorado solar ultraviolet spectrometer. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Scientific objectives were not satisfied. (SR list)
Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Manned Spacecraft Center Director and former msc Director of Flight Operations, reviewed Apollo program in Associated Press interview published in Baltimore Sun. Apollo 8 (launched Dec. 21, 1968) had been program’s pivotal mission. “It proved so many things that had a bearing on the progress of the program—things that it might have disproved. The navigation to and from the moon, the ability of the spacecraft systems to perform, the ability of man to survive the deep space environment, all hinged on the Apollo 8 mission.” Mission also had changed competitive position of U.S. and U.S.S.R. in space. “I really believed the Russians planned to fly a cir-cumlunar mission, sending a manned spacecraft looping around and returning it without orbiting the moon. That way they could say they sent the first man to the vicinity of the moon. And when we . . . decided to fly Apollo 8 as a moon-orbit mission, there was nothing left for them to do.” There was no major technological field that “hasn’t been materially changed or had some reflection of not only Apollo but of the whole space program.” Space technology had been important to maintenance of U.S. position as leading nation in world. Five manned lunar landing flights had produced greater scientific return than envisioned. “We have done just about all we should have done with the Apollo program in terms of lunar exploration. This is a good time to stop, evaluate what we have and use our resources to do other things in the space program.” (B Sun, 11/24/72, A10)
NASA launched four Nike-Cajun sounding rockets from Point Barrow, Alaska. First rocket carried Goddard Space Flight Center grenade payload to 110.2-km (68.5-mi) altitude to provide temperature, pressure, density, and wind data in support of closely coordinated ozone and atomic oxygen flights. All 31 grenades were ejected and detonated as planned and sound arrivals were recorded on ground. Second rocket carried gsfc payload to 84.6-km (52.6-mi) altitude to measure ozone distribution in mesosphere and stratosphere in Arctic after spring wind reversal and in conjunction with overpass of Nimbus 4 satellite. Payload deployed properly and on time and descended by parachute. Excellent ozone data were acquired. Third rocket carried experiment developed by Univ. of Michigan and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to 127-km (78.9-mi) altitude. Objective was to measure atomic oxygen distribution in mesosphere in proximity to ozone and grenade flights. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily and good atomic oxygen data were acquired. Fourth rocket carried 31-grenade gsfc payload to collect atmospheric data in support of ozone and atomic oxygen flights. All grenades were ejected and detonated as planned and sound returns were recorded on ground. (NASA proj off)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket was launched by NASA from White Sands Missile Range carrying Univ. of Minnesota experiment to measure composition of neutral atmosphere between 95 and 125 km (59 and 78 mi). Structural failure of undetermined origin caused vehicle to break up three seconds after launch, (nasa Rpt srl)
NASA launched Nike-Apache sounding rocket from Thumba, India, carrying Indian langmuir probe experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Historians would have difficult time explaining decision to abandon Apollo program, Time magazine article said. “Having trained the men, perfected the techniques and designed the equipment to explore the earth’s own satellite, having achieved the ability to learn more about man’s place in the universe, Americans lost the will and the vision to press on. Barely three years after the first lunar landing, the nation that made it all possible has turned its thoughts inward and away from space.” Though U.S. spent $5.9 billion to develop Apollo rocket system, “production of Saturn boosters has been halted. The painstakingly assembled team of skilled technicians, engineers and scientists that made Apollo possible is slowly being disbanded.” Those who had branded lunar landings propaganda ploys or technological stunts were “prisoners of limited vision who cannot comprehend, or do not care, that Neil Armstrong’s step in the lunar dust will be well remembered when most of today’s burning issues have become mere footnotes to history.” (Time, 12/11/72, 35)
Hall of Science, visited by some 5 million persons during 1964-65 World’s Fair in Flushing, N.Y., was reopened with exhibits including NASA satellite and Apollo mockup. Hall had been revived and remodeled as free scientific exhibition for public under grants from Rockefeller and Ford Foundations. (Andelman, NYT, 11/2/72; NY Visitors Bur) November 20:	Apollo 17 crew underwent preliminary medical checks and men were reported in good shape, while final test countdown for mission, begun Nov. 14, proceeded smoothly at Kennedy Space Center. Crew was not present as propellants were pumped into Saturn V rocket, to avoid risk. They planned to participate in dry run Nov. 21 after flammable oxygen and hydrogen had been drained from rocket. (UPI, NYT, 11/21/72, 46)
Delivery to Dulles International Airport of arts iii—computerized automated radar terminal system to improve air traffic handling in busy terminal areas—was announced by Federal Aviation Administration. System processed radar beacon signals emitted by airborne transponders giving aircraft identity and altitude and presented information on radar displays for air traffic controllers, (faa Release 72-19) January 30:	First of four lunar eclipses to occur during 1972 was partially visible in portions of North and South America. Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory spokesman said later that 37-min eclipse was not seen over Northeastern U.S. because of cloud cover. (NYT, 1/29/72, 19; 1/31/72, 3) January 31—February 23: European Space Research Organization’s 117-kg (257-lb) Heos 2 Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite was launched by NASA from Western Test Range by three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta (DSV-3L) booster at 9:20 am pst. Orbital parameters: 244 011-km (151621.4-mi) apogee, 416-km (258.5-mi) perigee, and 90.2° inclination. All vehicle systems monitored during launch functioned normally. Second burn of 2nd stage and ignition and burnout of 3rd stage occurred over Indian Ocean south of African continent. By Feb. 6 all flight experiments had been turned on and were working properly and all spacecraft systems were still functioning normally Feb. 23. On Feb. 18 NASA officially judged mission successful. Primary NASA objective was to place spacecraft into orbit that would permit successful achievement of esro scientific objectives and provide tracking and telemetry support. Satellite—16-sided cylinder with 70% of its outer surface covered with solar cells—carried seven experiments to investigate strength and direction of magnetic fields, energy distribution of protons and electrons, and nature of solar winds; make very-low-frequency solar observations; and detect micrometeorites. Heos 2 was second heos mission. Heos 1 had been launched Dec. 5, 1968, and was still in orbit. After orbital insertion, spacecraft was controlled from European Space Operations Center (esoc) and tracked by European Space Tracking Stations (estrack). European Space Technology Center (estec) was responsible for project management and would reimburse NASA $6.6 million for booster and prelaunch and launch support services, (nasa proj off; NASA Release 72-17; GSFC SSR, 1/31/72) January 31:	Mathematica, Inc., published Economic Analysis of the Space Shuttle System. Report of study directed by Klaus P. Heiss and Oskar Morgenstern under nasa contract concluded development of space shuttle system was economically feasible assuming level of space activity equal to average of U.S. unmanned space program of past eight years; thrust-assisted orbiter shuttle (taos) with external hydrogen and oxygen tanks was economically preferred choice among current shuttle configurations; and choice of thrust assist for orbiter shuttle was still open, with pressure-fed boosters and solid-fuel rocket motors, either using parallel burn, as main economic alternatives. Third economic choice was use of series-burn boosters. (Text)
U.S.S.R. announced appointment of Gen. Vladimir F. Tolubko, rocket specialist serving near Chinese border, as commander of Soviet strategic missile forces. (Shabad, NYT, 5/10/72)
Langley Research Center awarded 31-mo, $4 128 860 contract to Univ. of Iowa for design, construction, integration, test, and launch support for Injun-F spacecraft and onboard experiments. Injun-F would be launched from Western Test Range by Scout booster in 1974 to study interaction of solar winds with geomagnetosphere at large radial distances over earth’s north polar cap. Orbit would be highly elliptical and would traverse an area of space not previously surveyed. Spacecraft would weigh 27 kg (60 lbs) and would carry three principal experiments: magnetometer to map geomagnetic field over polar caps, low-energy proton electron differential energy analyzer to provide data on population density of charged particles, and extremely-low-frequency and very-low-frequency (elf-VLF) experiment to determine nature of electrostatic and electromagnetic fields. Experiments might lead to understanding of way in which natural radiation belts surrounding earth maintained their supply of charged particles. Principal investigator would be Dr. James A. Van Allen, discoverer of Van Allen belts, (nasa Release 72-65)
Artificial (gas-flame) fireplace logs were being produced by Martin Stamping and Stove Co. from materials developed for NASA, Marshall Space Flight Center announced. Materials—manufactured by Universal Atlas Div. of U.S. Steel Corp., Foote Mineral Co., and Vulcan Materials Co.—were fibrous insulation for Skylab and lightweight, refractory concrete used in Saturn rocket test stands to deflect hot exhaust. (msfc Release 72-119)
Philippines successfully launched Bong Bong II, its first liquid-propellant rocket. Rocket was successfully retrieved from South China Sea. {SBD, 3/22/72, 121)
Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, NASA Apollo Program Director, reviewed program in Los Angeles Times article: “As one looks back over the 12 years of Apollo, the biggest effort . . . was the engineering effort—the understanding of the demands that would be placed on the flight hardware, the understanding of the laws of nature that we would have to work with in order to fly to the moon, the conversion of dreams into hardware, the manufacture and testing of this hardware, so that we could feel confident to fly our men to the moon and return. “But within that overall engineering program, we knew we would be exploring, we knew we would open up new vistas and for that reason we developed the experiments to be taken along on later flights.” There had been “only one reason for flying Apollo after the first landing and that was to gather information for science, to continue the exploration of the Moon.” Underlying drive of Apollo “—to reach into space, to seize these new challenges, to learn more about the moon and also about earth, to explore for new opportunities for man to use in his future development—is not well understood by the public.” Apollo had “lifted mankind from his cradle and started him on the pathway to the stars.” {LA Times, 12/24/72)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Aerojet-General Corp., Lockheed Propulsion Co., Thiokol Chemical Co., and United Technology Center to receive separate, two-month, $150 000 study contracts to analyze possible use of solid-fuel motors with 305- and 396-cm (120- and 156-in) diameters to power space shuttle booster. (msfc Release 72-4)
Boosted Areas I launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range carried Univ. of Houston payload to 57-km (35.4-mi) altitude. Primary objective was to supplement comprehensive investigation of auroral zone disturbances conducted by Black Brant carrying Univ. of Texas payload and launched 60 sec later. Secondary objective was to study auroral phenomena in region above altitude already investigated, using balloons, and below altitude investigated, using rockets. Rocket and instrumentation performed nominally although one of two telemetry receivers provided marginal response. Recovery could not be effected because winds blew payload over Hudson Bay. NASA Black Brant, launched from Churchill Research Range 60 sec after Boosted Areas, reached 240-km (149.1-mi) altitude. Primary objective of Univ. of Texas payload was to provide complete data on auroral precipitation events, analyze particle spectrum over wide energy range and observe spectrum in and above aurora, and observe optical emissions and ionospheric parameters. Rocket performed nominally but only one of nine experiments was successful because of faulty nosecone ejection mechanism. Nosecone did not deploy until descent portion of trajectory. Payload was recovered. (NASA Rpt SRL; NASA proj off)
Fairchild Industries, Inc., and Western Telegraph Co. announced formation of new company, as yet unnamed, to enter domestic satellite field. Spokesman for Fairchild and Western (which had no connection with Western Union Telegraph Co.) said new company would use Fairchild’s satellite systems and development and manufacturing capabilities. (Smith, NYT, 8/9/72) August 4:	Nike-Apache sounding rocket, launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range, carried Goddard Space Flight Center payload to 159-km (98.8-mi) altitude. Objectives were to measure intensity and energy spectra of low-energy protons, helium nuclei, and heavier nuclei during polar cap absorption event; examine relative abundances of charge species; and study changes in intensity with time during event. Rocket and instruments functioned satisfactorily but telemetry signal was sporadic after 150 sec. Payload landed on ground and was recovered. Launch was first of two; second would be Aug. 5. (NASA Rpt SRL)
NASA launched Aerobee 170 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, carrying Johns Hopkins Univ. aeronomy experiment. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Mariner 9 mission ended as attitude-control gas supply was depleted and engineering telemetry signal ceased during 698th Martian orbit of spacecraft launched May 30, 1971. Mariner 9 had reached Mars Nov. 13, 1971, and was 383 675 000 km (238 416 000 mi) from earth when engineers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory sent 45 960th, and last, command—to turn off radio transmitter. Spacecraft was expected to remain in Mars orbit some 50 yrs. During 349 days (more than one half Martian year) of orbital activity, Mariner 9 had maintained instrumented surveillance of Mars and made first closeup photos of Martian moons Phobos and Deimos. Major findings had included: geologically active planet with volcanic mountains and calderas larger than any on earth, equatorial crevasses more than 3000 km (2000 mi) long and three to four times deeper than Grand Canyon, indications that free-flowing water might have existed in Mars’ geologic history, evolution of monumental dust storms that raged to altitudes of 50 to 60 km (31 to 37 mi) above Mars surface, and realization that dust storms and cloudiness accounted for much of variability of Mars’ appearance over years. Mariner 9 was first man-made object to orbit another planet. Mariner project, managed for NASA’s Office of Space Science by jpl, had been planned as two-spacecraft mission to Mars but Mariner 8, launched May 8, 1971, failed to enter orbit when Centaur stage of Atlas-Centaur booster malfunctioned after normal countdown and liftoff from Eastern Test Range. Spacecraft had reentered earth’s atmosphere. Plans had been revised and Mariner 9 had been launched successfully to conduct missions of both Mariners. Data from Mariner 9 experiments would provide groundwork for 1975 Viking lander mission to search for evidence of life on Mars, (jpl Release 634; A&A 1971)
Nike-Apache sounding rocket, carrying Goddard Space Flight Center payload, was launched by NASA from Churchill Research Range. Objectives were to measure intensity and energy spectra of low-energy protons, helium nuclei, and heavier nuclei during polar cap absorption event; examine relative abundances of charge species; and study changes in intensity with time during event. Rocket and instrumentation performance was not satisfactory. Radar beam malfunctioned at liftoff, telemetry signal was lost after 128 sec, 2nd stage apparently failed to ignite, and payload was not recovered. Launch was second of two; first had been Aug. 4. (nasa Rpt srl) August 6:	Erts 1 return-beam-vidicon (rbv) camera system was shut down after unexpected power surge, rbv system was second experiment to be shut down because of power surge; first had been No. 2 tape recorder Aug. 3. Although both systems could be operated, shutdowns were necessary to determine whether operation would damage experiments and to identify exact cause of problem. Erts 1 (launched July 23) was providing excellent images from multispectral scanner (mss) system and No. 1 tape recorder was being used as required, (gsfc Release 16-72)
NASA launched Black Brant VC sounding rocket from Wallops Station carrying Goddard Space Flight Center performance test payload. Rocket and instrumentation performed satisfactorily. (SR list)
Tenth anniversary of Canada’s Alouette 1 satellite launched by nasa from Vandenberg Air Force Base by Thor-Agena B booster. Satellite, designed and built by Canada to study ionosphere, was still transmitting data from 960-km (600-mi) circular orbit. Canada celebrated anniversary with special ceremonies Sept. 29, highlighted by official opening of new Spacecraft Assembly and Test Facility of Dept, of Communications Research Centre at Shirley Bay near Ottawa. Canadian Communications Minister Robert Stanbury said Alouette 1, as the “oldest satellite still sending back useful information from space, symbolizes the high standards of technology which Canada has maintained . . . and ... has helped to meet two important national needs—expertise in space-age technology, and improved communications.” (SBD, 9/27/72, 118; A&A 1962)
Decision that space shuttle booster stage would be powered by recoverable, reusable, solid-fueled rocket motors in parallel burn configuration, rather than by pressure-fed liquid-fueled rocket motor, was announced by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, to Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during FY 1973 authorization hearings. Announcement was also released to press during morning and Dr. Fletcher held press conference in afternoon. Dr. Fletcher said both solid- and liquid-fueled boosters had been found technically feasible but “choice was made in favor of the solid parallel burn because of the lower development cost and the lower technical risks. Cost estimate for shuttle development was now $5.15 billion instead of earlier $5.5-billion estimate. Request for proposals would be issued about March 17. nasa expected to select shuttle launch and landing site shortly. At press conference he said: “I think we have made the right decision at the right time. And I think it is the right price.” Dr. Fletcher said it was likely NASA would want to launch and land at same coastal site and possibly from sites on both coasts. Inland sites were unlikely because of requirement for booster recoverability. Dale D. Myers, Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, said at conference there would be eight-week response time to request for proposals to become prime contractor for shuttle development. NASA would evaluate proposals in another eight weeks and would be ready for choice of contractor in early July. Requirements had been developed jointly with Air Force and “we have a shuttle that meets the user’s requirements, both in NASA and in the Air Force.” Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, estimated breakdown of 580 shuttle flights projected over 12-yr period for newsmen. Out of 100% of missions, 26% would be manned or man-tended, 74% unmanned. Of that 74%, 27% would be for applications (including NASA and other agencies or commercial applications), 25% for science, and 22% for Dept, of Defense missions. (Hearings transcript; Press conference transcript)
Group of 60 Civil Air Patrol cadets from 32 states and Puerto Rico arrived at Marshall Space Flight Center for week-long space flight orientation course. Cadets would attend lectures on NASA programs, tour msfc laboratories, and visit Alabama Space and Rocket Center. (msfc Release 72-92)
New York Times editorial praised “encouraging response” of public and major corporations that would enable Science and Technology Div. of New York Public Library to reopen Jan. 17 after shutdown for lack of operating funds [see Jan. 3]. “But it is evident that the fate of the privately financed research divisions has merely been deferred— unless continuous and long-range efforts are made to put this vital facility on a sound financial footing.” (NYT, 1/10/72, 32) January 10—13:	Third Annual Lunar Science Conference held by NASA and Lunar Science Institute at Manned Spacecraft Center was attended by more than 600 researchers from U.S. and 16 foreign countries. Foreign visitors included Soviet scientists Y. I. Belyayev, M. S. Chupakhin, and K. P. Florenskiy, who participated in conference, consulted with U.S. scientists, looked at lunar samples stored at msc, and helped select samples to return to their colleagues in U.S.S.R. NASA provided three grams (one tenth ounce) of lunar material collected on Apollo 14 mission as part of U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements for exchange of samples. Samples included chip from widely studied crystalline rock, small piece of 9-kg (20-lb) boulder, and core samples soils, and polished thin sections. Conference papers dealt with scientific results of Apollo lunar landing missions, analysis of Soviet Luna 16 samples, and results of study of lunar surface by U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1. Apollo 15 Astronauts David R. Scott, James B. Irwin, and Alfred M. Worden discussed their observations of lunar surface made from lunar orbit during July 26-Aug. 7, 1971, mission. Dr. N. C. Costes, Marshall Space Flight Center representative of Apollo Soil Mechanics Investigation Science Team, discussed mechanical properties of lunar soil. Washington Post later compared conference with First Lunar Science Conference in 1970, when “there were few facts available and many theories.” At third conference, “situation seemed to have reversed.” Dr. Paul W. Gast, Chief of msc Planetary and Earth Sciences Div., said, “You’re not throwing facts out into a vacuum any more.” Among facts stated at conference were: moon once had strong magnetic field, of which remnants remained to suggest moon once had metallic core up to 280 km (175 mi) thick; lunar crust was 65 km (40 mi) deep and layered; existence of extinct plutonium 244 in Apollo 14 samples indicated plutonium had been trapped when lunar crust solidified shortly after origin of solar system; and Copernicus Crater had been gouged 850 to 950 million yrs ago, making process one of more recent major lunar events. Dr. James R. Arnold of Univ. of California at San Diego reported that moon’s radioactive elements were concentrated in two broad plains, Ocean of Storms and Sea of Rains. “As we go away from this region ... we drop to quite low levels of radioactivity.” Scientists agreed that these radiation emissions should not prove hazardous to astronauts who might visit for short period. Dr. Isidore Adler, Goddard Space Flight Center scientist, reported that map of lunar surface chemistry produced from Apollo 15 x-ray data indicated highlands of moon contained more aluminum than did plains. Finding supported hypothesis that moon’s early crust was rich in feldspar. Dr. Gary V. Latham of Columbia Univ., Apollo Program chief seismic investigator, debated presence of volcanoes on moon with Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Thomas Gold. Dr. Latham said that while main episode of lunar vulcanism seemed to have ceased 3 billion yrs ago, “it’s by no means certain that we do not have continuing vulcanism on a very minor scale on the moon.” Dr. Gold continued to support theory that moon was dead, rigid body with basins of compacted dust. Dr. Leon T. Silver of California Institute of Technology proposed theory of “parentless lead” on moon to explain presence in some lunar locations of more lead than could have been produced by decay of radioactive uranium. In moon’s extreme vacuum it was possible for vaporized lead to travel great distances from its parent, uranium. Dr. Silver said other materials could be distributed over lunar surface in same way, all of which could confuse analysis of moon’s age. Dr. John A. Wood of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory discussed tiny piece of green glass among Apollo 14 samples that scientists had nick-named “Genesis bean.” Bean and other glass fragments were almost identical chemically to rare meteorites, Howardites. Evidence suggested green glass had originated on moon and not from meteorite impacts on earth and thus might be some of earliest material of solar system. Consensus of conference on bulk composition of moon was summarized by Dr. Gast: feldspar-rich highland material with anorthosite as one prevalant component, basalts (solidified lava, low in radioactive elements and relatively young) in plains and basins, and KREEP (highly radioactive material rich in potassium, rare earth elements, and phosphorus). Conference closed with discussion of geologic setting of Apollo 16 Descartes landing site and plans for mission’s extravehicular activity. Soviet scientists returned to U.S.S.R. Jan. 23 with lunar samples for Soviet Academy of Sciences, (msc Release 72-06; NASA Release 72—18; Marshall Star, 1/12/72, 1; Wilford, NYT, 1/14/72, 22; NASA Trans Sect) January 11:	Apollo 16 lunar module pilot Charles M. Duke, Jr., was released from Patrick Air Force Base Hospital where he had been treated for bacterial pneumonia since Jan. 4. (AP, B Sun, 1/11/72)
NASA launched Aerobee 150 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, N. Mex., carrying National Center for Atmospheric Research aeronomy experiment. Rocket performed satisfactorily. Scientific objectives were not satisfied. (SR list)
Collection of sketches and notes on rockets and spacecraft and original manuscript on astronomy by Dr. Wernher von Braun, NASA. Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, were placed on permanent exhibition at Alabama Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. Display opening coincided with rocket pioneer’s 60th birthday. (Birmingham Post-Herald, 3/24/72)
