The space shuttle would introduce a new mode oi space research in the 1980s, Dr. John E. Naugle, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, said at a space transportation system press briefing in Washington, D.C. Sounding rockets gave the scientist an immediate return of data but only for a very short-duration flight. Satellites provided longer mission times but it might be five to seven years from the initiation of the project until data were received. Experiments flown on the shuttle could remain in orbit from 7 to 30 days and then be returned immediately for evaluation. This capability would be a powerful tool in the development of new technology. Dr. Myron S. Malkin, Space Shuttle Program Director, said NASA’s commitment to Congress called for a total development cost of $5.15 billion in 1971 dollars for two operational shuttle vehicles plus $10.5 million for each of 725 missions projected for 1980-1990. Mission costs would be shared by participating experimenters, and estimates were now running at $9.05 million per flight because of reduced estimates for external tank development. Cost for a shuttle flight, which could take 29 500 kg into orbit, contrasted with $18 million for a 4500-kg payload launched on an expendable Atlas booster and up to $58 million to orbit 14 000-18 000 kg on a Saturn IB. Shuttle development was on schedule; the first approach and landing tests were to be in the second quarter of 1977 and the first manned orbital flight in 1979. Orbiter manufacture was under way. The main engine oxygen burner had been tested 14 April and the first big engine firing was scheduled for the end of 1975. NASA would need a fleet of seven orbi-ters at $250 million each if the projected missions were flown. Elwood W. Land, Jr., of the Space Shuttle Systems Office said a 25-astronaut flight corps probably would be maintained to fly missions averaging more than one a week. LeRoy E. Day, Space Shuttle Program Deputy Director, reported the main engine was being designed to make 55 starts before refurbishment was necessary. Engine lifetime would be much longer. The solid boosters were being designed for 20 flights. Phillip E. Culbertson, Director of Mission and Payload Integration, said that all but the smallest expendable launch vehicles would be phased out about three years after the shuttle became operational. (Transcript)
The economic return from the U.S. space program amounted to 33% per year, exceeding the typical yield from investments in stocks, bonds, and real estate, Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Johnson Space Center Director, said in a speech at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univ. at Blacksburg, Va. Among returns not immediately visible to the public were some 30000 inventions available by the end of the Apollo program. The price of Erts 1 Earth Resources Technology Satellite—surveying the earth since its launch 23 July 1972—was less than 50 cents per American. “Given its potential for aiding us in the coming years, who would not support a program that costs less than a . . . half-pound [one fourth kilogram] of ground beef?” Dr. Kraft estimated that the space shuttle, at an annual cost of $5 for each American, was an investment that would “pay, perhaps, the greatest return to future generations.” With such a vehicle we could not only perform a variety of scientific studies with immediate application to life on earth but build permanent, space stations and launch planetary vehicles and eventually starships. The space shuttle program, with its international cooperation, would unite “many nations for the benefit of all.” (Text)
A Science editorial commented on the Nixon Administration and science: During his terms in office President Nixon, who had resigned 9 Aug., had been preoccupied by foreign policy and Watergate reaction. Science was “at most an afterthought.” Because he thought that science should advance the cause of national security and prestige, “grand technology seemed to have had a special fascination for Nixon,” most evident in his enthusiasm for the Apollo program and the supersonic transport. He had made a dramatic declaration of war on cancer and set the Nation toward Project Independence, under which the U.S. was to “achieve energy self-sufficiency by 1980.” There was “little evidence that Nixon was hostile to science but rather that, except for the technological extravaganzas, he was simply not interested.” He lacked rapport with scientists, allying himself instead with proponents and practitioners of the quasi-science of modern management. The Presidential tapes (tape recordings made secretly of conversations in the Oval Office) showed a President “badly informed, even indifferent,” helping to explain why the White House science advisory machinery was deemed expendable. “But in the present situation it takes no special wisdom to see how r&d decisions will affect how the government deals with serious energy and food problems and how important these actions will be in future economic developments. The Nixon tapes illustrate why good presidential advisers and good mechanisms to transmit their advice are necessary in every sphere of policy; this should not be overlooked amcmg the lessons of Watergate for the new Administration.” (Science, 23 Aug 74, 675-8)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded a 90-day $950 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Thiokol Chemical Corp. for studies, analysis, planning, and design required to define the interface and performance relationships of the solid-fueled rocket motor to the solid-fueled rocket boosters, external tank, and orbiter of the sDace shuttle. Award of the 90-day contract was necessary to continue the overall development schedule of the total space shuttle system. A contract award to Thiokol in November 1973 to develop the motors for the shuttle had been delayed pending the resolution of a protest filed by Lockheed Propulsion Co. (NASA Release 74-130; Huntsville Times, 17 Feb 74)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, announced his decision to award Thiokol Corp. immediately a 5.5-million, 180-day letter contract to develop the space shuttle solid-fueled rocket motors. The definitive contract would be awarded later. Lockheed Propulsion Co. had protested to the General Accounting Office the original, 20 Nov. 1973 contract award to Thiokol. gao validated NASA’s selection procedures 24 June 1974. gao stated, however, that the NASA cost analysis had contained an overstatement of the cost differential favoring Thiokol’s proposal over Lockheed’s and recommended the NASA Administrator determine whether the award should be reconsidered. Dr. Fletcher advised the Comptroller General that the decision to proceed with Thiokol was based on the conclusion that the rationale used for the initial selection remained valid, (nasa Release 74-178; 74-180; A&A 1973)
The Air Force launched an unidentified satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base by a Thor-Burner II booster into an orbit with an 878-km apogee, 781-km perigee, 101.4 min period, and 98.9° inclination. The press later identified the satellite as part of the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (dmsp). (Pres Rpt 74; SBD, 26 March 74, 138; Av Wk, 25 March 74,22)
The House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology reported on prospects for Advanced Nuclear Research in the wake of the February 1972 termination of the nerva nuclear rocket program and the FY 1974 reductions in nuclear power and propulsion research brought by NASA budget cuts. Concerned lest the $1.5 billion invested in these programs since NASA took charge of them in 1958 be entirely lost, the Subcommittee had held hearings 7 Feb. 1974 to determine how to maintain a research capability and to ensure that results of the previous R&D would be used toward solving critical energy problems. The Subcommittee was “disappointed” that the AEC—NASA Space Nuclear Systems Office had been abolished. Witnesses from industry, NASA, and aec described work being done in thermionic technology, plasma-core reactor research, high-temperature gas-cooled reactors, and medium-power reactor systems. The Subcommittee concluded that, though funding in these fields was modest, “the potential benefits [were] enormous in scope and magnitude.” While the traditional R&D areas were becoming less well defined for the various agencies, the Subcommittee found the greater portion of the funds for the programs should go to aec rather than to NASA. The Subcommittee recommended: (1) NASA should continue, and expand as its budget permitted, its advanced nuclear research in potential energy applications. (2) NASA should continue complementary arrangements with other Federal agencies, especially aec. (3) The Joint Committee on Atomic Energy should evaluate the Subcommittee findings. (4) NASA and aec should jointly investigate and report how nuclear power and propulsion r&d had been used and how data was stored. And (5) NASA and AEC should expand industrial participation. (Com Print)
President Ford signed into law the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (P.L. 93^138), abolishing the Atomic Energy Commission and establishing in its place three new Federal entities: the Energy Research and Development Administration, the Energy Resources Council, and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. The President also signed Executive Order 11841, activating the Energy Resources Council and appointing the Secretary of the Interior its Chairman. P.L. 93—438 was to become effective not later than 120 days after signature. {PD, 14 Oct 74,1271-3; CR, 8 Oct 74, H10134) Ariel 5—a 132-kg, solar-powered, 16-sided polygon designed by the U.K.—was the fifth satellite launched in a cooperative program between NASA and the U.K. Science Research Council. The mission of its one-year operating life was to study x-ray sources both within and beyond our galaxy, using five experiments from U.K. and one from Goddard Space Flight Center. Instruments were designed to follow up findings of UhuTu (Explorer 42), launched 12 Dec. 1970, and Oao 3, launched 21 Aug. 1971. Uhuru had extended the number of known celestial x-ray sources from about 30 to 200 and found evidence of a black hole companion to Cygnus X-l, later supported by Oao 3, sounding rocket, and ground-based observations. Four Ariel 5 pointing experiments focused on specific x-ray sources, and two scanning experiments swept the entire galaxy with every revolution. The GSFC scanning experiment—first of its kind to fly on an orbiting scientific satellite—consisted of two x-ray pinhole cameras, each with a 90° field of view, providing together a sweep of the entire sky. After evaluation, Ariel 5 results would be available to the world scientific community. Though all experiments obtained data during initial tests, two were drawing excessive current. The problem was resolved by outgassing. A slight delay in shutter closing on Experiment A, a star sensor, had little or no effect on the mission. The U.K.-U.S. cooperative satellite series had begun with Ariel 1 in 1962 and continued through Ariel 4, launched 11 Dec. 1971. Ariel 5 was launched under a 2 Nov. 1970 src-nasa Memorandum of Understanding, with a 27 Dec. 1973 letter modification shifting the launch site from Wallops Flight Center to San Marco to enhance scientific data return. The Memorandum tasked src with spacecraft design, fabrication, and testing, five experiments, primary command and control, and data reduction and analysis, nasa was responsible for one experiment, spacecraft technical support, the Scout launch vehicle, and tracking, command, and data acquisition, src financed all aspects of the Ariel program. The launch by members of the Univ. of Rome’s Aerospace Research Center was the seventh from San Marco, but the first payload for a country other than the U.S. or Italy (nasa mors, 11 Oct 6, Nov 74; nasa Release 74-274)
A new flight research program, the NASA terminal-configured vehicle (tcv) program studying problems in aircraft operations near airports, was under way at Langley Research Center. A modified Boeing 737 flying laboratory with its advanced digital electronics equipment would be used to study present and future terminal-area operating environments, precision four-dimensional [longitude, latitude, altitude, time] flight paths, aircraft performance requirements, automatic systems, displays, and pilot workload. Particular emphasis would be given to the human factors and the interaction of crew members. Research tasks would include close-in, minimum noise, curved approaches to touchdown on a runway with zero visibility. Rollout after touchdown and high-speed turnoffs would also be investigated. (NASA Release 74-163) 25 June-3 July: President Nixon traveled to Brussels (25-26 June) to meet with the government heads of most of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization countries and then to Moscow (27 June-3 July) for a summit meeting with General Secretary Leonid L. Brezhnev of the Soviet Communist Party’s Central Committee. During the Moscow summit meeting, agreements were signed 28-29 June outlining U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation—including exchange of information and scientists—in the fields of energy, housing and other construction, heart research, economics, industry, and technology. In addition, two treaties were signed 3 July limiting antiballistic missile systems and underground nuclear weapon testing. Under the treaties, both countries agreed to one antiballistic missile site each rather than the two originally agreed on in the U.S.-U.S.S.R. treaty signed 26 May 1972, to prohibition of underground nuclear explosions above 150 kt, and to discussions on the dangers of environmental warfare. The treaties were sent to the Senate for ratification 19 Sept. During a 2 July televised address to the Soviet people President Nixon said the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission, scheduled for July 1975, was “symbolic of the new relationship we are building between our two nations” for several reasons. First, the rocket technology built for war was being used for peace. Second, during the mission the astronauts and cosmonauts would “join with one another—just as we are doing and must continue to do.” Third, the newly standardized docking technology, making international space rescues possible, would make space travel safer “just as our new relationship can make life on earth safer for the people of both our countries.” And, finally, because the process of “working and building together ... is the way that together we can build a . . . peace that will last.” (PD, 8 July 74, 727-763; 23 Sept 74, 1170)
The Titan IIIE-Centaur proof-flight vehicle (TC-1), launched by NASA from Eastern Test Range Complex 41 at 9:48 am edt carrying a Viking spacecraft model and the sphinx satellite, was destroyed after the Centaur engine failed to start. At 8.1 min from launch, after normal separation from the Titan booster, the Centaur main-engine start failed and the vehicle automatically went into the restart sequence. A second attempt to start the engine failed at 9.2 min after liftoff. Since the vehicle had not achieved orbital velocity the Range Safety Officer at the Antigua, West Indies, tracking station transmitted destruction commands and the Centaur was destroyed at 12,5 min after the liftoff. The vehicle fell into the Atlantic Ocean 3530 km downrange. Inflight data indicated that the liquid-oxygen boost pump had failed to operate during both attempted engine starts. A committee was formed to investigate the failure and recommend corrective action. Although the primary objective of demonstrating the capability of the Titan-Centaur launch vehicle was not accomplished, some objectives were fulfilled: demonstration of the capability of the launch facility to support a Titan-Centaur launch, structural integrity of the vehicle, Centaur guidance and control of the Titan, Titan-Centaur separation, and Centaur standard shroud capability. The Viking Dynamic Simulator had been instrumented to verify flight loads for the two planned 1975 missions to Mars. Remaining attached to the Centaur stage, the vds was to have flown a typical Viking launch trajectory with a shortened bum to limit the spacecraft to a low earth orbit, to test the guidance system, and estimate injection accuracy. The sphinx Space Plasma High Voltage Interaction Experiment spacecraft had been intended for launch into an elliptical orbit to investigate the effect of charged particles in space on high-voltage solar cells, insulators, and conductors. The launch vehicle combined NASA’s versatile high-energy liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen Centaur upper stage with the Air Force-developed Titan III booster, a two-stage liquid-propellant core rocket augmented by two strap-on solid-fueled rocket motors. It was designed to fill the performance and cost gap between the Atlas-Centaur and the Saturn vehicles and boost NASA’s heaviest unmanned payloads into orbit or interplanetary trajectories. The first of six scheduled operational missions—the U.S. and West German Helios solar probe scheduled for the fall—would be configured to a two-burn mission to obtain data lost on the proof flight. The Titan-Centaur program was managed by NASA’s Office of Space Science. Lewis Research Center was responsible for the Titan-Centaur system. The Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization was responsible for the Titan IIIE booster, including aerospace ground equipment and Launch Complex 41 site activation. Kennedy Space Center directed launch operations at etr. (NASA mors, 25 Jan, 24 June 74; NASA Release 74r-25; UPI, W Post, 12 Feb 74, A2; Robinson, Today, 13 Feb 74)
nasa announced a 45-day $500 000 continuation of a 13 Feb. contract with Thiokol Chemical Corp. for the space shuttle solid-fueled rocket motor design study. In addition to original contract requirements, the continuation contract required that Thiokol assist nasa in idenifying materials, independent of the specific final motor design, that had long-lead-time supply times, (nasa Release 74-130)
Japan Rocket Development Assn., an industry group, had proposed a three-phase, $9-billion Japanese program to launch 65 satellites between 1978 and 1987, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Nineteen satellites, each weighing under 300 kg, would be launched in the $3.3-billion Phase 1 for engineering, meteorological, geographical survey, communications, navigation, and ionospheric research missions. Of 25 spacecraft in the $2.8-billion Phase 2, some would have earth resources survey missions. Weighing up to 600 kg, they would be launched by N—2 rockets incorporating McDonnell Douglas Delta 1st stages and two 4500-kg, Japanese-built upper stages. The first prototype N-2 was scheduled for summer 1975. The 21 Phase 3 satellites, some weighing 1000 kg, would be orbited at a cost of $2.6 billion, and many would be launched by a Japanese O-model launch vehicle still being designed. The program also called for launch trials for Japanese M-X boosters. (Av Wk, 23 Sept 74,21)
A giant nylon parachute was demonstrated at Kennedy Space Center as a possible design for the recovery of the space shuttle solid-fueled rocket booster casings. The parachute—built by Goodyear Aerospace Corp. to provide knowledge of handling heavy parachutes—had a base diameter of 40 m, base canopy circumference of 120 m, and total weight of 940 kg. Plans called for the use of three or four chutes of this kind in addition to a drogue chute to land the shuttle’s two 73 000-kg booster casings in the Atlantic, where boosters and parachutes could be retrieved by ships. (Spaceport News, 27 June 74, 5)
Hazard analyses and quality control techniques developed by NASA in the Apollo program would improve the reliability of safety and antipollution equipment used in the offshore drilling of oil wells, NASA announced. At the request of the U.S. Geological Survey, NASA teams at Marshall Space Flight Center, the Mississippi Test Facility, and the Michoud Assembly Facility had recommended development of subsurface safety valves, activated either automatically after sensing increased velocity in the oil line or by remote control from a surface location, to protect the marine and coastal environment, (nasa Release 74-10)
Capt. Lee R. Scherer (usn, Ret.), Flight Research Center Director, had been named Director of Kennedy Space Center effective in mid-January 1975, NASA announced. He would succeed Dr. Kurt H. Debus, who retired 9 Oct. Before going to frc in 1971, Capt. Scherer had been Lunar Exploration Director in the NASA Hq. Apollo Program Office, directing the scientific exploration of the first five manned landings on the moon. He had been Manager of the Lunar Orbiter Program 1963—1967. (nasa Ann, 23 Dec 74)
Wind-tunnel tests of almost all supersonic portions of a typical NASA space shuttle flight were completed at Arnold Engineering Development Center. The simulated flight profile included separation of the orbiter and its fuel tank from the two large solid-fueled rocket motors, orbiter flight with and without fuel tank, and orbiter reentry into the earth’s atmosphere. The tests, begun September 1973, showed orbiter flight characteristics and the heat levels segments of the system could be expected to experience while traveling 4% to 20 times the speed of sound, (afsc Newsreview, June 74, 8-9; aedc proj off, interview, 27 March 75) 6-7, 12-13 March: nasa Acting Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Edwin C. Kilgore and other NASA officials testified on the FY 1975 nasa oast budget in hearings before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Kilgore testified 6 March that in FY 1975 oast would modify its “program again to meet the changing needs of the Nation.” Energy conservation “is an inherent part of our aeronautics and space research and I believe we have the capability also to provide significant support to civil needs for energy technology. At the same time, we must continue our effective response to the Nation’s need for a quiet, clean, economical air transportation system, for support to military aviation, and for a viable program to exploit and explore space.” Much of the aeronautics program [see 26 Feb.] already was “contributing to aircraft fuel conservation.” Advanced avionics systems to relieve terminal congestion, more highly maneuverable aircraft and operational procedures, more efficient engines, composite materials for weight reduction, and aerodynamic drag reduction techniques—“all contribute to fuel economy.” And the program was being examined to increase emphasis in areas related to the national energy problem, both in conservation and in long-term technology. For space exploration, propellants with more powerful liquified-gas oxidizers—storable in cold space conditions—offered up to 30% increase in payloads over those permitted by earth-storable propellants. Nuclear energy studies included investigation of low-temperature thermionic converters, gaseous uranium reactor concepts, and use of heat from high-temperature reactor sources for industry use. In stationary power, NASA was working with the Dept, of Interior’s Office of Coal Research to increase power produced from coal 40%. [See also During March.] George W. Cherry, Deputy Associate Administrator for Programs, oast, said 12 March that research and development on shuttle systems had contributed to substantial improvements in both high- and low-temperature reusable insulations, coatings, bearings, seals, and hydraulic fluids, all applicable on the earth. The requirement that a reusable space tug return to the shuttle for return to the earth had doubled the velocity requirement of the vehicle, speeding the development of a high-performance propulsion system. (Transcript)
The U.S.S.R. launched eight Cosmos satellites on a single booster from Plesetsk, in its second eight-satellite launch of the year [see 23 April]. Orbital parameters were: Cosmos 677—1466-km apogee, 1398-km perigee, 114.5-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 678—1533-km apogee, 1466-km perigee, 116.0-min period, 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 679—1511-km apogee, 1466-km perigee, 115.8-min period, 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 680—1492-km apogee, 1466-km perigee, 115.5-min period, 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 681■—1472-km apogee, 1466-km perigee, 115.3-min period, 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 682—1466-km apogee, 1453-km perigee, 115.1-min period, 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 683—1467-km apogee, 1434-km perigee, 114.9-min period, 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 684—1467-km apogee, 1416-km perigee, 114.7-min period, 74.0° inclination. The U.S. press speculated that the satellites were part of an operational system for worldwide naval communications, (gsfc Whly SSR, 19-25 Sept 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 20 Sept 74, Ul; SBD, 23 Sept 74, 101; 21 Oct 74,52)
The Air Force launched Nts 1 Navigation Technology Satellite on an Atlas F booster from Vandenberg Air Force Base into orbit with a 13 762-km apogee, 13 440-km perigee, 7-hr 48-min period, and 125.1° inclination. The spacecraft, designed and built by the Naval Research Laboratory and originally called Timation 3A, would test techniques under consideration for the Dept, of Defense’s navstar Global Positioning System (gps) . Nts 1 carried receivers and transmitters to broadcast its exact position continuously and an atomic clock to transmit ultraprecise time signals, navstar, when completed in the mid-1980s, would be a system of 24 satellites providing worldwide, accurate, and instantaneous three-dimensional positions of air, sea, and surface vehicles equipped with a gps receiver. (Pres Rpt 74; Av Wk, 22 July 74,14; ajfsc Release oip 274.74)
An electric rocket engine that short-circuited aboard Sert II Space Electric Rocket Test satellite in 1970 had been restarted in space and successfully operated for six weeks, scientists at Lewis Research Center reported. Launched 3 Feb. 1970 to demonstrate that electric propulsion could be used for future space missions, Sert II was to have operated an ion engine for six months in space. Engine thruster 2 shut down after less than three months of operation; thruster 1 performed for five months. Both failures were attributed to a small chip apparently eroded from a molybdenum grid and lodged between two grids at the back of the engine. William R. Kerslake, Sert II experiment manager, believed the chip was jarred loose in summer 1974 when the spacecraft was spun up by its cold-gas thruster system to obtain a better sun angle for solar arrays. Since then, the thruster had been operated successfully on 17 occasions for short periods, obtaining up to 80% of its maximum thrust. Electrical Propulsion Branch Chief Robert C. Finke said operation after 4% years proved “the long term storability of this thruster design” and indicated that the system could be “confidently incorporated into future missions requiring several years of thruster operation.” (LeRC Release 74—60)
Japan successfully launched Tansei 2 experimental MS-T2 satellite from Kagoshima Space Center, Uchinoura, on a three-stage MU—3C booster at 2:00 pm local time (1:00 am edt) after a two-day postponement because of bad weather. A thrust-vector-control system had been installed on the 2nd stage of the booster to stabilize its flight. The improved version of the four-stage MU-4S was the first guided booster Japan had used. The satellite entered orbit with a 3229-km apogee, 283-km perigee, 121.7-min period, and 31.2° inclination, kyodo news service reported the objective was “to test the control devices and not for scientific observation.” Tansei 2, named “Light Blue” for the Univ. of Tokyo colors, was Japan’s fifth satellite and third test satellite. Ohsumi (launched 11 Feb. 1970) and Tansei 1 (launched 16 Feb. 1971) were test satellites returning performance data. Shinsei (launched 28 Sept. 1971) had carried instruments to study cosmic rays and electric waves, and Denpa (Radio Explorer Satellite launched 19 Aug. 1972) had carried instruments to probe the ionosphere, (gsfc SSR, 28 Feb 74; FBis-Japan, 22 Feb 74, 13-14; A&A 1971) The Italian-built 170-kg San Marco 4 carried three experiments: an Italian density-drag accelerometer to measure atmospheric drag, a U.S. omegatyon to measure the temperature and density of thermosphere molecular nitrogen, and a U.S. neutral mass spectrometer to measure primary constituents of the neutral atmosphere. Data gathered by San Marco 4 in the equatorial zone and Explorer 51 in the auroral zone would provide a good picture of the effects of magnetic storms on the thermosphere and differences in the thermosphere’s response to energy coming from the sun to the poles and the equator. The omegatron experiment was activated 19 Feb. and the neutral mass spectrometer 22 Feb. By 26 Feb. both instruments were acquiring worthwhile scientific data. The Italian density-drag accelerometer, activated shortly after launch but not performing properly, was being investigated. All spacecraft systems were functioning as planned. San Marco 4 was the fourth satellite launched under cooperative agreements between NASA and the Italian Space Commission. San Marco 1 was launched 15 Dec. 1964; San Marco 2, 26 April 1967; and San Marco 3, 24 April 1971. Under the latest agreement, signed 6 Aug. 1973, Italy had designed and built the spacecraft, provided one experiment, and conducted launch operations. The U.S. provided the Scout booster, two experiments, technical consultation, launch crew training, and spacecraft tracking and data acquisition, (nasa mors, 15, 26 Feb 74; NASA Releases 74-30,74-39) 18 February—6 March: Thomas L. Gatch ’was lost at sea while attempting the first transatlantic balloon flight. Gatch lifted off from Harrisburg, Pa., 18 Feb. in a two-meter sealed gondola, the Light Heart, suspended from 10 helium-filled balloons. He hoped to reach 12 000-m altitude and ride the jet-stream winds across the Atlantic to Europe, but changes in air currents pushed him south of his planned course. Radio contact was made with Gatch 19 Feb. by an airliner 1600 km east northeast of Puerto Rico. He was spotted at 305-m altitude 21 Feb. by a Liberian ship 1670 km off the coast of Africa. Further inconsistent and unconfirmed radio contacts and sightings made tracking Gatch’s balloon difficult. After reports of a sighting on the Spanish Sahara, the Spanish Foreign Legion searched the 480-km Moroccan-Spanish Sahara border for two days, while U.S. military aircraft and ships were put on lookout. The Dept, of Defense ordered an intensive visual radar and radio search 1 March of the Atlantic Ocean 1530 km west of Africa, but the search was given up 6 March after exploration of 578 000 sq km of ocean. (W Star-News, 18, 22, 26 Feb. 74; W Post, 25 Feb, 2, 7 March 74; B Sim, 21,25 Feb 74) _
NASA announced plans for a joint mission with Great Britain in June 1975 to launch an x-ray telescope on a British Skylark sounding rocket to study the Puppis A supernova remnant. NASA would design, fabricate, and assemble the flight telescope; the British would integrate the payload into the sounding rocket and provide the high-resolution position-sensitive detector, launch facilities, and operations. The combination of the Wolter Type I glancing incidence telescope and the detector would permit the structural details of the regions responsible for the supernova’s soft x-ray emission to be studied with unprecedented resolution, (nasa Release 74-179)
The first system to use solar energy to heat a U.S. school began operation in Timonium, Md. The $568 000 project, jointly sponsored by the National Science Foundation and AAl Corp. [see 2 Feb.], was rushed into operation in six weeks to use the remainder of the winter’s chilly days to gather experimental data for future solar heating systems. (Richards, W Post, 8 March 74, C2) 7, 12-14 March: Dr. John E. Naugle, Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified on NASA’s space science program before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications during FY 1975 authorization hearings: A Solar Maximum Mission (smm) satellite was proposed for FY 1975 design study and launch in the next period of maximum solar activity, 19781979. smm would investigate solar flares and related phenomena and their effects on the solar-terrestrial system, making, for the first time, simultaneous measurements of flares across the electromagnetic spectrum—within a national program of satellite, sounding rocket, and ground-based observations of the sun during maximum activity. The spacecraft would be shuttle-retrievable for refurbishment and reflight with advanced solar physics experiments in the 1980s. Requested funding for the Large Space Telescope (Ls’r) for FY 1975 was $6.2 million, to proceed with design of telescope optics, detectors, and support systems. NASA had originally planned to spend about $10 million in FY 1975 on the lst—to be launched on the space shuttle in 1980—but reduced the request to reflect the four- to six-month delay in shuttle development. NASA—in cooperation with the Naval Research Laboratory, Sandia Laboratories, and West Germany—was developing an Aries sounding rocket to support the physics and astronomy program. Aries, which used the 2nd stage of surplus Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missiles, would provide a greater lift and longer flight time than possible at the price of rockets now in use. Cost overruns on the 1975 two-spacecraft Viking mission to Mars could total 10% of the original $838-million estimate for the program because of hardware development problems. Major problems with the biology instrument included packing the sophisticated instruments into a small volume, development of very small valves to inject sufficiently small amounts of nutrients into Martian samples, and thermal control. The instrument was running $21.2 million over the budgeted cost. Difficulties also had been encountered in producing enough 0.005-cm plated magnetic wire of uniform characteristics for the onboard computer. Dr. Naugle said that, although the overall coniplexity of the spacecraft had been underestimated, “we expect these problems to be solved and to launch both Viking spacecraft on schedule in 1975.” (Transcript) Experiments were designed to demonstrate an attitude control accuracy of better than three arc minutes using a gas jet system, measure the performance in orbit of operational infrared sensor components, demonstrate an inexpensive Canopus sensor of high reliability, measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft, determine interference generated by the propane gas control system, demonstrate a basic sensing element with application in digital sun and earth albedo sensors, and measure degradation of silicone solar cells in orbit. NASA’s objective of placing the satellite in an earth orbit that would permit achievement of the scientific objectives was met, and the mission was adjudged a success 19 March. Under a December 1972 Memorandum of Understanding between NASA and the U.K.’s Dept, of Trade and Industry, NASA would be reimbursed for launch vehicle and services. Developed for the U.K. by Hawker Siddeley Dynamics Ltd., the 83.5-by 66.5-cm, 92-kg spacecraft was powered by a four-panel 250-cm-long solar array of 1800 solar cells. Miranda was deployed in a fully sunlit polar orbit with a yo-yo despin system and its attitude control system acquired the sun through three sun sensors. The eighth NASA launch of a U.K. satellite and the fourth on a Scout vehicle—Miranda carried the names of 80000 Boy Scouts from nine U.S. states on a microdot. (NASA MOR, 21 March 74; NASA Releases 74-36, 74-53; UN Reg;- Newport News, Va, Daily Press, 22 Feb 74; SBD, 12 March 74,59)
Dr. Paul E. Hemke, a pioneer in aeronautical engineering, died at the age of 84. In 1910 he had assisted in designing one of the Nation’s first aircraft, which flew to a height of 0.6 m. Dr. Hemke, an analyst at the Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory 1924-1927, was responsible for establishing aeronautical engineering departments at Case Institute of Applied Science in 1931 and at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1936, where he headed the department until 1949. During World War II Dr. Hemke served on a Government team of scientists sent to Europe to persuade European scientists, especially rocket experts, to emigrate to the U.S. (W Star-News, 29 May 74)
Thiokol Corp. had been awarded an $8 900 000 contract for strap-on motors for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle, NASA announced. Delivery would run from May 1975 through May 1976. The contract called for 124, TX—354-5 (Castro II) rocket motors, 41 upper-burn nozzle closure plugs, and documentation for the Thor-Delta, which was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center. The Castro II strap-ons had a thrust of about 270 000 newtons (60 000 lbs). (NASA Release 74-219)
Plans almost to double spending for the European Space Research Organization’s Ariane launch vehicle program in 1975 were made at ah Ariane Program Board meeting in Paris. Spending authority would exceed $71 million, up from 1974’s $37-million budget, and obligational authority was proposed at about $110 million instead of $71 million proposed earlier, in authorizations expected to be approved at the 26 Nov. Board meeting. The Board—made up of officials from esro and 10 European countries financing Ariane development—met to review budget and development following France’s confirmation that she would continue to contribute 62.5% of the financing. The development schedule would still call for flight trials of the launcher in 1979 and 1980. The Board also was informed that the Societe Europeene de Propulsion (sep) had sold a production license for the Ariane’s Viking rocket motors to the Indian Space Research Organization for ISRo’s SLV—3 vehicle, under development for launching future educational broadcast satellites. (Av Wk, 28 Oct 74,19)
A Black Brant sounding rocket launched from Peru by a team of U.S. and Peruvian scientists found evidence that auroral activity occurred not only in the polar regions but in the ionosphere near the earth’s geomagnetic equator. The scientists—from Aerospace Corp., Univ. of Texas, U.S. Air Force, Peru’s Geophysical Institute, and the Peruvian government—were studying recurring ionospheric disturbances, known as spread F, that had been discovered by Peruvian radar studies. (Miles, LA Times, 28 April 74)
The U.S.S.R. cosmonaut corps was being built up at same time the U.S. astronaut force was dwindling, a Miami Herald article said. The Herald quoted Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, who had visited the U.S.S.R. during training for the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission, as saying : “Star City (where most of the cosmonauts live and train) looks like a boom town. There’s no doubt the Soviets have a vigorous ongoing manned space effort planned for the next five or six years.” He said that the number of buildings in Star City had tripled in the previous two years, with more under construction. The total of 75 to 80 cosmonauts was a sharp increase over the estimated 55 of five years ago. In contrast the U.S. astronaut corps had fallen to 34 from a peak of 60 during the Apollo program, with only three training for a flight. Stafford said he did not believe the U.S.S.R. had any new spacecraft under development hut rather planned for the continued use of the Soyuz as a workhorse. (M Her, 21 Aug 74)
France reluctantly decided to cut back construction of the Anglo-French Concorde supersonic airliner and to scrap production of the Mercure short-range twin-jet airliner, at a special meeting of Premier Pierre Messmer and five ministers. France had been demanding production of eight Concorde aircraft but would now accept as few as six in the knowledge that, with a Labor Party victory in the 28 Feb. British elections, the U.K. might be willing to scrap the entire project. The press said the French decision came after a report from France’s rocket testing center suggesting a $90-million fuel-tank modification to boost range at the expense of reduced transatlantic loads. A suggested 10% increase in engine thrust, requiring 8% more wing area at a cost of as much as $400 million, was believed rejected at the meeting. The decision to scrap the 120-seat, 1200-km range Mercure was taken after an initial production run of 10 aircraft and writeoff costs reported by the press at $120 million. Competition from the already established DC-9s and Boeing 727s and 737s was too great for the Mercure, whose one buyer was Air Inter, the internal French airline. (Randal, W Post, 17 Feb 74, Al)
Dr. William 0. Davis, Chief of the Upper Atmosphere and Space Services Office of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and a leading rocket and space expert, died in Washington, D.C., at the age of 54. Dr. Davis was a member of the interagency team that planned and coordinated NASA’s Earth Resources Satellite program. As Assistant Director of Laboratories at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base 1957-1958, he had directed Project Far Side, the earliest attempt to obtain radiation and magnetic data from outer space by launching a multistage rocket from a high-altitude balloon. {W Post, 15 May 74)
The nasa Space Shuttle Cost and Review Committee recommended program changes to Dr. James C. Fletcher, Administrator, to reduce rising costs. It also reported design changes made necessary by thermal weight constraints. The committee, headed by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight John F. Yardley, recommended delaying the second shuttle orbiter flight, refurbishing the first test orbiter earlier than planned instead. Deferrals of three months to two years were recommended for components of the second shuttle launch complex at Kennedy Space Center, which had originally been scheduled for completion about the time of the first shuttle flights. Also recommended was a delay in the development of improved spacesuits and portable life support systems for extravehicular activities from the space shuttle. Instead, evas would use Apollo-style hardware. Emergency barriers on shuttle runways and a building at Ksc for installing fairings and parachutes on solid-fueled rocket motors were judged unnecessary. Some tests were recommended for cancellation. Design changes to accommodate thermal and weight constraints included payload doors of a graphite epoxy composite that expanded less when heated and weighed 400 kg less than die aluminum composite originally planned for use. Solid-fueled-rocket separation motors that would provide a higher thrust level for a shorter time when separating die large solid-propellant boosters from the orhiter after launch were found to cause no orbiter damage—solving a possible problem anticipated with the original separation motors. The committee also recommended switching to a new thermal coating material for the external liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen tank to prevent tank overheating during launch, (nasa prog off, interview, 22 Sept 75; Av Wk, 9 Sept 74, 9-10; NASA Off of Admin, Daily Appointments Calendar)
Marshall Space Flight Center awarded more than $28.2 million in contracts of $25 000 or more. Among awards were $2 253 300 to Inscho’s Mechanical Contractors, Inc., for construction of the X-Ray Telescope Facility at msfc ; also $695 000 to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and $687 201 to Martin Marietta Corp., for Large Space Telescope support system module studies, (msfc Release 75-18) 1974 in Summary The U.S. orbited 28 payloads in 22 launches during the year. The U.S.S.R. orbited 95 payloads in 81 launches; Italy launched 2 payloads, using NASA launch vehicles; and Japan launched 1. U.S. launches included 16 payloads in 14 NASA launches and 12 spacecraft in 8 Dept, of Defense launches. For the first year since 1967 the U.S. launched no men into space, although Skylab 4 Astronauts Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue completed the longest mission yet accomplished by man when they splashed down in the Pacific Ocean 8 Feh. after 84 days in space. The U.S.S.R. orbited three two-man crews during the year, including two crews to dock with the Salyut 3 space station. The Soyuz 14 crew docked and worked aboard the laboratory for nearly 16 days, but Soyuz 15 failed to dock and it returned to earth after 48 hrs in space. Soyuz 16 tested the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project configuration in December. The U.S.S.R. also launched the Salyut 4 orbiting space station, to be joined by a two-man crew in January 1975. The 16 NASA-launched payloads—li paid for by domestic and foreign corporations or foreign governments—included 7 communications, 1 applications technology, 2 meteorological, and 6 scientific satellites. These were in addition to 2 Italian-launched cooperative scientific satellites. Comsats included two spacecraft launched for United Kingdom military communications ■—Skynet IIA into too low an orbit, followed later by the successful Skynet IIB, Westar 1 and 2, launched for Western Union Telegraph Co., were the first U.S. commercial domestic communications satellites. The most complex and versatile of the Applications Technology Satellites, Ats 6, went into orbit in May. The spacecraft was transmitting medical and educational telecommunications to small inexpensive ground stations in remote areas of the U.S. and would, in 1975, he positioned to broadcast educational programs to 5000 villages in India. Symphonie 1 was launched for France and West Germany as the first of two experimental communications satellites. Intelsat-lV F-8 was launched for Communications Satellite Corp. on behalf of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, and Amsat Oscar 7 for Radio Amateur Satellite Corp. as a secondary payload on the Noaa 4 launch. The two meteorological satellites included Synchronous Meteorological Satellite Sms 1, launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to provide continuous day and night images of cloud cover over the U.S. and Atlantic Ocean for the first time. Sms 1 was the first meteorological satellite in synchronous orbit. Noaa 4 was launched as part of noaa’s global weather watch program. All but one of NASA’s six scientific payloads were cooperative efforts with foreign countries. Miranda (UK-X4) was launched for U.K. to measure the density of sun-reflecting particles near the spacecraft as well as test spacecraft systems. Spain’s first satellite—Intasat, put into polar orbit as a secondary payload with Noaa 4—began studies of the ionosphere. Two spacecraft were launched in cooperation with West Germany: Aeros 2 to measure aeronomic parameters of the upper atmosphere and solar ultraviolet radiation, Helios 1 into solar orbit to investigate interstellar space closer to the sun than any previous spacecraft had and to gather extensive new data on the sun. NASA and The Netherlands joined to orbit The Netherlands Astronomical Satellite Ans 1 to study stellar uv and x-ray sources. NASA’s only all-U.S. scientific payload, Hawkeye 1 (Explorer 52), was launched into polar orbit to study plasma properties of the magnetosphere over the north polar cap. A Titan-Centaur proof-flight vehicle carrying a Viking spacecraft model and a sphinx satellite failed to achieve orbit and was destroyed during launch operations. The new NASA launch vehicle later successfully launched Helios 1. Italian launch crews, using NASA launch vehicles, launched two satellites into earth orbit from the San Marco launch platform in the Indian Ocean off the East African coast. San Marco 4 in February carried two U.S. and one Italian experiment into orbit to measure diurnal variations in the equatorial neutral atmosphere. Ariel 5 was launched in October for U.K., to study galactic and extragalactic x-ray sources, in the first Italian launch for a country other than the U.S. or Italy. Japan launched its fifth satellite, Tansei 2—Japan’s first on a guided booster. In addition to the three manned Soyuz missions^ the U.S.S.R. launched 2 Salyut space stations; 3 unmanned Soyuz spacecraft identified as Cosmos 638, 656, and 672 ; 7 Molniya comsats; 5 Meteor meteorological satellites; 2 cooperative Intercosmos; 2 Luna lunar probes; and 71 spacecraft under the Cosmos designation. Space Science and Exploration Besides the new scientific satellites, NASA continued systematic exploration of the solar system as Pioneer 11, launched in April 1973, sped to within 42 000 km of Jupiter 3 Dec. The spacecraft photographed the giant planet and its moons, transmitting new information on the planet’s weather patterns, atmosphere, and radiation belts. Data from Pioneer 11 and its predecessor Pioneer 10, which had encountered Jupiter in December 1973 revealed that Jupiter was hotter than previously estimated and composed largely of liquid hydrogen. Cyclones and anticyclones stretched completely around the planet with rising grey-white cloud ridges extending 20 km above Jupiter’s distinctive orange-brown belts. Jupiter’s great red spot was probably the vortex of a great storm that had- raged along a 400 000-km front for centuries. At year’s end Pioneer 11 was speeding toward rendezvous with Saturn to give man his closest look at that planet while Pioneer 10 raced to cross the orbits of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto and become the first spacecraft to leave the solar system. Meanwhile Mariner 10—after passing within 5800 km of Venus and sending back new information on particle environment, mass, and density of that planet—made two successful flybys of Mercury in March and September. The spacecraft transmitted data that gave scientists mass measurements 100 times better than previous ones, described a detached, well-defined bow shock wave, and showed temperatures varying from 90 K on the night side to 700 K on the day side ( — 300°F to 800°F). During the two encounters the spacecraft photographed 45% of the planet’s surface. By the end of the year Mariner 10 was headed for a third Mercury encounter in March 1975. Preparations for the two 1975 Viking missions to Mars continued with the qualification-testing of Viking science instruments, engineering subsysterns, and entire orbiter and lander spacecraft. During the last quarter of the year the lander successfully completed critical surface simulation tests that included subjecting the spacecraft to temperatures approximating Martian conditions and dropping it from 0.6 m to determine the effects of landing shocks on the integrated Viking equipment. A detailed spacecraft design for the 1977 Mariner mission to Jupiter and Saturn was completed while a major effort to find a satisfactory way to protect the spacecraft from Jupiter’s strong radiation continued. A major new space science start, approved in nasa’s FY 1975 budget, was the 1978 dual Pioneer-Venus mission to obtain detailed measurements of the Venus atmosphere with an orbiter and four atmospheric entry probes. Hughes Aircraft Co. was chosen in February for spacecraft design, with an option for spacecraft development, and experimenters and scientific instrumentation were selected in June. NASA continued preparations to place the Large Space Telescope in earth orbit to make detailed astronomical observations 10 times deeper into space than possible before. During 1974, preliminary system definitions and advanced technological development were carried out on selected elements of the LST. Besides preparing for future missions, scientists continued analysis of data accumulated from previous missions. A Lunar Data Analysis and Synthesis program began to correlate existing data and data still being collected by the five Apollo lunar surface-experiment packages (alsep) left on the moon during the lunar landing program. With the conclusion of the Skylab flight program, large volumes of new data on the sun and the earth and the most comprehensive inflight data yet on man’s adaptation to space flight became available. During the year sounding rockets, balloons, telescopes, and instrumented aircraft continued to increase knowledge of the universe. NASA launched nearly 80 sounding rockets from sites around the world. A significant accomplishment was the launch of 54 sounding rockets within 24 hrs to support the Joint NASA-Air Force Atmospheric Layering and Density Distribution of Ions and Neutrals (aladdin) program. During 1974 scientists in programs outside NASA as well as in, using data from both orbital and suborbital programs, discovered a 13th moon of Jupiter, observed a pulsar that was a member of a double star system, obtained new data on the size and shape of the Crab Nebula, discovered a galaxy six times larger than any previously known in the universe, and made the greatest advance yet in cometary research with the study of the Comet Kohoutek, including first-time identification of water molecules in a comet. The U.S.S.R. continued a program of space exploration with the launch of lunar probes Luna 22 in May and Luna 23 in October. Luna 22 studied the lunar surface and atmosphere from lunar orbit. Luna 23 was damaged while landing on the moon’s surface and its work was discontinued after three days of equipment testing. Space Transportation and Technology The space shuttle program accelerated, with funding increasing from $475 million in FY 1974 to $800 million in FY 1975. But this total reflected an $89-million cut by the Office of Management and Budget from planned space shuttle funding, delaying the program four to six months. The final maj or contract was awarded and design work neared completion; by year’s end the program moved into hardware test and fabrication stages. Construction of the shuttle runway at Kennedy Space Center began in April and throughout the year contracts were awarded for additional space shuttle facilities. The European Space Research Organization selected VFW-Fokker/ ehno Raumfahrttechnik GmbH as prime contractor to design and build Spacelab for missions on the shuttle. Primary efforts were directed toward planning early shuttle missions and making analyses for a NASA mission model. In solid propulsion technology, the final motor—the first with a restart capability—in a series of high-efficiency solid-fueled motors was successfully static-fired. The October firing marked the first time a spacecraft solid-fueled motor had been fired, quenched, reignited, and requenched. Another significant step was the static-firing of a thermally sterilized solid-fueled motor. Electric propulsion—attractive as auxiliary propulsion for long-life station-keeping and attitude control—took a stride forward with the tests of a 4.5-millinewton (0.001-lb-thrust) ion engine aboard Ats 6. In spacecraft energy system technology, solar cells were made from a silicon ribbon grown directly from the liquid state, a critical first step in low-cost manufacture of solar cells. Other advances were made in laser, nuclear, atmosphere-entry, material-and-structures, guidance, and control-and-information technology. The X—24B lifting body completed 15 flights in the NASA and Air Force program to develop a safe piloted vehicle for reentry from space flight and to develop hypersonic technology. Following the first supersonic flight in March, the vehicle’s performance and handling qualities were evaluated in the speed range between mach 1.6 and landing. NASA’s aeronautics research and development program to reduce fuel consumption, reduce undesirable environmental effects, improve safety, and advance technology continued during the year. Flight tests of an F—111 equipped with the NASA-developed supercritical wing demonstrated a 15% reduction in fuel consumption. Other tests using flexible aircraft skin concepts, composite materials, active-control technology, and alternative fuels also demonstrated reduced drag and potential fuel savings. In NASA’s refan program—an effort to reduce noise of the JT8D engine that powered most of the Nation’s narrow-body commercial fleet—three refanned engines demonstrated in ground tests that the ground area affected by objectionable noise from commercial aircraft could be reduced by 75%. In another technique, a DC-8 using a NASA-developed two-segment landing approach reduced the ground area affected by excessive noise 53%. Efforts to measure and reduce aircraft engine exhaust in the atmosphere continued with the Global Air Sampling Program. A United Air Lines, Inc., Boeing 747 equipped with an atmospheric sampling instrument began measuring aircraft pollution on commercial air routes, while the clean combuster technology program was expanded to reduce engine emissions. Programs to improve aircraft safety continued to make progress. Techniques to reduce hazardous trailing vortices were flight-tested. A NASA-developed prototype system to track aircraft wakes near airports, allowing traffic controllers to adjust aircraft spacing more closely, was being operationally evaluated at John F. Kennedy Airport in New York City. The Dept. ,of Defense A-10 close-air-support program moved into production stage, with the first of six aircraft in final assembly and checkout. Production of an initial increment of 22 aircraft was approved in December, with a full production decision expected late in 1975. dod’s B-l advanced strategic bomber moved through engine preliminary flight-readiness tests in April, rollout in October, and first flight in December. Following flight testing, a production decision would be made in 1976. The first operational F—15 advanced tactical fighter was delivered in November. At year’s end 20 test aircraft had accumulated more than 300 flight hrs. International Cooperation Aerospace activities continued to become more international. Of the 16 NASA-launched payloads, 10 were cooperative efforts with foreign organizations. In addition, the 2 Italian-launched payloads carried U.S. experiments. During the year negotiations were completed on an agreement for NASA to furnish reimbursable launches for three future synchronous-orbit Japanese satellites, nasa-esro Spacelab working groups met throughout the year on experimental objectives and user requirements. Investigators from 42 countries and 5 international organizations were selected for Earth Resources Technology Satellite follow-on investigations, and Italy and Iran signed agreements with NASA to build earth stations to receive ERTS data directly. The 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project neared flight readiness. Joint compatibility tests of communications and docking systems were carried out and intensive joint flight-crew and flight-controller training was begun. Apollo hardware was completed. The U.S.S.R launched two unmanned and one manned Soyuz spacecraft (Cosmos 638 and 672 and Soyuz 16) to check out new systems and equipment for the joint mission. NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences approved public information plans and plans for prelaunch testing at the U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. U.S. and Soviet specialists exchanged information about the moon, planets, environmental problems, and biomedical results from U.S. and U.S.S.R. space flights. U.S. and Soviet scientists preparing a joint experiment using Ats 6 data met in the U.S. in October for technical coordination. And plans were formulated in October for a U.S. life science experiment to fly on the next available Soviet biological satellite. For 101 days, June-September, the U.S. and 69 other countries participating in the Global Atmospheric Research Program’s Atlantic Tropical Experiment monitored nearly every known meteorological factor along a 52-million-sq-km tropical area of land and sea from the eastern Pacific Ocean across Latin America, the Atlantic Ocean, and Africa to the western Indian Ocean. More than 4000 persons using 41 ships, 40 instrumented buoys, 12 aircraft, and 6 satellites probed from 1.6 km below the sea surface to the top of the atmosphere to improve weather predictions, assess pollution, determine the feasibility of large-scale weather modification, and establish new bonds of international cooperation. " Applications and Energy During 1974 space technology continued to make significant contributions to the quality of life. In addition to 1974-launched Ats 6, Sms 1, Westar 1 and 2, Intelstat-lV F-8, and Noaa 4 to improve weather predictions and communications on the earth—Erts 1, launched in July 1972, completed 29 mos in operation. Erts 1 had transmitted more than 100 000 photos covering three fourths of the world’s land masses and coastal areas, erts data—used to monitor urban and agricultural development, locate air and water pollution, update maps, and find new water and mineral resources—had been provided to more than 300 U.S. and foreign investigators in government, universities, and industry, erts—b development continued on schedule. NASA’s pollution monitoring program—to develop and demonstrate technology to monitor atmospheric and water pollution—completed its second year. Procurement for design and construction of the Nimbus-G Oceanographic and Air Pollution Observing Satellite, planned for 1978 launch, was under way. The Lower Atmospheric Composition and Temperature Experiment (lacate) was demonstrated in May and a test in the advanced applications flight experiment program-—using balloons, sounding rockets, and aircraft as well as ground-based experiments—successfully gathered atmospheric data over a five-hour period. dod expanded and improved its Defense Satellite Communications System and let contracts for Phase 1 navstar global positioning satellites. The Defense Meteorological Satellite program continued to furnish weather data for military and civilian use. Space technology continued to be applied to medicine. A digital computing cardiotachometer to monitor heart rates, an automated blood pressure monitoring system, and a new method of attaching artificial limbs were among the NASA-developed contributions demonstrated in 1974. An Office of Energy Programs was established in NASA to focus the application of its aerospace technology to energy needs. In addition to programs to reduce aircraft air pollution and energy consumption and develop new fuels, NASA, under the Solar Heating and Cooling Demonstration Act of 1974 and in cooperation with the Dept, of Housing and Urban Development and other Federal agencies, was investigating the use of solar energy for heating and cooling buildings. An experimental solar house at Marshall Space Flight Center would ultimately derive up to 85% of its heating and cooling energy from the sun. Solar heating and cooling were being demonstrated in school. NASA continued research on wind energy systems, with the construction of a 100-kw wind-powered generator at Lewis Research Center; low-pollution, low-fuel-consumption automotive engines; aerodynamically designed vehicles to increase fuel economy; energy conversion systems. NASA distributed some 300 new Tech Briefs and 30 special compilations of new technology items to 15 000 subscribers in business and industry. Use of Regional Dissemination Centers for space technology applicable to other uses increased 34%, to 4000 clients. Tracking and Data Acquisition The Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (stdn) supported some 40 flight projects during 1974, including all NASA’s earth-orbital missions as well as space projects of foreign governments and private industry. Congress authorized funds for procurement activities for a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (tdrss)—two earth-orbiting satellites leased by NASA to relay data between low-altitude spacecraft and a single ground station. The authority to proceed further was subject to additional congressional review of a NASA-owned versus a leased system. (Pres Rpt 74; NASA Release 74r-330; NASA Activities, 15 Dec 74; A&A 74)
A shortage of unsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine (udmh) rocket fuel was being strictly managed to prevent delays in military and NASA launches. The fuel was produced from raw materials found to have an agent that could cause cancer in humans. Methods had been devised to produce the fuel by removing humans from the step endangering health, but adequate supplies could not be produced before the end of the year. Stopgap measures taken by the Air Force, including strict control and allocation of existing supplies, was preventing the shortage from interfering with any critical launches, (nasa Dir Launch Vehicle & Propulsion Prog, interview, 2 Oct 75; Av Wk, 11 Nov 74,14)
A declassified feasibility study by Goodyear Aerospace Corp. had indicated that reflector satellites 200-900 m in diameter could illuminate ground areas continuously at night, the Huntsville Times reported. Pointing out commercial uses, an official from Marshall Space Flight Center, which had managed the Project Able study, told the Times that potential applications included reflecting microwaves from space for conversion to electrical power, beaming rays on Florida’s orange groves should frost threaten the fruit crop, and lighting Alaska during its extended darkness. Launched on a Saturn V booster or on the space shuttle, a 640-m-dia, 20 000-kg reflector satellite could provide twice the light of the full moon and raise the temperature of the area covered by several degrees, (Casebolt, Huntsville Times, 11 Sept 74)
Lockheed Propulsion Co. asked the General Accounting Office to set aside NASA’s 20 Nov. 1973 selection of Thiokol Chemical Corp. for negotiation of a $106-million contract to design and develop the space shuttle’s solid-fueled rocket motor. Lockheed charged that it had an edge in technical evaluation of the engine and that it had been the low bidder before NASA had made “improper adjustments” in its bid. Lockheed also maintained Thiokol’s transportation costs from Utah to Florida would be higher and that Thiokol’s proposed design would not meet program objectives without major revision, (latns, Today, 10 Jan 74; NASA Release 74r-130)
Josef Boehm, rocket pioneer from Peenemuende, Germany, and Chief of Marshall Space Flight Center’s Electromechanical Engineering Div., died at the age of 65. An associate professor of kinematics before joining Dr. Wemher von Braun in 1939 at the Rocket Research Center in Peenemuende, Boehm came to the United States in November 1945 with Dr. von Braun under U.S. contract. He was instrumental in designing and engineering the first U.S. spacecraft for the Army Ballistic Missile Agency, beginning with Explorer 1 (launched 31 Jan. 1958), and continued with msfc after it was formed in 1960. He had a major role in developing the Skylab Workshop’s Apollo Telescope Mount. (Marshall Star, 9 Jan 74,4; Huntsville Times, 1 Jan 74)
Goddard Space Flight Center launched an Aerobee 200 sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range to study Comet Kohoutek’s ultraviolet rays. The rocket carried cameras, spectrometers, and other instruments to 232.6-km altitude to determine amounts of oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon dioxide in the comet. The flight was “highly successful,” Dr. Stephen P. Maran, gsfc Manager of Operation Kohoutek, said. The comet, discovered 5 May 1973 by Czechoslovak astronomer Dr. Lubos Kohoutek, was once predicted to be the “comet of the century” as it passed near the earth on its 75 000-yr journey around the sun. It was only twice as bright as nearby stars but reflected enough light to permit instruments to be aimed at it precisely. (Maran, interview, July _ 74; Watson, WPost, 5 Jan 74; Dilts, B Sun, 5 Jan 74, Al)
Aleksander Y. Bereznyak, Soviet pioneer in jet aircraft development, died in Moscow at the age of 61. Bereznyak, one of a group of design engineers who worked on rocket and jet engines during World War II, had helped design a rocket-powered aircraft flight-tested in May 1942. (.NYT, 14 Aug 74,26)
Prof. Mikhail Tikhonravov, Soviet rocket pioneer, died in Moscow at the age of 73. Prof. Tikhonravov had worked on the development of the first man-made satellites, pilot-operated spacecraft, and automatic space stations. With Sergey P. Korolev, he had worked on development of early liquicUfuel rockets in the 1930s. He had been an early expert in glider and aircraft engineering. Tikhonravov had been awarded the Orders of Lenin and the Red Banner of Labor, the title of Hero of Socialist Labor, and the Lenin Prize. (NYT, 7 March 74, 40; Av Wk, 11 March 74)
Economy moves left Kennedy Space Center dangerously short on fire protection, according to Jack N. Anderson and Les Whitten in a Washington Post article. The Center was being protected between 3:00 pm and 7:00 am by eight on-duty fire fighters, not enough to man the $750 000 worth of fire equipment or fight a conflagration, they said. The 3 237 500-sq-km facility contained 3747 cu m of liquid oxygen, 3028 cu m of liquid hydrogen, and rocket fuel “to stoke .a flash fire.” Boeing Co., which held the icsc fire protection contract, planned to lay off 21 firemen and shift others to lower paying jobs. A Boeing spokesman had said no manned missions were planned until 1975 and the base was adequately protected. The Post quoted a NASA spokesman as saying that the cuts were necessary and that additional fire fighting help was only five minutes away. (W Post, 11 Feb 74, B13)
The Air Force launched three satellites on a single Titan HID booster from Vandenberg Air Force Base—including S3-1, launched to measure air density, obtain upper-atmosphere composition data, and provide information on atmospheric effects on spacecraft orbits [see 7 Aug.]. The first satellite entered orbit with a 279-km apogee, 152-km perigee, 88.8-min period, and 96.7° inclination and reentered 19 March 1975. The second entered orbit with a 542-km apogee, 540-km perigee, 95.3-min period, and 96.1° inclination. The third entered orbit with a 3711-km apogee, 147-km perigee, 125.4-min period, and 97.0° inclination; it reentered 26 May 1975. (Pres Rpt 74; afsc pao, interview, 23 March 76; afsc Release oip 137.74)
A new artificial limb had been developed by Kennedy Space Center and Rancho Los Amigos Hospital in California, icsc announced. The strapless device was attached directly to the amputee’s bone through a carbon collar that remained at skin level. Originally developed for rocket motors, the high-purity carbon material would not cause infection in patients. Previously, the body’s rejection of foreign materials and the failure of the skin to form a hygienic seal had prevented direct attachment to the bone. A quick-release ball connector for the limb was based on a device that held rocket umbilical attachments in place until liftoff, (ksc Release 134-74)
The U.S.S.R. launched eight Cosmos satellites on a single booster from Plesetsk. Orbital parameters were: Cosmos 641—1483-km apogee, 1387-km perigee, 114.6-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 642—1481-km apogee, 1319-km perigee, 113.8-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 643—1482-km apogee, 1353-km perigee, 114.2-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 644—1483-km apogee, 1335-km perigee, 114.0-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 645—1483-km apogee, 1369-km perigee, 114.4-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 646—1486-km apogee, 1403-km perigee, 114.8-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 647—1484-km apogee, 1423-km perigee, 115.0-min period, and 74.0° inclination. Cosmos 648—1480-km apogee, 1439-km perigee, 115.2-min period, and 74.0° inclination. The press reported observers believed the satellites would operate in support of Soviet naval communications, (gsfc Wkly SSR, 18-24 April 74; SBD, 25 April 74,313)
Tentative NASA plans for launching 810 payloads into space in the next two decades were outlined by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, in an address before the National Space Club in Washington, D.C. The total, for late 1973 to 1991, included non-NASA payloads for Government agencies (other than the Dept, of Defense), foreign agencies, and private industry. The tentative payload model—presented to Congress in October 1973 to show “what could be done in the 1980s” when the space shuttle was in use—included as many as 10 missions to the outer planets Uranus, Neptune, Jupiter, and Saturn. In 1990 and 1991 two very heavy payloads might be sent to orbit one of Jupiter’s moons and land an instrument package. Tentative missions to the inner planets included five missions to Venus, one of them with a lander, and two spacecraft to orbit Mercury. Tentative Mars missions included one spacecraft to orbit the planet, two landers, and two to return samples from the two moons of Mars. Lunar missions under consideration included a lunar polar orbiter in 1979, two other orbiters in the 1980s, two lunar rovers in the 1980s, a lunar halo satellite to ensure communications with the hidden side of the moon, and two lunar rovers in 1990 and 1991 that could return samples to the earth from any point on the moon. Other plans under consideration were a flyby and rendezvous with Comet Encke and a landing on the nucleus, a flyby of Haley’s Comet in 1985, and two missions to asteroids in 1986. Of the 810 total payloads, 57 were designated for planetary exploration and 753 for earth orbit. Scientific satellites for earth orbit were Large Space Telescopes, High Energy Astronomical Observatories, Large Solar Observatories, Large Radio Astronomy Observatories, and x-ray telescopes. The large spacecraft would be unmanned but visited regularly by space shuttle crews and brought back to earth for refurbishing. In the applications field were large Earth Observatory Satellites. And NASA expected to orbit 120 communications and navigation satellites for other agencies or private industry through 1991, not including those for DOD. Of some 300 payloads to be flown in the Spacelab, most would be NASA payloads in the fields of astronomy, physics, earth observations, earth and ocean physics, communication and navigation, life science, and space technology. Of non-NASA payloads, 10 would be for private industry space processing, beginning in 1985. Some 10% were expected to be flown for foreign users. The large number of contemplated missions, even with the increasing number of U.S.S.R. launches, was expected to have very little impact on the environment. Effects of the major constituents of the solid-fueled rocket booster exhaust—water vapor, carbon dioxide, hydrogen chloride, and aluminum oxide—would be negligible. (Text)
The Apollo 16 command module (launched 16 April 1972) went on public display at the Alabama Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. The CM, called Casper, had carried Astronauts Thomas K. Mattingly II, Charles M. Duke, Jr., and John W. Young to the moon and back during the fifth successful lunar landing mission. (Marshall Star, 6 Feb 74, 1)
Three Intelsat IV communications satellites transmitted the Muhammad Ali-Joe. Frazier boxing match in New York City to 17 countries. The three-hour match, won by Ali by a decision, was transmitted to Argentina, Australia, Barbados, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Jamaica, Japan, Korea, Mexico, Nicaragua, Philippines, Puerto Rico, Thailand, United Kingdom, Venezuela, and Zaire. (ComSatCorp Release 74-6; W Star-News Library) 28 January-1 February: The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics held its 10th Annual Meeting and Technical Display 28—30 Jan. and 12th Aerospace Sciences Meeting 30 Jan.-l Feb. in Washington, D.C. “Spaceship Earth—A New Perspective” was the theme of the meeting, chaired by Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President of Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former Marshall Space Flight Center Director and NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning. At the honors banquet 30 Jan. Dr. Kurt H. Debus, Director of Kennedy Space Center, received the Louis W. Hill Space Transportation Award for 1973 for scientific, engineering, and organizational contributions to manned and unmanned space missions, beginning with the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, in 1958. Dr. John H. Wolfe, Chief of Ames Research Center’s Space Physics Branch, was given the aiaa Space Science Award for 1973 for his leading role in the Pioneer missions and his contribution to man’s understanding of interplanetary space. The Goddard Award was shared by Paul D. Castenholtz, Rockwell International Corp.; Richard C. Mulready, United Aircraft Corp.; and John L. Sloop, former NASA Assistant Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology—for significant contributions to the development of the practical liquid oxygen and hydrogen rocket engine. Winner of the aiaa History Manuscript Award for 1973 was Dr. William M. Leary, Jr., Univ. of Georgia historian, for “The Dragon’s Wings: The China National Aviation Corporation and the Development of Commercial Aviation in China.” Carroll H. Woodling, Chief of Johnson Space Center Crew Training and Simulation Div., received the de Florez Training Award for advancing development of space flight simulators and for flight training programs. The G. Edward Pendray Award was awarded to Frederick I. Ord-way III, Univ. of Alabama, for his contributions to the literature recording the history and benefits of the space program. Willis H. Hawkins, Lockheed Aircraft Corp., was awarded the Sylvanus Albert Reed Award for contributions to the design and development of aerospace vehicles— including vertical take-off, transport, interceptor, and supersonic fighter aircraft-—and to missile and space programs including ramjet and reentry test vehicles. The Lawrence Sperry Award went to Dino A. Lorenzini, Air Force Academy, for developing a modern inertial guidance test facility incorporating computer-control, data-acquisition, sensor-excitation, and seismic-isolation technology. . Dr. Harold A. Rosen, Hughes Aircraft Co., received the Spacecraft Design Award for contributions to the development of satellite communication systems, including the spin-stabilized synchronous-orbit spacecraft concept and commercial systems. Dr. Alan M. Lovelace of the Air Force Systems Command delivered the von Karman Lecture, “Advanced Composites,” pointing to a need for competitive cost and innovative design to realize the advantages of composites in material, fabrication, and configuration. The Dryden Research Lecture was delivered by Herbert F. Hardrath, Langley Research Center, who reviewed the use of fracture mechanics to choose materials, configure safe and efficient structures, specify inspection procedures, predict lives of flawed structures, and develop the reliability ofcurrent and future airframes. Daniel J. Fink, Vice President of General Electric Co. and General Manager of the GE Space Div., was installed as 12th president of aiaa. The 19 new Fellows elected included Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, msfc Director; John P. Campbell and John P. Reeder, LaRc; and Astronaut Charles Conrad, Jr. Inducted as Honorary Members were Sen. Frank E. Moss (D-Utah) and Rep. Olin E. Teague (D-Tex.). (AdcA, Mar 74; AIAA Bull, Jan 74; aiaa Releases, 21 Dec 73; aiaa History Newsletter, 24 May 74; Ksc Release 14r-74; arc Astrogram, 18 Jan 74, 1; Marshall Star, 30 Jan 74,1)
The U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 656 from Baykonur Cosmodrome into orbit with a 322-km apogee, 185-km perigee, 89.6-min period, and 51.8° inclination. The press reported that Cosmos 656 was probably a test flight of a Soyuz spacecraft. The spacecraft reentered 29 May. (gsfc SSR, 30 June 74; Tass, Fbis-Sov, 29 May 74, Ul; O’Toole, W Post, 30 May 74, A18) ' 29 May—19 June: The U.S.S.R. launched Luna 22 unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam at 1:57 pm local time (4:57 am edt). The automatic station was separated from a platform rocket system in earth orbit and put into a close-to-planned trajectory for the moon. A flight-path correction maneuver 30 May aimed the spacecraft toward a selected area of near-moon space. Luna 22 went into circular orbit of the moon 2 June, with a 220-km apogee, 220-km perigee, 130.0-min period, and 19.6° inclination. The Soviet press reported 3 June that all instruments aboard the spacecraft were functioning normally and scientific investigation of the moon had begun. Luna 22 was transferred into an elliptical orbit with a 244-km apogee and 25-km perigee 9 June to take detailed TV photos of the lunar surface and to study surface relief using an onboard altimeter. Chemical composition of rocks was obtained by determining the gamma radiation. After completion of the photography program the spacecraft was moved to an orbit with a 299-km apogee and 181-km perigee. By 19 June Luna 22 had completed 187 orbits of the moon; all equipment continued to function normally, (gsfc SSR, 30 June 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 30 May 74, Ul; 4 June 74, Ul; 20 June 74, Ul; SF, Nov 74, 434) 30 May—28 June: NASA launched Ats 6 Applications Technology Satellite from Eastern Test Range at 9:00 am edt on a Titan TlIC launch vehicle. The booster ejected the transtage and spacecraft into an elliptical parking orbit with a 626-km apogee and 152-km perigee. At the second equatorial crossing the first bum of the transtage placed the spacecraft in a transfer orbit. Launch, parking orbit, and transfer orbit were close to the program plan. At 3:29 pm EDT, Ats 6 was injected into geosynchronous orbit with a 35 845.6-km apogee, 35 774.1-km perigee, 23-hr 57-min period, and 1.8° inclination. The near-perfect orbit eliminated need for corrections, leaving nine kilograms of fuel for operational contingencies. The spacecraft separated from the transtage at 3:33 pm EDT. An orbital correction 7 June changed the 0.27°-per-day westward drift to a 0.05° eastward drift. Checkout of spacecraft systems and onboard experiments was completed 28 June with no significant anomalies. The mission was adjudged a success 26 Sept Primary objectives of the mission were to inject the spacecraft into near-geostationary orbit, erect and evaluate a nine-meter antenna to provide a good-quality signal to small inexpensive ground receivers, stabilize the spacecraft using a three-axis control system, and support user-oriented applications experiments. Secondary objectives were to demonstrate new technology in aircraft and maritime traffic control and infrared earth observations; acquire system data for communications applications in space, including spacecraft-to-spacecraft relay; test spacecraft control; and measure particles and radiation. The 20 experiments included a health-education telecommunications experiment to broadcast programs in several languages simultaneously to citizens in remote areas of the country. The satellite also would aid in remote medical telediagnosis and teleconsultation, transmitting patients’ medical records to faraway hospital centers for emergency assistance. One year after launch Ats 6 would be moved over Lake Victoria in Central Africa. India would then use the satellite to broadcast programs teaching agricultural techniques, family planning and hygjene, school courses and teacher education, and occupational skills to 5000 villages. The $600 ground receiving terminals each consisted of a receiver, converter, and three-meter chicken-wire antenna. Ats 6 was the sixth in a series of ATS satellites developed to advance technology in design, propulsion, and stabilization systems; meteorological concepts; applications; space environmental studies and measurement systems; and communications. Ats 1 (launched 6 Dec. 1966), Ats 3 (5 Nov. 1967), and Ats 5 (12 Aug. 1969) were still transmitting useful data. The ATS program was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of the Office of Applications. (NASA mors, 24 May, 3 June, 8 July, 2 Oct. 74; NASA prog off, interview, 5 Feb. 74; NASA Release 74-111)
Francis C. Schwenk, Director of the Research Div. in NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, testified on four NASA projects in hearings on space nuclear propulsion and power before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Aeronautics and Space Technology. Early research had shown that high-temperature thermionic converters combined with a compact nuclear reactor could provide an efficient power plant for advanced planetary missions. NASA technology would now focus on thermionic energy conversion for achieving highly efficient operation at lower temperatures. During the Apollo and Pioneer programs, NASA had proved the advantages of a small (40- to 70-w) radioisotope-thermoelectric-generator power system, which had operated at 6% efficiency at a cost of $20 million per kilowatt. NASA was developing technology for a 0.5- to 2.0-kw gas-turbine conversion system (Bray-ton energy conversion system) to achieve efficiencies of 25% and reduce costs to one fourth. Gaseous-core nuclear rocket research had led to plasma-core reactors as advanced energy sources for terrestrial as well as space propulsion uses; use of uranium hexafluoride as plasma fuel was expected to achieve efficiencies of more than 50%. Lewis Research Center research into superconducting magnets and plasma confinement and heating in advanced steady-state schemes was expected to show within a year whether a superconductive magnetic apparatus (summa) could produce fusionlike plasmas as predicted. (Text)
A 5-million-km hydrogen cloud surrounding Comet Kohoutek was photographed by a Naval Research Laboratory camera aboard a NASA Aerobee 200 sounding rocket. The rocket, launched from White Sands Missile Range, reached an altitude of 193.1 km. The image of the cloud, invisible from the earth because it glowed at an ultraviolet wavelength that did not penetrate the atmosphere, was obtained by photographing the comet in the light of the Lyman-alpha line of atomic hydrogen using a special electronic uv camera. Scientists believed the comet consisted largely of water ice which evaporated as it neared the sun, breaking up into component hydrogen and oxygen atoms. The lighter hydrogen atoms escaped rapidly, producing the cloud. (Naval Research Reviews, Jem 74,29)
