The Air Force had announced operational concepts for Space Shuttle launches at Vandenberg Air Force Base. Construction, planned to begin in mid-1978, would cost $50 million less than original estimates through maximum use of existing facilities such as Space Launch Complex No. 6—constructed in the 1960s for the Air Force’s manned orbiting laboratory cancelled in June 1969—and existing roadways and railroad tracks. An “integrate on the pad” concept and modification of surplus Saturn IB rocket transporters to move the Orbiter and external tanks to the launch pad had eliminated the need for a new highway and railroad system. A study coordinated with the Navy showed that the solid-rocket booster that dropped off the main tank into the ocean could be successfully recovered with a minimum of new facilities by using an existing Navy dock and large stationary crane. Operations facility requirements would be programmed in two phases: Phase one, construction of a complete ground-support system, would allow the DOD to operate Space Shuttle missions from Vandenberg by December 1982. Phase two called for completion of a second launch pad in late 1986. (AFSC Newsreview, July 75, 16)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $4 409 000 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to Bendix Corp. for design, development, test and evaluation, and fabrication of integrated electronic assemblies (1EA) for Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters on the first six Shuttle developmental flights. Each booster would require two IEAs: The forward IEA would initiate release of the nose cap and frustum, jettison the solid-rocket-motor nozzle, detach the parachute, and turn on recovery aids. The aft IEA would interface with the Orbiter, the forward IEA, and other avionic systems. Delivery of the IEAs would begin in 1976 and continue through 1 Apr. 1979. (MSFC Release 75 — 190)
NASA’s Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Director Chester M. Lee said at a NASA Headquarters press briefing that a number of modifications had been made on the Apollo command and service modules to accommodate the special requirements of the July U.S.—U.S.S.R. ASTP mission. Changes to the command module included a modified umbilical to accommodate docking-module functions, an additional TV camera and recorder for coverage of joint activities, modified controls and displays for new equipment and experiments, additional equipment for communications and TV coverage via Ats 6 (Applications Technology Satellite, launched 30 May 1974), modified stowage, added intervehicular intercom, and additional VHF-FM communications capability at the U.S.S.R. frequency. Changes in the service module included added heaters and insulation of propellant systems for solar inertial attitude, added propellant storage module for increased attitude-control and backup deorbit capability, and deletion of the unused main propellant tank. The docking module would be carried in the same position in which the lunar module had been during lunar landing missions. It would be extracted in the same manner, by separating the CSM from the booster once in orbit, turning around, and pulling out the docking module with the nose of the CSM. In response to questioning, Lee said that the U.S. cost of the ASTP mission would fall within the $245-mi]lion congressional authorization. Although the Soviets had not quoted a specific amount, Lee believed that the launch of the two unmanned Soyuz spacecraft to check out modifications made for ASTP, the launch of a manned mission, and the preparations for two complete spacecraft and crews would indicate that the Soviets were investing “at least the equivalent” in resources. (Transcript)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of United Technologies Corp. for negotiation of a fixed-price contract of $1,775 million for solid-propellant booster separation motors (BSM) for use on the first 6 development flights in the Space Shuttle program, beginning in 1979. The BSMs would separate the two reusable solid rocket boosters (SRB)—each SRB requiring eight BSMs, four forward and four aft—approximately 110 sec after launch. (MSFC Release 75—175)
Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D— Mass.) introduced S. 397 to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to acquire and maintain for future generations the site in Auburn, Mass., on which Dr. Robert H. Goddard launched the first liquid-propelled rocket on 16 March 1926. (CR, 27 Jan 75, S884) 27 January—13 February: A joint conference of technical directors for the U.S.—U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project met at Johnson Space Center. Participants in the conference, held while U.S. and Soviet working groups also met at JSC (see 16 Jan. —8 Feb.), reviewed the progress of ASTP preparations and published the necessary documentation. A joint communique issued 13 Feb. stated that discussions and agreements were completed on technical questions relating to the development of new spacecraft equipment and design improvement, mission ground-support equipment, and publication of technical documentation. The communique also stated that communication lines between U.S. and U.S.S.R. centers fully guaranteed the flow of information necessary to conduct the joint mission. Both docking systems were carefully checked and were ready for flight, with final checkouts scheduled at the respective launch sites. Crew training was proceeding satisfactorily (see 7—26 Feb.) with the final joint training session scheduled for April in the U.S.S.R. Soviet ASTP Technical Director, Professor Konstantin D. Bush-uyev, had informed U.S. officials that Soyuz 16 (launched 2 Dec. 1974) had successfully completed a full test of basic flight phases planned for ASTP as well as performance of spacecraft systems and interaction with U.S.S.R. ground Control systems. Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. tracking activity during the flight had shown that the precision of tracking information was satisfactory. During a 13 Feb. press conference at JSC, Professor Bushuyev said that, in addition to changes in the Soyuz life-support systems and the addition of the docking apparatus, other design changes on the Soyuz spacecraft included the installation of a transporter for the Apollo and related antennas, a new interspacecraft communications system, an optical target to permit Apollo to target the approach and rendezvous, and some flashing beacons and orientation lights. (Joint communique text; JSC press briefing transcript, 13 Feb 75)
Contracts involving $25 000 or more awarded by Marshall Space Flight Center during the month totaled nearly $200 million. Among them were awards to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., Inc., for $67 500 to develop the capability of predicting radiant heating at the base region of the Space Shuttle, and for $49 971 to continue a two-phase study of flow effects on Space Shuttle plume simulation. Lockheed also had received $59 740 to continue analyses of Apollo Telescope Mount data obtained during the Skylab mission. A $29 945 contract had gone to Northrop Services, Inc., to continue studies on Space Tug recovery of a spinning satellite. The U.S.'Army Engineer Div., Ala., had received two contracts. A $2-million contract had been awarded for construction at MSFC of the structural test facility for the Solid Rocket Booster and a $2.93-million contract has been awarded for construction and modifications to the Dynamic Test Facility for vibration testing of the Space Shuttle in the vertical positions. The contracts also included a $152.6-million award to Martin Marietta Corp. for the design, development, test, and evaluation of the Space Shuttle external tank, including six flight units and test hardware. MSFC had awarded the Dept, of Commerce $60 000 for an atmospheric measuring program. Bendix Corp. had received $99 736 for a Skylab control-moment gyro anomaly investigation, and the University of New York had received $36 253 to continue data analysis of a Skylab zodiacal light experiment. (MSFC Release 75— 39) February 1975
NASA launched Nimbus 6 on a thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster from the Western Test Range at 1:12 am PDT after a 6-min delay to clear a ship from the jettison trajectory of the Delta’s solid rockets. The spacecraft entered sun-synchronous polar orbit with a 1103-km apogee, 1094-km perigee, 107-min period, and 99.96° inclination. Separation of the spacecraft from the launch vehicle was normal, at 59 min into the flight. The solar panels were deployed and the attitude-control system quickly acquired earth. A wheel control provided three-axis stabilization. Checkout of the power system, telemetry, command links, and tape recorder was completed on the first day of operation. At 7 hr after launch, a cryogenic vent valve associated with the limb-radiance inversion radiometer was pyrotechnically actuated as planned. This caused unexpected high torques and excessive control-gas usage. Nimbus 6 was put into a safe wideband gravity-gradient mode to conserve gas, and an investigation was begun to find the cause of the problem and determine possible remedies. By 24 June the 9 experiments and all spacecraft systems had been checked out and all instrumentation, except for 2 tape recorders, was working normally. The primary objective of the Nimbus 6 mission was to contribute to the Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP) by refining and extending the capability of vertically sounding the temperature and moisture of the atmosphere, with particular regard to altitude resolution and interference effects of clouds. GARP, a cooperative worldwide weather program, was established to improve understanding of meteorological atmospheric processes in the tropics and to improve observation and computing systems for weather prediction and analysis. Nimbus 6 would also monitor environmental conditions such as sea ice and rainfall and would measure the earth’s radiation budget with a precision never before attained. Secondary objective of the mission was to demonstrate the ability to track and relay data from a low-altitude polar-orbiting spacecraft using a geosynchronous satellite as a communications relay. Ats 6, the Applications Technology Satellite launched on 30 May 1974, would be the relay comsat. A data-collection, processing, and relay-to-earth system was also on board to collect data from approximately 300 balloon-borne platforms, designed to float at an altitude of 20 km, and a large number of earth- and sea-based data platforms. Nimbus 6, unlike previous spacecraft, could receive and process up to eight incoming signals at a time. The satellite carried nine new instruments to extend measurements of atmospheric parameters to significantly higher altitudes than had previously been possible: the tracking and data-relay (T&DR) experiment; a high-resolution temperature sounder (HIRS) and a scanning microwave spectrometer (SCAMS) to take temperature soundings in the atmosphere outside the tropics; a tropical wind-energy conversion and reference level experiment (TWERLE) to provide data on tropical areas; a limb-radiance inversion radiometer (LRIR) and a pressure-modulated radiometer (PMR) to provide high-altitude temperature soundings; an earth radiation budget (ERR) experiment to establish the earth’s atmospheric radiation balance; an electrically scanning microwave radiometer (ESMR) to map the liquid-water content of the clouds, ocean rainfall,, and distribution and variation of sea-ice cover; and a temperature/humidity infrared radiometer (THIR) to provide data on cloud cover, ground temperatures, and water-vapor distribution. Nimbus 6 was next to last in a planned series of seven experimental meteorological satellites. Nimbus 1 (launched 28 Aug. 1964) and Nimbus 2 (launched 15 May 1966) achieved all their objectives. Launch of the third Nimbus, on 19 May 1968, failed when the launch vehicle malfunctioned; an identical spacecraft launched 14 April 1969 successfully functioned as Nimbus 3. Nimbus 4 and 5 (launched 8 April 1970 and 10 Dec. 1972) had both completed all mission objectives and were still operating. General Electric Co. was the prime contractor responsible for Nimbus 6 integration and test, stabilization control, control-subsystem integration, and spacecraft structures and antennas. Seven U.S. and two British companies, in addition to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, provided the nine instruments. Goddard Space Flight Center managed the Nimbus program under the direction of the NASA Office of Applications and was also responsible for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (NASAMORs 21 May 74,12 June 75, 24 June 75; NASA Release 75-145)
Soviet engineers had been working on a “spaceplane” to carry cosmonauts to and from orbit as part of a long-term project to establish a major space platform in the 1980s, the Christian Science Monitor reported. Western observers had expected the reusable spacecraft to be launched by an expendable booster, but CSM reported that the rumored aim was to fly it from the back of a ramjet-powered boost vehicle that would return to base. The project was thought to be linked with development of a large multiman modular space station that the Soviets expected to assemble in orbit before 1980. CSM reported that U.S. Air Force reconnaissance satellites had noted preparations at the Baykonur Cosmodrome to retest the huge SLX—14 booster, scheduled to launch the station. The SLX—14 had been delayed for 5 yr by a series of mishaps: Two launch complexes had been built for the SLX—14, one of which burned during a 1969 fueling test. Intelligence reports indicated it had been rebuilt. In an August 1975 issue of Sputnik magazine, reprinted from the Soviet Naukal Zhin, U.S.S.R. Chief of Cosmonaut Training Vladimir A. Shatalov confirmed Soviet interest in a reusable space vehicle. Although “the future of cosmonautics is largely connected with longterm orbital stations,” he said, the fact that carrier rockets were extremely expensive and could be used only once was “becoming a serious brake on the development of cosmonautics and relevant research.” Neither the airplane nor the spaceship had proven capable of flying into orbit and then reentering. But there is every reason to believe that in the not-so-distant future aviation and cosmonautics would “draw appreciably closer together.” Shatalov said Soviet and U.S. scientists had already made important high-altitude and highspeed experiments. Shatalov visualized “a new-type spaceship” consisting of a smaller one launched from a larger one after reaching required speed. The carrier craft would return to a landing field, and the smaller craft would orbit, accomplish its mission, and then land. “Creation of an apparatus with greater orbital maneuverability would . . . make it possible ... to deliver satellites on orbits in the spacecraft’s freight compartment, serve and repair them in space and bring back to earth samples of explorations and observations and even the satellites themselves if they go out of order.” Although “creation of this new type of space apparatus” posed a host of technical problems, “modern science and technology can solve them” and “the time was not far off when such a plane would make its maiden flight.” (Gatland, CSM, 28 July 75, 11; Sputnik, “Plane for Outer Space,” Aug 75, 68-71)
The rocket-powered M2—F3 lifting body—a wingless vehicle that derives aerodynamic lift from its body shape—arrived for display at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C. In a flight program beginning in 1963 and ending in 1972, the three versions of tbe M—2 vehicle had demonstrated that a manned reentry vehicle could reenter from space, maneuver through the atmosphere, and safely make a deadstick landing. M2—F3 was the thjrd version of Ames Research Center’s M—2 lifting-body design. The first, M2—FI, was a lightweight plywood glider towed to altitude by a C-47 and released, whereupon the pilot guided the craft to a landing. A heavier version, M2—F2, was launched from underneath the wing of a B— 52 aircraft. After nearly a year of testing the unpowered vehicle, an XRL—11 rocket engine was installed in preparation for rocket-powered flight; on the second glide flight after engine installation, the vehicle crashed, badly damaging the vehicle and injuring the pilot. The lifting body was rebuilt, incorporating modifications, and designated M2—F3. The M2—F3 made more than 37 glide and powered flights with a jet reaction-control system that successfully demonstrated the feasibility of using a single system from orbit to landing. A lifting body design that had been considered for the reentry vehicle in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs was rejected in favor of a ballistic reentry design. The use by Space Shuttle of the maneuver-to-a-deadstick-landing concept was possible largely because of the confidence level built up by 9 yr of lifting-body flight tests. (NASA Release 75—199; A&A 62 through A&A 74)
NASA’s winter phase of meteorological rocket and satellite comparisons had b'een completed at Wallops Flight Center, where 31 single and two-stage rockets had been launched since 18 Nov. Data obtained from the launches had been compared with measurements received from the Nimbus 6 satellite passing over the Wallops facility. The Super-Loki single-stage rocket had carried three types of payload: inflatable spheres of mylar to obtain atmospheric density and wind measurements; datasondes to obtain temperature and wind data; and ozone-measuring devices. The Nike-Cajun, a two-stage vehicle, carried acoustic grenade payloads to measure wind and temperature by recording time and location of detonation on arrays of sensitive microphones at the launch site that could measure time lapse and direction of sound arrival. The rocket and satellite data comparison had been the latest of several conducted from the Wallops facility since 1970. (WFC Release 75—14)
The U.S. could land men on Mars in 10 yr if a commitment similar to President Kennedy’s pledge in 1961 to make a moon landing were made, Dr. Wernher von Braun, former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator, said in a speech at the Johns Hopkins Univ. Applied Physics Laboratory. Dr. von Braun, vice president for engineering and development at Fairchild Industries, Inc., said that nuclear-powered command ships could be sent to orbit the planet while a lander traveled to the Martian surface. The cost of the program would approximate the near-$25 billion cost of the Apollo program. (B Sun, 16 Feb 75, B16) '
After spending some $1.5 billion over more than 10 years, the United States, through the loss of its will to go forward in space, gave up on this next generation of rockets even though the nuclear technology worked,” Gary L. Bennett said in a letter to the editor of the Washington Star. Noting that U.S. basic rocket technology was close to 40 yrs old, Bennett wrote, “We have shown no inclination to develop new rocket concepts despite the fact that these concepts have definite terrestrial advantages in terms of energy and employment. It’s sad to think that we came so close to realizing our destiny in space and then we gave it all up for a senseless enervating policy of introspection.” (W Star, 30 June 75)
NASA and the U.S. Coast Guard were jointly designing and developing a lightweight portable firefighting module to combat shipboard and dock fires, NASA announced. The module, a completely self-contained pumping system including pumps, hose, and firefighting suits, would pump sea water at a rate of up to 7300 liters per min (2000 gallons per min) for periods up to 3 hr. Marshall Space Flight Center was designing a prototype scheduled for construction early in 1976 and for testing 18 mos later. The Coast Guard had asked NASA to participate in the project because of its long experience with high-capacity lightweight fuel pumps developed for rocket engines. The project was being managed for NASA by MSFC’s Technology Utilization Office. (NASA Release 75—267)
Soviet scientists told U.S. scientists and journalists touring Soviet scientific facilities that they had successfully used) a rocket engine and gigantic magnets to produce large amounts of less expensive electricity with less pollution than other methods. Called magnetohydrodynamics and first proved feasible in the U;S. in the early 1960s, the new system was one of the cooperative programs between the two countries. j A recent test that produced 12.4 mw of power for 1.5 hr wa£ the first time the system had achieved that power and duration. Based on the knowledge-that electricity could be generated by passing a charged gas through a magnetic field, the Soviet experiment burned 55 kg per sec of natural gas with oxygen-enriched air into which a potassium compound was injected to create a plasma of positive and negative particles; when passed between the poles of a great magnet, the charges separated onto electrodes and created large voltages. The Washington Post later reported that the Soviets were committed to budding, by 1981, a 1000-mw magnetohydrodynamic plant with expected conversion efficiency of 50%. Conventional steam-turbine plants using oil or coal for fuel operate at 40% efficiency, those using nuclear fuel at 33%. (Toth, LA Times News Service, WPost, 28 March 75, A3)
Lt. Col. Michael Love successfully completed the 28th flight of the X—24B lifting body, making its second and final runway landing [see 5 Aug.] at Flight Research Center. The purpose of the flight was to land on a concrete runway, survey body pressure, study a lefthand fin tuft, check out the thermal protection system, and perform stability and control maneuvers with the rudder bias at 5° toe-out. Launched from a B—52 aircraft at 13 700 m, Col. Love ignited the vehicle’s rocket engine and the X—24B reached a speed of mach 1.53 and an altitude of 21 900 m before engine shutdown and unpowered glide and landing. Flights of the 11-m delta-shaped vehicle were part of a joint NASA-Air Force program to study transonic flight characteristics of an aerodynamic shape that could be the forerunner of future hypersonic cruise vehicles. (X—24B fit rpt, NASA Prog Off; FRC Release 25—75)
The Japanese National Space Development Agency announced the award of a contract to the Mitsubishi Electric Corp. to design two experimental stationary communications satellites for launch in FY 1978. Design was expected to be complete by 20 Sept. Each 130-kg satellite, to be launched by a Japanese N rocket, would be used to study technology for launching stationary satellites, satellitetracking technology, and attitude-control techniques. (Kyodo, FBIS-Japan, 3 April 75, C2)
Potential propellants for the Space Shuttle had been tested at an underground facility at Arnold Engineering Development Center, the Air Force Systems Command reported. Testing was part of a selection process to find a compatible propellant for the auxiliary motors that would separate the Orbiter from the two solid-rocket boosters. Three candidate propellants were tested at a simulated altitude of 40 000 m. Reusable ballistic test-evaluation system motors, each loaded with 45 kg of propellant, were fired seven times, burning for 2 sec and generating 53 400 newtons of thrust. Exhaust plumes were directed at 15- by 15-cm tiles of thermal protective material at various distances and angles; after the tests, the tiles were checked for erosion of the surfaces and edges. Pressure and temperature were measured in the rocket plumes, and surface temperatures and heating rates were measured on 21 selected material samples. All data and samples were sent to Marshall Space Flight Center for analysis. (AFSC Newsreview, July 75, 3)
NASA had awarded a definitive $140 577 924 contract to Thiokol Corp. Wasatch Div. for solid rocket motors for the Space Shuttle, MSFC announced. A previous letter contract issued 26 June 1974 had given Thiokol authority to proceed with the work which included design, development, test, and evaluation of the solid rocket motor. The contracts also called for Thiokol to provide support .equipment, tooling and support parts, systems-integration support and special studies, and data and documentation. (MSFC Release 75—91)
Thor-Delta launch operations at the Eastern and Western Test Ranges had resumed on a limited basis despite the continuing strike by employees of the launch vehicle’s manufacturer, McDonnell Douglas Corp. [see 10 Feb.and 22—23 March], Aviation Week and Space Technology reported. With supervisory personnel at the company’s plant completing the hardware in the place of striking workers, McDonnell Douglas hoped to finish 10 of the 12 launch vehicles scheduled for delivery to NASA launch sites by the end of 1975. NASA’s GEOS—C Geodynamic Experimental Ocean Satellite and Canada’s Telestar—C communications satellite, both originally scheduled for March, had been rescheduled for April and May launch on Thor-Delta vehicles delivered before the strike began. Other launch dates would depend on the buildup and checkout of booster hardware at the launch site, and on availability of hardware still at the plant. Other scheduled launches affected by the strike included Nimbus— F experimental satellite, OSO—I Orbiting Solar Observatory, and Communications Satellite Corp.’s Marisat—A maritime communications satellite. (Av Wk, 7 April 75, 17)
A Soyuz spacecraft, launched by the U.S.S.R. from Baykonur Cosmodrome and carrying Cosmonauts Vasily Lazarev and Oleg Makarov, was returned to earth shortly after launch when the launch vehicle failed to perform normally. Tass reported, “On the third-stage stretch the parameters of the carrier rocket’s movement deviated from the preset values and an automatic device produced the command to discontinue the flight under the program and detach the spacecraft for return to earth.” Tass also reported that the purpose of the mission had been to continue experiments aboard the Salyut 4 space station (launched 26 Dec. 1974). The Soyuz softlanded southwest of Gorno-Altaisk in Western Siberia. The search and rescue service brought the cosmonauts, both in good condition, back to the cosmodrome. During a telephone conference on 8 April, Prof. Konstantin D. Bushuyev, U.S.S.R. technical director for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, told his U.S. counterpart, Glynn S. Lunney, that the launch vehicle that failed was not the version of the booster that would be used for the July ASTP launch. He promised to provide Lunney with additional details on the failure after they became available. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 7 April 75, Ul; NASA Release 75—97; W Star, 7 April 75, A4)
The U.S.S.R.’s Baykonur cosmodrome, located in the city of Leninsk near Tyuratam, was three to four times as big as Kennedy Space Center, U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project commander Thomas P. Stafford said at an ASTP press briefing at Johnson Space Center. ASTP astronaut Vance D. Brand said that 50 000 persons inhabited the launch complex. The briefing followed the crew’s return from the Soviet Union where they had participated in the final training session before the scheduled July launch [see 14—30 April]. The astronauts said that at the Soviet spaceport they had been shown “everything we had a requirement to see,” the launch pad, spacecraft, test and checkout facilities, automatic checkout equipment (ACE) rooms, and crew quarters. The one “drastic difference” between the tour received by the Soviet cosmonauts in the U.S. and that of the American astronauts in the U.S.S.R., said Stafford, was “we didn’t go to Disneyland over there.” Astronaut Donald K. Slayton described the launch pad as “relatively simple.” The spacecraft, assembled on top of a railroad car, was hauled to the pad about 4 days before launch. The stacked vehicle was jacked up and set on the pad; after checkout, the vehicle was rotated to the proper launch azimuth. The booster was held to the pad by four support arms which were popped out of the way by counterweights once the vehicle started to move. Stafford said that Leninsk was a new city built in a desert. The continued construction activity indicated that the Soviets “are not slowing down one bit in their space program.” The Soviets had told their U.S. counterparts that they would continue to have several manned flights a year operating in low earth orbit. (Transcript)
NASA successfully launched Oso 8 Orbiting Solar Observatory at 7:43 am EDT from Eastern Test Range on a thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster, after a 1-day delay because of an electrical malfunction in the launch vehicle. The spacecraft entered a near-perfect circular orbit with a 560-km apogee, 544-km perigee, 95.74-min period, and 32.94° inclination. By 23 June Oso 8 was stabilized and was accurately tracking the center of the sun as planned. All spacecraft systems were operating normally. By 27 June all eight experiments had been activated and were acquiring data. Primary objective of the Oso 8 mission was to investigate the sun’s lower corona and its chromosphere, and their interface in the ultraviolet spectral region, to better understand the transport of energy from the photosphere into the corona. Secondary objective was to study solar x-rays and earth-sun relationships and to investigate the background component of cosmic x-rays. The 1064-kg spacecraft had two sections: A rotating cylindrical bottom section—the wheel—accommodated experiments that did not require solar reference pointing or that scanned the celestial sphere. The nonspinning rectangular sail section mounted on top of the wheel accommodated experiments that required stable pointing at the sun. The spacecraft carried eight experiments. The two on the sail section were a Univ. of Colo, high-resolution ultraviolet spectrometer to measure solar-ultraviolet line profiles in the range of 1050 to 2300 A and their variation with time and position, and a spectrometer and a Cassegrain telescope that would observe the solar chromospheric structure simultaneously in six lines from 1000 to 4000 A originating from different levels in the sun’s atmosphere. This experiment was provided by France’s Laboratory for Stellar and Planetary Physics under a cooperative agreement between NASA and the French Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique. Other experiments—all on the wheel portion of the spacecraft and supplied by U.S. universities, industry, and government agencies— included a high-sensitivity crystal spectrometer to monitor the sun’s emission in the 2- to 8-kev range, obtain a complete spectrum of the sun every 10 sec during flares, and obtain high-resolution spectra of many celestial x-ray sources; a mapping x-ray heliometer to measure location, spectrum, and intensity of intermediate-energy x-rays from individual solar-active regions and to acquire data on extrasolar x-ray sources; an investigation of soft x-ray background radiation using proportional counters; a cosmic x-ray spectroscope to determine the spectra of sources and the diffuse cosmic x-ray background in the energy range of 2 to 60 kev, and to measure intensity variations and identify possible emission lines of discrete x-ray sources; a high-energy celestial x-ray experiment to measure the spectrum of all point x-ray sources observable in the energy range of 0.01 to 1 megaelectron volts, and to search for temporal variations in the intensity and spectrum of the point sources detected; and a study of extreme ultraviolet radiations from earth and space, to determine the behavior of atoms such as hydrogen and neutral and ionized helium in the earth’s atmosphere by measuring the intensity and distribution of solar radiation resonantly scattered by these atoms. Oso 8 was the ninth, and last, in a series of spin-stabilized orbiting solar observatories designed to gather new knowledge of the sun, the earth’s atmosphere, and sun-activated terrestrial phenomena over a broad range of the electromagnetic spectrum not detectable by ground-based equipment. Of the eight OSO launches that began with Oso 1 on 7 March 1962, only one, OSO—C, was unsuccessful, because of a launch-vehicle failure. Discoveries made by OSO spacecraft included gamma-ray emissions from the galactic center; a previously unknown isothermal plateau in the chromosphere of the solar atmosphere; differences in the structure of the extreme ultraviolet corona above quiet and active regions on the solar disk; evidence that the corona above the solar poles was significantly cooler than nonactive coronal regions near the equator; and synoptic observations of “holes” in the corona that survived several solar rotations. Oso 8—built by Hughes Aircraft Co.—was managed by Goddard Space Flight Center under the direction of NASA’s Office of Space Science. GSFC was also responsible for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (NASAMORs, 4 June 75,23 June 75,27 June 75; NASA Release 75 — 158) 23 June: NASA and the Energy Research and Development Administration signed an interagency cooperative agreement to enhance the national energy effort. ERDA and NASA management would identify specific program tasks that could be undertaken by NASA centers in support of ERDA programs. ERDA would use NASA’s basic and applied research capabilities in areas including solar heating and cooling systems, gas turbines, fuel cells, hydrogen technology, ground-propulsion technology, bearings, seals, combustion, automatic control systems, and materials and structures technology. NASA would submit proposals and plans to ERDA for specific technology developments including testing, evaluation, and demonstration of projects or hardware; ERDA would also call upon NASA for specific short- and long-term technical and administrative expertise such as technical review boards, evaluation groups, and other assessment techniques. The agreement would establish an ERDA—NASA program committee to annually review NASA research and development work in support of ERDA. (NASA Release 75-182; ERDA Release 75-99)
The current fleet of supersonic transports—including the 16 Anglo-French Concordes and 14 Soviet Tu—144s flying or scheduled for service—would cause minimal damage to the ozone layer, Dr. Alan J. Grobecker, Director of the Dept, of Transportation’s Climatic Impact Assessment Program, announced at a press briefing. Citing a 3-yr DOT study, “The Effects of Stratospheric Pollution by Aircraft,” Dr. Grobecker said it would require 125 Concordes flying 4.5 hr daily to cause a minimally detectable change in the ozone layer. However, the study concluded that future expansion of stratospheric jet fleets should be carefully monitored. Recommendations made by the study included development of engines to meet specific nitrogen oxide-emission standards, development of low-sulfur aviation fuels, and establishment of stratospheric air-quality standards and engine-emission regulations. (AP, NYT, 22 Jan 75, 33; Robinson, Av Wk, 27 Jan 75, 16—17) 22 —25 January: NASA launched Landsat 2 (Landsat—B), formerly called Earth Resources Technology Satellite (ERTS-B), from Western Test Range at 9:56 am PST on a two-stage Thor-Delta booster supplemented by nine strap-on rockets. The satellite entered a near-polar orbit with a 918.23-km apogee, 912.89-km perigee, 103.32-min period, and 99.09° inclination. Primary objective of the mission was to acquire multispectral imagery over the U.S. and foreign countries in quantity sufficient to improve remote-sensing interpretative techniques and to further demonstrate the practiced application of Landsat data. Secondary objectives were to acquire sufficient multispectral coverage over the U.S. to supply data requirements for the Applications System Verification Tests for at least 1 yr, to acquire multispectral coverage for at least 2 yr over the major agricultural areas of the world to illustrate further applications of Landsat imagery for crop inventory, and to demonstrate successful operation of the Data Collection System. A 3-day delay in the launch changed the initial orbital phasing of Landsat 2 relative to Landsat 1 (launched as Erts 1 on 23 July 1972) into a 12- to 6-day repeat cycle instead of the planned 9-day cycle. However, an orbital correction maneuver beginning 27 Jan. and ending 6 Feb. altered phasing to a 9-day repeat cycle. The payload separated from the launch vehicle 50 min 3 sec after launch, followed by solar-panel deployment and earth acquisition using the attitude-control system. The command system was turned on automatically, permitting activation of the payload by ground stations. During the night of 22—23 Jan. the mechanical integrity of the wideband video tape recorder was verified, Data-Collection System (DCS) activated, and data-collection platform experiment data transmitted. By 12:00 pm EST 23 Jan. all spacecraft systems were operating and by 25 Jan. the wideband transmitter, wideband video tape recorder, multispectral scanner (MSS), and return-beam vidicon (RBV) were turned on, and operating normally. Teaming up with Landsat 1, the 953-kg Landsat 2 would provide repetitive coverage of almost the entire earth to demonstrate the practical benefits of resources management from space for NASA in cooperation with the Dept, of Agriculture, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Dept, of the Interior, Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and various state, local, and foreign organizations. Experiments included the cooperative NASA—DOA—NOAA Large Area Crop Inventory (LACIE), which combined crop-acreage measurements derived from Landsat data with meteorological information from ground stations and NOAA satellites to assess crop yields and make production forecasts. During the first yr of operation, LACIE would concentrate on U.S.-grown wheat, but the experiment would later be expanded to other crops and other regions. Other experiments included land-use survey and mapping; mineral resources, geological, structural, and land-form surveys; water resources studies; marine and ocean surveys; meteorological and environmental studies; and interpretative techniques development. Data were being transmitted to three NASA tracking and data-acquisition facilities at Fairbanks, Al.; Goldstone, Calif.; and Greenbelt, Md. In addition, Canada and Brazil operated Landsat ground data-acquisition stations and Italy and Iran were constructing similar facilities. Data received from the satellite were sent to the NASA Data Processing Facility at Goddard Space Flight Center where 1300 images, covering 45 million sq km, could be processed each week. The data would then be forwarded to the Federal Data Center and made available to the public. The Landsat mission was part of a U.S. program to develop remotesensing methods for improved management of earth’s resources. In addition to Landsat 1 and 2, the program included remote-sensor instrument development; data-analysis research using data from spacecraft, aircraft, and ground-truth sites; low-, intermediate-, and high-altitude aircraft flights; and Earth Resources Experiment Package (EREP) experiments completed during the 1973 manned Skylab missions. (NASA MORs, 9, 23 Jan 75; NASA Releases 74—329, 75-31)
A prototype of the YC—15 advanced medium short-takeoff-and-landing (AMST) cargo transport successfully completed its first flight. Airborne for 2 hr 26 min, the YC—15 was flown from Long Beach municipal airport to Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., achieving a peak altitude of 5500 m and a top speed of 485 kph. During the flight the pilots evaluated the aircraft’s flight controls, handling and slow-speed-flight qualities, and speed advance to the assigned maximum. Built by McDonnell Douglas Corp. for the Air Force, the YC—15 was the first large transport aircraft to include both the NASA-developed supercritical wing for improved flight performance and reduced fuel consumption, and externally blown flaps for powered lift. This aircraft and a second nearing completion would be evaluated, during a 12-mo flight-test program, against established Air Force performance goals and against two YC—14 prototype AMSTs built by Boeing Co. (Fink, Av Wk, 11 Aug 75, 18—20; NYT, 27 Aug 75, 58; AFSC Newsreview, 16 Oct 75, 16) 27 August-. Astronomers had picked up microwave signals that dated back 10 billion yrs to the creation of the universe, Sir Bernard Lovell, director of the Jodrell Bank radio telescope station, told the 137th annual meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. First picked up accidentally by equipment testing space communications, and later monitored by a sounding rocket, the signals apparently had originated in the cataclysmic explosion—the “big bang”— caused when a single primeval fireball exploded to form the universe. The observed radiation was “a relic of the high-temperature phase of the universe,” Lovell stated, “perhaps within a second or so of the beginning of the explosion.” Lovell urged scientists to reexamine their responsibility to society during their quest for knowledge of the universe and life on other planets; he questioned whether man could “survive for long the consequences of the probing of scientists,” saying that the search might produce answers too overwhelming for the mind of man to comprehend. He warned that extensive military involvement might lead to great human disaster, recalling how man’s quest for knowledge had led to the development of nuclear weapons. (AP, W Star, 28 Aug 75)
A Black Brant VC sounding rocket, first of a series scheduled over the next 5 yrs in a Space Processing Applications Rocket (SPAR) project managed by Marshall Space Flight Center, was launched to an altitude of 225 km from the Army’s White Sands missile range and traveled downrange about 80 km, providing about 5 min of near weightlessness during its coast phase. The rocket carried nine space-processing experiments in a 143-kg payload assembled at MSFC. The next flight had been scheduled for the spring of 1976. (MSFC Release 11 Dec 75)
A giant washing machine capable of doing 318 kg of laundry would help to develop economical and efficient methods of cleaning and refurbishing the Space Shuttle solid-rocket booster parachutes, and to identify the problems encountered during the process, Kennedy Space Center’s Spaceport News reported. The washer—2 m wide by 2 m high and 10 m long, and holding 23 668 liters of water—would wash a 23-m 318-kg 80-gore parachute. Once washed, the parachute, 136 kg heavier, would be taken by monorail to a drying area. A team of five technicians was required to complete the 4-hr process. (KSC Spaceport News, 18 Sept 75, 6)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $59 950 contract to Abbott Laboratories for living human kidney cells to be used by U.S. astronauts in the German electrophoresis experiment during the July U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Abbott Laboratories would provide the cells as part of an experiment to find a way to isolate effectively the one kidney cell in 20 that produced the enzyme urokinase, an enzyme capable of dissolving blood clots. Because gravity made such separations difficult on earth, scientists hoped to develop new technology in the zero-g environment of space. The experiment was being developed, built, and tested by West Germany’s Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm Gmbtt. (MSFC Releases 75- 7, 75-13) mobile launcher inside the Vehicle Assembly Building on 13 Jan. Engineers began electrical and mechanical systems tests on the first stage and installed flame curtains and panels to shroud the outboard engines. The Saturn IVB second stage was mated to the booster 14 Jan. and the instrument unit added to the stack 16 Jan. A boilerplate unit simulating the Apollo command module was added 17 Jan. The boilerplate would be removed and replaced with the actual spacecraft, and the rollout of the entire vehicle to the launch pad was scheduled for March. The docking system and docking module were mated 17 Jan. after combined systems tests. The complete unit would be placed into the spacecraft adapter in February. Swing-arm launch-control center integration was completed 21 Jan. (KSC Release 165—74; MSFC Release 75—19; Spaceport News, 23 Jan 75, 3; 6 Feb 75, 3; Marshall Star, 2 Jan 75, 2)
Marshall Space Flight Center forwarded the experimental payload for the first launch of NASA’s Space Processing Applications Rocket (SPAR) project to Goddard Space Flight Center, where the payload would be integrated with its launcher, a Black Brant sounding rocket. The integrated unit would undergo checkout before being sent to N. Mex. for firing by White Sands Missile Range early in Dec. The payload consisted of nine scientific experiments on processing materials in near-weightlessness. After the first launch, three flights per year carrying similar payloads had been planned through 1980. All payloads were to be recovered by parachute for ground analysis. The low-cost SPAR missions would provide data on space processing until Space Shuttle flights began in the early 1980s. (MSFC Release 75—233)
Two solid rockets on the Space Shuttle acoustic model accidentally escaped from the test stand during a captive static firing. The model’s liquid-propellant rocket engines had operated normally for a few seconds when the two solid rockets ignited on schedule. Both solid rockets then separated from the test stand. One was propelled north for 1.2 km, landing in a pine thicket; a brush fire caused by the rocket was quickly extinguished and no one was injured. A nine-member board was appointed to investigate the cause of the accident, determine the amount of property damage, investigate the adequacy of safeguards to prevent further incidents, recommend corrective measures, and assure containment of facilities and surrounding areas in case of recurrence. Although the test stand was damaged, the Orbiter and external tank of the model were not. The model would be returned to operation with the replacement of some wiring and instrumentation. (Marshall Star, 2 April 75, 2)
NASA announced that Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Associate Administrator, would leave NASA in May to join the National Center for Resource Recovery as president and chief executive officer. Dr. Petrone, who in 1960 was assigned on loan from the Army to Kennedy Space Center as Saturn project officer, later became Apollo program manager responsible for planning, developing, and activating all launch facilities for the Apollo program. Upon retirement from the Army he served at KSC as director of launch operations from 1966 to 1969, when he was appointed Apollo program director. In 1972 he was assigned additional responsibilities as program director of the NASA portion of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. In Dec. 1972 he was appointed Director of Marshall Space Flight Center, a position he held until his appointment in 1974 as Associate Administrator. (NASA Releases 69-124, 75-98)
France launched two satellites, Castor and Pollux, on a single Diamant BP—4 booster from Kourou, French Guiana. It was the first time France had orbited two satellites on a single booster. Castor entered orbit with a 1269-km apogee, 273-km perigee, 100.3-min period; and 3(f inclination; Pollux entered orbit with a 1283-km apogee, 270-km perigee, 100.4-min period, and 3(f inclination. The press reported that Castor carried an accelerometer to measure changes in the earth’s atmosphere for a 5-to-6-yr period. Pollux carried a micrometer for experiments in satellite propulsion. (GSFC Wkly SSR, 15—21 May 75;SF, Nov 75, 406; Agence France-Presse, Today, 18 May 75) .
The 38 000-kg second stage from the Saturn V booster that placed the Skylab 1 orbital workshop in orbit 14 May 1973 reentered the atmosphere over the Atlantic Ocean just before 3 am EST. NASA reported that radar tracked one large chunk that survived the fiery plunge through the atmosphere and fell into the ocean at 34° north latitude, 19° west longitude, about 1600 km west of Gibraltar. Smaller pieces might have scattered over an area several kilometers to the . northwest and southeast of that point and some charred debris might have fallen on the Sahara Desert, but NASA received no report that any fragments had caused damage or injury. (NASA PAO, interview, 30 June 1976; Reuter, W Post, 12 Jan 75, A14; AP, WStar-News, 12 Jan 75, Al; UPI, NYT, 12 Jan 75, 55) 11 January—9 February: The U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 17, carrying cosmonauts Lt. Col. Aleksey A. Gubarev and Georgy M. Grechko, from Baykonur cosmodrome at 2:43 am local time (4:43 pm EST 10 Jan.) to rendezvous and dock with the Salyut 4 space station launched 26 Dec. 1974. Soyuz 17 entered orbit with a 249-km apogee, 186-km perigee, 88.9-min period, and 51.6° inclination. Tass announced that the mission would carry joint experiments with Salyut 4, including a comprehensive checkout of the spacecraft’s onboard systems in various flight conditions. After an orbital correction that raised the spacecraft’s orbit to 354km apogee, 90.7-min period, and 51.6° inclination, Soyuz 17 docked with Salyut 4 on 12 Jan. Gubarev and Grechko entered the station, switched on the power and radio transmitters, and inspected the scientific equipment. During tbeir nearly 30 days aboard Salyut 4, the cosmonauts studied solar phenomena, x-radiation from celestial bodies, and earth’s radiation. They also studied the effects of weightlessness on the human body, made earth-resources observations, and studied the earth’s upper atmosphere. They resprayed two telescope mirrors dulled by exposure to space; carried out biological “Oasis” experiments using insects, microorganisms, tissue cultures, and plants; and recycled water, condensed from the cabin’s atmosphere, for drinking and food preparation. The crew began preparations to return to earth on 9 Feb., reboarding Soyuz 17 and undocking from the space station at 11:08 am Baykonur time (1:08 am EST). Soyuz 17 softlanded in-the U.S.S.R. 110 km northeast of Tselinograd, Kazakhstan, “in complex meteorological conditions” after 29 da 13 hr 20 min in space. On-the-spot and subsequent medical checks showed the cosmonauts to be in good health. The Soyuz 17 cosmonauts broke the previous 23-day 18-hr 22-min Soviet record for time in space, set by the Soyuz 11 crew (6—30 June 1971) before they were killed during reentry. (GSFC SSR, 28Feb 75; Tass, FBIS—Sov, 13 Jan—13 Feb 75;SF, April75,144-5, June 75,235; UPI, AFT7, 16 Jan 75, U-,SBD, 14 Jan 75, 62; LC S&T News Alert 2645)
Arnold Engineering Development Center was studying the feasibility of the secondary burning—called external burning—of fuel-rich exhaust to increase the efficiency of solid rocket motors. The concept called for the diversion of the exhaust of burning propellant through ports that ring the rear end of the motor casing, and its injection at right angles into the airstream. Miniature nozzles in each port would accelerate the exhaust gas to sonic speed. Turbulent mixing of the fuel-rich sonic gas and the supersonic airflow would cause a secondary combustion, increasing pressure at the base of the motor and overall thrust of the propulsion system. (AFSC Newsreview, July 75, 12)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced selection of Moog, Inc. for a $6 685 584 cost-plus-incentive-fee/award fee contract to design, produce, test, and maintain the Solid Rocket Booster Thrust Vector Control (TVC) electrohydraulic servoactuators. The devices move the solid rocket booster exhaust nozzle, providing directional control by gimballing the nozzle during propellant bum. (MSFC Release 75— 232)
France would begin deactivating its space center at Kourou, French Guiana, in September, the New York Times reported. A space center spokesman was quoted as saying, “We’ll have to put the space center to sleep for a while because of lack of funds.” The deactivation did not mean that the French were abandoning their ambition to achieve independence from the U.S. in space operations but that it would take longer than originally thought. The European space program at Kourou would resume with launches of several experimental rockets scheduled in 1979 and a satellite launch planned for the 1980s. Since its establishment in April 1968, the Kourou center had launched more than 225 balloons, satellites, and sounding rockets. Its location 5° north of the equator made Kourou especially suitable for equatorial launches. The largest of its disappointments had been the failure of the Europa 2 launch vehicle in 1971, a program finally abandoned in 1973 in favor of the Ariane booster. (Howe, ATT, 14 June 75)
The U.S.S.R. launched comsat Molniya 1—30 and France’s Sret 2 on a single booster from Plesetsk. Molniya 1—30 entered elliptical orbit with a 39 876-km apogee, 448-km perigee, 712.2-min period, and 62.8° inclination. Sret 2 entered orbit with a 40 824-km apogee, 512-km perigee, 737.8-min period, and 62.8° inclination. Tass reported that Molniya 1—30 would ensure long-range telephone, telegraph, and radio communications as well as transmit TV programs to Qrbita network stations in extreme northern Siberia, the Far East, and central Asia. Sret 2 (Satellite de Recherches et d’Environment Technique), according to Tass, would study the efficiency of a radiation system of thermal protection in outer space. It was the second of three spacecraft in a program of Soviet—French cooperation. Sret 1, launched 4 April 1972, had studied the characteristics of solar batteries for space operations and the degeneration of solar cells from cosmic-ray exposure in the Van Allen Belt. (GSFC WklySSR, 5—11 June 75; Tass, FBIS-Sov, 17 June 75, Ul; A&A 1972, 128)
European spending for space programs would rise significantly during 1975 as major projects begun in the past reached a maximum pitch, Aviation Week and, Space Technology reported. Most space spending was reflected in the European Space Research Organization (ESRO) budget which had jumped 50%, from $220 million in 1974 to $350 million in 1975. Two programs—the Ariane launch vehicle and the Spacelab for use on the Space Shuttle—accounted for half the ESRO budget for 1975. Av Wk reported that officials of France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES), prime contractor for the Ariane, had estimated that the booster would be used to orbit between 20 and 39 geostationary satellites during the 10-yr period from 1980 to 1990. Other European space programs under way included the Orbital Test Satellite (OTS), a test bed to evaluate equipment and concepts planned for a European comsat to be launched around 1980; Aerosat, a Canadian— ESRO— U.S. comsat program, with the first of two satellites scheduled for launch in 1978; Marots, a maritime comsat planned for launch in 1977; and Exosat, an x-ray astronomy satellite to be launched in 1979. All ESRO programs would be reviewed in the spring to resolve any pending disagreements, and to obtain approval of a 3-yr financial plan that called for a budget of $410 million in 1976 and $415 million in 1977. (Av Wk, 17 March 75, 65- 68)
NASA commemorated the 15th anniversary of the launch of Tiros 1 (Television Infrared Observation Satellite), the world’s first weather satellite. Since its launch 1 April 1960 at Cape Canaveral on a Thor-Delta booster, 30 experimental and operational weather satellites of increasing complexity had been launched to provide continuous information on earth’s environment. Over the 15-yr span the weather satellites had taken more than 2.2 million photographs while traveling through 12.1 billion km of space. Not a single major hurricane or storm had gone undetected or untracked. President Ford issued a statement in recognition of the Tiros 1 anniversary: “More accurate daily weather forecasts. . .have had an immeasurable impact in making the lives of millions more pleasant, productive, and secure. No major storm anywhere goes undetected by NASA or NOAA [National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration] satellites. We can be proud that people everywhere can benefit from this practical application of U.S. space science and technology.” (NASA Release 75—73; NASA Activities, April 75)
Lutz T. Kayser, an aerospace engineer from Stuttgart, Germany, had established a business called Orbital Transport and Raketen A.G. to build and launch rockets on a commercial basis, starting in 1980: if successful, it would be the world’s first private space-launch venture. NASA had been charging at least $25 million to put a $12-million satellite into space; Kayser had designed a “space truck” to put satellites in orbit for half the NASA price. His rockets could not be used for military purposes, he said, as he had no plans to sell equipment, but would do the launches himself and sell only booster services. As the launches could not take place in crowded West Germany, they would have to be done from either a ship at sea or from a base in some sparsely populated country. After ground tests of Kayser’s rocket engines last summer, German scientists had been convinced that his spacecraft would fly. Kayser said that if the Germans would not support him, he would seek backers elsewhere, in South America or Asia. He had hoped more than half the backing would come from private investors, and the rest from banks. The West German government had spent about $2 billion to encourage German and European space projects that could offer an alternative to the NASA monopoly, but such projects had not succeeded. The first “space truck”—now under construction for suborbital test next year—would be 39.62 m high and consist of inexpensive conventionally produced materials. To make mass production possible, all stages would use identical engines; the stages would be placed in concentric rings that would drop off as the craft climbed. (ATT, 28 Dec 75, 18)
Engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center were completing tests seeking to refine the means of towing to shore for refurbishment and reuse recovered solid rocket boosters from Space Shuttle launches. These tests explored the question of whether the parachute recovery lines and riser lines on the three recovery parachutes to be attached to each booster would, when under tension during descent, stretch enough to develop sufficient latent energy to deploy the 52-mm-dia by 15-m long tow rope from a tray located in the booster’s forward skirt. The tests employed a 10-m Saturn S—II-stage adapter ring, to which the parachute lines were attached. A crane hoisted the adapter ring until the stress on the rings was 12 000 kg, about one-half the stress expected on the parachutes lowering the booster. An explosive bolt was detonated, abruptly freeing the parachute lines; they contracted and the lines and fitting to which they were attached were yanked upward more than 60 m, quite enough energy to deploy the tow line. The recovery system parachutes would be fitted with flotation devices so they could be recovered. On the first six Shuttle developmental flights, the set of parachutes would be cut free from one booster in each set of two and both would be tested to determine which configuration made it easier to retrieve and tow the booster. (MSFC Marshall Star, 10 Sept 75, 2)
Boeing Co., which had a 44-mo $3-million subcontract from Rockwell to detect electrical problems with the Space Shuttle, reported that 35 design or hardware changes had been necessary in main-engine electrical circuits of the Shuttle so far. Boeing was conducting a sneak circuit analysis of the first Shuttle orbiter, to be used for approach and landing tests; later studies were scheduled for the second orbiter, the solid rocket booster, and the external fuel tank, as well as critical ground-support equipment. (SBD, 18 Nov 75, 92)
Marshall Space Flight Center had issued a single-source request to Sunstrand Corp. to submit a proposal for the design, development, manufacture, test, and delivery of the auxiliary power unit for the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster’s thrust-vector control subsystem. The APU would include a gas generator, turbine, gearbox, fuel pump, electrical controls, control valves, instrumentation, mounting system, and the mechanical and electrical connections required to interface with other SRB subsystems. Two APUs would be used during prelaunch and ascent phases of flight to provide hydraulic power to the thrust-vector control system of each booster. (MSFC Release 75 —62)
Japan’s N booster launched, from Tanegashima launch site, its first payload—Kiku, an 83-kg spacecraft designed to measure launch vibrations and spacecraft temperatures in space. Kiku entered orbit with a 1104-km apogee, 977-km perigee, 106-min period, and 47° inclination. The launch vehicle consisted of a Rocketdyne MB— 3 first-stage engine, modified from the U.S. Thor program, with three Thiokol Corp. Castor 2 solid-rocket strap-ons. The second stage, designated LE—3, had been designed by Japan’s National Space Development Agency with Rocketdyne assistance. The third stage was a Thiokol TE—364— 4 solid-rbcket motor. (GSFC WklySSR, 4—10 Sept 75; Av Wk, 22 Sept 75, 50)
Radio astronomers in both the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had intensified their search for possible civilizations out in space, Walter Sullivan wrote in theNew York Times. Little publicity had been given the search to prevent raising public expectation for “what is likely to be a prolonged effort.” Costs were minimal, because the observations had made use of equipment also used for other research. Dr. Hans Mark, Director of Ames Research Center, had told students at the Polytechnic Inst, of N.Y. that the search for other civilizations would become “one of the major scientific enterprises,” and cited his belief that “communicative civilizations” had been a natural consequence of biological evolution. Dr. Mark pointed out that the U.S. giant antenna at Goldstone, Calif., used for spacecraft communications, could pick up emissions only from the vicinity of the nearest stars. One American search is using the largest antenna on earth—the dish at Arecibo, P.R.—to scan the five nearest galaxies at 1420 mhz, the frequency of radio waves given off by hydrogen atoms, long considered a logical frequency for civilizations trying to make contact. The Arecibo search had been conducted by two Cornell professors, Dr. Frank B. Drake and Dr. Carl Sagan. Another American search had been using the National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Bank, W. Va., to scan 700 stars (resembling earth’s sun) within 80 light years of the solar system for signals at the 1420-mhz wavelength. No obvious signals had been detected, but the recordings had not been subjected to detailed analysis, according to Dr. Patrick Palmer of the Univ. of Chicago and Dr. Benjamin M. Zuckerman of the Univ. of Md. The Soviet program, scanning the entire portion of the celestial sphere visible from the Soviet Union, had been using two networks with a total of eight stations spread across the vast width of the Soviet Union. The November issue of Icarus, international journal of solar-system studies, had carried a prospectus of the Soviet CETI (communication with extraterrestrial intelligence) program divided into two phases. CETI 1* scheduled from 1975 to 1985, included the whole-sky Scan by eight stations plus monitoring by two space stations and a survey of nearby galaxies like the one under way at Arecibo. Only the eight-station project had been initiated, as far as U.S. scientists knew. CETI 2, from 1980 to 1990, had been scheduled to continue satellite monitoring but would also use setnirotatable antennas such as the RAT AN—600 antenna 600 m wide, known to be located high in the Caucasus; the system consisted of numerous plates that had to be aimed individually* calling for hand alignment since no computer had been designed to perform this role. The Soviets also envisioned a monitoring station at the point beyond the moon where the gravitational fields of earth and moon would balance each other; a station at that point would be protected from the earth’s own radio emissions. Identical fluctuations of signal recorded simultaneously at widely separated points would be considered to have extraterrestrial origin rather than to result from a local manmade effect. (NYT, 29 Nov 75, C13) During November: An x-ray telescope assembled at Marshall Space Flight Center for the study of remnants of an exploded star had been shipped from England; where it had undergone payload integration, to the Woomera Rocket Range in Australia for launch. The project, called Skylark for the British sounding rocket on which the telescope would fly, was a joint British-Anierican undertaking to study a supernova remnant known as Puppis A for information on the evolution of stars and perhaps oil the formation of neutron stars. The flight would provide at least 3 min 20 sec for the 346.5-kg payload to make its observations above 120-km altitude. (NASA Release 75—287; MSFC Release 75—238)
Design and fabrication of the first Space Shuttle Orbiter was progressing well, with all major structural elements—forward fuselage, tail, wings, mid fuselage—scheduled for final assembly in mid-1975, NASA Deputy Director of the Space Shuttle LeRoy E. Day told the Canadian Science Writers Association in Toronto, Canada. The main rocket engine, the most difficult development item, was being built on a 10-yr technology base in which government and industry had invested nearly $100 million. During 1974, initial component engine firings had been made, and firings of the first integrated subsystems test bed engine were scheduled for July. The emphasis for the expendable external tank had been on simplified low-cost production. An inexpensive spray-on insulation had been developed to protect the aluminum skin from excessive temperatures during ascent. ' In summary, NASA and its contractors were making steady progress, holding within cost and schedule commitments. The first Orbiter would be rolled out in 1976, with its first captive flight on the back of the Boeing 747 aircraft scheduled for the second quarter of 1977. The first approach and landing tests, in 1977, would be made by separating the Orbiter from the 747 at about 8500 m, permitting the Orbiter to glide down and land on the runway at Edwards Air Force Base. The second Orbiter would be used for the first orbital flight in 1979, with six developmental flights scheduled before the Space Shuttle became operational in 1980. (Transcript)
At a Moscow exhibition of space art to commemorate the joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, Soviet art glorified man’s role in space, whereas U.S. art emphasized technology, the Baltimore Sun reported. U.S. artists, commissioned by NASA and the National Gallery of Art to record the space program, showed basically factual treatments of blastoffs, launch towers, and mazes of steel gridwork. Artist Alden Wicks depicted Kennedy Space Center’s Vehicle Assembly Building as “The New Olympus.’’ Men played subordinate roles in U.S. art; they swarmed through control centers or, as in Jamie Wyeth’s “Firing Room,” sat by the dozens in front of individual TV monitors. Engineers ministered to launch vehicles like priests before an idol. Even in the pen-and-ink drawings of individual astronauts, faces were diminished by the detailed minutiae of spacesuit and life-support paraphernalia. By contrast, man dominated the Soviet art. Artist Anatoly Yakushin depicted pioneer rocket theoretician Konstantin Tsiolkovsky against a geometric maze, but man controlled the idea. A painting by Boris Okorokov showed a young flight controller commanding abstract equipment, in contrast to Wyeth’s passive TV-monitor watchers. The irony of the two artistic visions was that they “reverse the technological visions of the nations’ manned space programs,” the Sun said. In reality, U.S. flights left much of the flying up to the astronauts, while the Soviets had kept their cosmonauts as passive as possible. Also included in the exhibition were paintings by Apollo-Soyuz Test Project cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov, the only one of the artists who had seen outer space. He painted cosmic scenes in brilliant colors: His deep space was not a flat black, but a composite of black and indigo, streaked with magenta and stars with violet coronas. The Leonov earth as seen from space was deep marbled blue with atmospheric sheaths surrounding it in hard-edged layers, pale hues close to the planet, darkening in stages to the night of Space. (B Sun, 16 July 75, A4)
Marshall Space Might Center announced selection of nine experiments on processing materials in space to be carried aboard a Black Brant 5C sounding rocket scheduled for December launch. The launch would be first in a 5-yr series of space-processing flights in MSFC’s Space Processing Applications Rocket (SPAR) project to find improved methods of materials processing on earth, and ultimately to produce materials in space that could not be produced on earth. The nine experiments were: dendrite remelting and macrosegregation; liquid mixing; lead-antimony eutectic; foams from sputter-deposited metals; thoria-dispersed magnesium; dispersion-strengthened lead-silver alloys; particle-interface interactions; bubble behavior in melts; and contained poly crystalline solidification. The low-cost rocket launches, each of which provided approximately 5.5 min of low gravity (0.001 of earth’s) during the coast phase of the trajectory, would offer the only means of obtaining scientific data on space processing of materials in near-zero gravity until flights of the Space Shuttle in the early 1980s. (MSFC Release 75— 225)
The Space Shuttle orbiter might travel by ground rather than air from Rockwell International’s assembly facility at Palmdale, Calif., to Edwards Air Force Base for its approach and landing tests, a Rockwell official said as the orbiter made its first appearance for the press. Original plan had been to send the orbiter piggyback on NASA’s Boeing 747 scheduled to launch the unpowered craft during its tests at Edwards. Travel on the ground would take 6 hr to go about 32 km, using an off-the-road vehicle inherited from the Apollo program, and would cost less. (NASA Release 75— 293; Aero Daily, 20 Nov 75, 107)
NASA launched Cos-B scientific satellite for the European Space Agency at 3:48 pm PDT from Western Test Range on a three-stage thrust-augmented Thor-Delta booster. Launch had been delayed for 2 days because a telemetry aircraft was grounded with hydraulic-valve failure. The satellite entered the planned highly elliptical polar orbit with a 99 886-km apogee, 344-km perigee, 36.7-hr period, and 90.13° inclination. NASA’s objective for the launch was to place Cos-B into a highly elliptical near-polar orbit with sufficient accuracy to allow the satellite to conduct its planned scientific experiments. Purpose of the Cos-B mission was to study extraterrestrial gamma radiation in the energy range 25 mev to 1 gev in order to establish the intensity of the average gamma-ray flux; examine large-scale anisotropy of the radiation over angular regions corresponding to galactic features; study quasars, x-ray, and radio sources of small angular size in supernova remnants; measure energy spectra of various galactic radiations; and study time variations of radiation from pulsars, x-ray, and radio sources. On 11 August, ground controllers sent low-voltage commands from ESA’s space operations center (ESOC) in West Germany to check out spacecraft and experiment performance. After a second switch-on at high voltage, a series of inflight tests further validated all onboard systems and experiment performance. On 15 Aug. a complete review of spacecraft operational status showed all air and ground systems were operating normally; by 19 Aug., the first data had been returned to earth. Cos-B, first satellite launched for the newly organized ESA, was the eighth developed by ESA’s predecessor, the European Space Research Organization [see 30—31 May]. Under the direction of the European Space Research and Technology Center (ESTEC) and prime contractor Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm GmbH, Cos-B had been designed and built by organizations in 7 of the 10 ESA member countries. The single experiment—a 115-kg spark chamber—had been assembled from five primary and two subsidiary experiment units supplied by six institutes in four European countries. After separating from the launch vehicle, Cos-B transmitted data in real time to ground stations of the European Space Tracking Network with central control at the European Space Research Operations Center in West Germany. For NASA, Goddard Space Flight Center had the responsibility for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle under the direction of the Office of Space Science. GSFC also had responsibility for limited tracking support. (NASA MOR S-492 -301 -75 -01, 22 July 75, 10 Sept. 75; NASA Release 75—214; Releases 7—19 Aug 75)
Lewis Research Center had awarded a contract to Rockwell International Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for a laser-heated rocket thrust chamber for spacecraft. The concept included transmitting laser energy from a ground laser-generating station to a spacecraft; propellant carried aboard tho spacecraft would convert laser energy into propulsive thrust. The potential improvement in performance included a 400% increase in payload capability for a Space Tug. Rockwell would build an experimental thruster, to be powered by a 10-kw laser beam and tested at LeRC using an in-house carbon-dioxide laser system, and would provide a preliminary design for a 5000-kw thruster. (Rocketdyne Release RD—16)
NASA awarded a 1-yr contract to Boeing Co. to study a proposed Large Lift Vehicle (LLV) made up of Space Shuttle engines, fuel tanks, and avionics. Launched without the Space Shuttle Orbiter, the LLV could carry tons of freight into space, or could rocket to the moon with a second stage attached. It would be less expensive than the Saturn V because the avionics package could be retrieved in orbit and the twin boosters were recoverable. In a 1974 interview with the Huntsville Times, John H. Disher, NASA Director for Advanced Programs, had said that no definite mission for the LLV was planned, but that NASA was looking to the future. (Casebolt, Huntsville Times, 12 Aug 74; NASA Hq Adv Progs Off, Fero, interview, 10 Aug 75) August 1975
NASA launched a two-stage solid-propellant Nike-Hawk sounding rocket from Wallops Island, carrying an 84-kg payload to a 164-km altitude. The flight, to demonstrate successful mating of a surplus Hawk engine with the Nike M—88 first stage, also tested a newly developed recovery system for both the single-stage Hawk and the Nike-Hawk vehicle. The system, designed for both land or air recovery, could return up to 136 kg of payload by parachute. The sounding rocket carried a Univ. of Pittsburgh high-resolution photoelectron spectrometer to measure daytime photoelectron energy distribution with a very high-energy resolution. The payload impacted 178 km downrange and was retrieved by the research vessel Annan-dale. (WSC Release 75—10)
Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and New York City mayor Abraham D. Beame met in New York to review NASA-developed safety standards for handling liquefied natural gas. Following a 1973 gas storage tank fire that killed 40 persons, New York officials had asked NASA to use its experience in handling highly volatile rocket fuels to help the city establish a comprehensive risk-management plan to design, construct, and operate natural gas facilities. The plan, developed at Kennedy Space Center and incorporated into New York City Fire Department operating procedures, identified liquid gas risks, controlled the risks through redundant fail-safe techniques, and set up criteria for discussions to eliminate or accept certain risks. Also discussed was the new fiberglass and aluminum breathing system developed at Johnson Space Center and being tested by firefighters in New York, Houston, and Los Angeles. Results to date indicated that the new unit—which was 30% lighter than conventional systems and featured a high-pressure, longer duration air tank and a face mask allowing better vision—was superior to old-style units. The new system was expected to be introduced commercially later in the year. (NASA Release 75—25)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the award of a $1.9-million firm-fixed-price contract to the Martin Marietta Corp. for fabrication, acceptance testing, and delivery of 322 pyrotechnic-initiator controllers (PIC) for the Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters. (MSFC Release 75—182)
Marshall Space Flight Center had selected Moog Inc. Controls Div. to negotiate a cost-plus-incentive-fee/award-fee contract totaling $6 685 584 for the design, development, production, and acceptance testing of a thrust-vector control electrical-hydraulic servoactuator on the Space Shuttle solid rocket booster. The servoactuator would control the SRB’s exhaust nozzle. (Marshall Star, 12 Nov 75, 4)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics announced that James B. Lazar, NASA’s Chief of Electric Propulsion and Flight Experiments Branch in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology, and Roderick W. Spence of the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory would receive the James H. Wyld Propulsion Award. The award was given annually in recognition of “outstanding leadership of this nation’s advanced propulsion programs in the separate fields of nuclear and electric rocket propulsion.” Lazar had been responsible for NASA’s electric propulsion program, providing NASA with the option for a highly reliable, efficient, and flight-proven space propulsion system. Dr. Spence had directed design and development of the nuclear rocket reactors at the Los Alamos laboratory, providing the foundation of technology for the nation’s nuclear rocket program. (AIAA Release 18 Sept 75)
The upper stage and instrument unit of the Saturn IB rocket that carried the U.S. astronauts into orbit for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project reentered the earth’s atmosphere at 9:45 pm EDT. The 14 100-kg stage and instrument unit, empty of 320 cu m of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen, broke into pieces as they reentered over the Pacific Ocean. Reentry was activated by ground commands; excess fuel was dumped through the engine, slowing the stage and ensuring that disintegration came in a remote ocean area. (MSFC Release 75 — 160)
Rockwell International Corp. Rocketdyne Div. successfully test-fired the main chamber of the Space Shuttle main engine for the first time, at NASA’s National Space Technology Laboratories. Initial evaluation of ignition-test data indicated that all test objectives were achieved. During a second firing the engine’s high-pressure fuel pump reached a maximum speed of almost 7000 rpm, 19% of full power. The test was seventh in a planned series of 10 to 15 short-duration ignition tests that began 11 June and would culminate in the operation of the engine at 20% of maximum thrust level of 2 090 664 newtons (470 000 lbs). Subsequent tests would attempt higher mainstage thrust levels to evaluate engine-starting characteristics and performance. The Space Shuttle main engine, the most advanced liquid-fueled rocket engine ever built, was the first to use an electronic digital computer for automatic control. Three of these engines, designed for reuse up to 55 times, would power the Space Shuttle Orbiter. (Marshall Star, 2 July 75, 1; Rocketdyne Release RD—15; MSFC Release 75-115)
Soviet and French scientists had completed the “Araks” study of the earth’s magnetically interlinked points, Izvestiya reported, by observing what happened when a bundle of electrons was artificially injected into the magnetosphere. French Eridan sounding rockets— equipped with electron accelerators, plasma generators, and instruments for measuring and recording wave radiation and particle streams—were launched on 26 Jan. and 15 Feb. 1975 from Kerguelen Island. During the ascent the accelerator emitted electron impluses at various angles to the line of magnetic force while the plasma generator emitted a stream of cesium plasma to compensate for the positive charge of the rocket. At the same time Soviet and French specialists in Arkhangelsk Oblast made optical observations using supersensitive TV installations, photometers, and electron optical-image intensifiers. Radar and radio spectrographs in Kostroma and Vologda Oblasts observed the dispersal of radio waves and radio emission in the area where the electrons penetrated the dense strata of the atmosphere. From the Araks data, scientists hoped to determine the true position of the magnetically interlinked spot and to learn more of the interaction between the electron bundle and its medium. (Izvestiya, FBIS— Sov., 13 March 75, E2) ’
Communications Satellite Corp., U.S. representative in the International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium, transmitted its twelfth annual report to the President, covering the activities of ComSat from 1 July 1974—30 June 1975. Two more Intelsat IV satellites had been orbited, Intelsat IV F—8 21 Nov. 1974 over the Pacific Ocean and Intelsat IV F— 1 22 May 1975 over the Indian Ocean. A third satellite, Intelsat IV F—6, failed to achieve orbit when the launch vehicle malfunctioned. By 30 June 1975 a network of 112 antennas—27 more than last year—at 88 earth stations was providing 379 ComSat pathways, with 107 countries leasing satellite services, an increase of 7 over the previous year. Comsat General Corp., a subsidiary, had entered into a joint venture with the European Space Agency and the Government of Canada on 3 Dec. 1974 to provide satellite capacity for an Aerosat (aeronautical satellite) communications test and evaluation program. Comsat General and International Business Machines Corp. had notified the Federal Communications Commission that they would seek to enter the domestic satellite business with one or more partners. ComSat’s earth stations in Connecticut and California neared readiness for Marisat (maritime satellite) communications services in the Atlantic and Pacific Ocean areas. ComSat reported a net income of $44 918 000, or $4.49 per share, up from $36 299 000 or $3.63 per share in 1973. (Text) During August: “The importance of space to our defensive military effort can only increase in the future,” Gen. Samuel C. Phillips, retiring commander of the Air Force Systems Command and NASA’s Apollo Program Director from 1964— 69, said in an interview. Gen. Phillips speculated that aircraft, including the B— 1 bomber under development by the U.S., would be an important part of the military force “for as many decades ahead as anyone cares to project.” However, he saw energy scarcities increasing the need for training simulators and alternative aircraft fuels. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug 75, 1) September 1975
Ground was broken for Marshall Space Flight Center’s x-ray telescope test facility for the High Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO) program. The facility, which would cost $4 million including equipment, would be used to test instruments for the HEAO program as well as to calibrate rocket payloads for x-ray stellar studies and make advance telescope calibrations. The HEAO program included three unmanned scientific satellites to be launched into low earth orbit between 1977 and 1979 to study the invisible light of x-rays, gamma rays, and cosmic rays. (Marshall Star, 29 Jan 75, 4)
NASA was conducting design studies and component testing for an experimental laser-energy system using a nuclear-fission reactor fueled with gaseous uranium or a gaseous uranium compound such as hexafluoride, Dr. Karl Thom said in an article released by NASA. Whereas conventional laser power used various processes of energy conversion that required costly equipment and resulted in net loss of energy, a nuclear system could produce large amounts of high-grade power very cheaply and efficiently. Some scientists were using various nuclear-powered lasers for experiments, but most used systems that transferred energy from external reactors to the laser gas within the laser tube. NASA with its interest in gaseous fuel reactors as high-performance space power and propulsion systems, was looking at a more efficient system in which the fission fragments that energize laser gas were energized within the laser tube itself creating, at fission, a powerful chain reaction. Dr. Thom said that, in combination with the research on nuclear-pumped lasers, Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory scientists were testing gaseous fuel reactors using components, reflectors, and controls salvaged from the nuclear rocket program. If the system proved practical “a new era of nuclear energy utilization will begin, in space and on Earth.” Space engineers could create a nuclear-powered laser station in earth orbit to beam power via lasers to various customers in space, to other space probes for propulsion, to lunar bases for their power needs, and to earth for clean and abundant energy. (NASA Release 75—169)
NASA announced the appointment of David R. Scott as Director of Flight Research Center to replace Lee R. Scherer, who had become Director of Kennedy Space Center. Scott had been an astronaut on Gemini 8 (16 March 1966), on Apollo 9 (3 — 13 March 1969), and on lunar landing mission Apollo 15 (26 July—7 Aug. 1971). After leaving the astronaut corps in 1972, Scott served as technical assistant to the Apollo Program Manager at Johnson Space Center, and as special assistant for mission operations and government-furnished equipment in the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office. (NASA anno, 18 April 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award of a $5 768 612 costplus-incentive-fee contract to Sperry Rand Corp. for design, development, test, and delivery of 37 multiplexer-demultiplexers (MDM) for the Space Shuttle rocket boosters. The MDM, an electronic device that permitted sending or receiving more than one message, signal, or unit of information on a single communication channel, was housed in the solid rocket boosters’ integrated electronics assembly. It would process signals for such functions as ignition, thrust vector control, release of nose cap and frustum, jettison of solid rocket motor nozzles, detachment of parachutes, and tum-on of recovery aids. (MSFC Release 75—154)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced the selection of Bendix Corp. Guidance Systems Div. for negotiations leading to a contract for integrated electronic assemblies for the Space Shuttle solid rocket booster. The cost-plus-incentive-fee contract would cover design, development, test and evaluation, and fabrication of assemblies and assorted test equipment for the first 6 Shuttle flights. The initial contract would call for 33 units, including flight articles, spares, and development and test versions, with delivery to begin in 1976. Each solid rocket booster would have two assembly units, one forward and one aft. Ignition commands would route from the Orbiter through the aft assembly to the forward assembly. During launch, the aft assembly would route commands from the Orbiter to the thrust-vector control system. The forward assembly would release the nose cap and frustum, jettison the solid rocket nozzle, detach the parachutes from the solid rocket booster, and turn on recovery aids. (MSFC Release 75—106)
Marshall Space Flight Center had resumed acoustic testing of a 6.4%-scale model of the Space Shuttle to provide information needed in designing the Shuttle and its launch facilities, MSFC announced. The tests would also produce data on effects of hot exhaust gases on the aft portion of the Shuttle immediately after ignition. Data from earlier testing of the model, which included the liquid-fueled engines and solid rocket motors, had alerted designers that special provisions would be needed to deflect hot gases out of the solid rocket boosters away from the facility fuel lines near the launch pad. A pad design based on this analysis had been tested and proven. During the tests, which had begun originally in August 1974, the model was held in a test stand while its engines were fired from 6 to 10 sec. (MSFC Release 75—205) During September: NASA had invited nearly 5000 scientists worldwide to propose experiments for a possible 6-yr mission to Uranus, beginning with a November 1979 launch. The mission, which could include a swing by Neptune, was being studied for inclusion in NASA’s FY 1977 budget request. A mission to Uranus and Neptune would mean that every planet in the solar system except Pluto would have been probed by a U.S. spacecraft by 1988. The spacecraft itself would be adapted directly from the Mariner probe now under development at Jet Propulsion Laboratory for a planned 1977 mission to Saturn; like Mariner-Satum, the Uranus mission would use the gravity of Jupiter to hurl the spacecraft on toward the more remote planet. If the spacecraft remained healthy after it investigated Uranus, it would use the gravity of that planet to fly on to Neptune, more than 1.6 billion km deeper into space. (GSFC Goddard News, Sept 75, 2; UPI, NYT, 4 Sept 75, 20) October 1975
Dr. Noel W. Hinners, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science, and Major General Soehardjono, Director General of Posts and Telecommunications for the Republic of Indonesia, signed an agreement for the July 1976 launch of Indonesia’s first communications satellite on a NASA Thor-Delta rocket. The new comsat, in synchronous equatorial orbit over Indonesia where its signal could be transmitted to 40 ground receiving stations, would permit Indonesia to begin development of a national communications network. (NASA Release 75-134)
Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, associate director for science at Marshall Space Flight Center, would retire after 30 yrs of Federal service on 28 Dec., NASA announced. Born and educated in Germany, Dr. Stuhlinger became a physicist and had been involved in rocketry and space work since 1943 when he joined the rocket development team at Peenemunde, Germany. He had come to the U.S. after World War II and worked for the U.S. Army before transferring to NASA when MSFC was wet up in 1960. Early planning for lunar exploration and the Apollo telescope mount had been carried out under his direction, as well as early planning on the High Energy Astronomy Observatory and initial phases of the Space Telescope project. His work had included electric propulsion studies and scientific payloads for the Space Shuttle. (MSFC Release 75—256)
The wingless unpowered X—24B lifting body had made its first landing on a concrete runway at Edwards, Calif., to demonstrate maneuver and safe landing of an unpowered reentry vehicle on a conventional runway. After launch from a B —52 aircraft flying at 14 000 m, test pilot John N. Manke, chief Flight Research Center pilot for the X—24B project, had ignited a small rocket engine, propelling the X—24B to a speed of 1381 km per hr and altitude of 18 300 m. Manke then shut off the engine and glided to a perfect 300-kph landing on the 4600-m runway. The 11.3-m-long X—24B was a part of a joint NASA-Air Force program to study transonic flight characteristics and landing ability of a vehicle designed for hypersonic speeds. (FRC Release 24 —75; LA Times, 6 Aug 75)
NASA announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. for negotiation of a $14.8-million fixed-price incentive contract to develop, build, and deliver Space Shuttle solid rocket booster (SRB) structures, and to design and build the tooling necessary to produce them. The SRB structures would support the Space Shuttle on the launch pad, transfer thrust loading to the Orbiter and external tank, and provide structural support for the SRB recovery system, electrical components, and thrust-vector control system. (NASA Release 75-238)
High-temperature core reactors, fueled by fissioning uranium plasmas, could be used to “burn up” or eliminate radioactive wastes produced in the fission process, NASA announced. In a NASA-sponsored program to develop advanced nuclear-powered rocket propulsion, scientists had found that long-lived radioactive wastes could be transformed into harmless materials by bombarding them with neutrons. The uranium-compound fuel could be circulated and returned to the reactor to burn up the materials produced in the fuel. Computer analyses showed that a gaseous fuel reactor could establish a balance in rates of production and elimination of the waste produced after 3 yr of operation; once this equilibrium was established, no additional long-lived radioactive wastes would be produced. The gaseous fuel reactor also could be designed to burn wastes from conventional nuclear-fission reactors. (NASA Release 75—44; Schneider et al., Nuclear Technology, Sept 75, 34—50)
One of the most highly detailed and instrumented models of the Space Shuttle ever constructed had been wind-tunnel-tested at the Arnold Engineering Development Center, the Air Force Systems Command announced. Located throughout the 92-cm model were 835 temperature sensors to measure heat levels of major components at jettison of the two expended solid-propellant boosters. Two other Shuttle tests also had been completed for NASA at AEDC: A smaller model and computer-controlled systems were used to study aerodynamic forces during the separation of the expended solid boosters. During the test the Orbiter and external fuel-tank models were attached to the tunnel supports and a solid booster model was attached to the computer-controlled support. Measurements were recorded with a single booster model at various points below, beside, and behind the Orbiter-tank combination and with the booster and Orbiter-tank at various pitch and yaw angles. In the third test, heating data were obtained on an Orbiter model positioned at a high angle of attack at mach 8. Special paints that changed from a solid to a liquid at specified temperatures were used to record heating histories on the surface of the model, and oilcoating techniques were used to examine airflow. (AFSC Release OIP
Kennedy Space Center deactivated its hyperbaric decompression chamber after 6 yr of operation. The chamber had never been used for its intended purpose—to save the lives of astronauts in the event of a malfunction during atmospheric chamber tests—but had treated 12 local civilian divers for the bends, a painful crippling illness caused by formation of nitrogen bubbles in the bloodstream when a diver moves too quickly from high-pressure water depths to the surface. The $100 000 chamber intended for the manned space program had been opened to public use by the center director. With the end of the Apollo program and the next manned flight 4 yr in the future, the decision was made to deactivate the chamber. The Orlando Sentinel Star quoted Russell P. Lloyd, KSC engineer in the Support Operations Div., as saying the possibility existed that the chamber would be reactivated for the Space Shuttle program, but for the time being it would remain closed. (Lloyd, interview, 19 Sept 77; Upchurch, Orlando Sentinel Star, 17 Aug 75)
Marshall Space Flight Center observed the 15th anniversary of the transfer of personnel, facilities, and responsibilities from the Department of Defense’s U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency to NASA. The center had been formally dedicated at a ceremony 8 Sept. 1960 attended by President Dwight D. Eisenhower; Dr. T. Keith Glennan, NASA Administrator; Alabama Governor John Patterson; MSFC Director Dr. Wemher von Braun; and Mrs. George C. Marshall, widow of the statesman, soldier, and Nobel Peace Prize winner for whom the center was named. With the transfer had gone responsibility for continued development of the Redstone and the Saturn I; soon to come would be the Saturn IY and Y launch vehicles that would carry U.S. astronauts into earth orbit and, eventually, to the moon. More than 100 000 employees in 12 000 companies across the U.S. worked during the peak of developing the Saturn family and its 31 launches with 100% launch success rate. MSFC developed the Lunar Roving Vehicle that carried moon-based astronauts several km from the landing site across rugged lunar terrain. MSFC was also responsible for the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop. Launched into earth orbit 14 May 1973, Skylab 1 carried other MSFC developments including solar-observation instruments, the docking adapter, and many experiments. Three three-man crews occupied the space station for a total of 171 days. To date, as the last Saturn booster was preparing to carry three U.S. astronauts to an earth-orbital rendezvous with two Soviet cosmonauts for the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, MSFC was heavily involved in development of the Space Transportation System, including the Space Shuttle, Space Tug, Spacelab, and related payloads. MSFC employees were also working on the development of solar heating and cooling systems and other applications projects. In a message to MSFC Director Dr. William P. Lucas, President Gerald R. Ford said that “From its inception, the Marshall center has continued in the forefront of this Nation’s tremendous advancement in the exploration of space. We look forward to more vital contributions . . . from the Marshall center in the years ahead as the United States continues to lead the way in using space for the benefit of all mankind.” (MSFC Releases 75—131, 75—140; Historical Origins of The George C. Marshall Space Flight Center, MSFC Historical Monograph No. 1, Dec 1960)
France launched Storiette, a passive geodetic satellite, from Kourou, French Guiana, on a Diamant B/P.4 launcher.The satellite entered orbit with a 1137-km apogee, 804-km perigee, 104.5-min period, and 49.8° inclination. Storiette, with an inner core of uranium 238 to give it a high mass and reduce gravitational effects on the spacecraft, would reflect laser emissions directed at it from ground stations to study the earth’s gravitational field, elasticity of the earth, and moments of the earth’s poles. The launch was the first for the Diamant booster developed by the Centre National de Recherches Scientifiques. (GSFC WklySSR, 6—12 Feb 75; Av Wk, 9 Dec 75, 55; 17 Feb 75, 19)
The Peoples Republic of China announced the launch of its fifth earth satellite, third launched this year. Reuters, quoted in the New York Times, said observers believed it had been a step toward Peking’s first manned space flight. The fourth China spacecraft, launched 26 Nov., had been recovered, leading observers to believe the Chinese engineers had perfected soft-landing techniques. Weights of the three craft launched this year had not been disclosed, to hide the capacity of the type of rocket used for launch, nor had the current announcement disclosed the satellite’s orbit or height. (NYT, 18 Dec 75, 26; New China News Agency, in FBIS 243, 17 Dec 75)
Flat conductor cable developed by NASA for rocket and spacecraft wiring was being installed in Marshall Space Flight Center’s experimental solar house, MSFC announced. The surface-mounted cable was being considered for commercial and residential applications, to provide a wiring system that was lower in cost, easier to install, adaptable to all types of wall construction, and as safe as or safer than conventional roundwire electrical systems. Flat conductor cable could be routed under all paneling, tile, and carpet, and the low-voltage flat cable for lights and receptacles could be routed under wallpaper or simply painted. The cable had already been installed successfully in an MSFC conference room and in six apartments in Yonkers, N.Y., as a joint effort between NASA and the New York State Urban Development Corp. (MSFC Release 75—94)
NASA launched Sms 2 (SMS-B Synchronous Meteorological Satellite) into transfer orbit from the Eastern Test Range at 5:04 pm EST. Launched for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the three-stage inertially guided Thor-Delta booster placed the satellite in an orbit with a 36 810-km apogee, 197-km perigee, 651.0-min period, and 23.9P inclination. Originally scheduled for 30 Jan., the launch had been delayed to replace the Inertial Measurement Unit of the launch vehicle’s flight-control system with a newer more reliable unit. The spacecraft performed normally during the transfer orbit, and attitude and reorientation maneuvers were performed as planned. The apogee boost motor was fired on second apogee at 9:43 am EST 7 Feb. placing Sms 2 in a synchronous orbit; orbital parameters were 36 685-km apogee,. 35 680-km perigee, 1456.4-min period, and 1.1° inclination. By 10 Feb. the spacecraft was drifting westward at 6° per day toward the final operational station of 115° west longitude. Over several days beginning 10 Feb., the onboard auxiliary propulsion system was fired to place the spacecraft into proper attitude for operational use. First photos were transmitted 11 Feb. NASA objectives—to launch the spacecraft into a synchronous orbit of sufficient accuracy to enable the spacecraft to accomplish its operational mission requirements, conduct an in-orbit evaluation and checkout of the spacecraft, and turn operational control over to NOAA—were met, and the mission was adjudged successful 22 April. NASA turned over control of Sms 2 to NOAA 10 March. The 628-kg cylindrical spacecraft carried five instruments to provide high-quality day and night cloudcover data; take radiance temperatures of the earth’s atmosphere; measure proton, electron, and solar x-ray fluxes, and magnetic fields; transmit processed data from central facilities to regional stations; and transmit environmental information to NOAA from the thousands of manned and unmanned data-collection platforms on land, rivers, lakes, and the sea. Sms 2, together with its sister craft Sms 1 (launched 17 May 1974), provided continuous coverage of the Western Hemisphere, transmitting weather photos every 30 min. SMS photos would be made into film loops of clouds moving over oceans and land masses to help meteorologists determine what types of cloud formations and weather conditions might cause the destructive tornadoes and hurricanes that frequently occur over the eastern U.S. Sms 2 was the second in a series of two operational prototypes and one operational spacecraft (SMS-C, to be called Goes 1 in orbit) developed and funded by NASA to meet the requirements of the Dept, of Commerce’s Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) system. Under a NASA- DOC agreement, NASA was conducting a program to develop improved sensors and techniques—based on technology developed in its Tiros, Nimbus, and Applications Technology Satellite programs—for DOC’s operational program. Follow-on GOES spacecraft were being planned. Goddard Space Flight Center, which managed the SMS program under the direction of NASA’s Office of Applications, also had responsibility for the Thor-Delta launch vehicle. (NASA MORs, 9 Jan, 10 Feb, 23 April 75; NASA Releases 75- 6, 75- 27; GSFC Wkly SSR, 6-12 Feb 75)
Launch of the Viking—A spacecraft to Mars was postponed because of a faulty thrust-vector control valve found in the solid booster stage of the Titan-Centaur launch vehicle during countdown tests. The launch team decided to remove and replace the valve, rescheduling the launch for 14 Aug. (Viking Status Bulletin No 10, 20 Aug 75; O’Toole, W Post, 12 Aug 75; McElheny, NYT, 12 Aug 75)
Salyut 4, launched into earth orbit on 26 Dec. 1974, was continuing its flight, Tass reported. To date, the space station had completed 4200 revolutions of the earth and, in automatic mode, was collecting data and making astrophysical observations with the onboard instrumentation. All systems were functioning normally. Since its launch, Salyut 4 had been inhabited by two two-man crews. The first crew, launched 11 Jan. 1975 aboard Soyuz 17, lived and worked aboard the station for nearly 30 days. A second crew, launched 24 May 1975 aboard Soyuz 18, visited the station for a Soviet manned space flight record of 63 days. A third mission, launched 5 April, was aborted when the booster third stage malfunctioned. (Tass, FBIS—Sov, 23 Sept 75, Ul; A&A 74)
