NASA selected 3 firms for negotiations leading to award of a single contract for assembly, checkout, launch operations, and refurbishment of the Space Shuttle solid-fueled booster, MSFC announced. The firms were Boeing, McDonnell Douglas, and United Space Boosters Inc. of Sunnyvale, Calif., a wholly owned subsidiary of United Technology Corp. The contract would extend through March 1980 to include the first 6 development flights of the Shuttle, with option for renewal through Feb. 1982. The contractor would be responsible for assembling and checking out the booster (forward and aft skirts, attach structures, nosecone, and various subsystems) with the solid-fueled motor. Two solid-fueled boosters would be used to launch the Shuttle, in conjunction with the orbiter main engines; after launch, the boosters would be jettisoned, lowered into the ocean by parachute, retrieved, and returned to KSC for refurbishment and reuse. Work would be performed at MSFC and KSC except for the solid-fueled motor, which would be returned to Thiokol facilities in Utah for reloading with propellant. (MSFC Release 75-159)
NASA announced selection of United Space Boosters, Inc., Sunnyvale, Calif., as assembly contractor for the Space Shuttle solid-fuel booster rocket. USBI, a wholly owned subsidiary of United Technologies Corp., received a cost-plus-award fee contract for $122 million, to cover six design, development, and test and evaluation flights up to March 1980, with options for 21 operational flights extending into 1982. The contract would cover all booster assembly activities at MSFC and KSC; MSFC would supervise assembly, checkout, and refurbishment of the boosters, and KSC would supervise final assembly, checkout, launch operations, and postlaunch disassembly of the boosters. First of six orbital test flights had been scheduled for the second quarter of 1979, with operational flights to begin in 1980. At launch, the three main engines and two boosters of the Space Shuttle would operate together; upon burnout at about 43 km altitude, the boosters would separate and descend by parachute to the ocean for retrieval and refurbishment. The boosters were designed for use 20 times. (NASA Release 76-212; MSFC Release 76-215; WSJ, 21 Dec 76, 11)
Evaluation of data and pictures from a dendrite-remelting experiment flown in Dec. 1975 on a space processing applications rocket (SPAR 1) confirmed the belief that space processing could produce better materials than was possible on earth, NASA announced. The experiment, one of nine sent to a 225-km altitude for about 5 min of near weightlessness, included a camera to record solidification of aluminum chloride solution in a transparent vial in the absence of gravity. No fluid motion was detected in the liquid, which solidified uniformly without the formation of crystals (dendrites) that broke off and settled to the bottom of the solution in a control experiment on earth. This experiment was the first in which scientists had viewed the process of solidification under weightless conditions, said the co-investigators, Carolyn Griner and Dr. Mary Helen Johnston of Marshall Space Flight Center. Controlling the crystalline structure of materials would enable scientists to make them uniformly strong to meet specific needs. (NASA Release 76-159; MSFC Release 76-167)
NASA announced “an unusual agreement” with McDonnell Douglas Corp., under which the firm would build a solid-fuel upper-stage rocket as a commercial venture, to be available for use in future Space Shuttle missions. The firm would build and market the product using its own funding and initiative, at no direct cost to NASA or the U.S. government, except when the government might be a purchaser; NASA agreed that it would not knowingly fund or formally solicit development of competitive or alternate upper-stage systems. McDonnell Douglas would market the stage hardware and services either directly to users, or through NASA; NASA would not be committed to buy any hardware or services from McDonnell Douglas. The Delta rocket, workhorse of NASA’s expendable launch-vehicle program, which had carried most of the com-sats and metesats now in geosynchronous orbit, .would be phased out along with other expendable vehicles after the Space Shuttle became operational. After the Shuttle had carried payloads into low earth orbit, the upper stage would put the payloads (weighing up to 1110 kg) into a transfer orbit, where a kick motor would insert them into geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release 76-198)
NASA announced plans to launch a third maritime satellite, Marisat-C, for Comsat General Corp. from Cape Canaveral on a Delta rocket 14 Oct. Marisat 1, launched 19 Feb., was in orbit over the Atlantic Ocean at 15°W; Marisat 2, launched 9 June, was in orbit over the mid-Pacific at 176.5°. The two Marisats currently provided communications services to the U.S. Navy as well as fulltime commercial voice and data communications to the maritime industry; Marisat-C, which would be in synchronous orbit over the Indian Ocean, would be used initially only by the Navy, which planned to lease UHF capacity it found to be surplus, Comsat General would reimburse NASA for the cost of launch vehicle, launch, and other administrative expenses, and would supply all ground-station support. (NASA Release 76-156) 18-20 Sc jo (ember: The Viking 2 lander signaled to mission scientists at JPL that its sample-collecting arm was working and had moved toward the x-ray instrument that would analyze the mineral content of the Mars soil. If the collector had delivered its sample and the analysis was proceeding, the signal expected on the next relay would confirm that the arm was available for further sampling. The mission scientists said they planned to instruct the arm to turn over a rock on the surface and take a sample haler prise - Sparc Shuttle Orbiler 101—on public display for the first time at Rockwell's Palmdale, Calif., facility, 17 Sept. 1981. (NASA 70-H-854) from the underlying soil that had not been exposed to lethal ultraviolet rays. Geologists had characterized the appearance of nearby soil structure as resembling “caliche,” a calcium carbonate crust formed on earth surfaces by evaporation of water that deposited mineral salts on the soil particles and cemented them together. The cementing action might increase the difficulty of dislodging a rock with the lander arm, but scientists noted the ease with which the arm had taken the first sample. As the content of that first Viking 2 sample so closely resembled that from the Viking 1, scientists wanted to try for a sample with different properties, especially some trace of carbon-based chemicals that would indicate life processes. The caliche sample would be taken 25 Sept, and the attempt to move a rock would be made 8 Oct., a 3-hr strategy meeting decided 20 Sept. Project Manager James S. Martin, Jr., said the x-ray instrument had never received its sample for analysis, so a sample for it would be dug 3 Oct. An editorial in the New York Times asked whether, in the absence of carbon compounds, the mission scientists should consider the possibility of Martian life based on some chemical other than carbon. (Mission Status Bulletin 42; ATT, 19 Sept 76, 29; 20 Sept 76, 32; W Post, 19 Sept 76, A12; 20 Sept 76, A-5; W Star, 19 Sept 76, A-2)
MSFC announced selection of the Bendix Corp., Teterboro, N.J., for negotiations leading to award of a $7 007 210 cost-plus-award-fee contract for installing, activating, disassembling, and removal of special equipment at MSFC for Space Shuttle structural and dynamic ground tests. The contract would run from 15 Nov. 1976 through Dec. 1979. MSFC responsibilities in developing the Space Shuttle covered three areas: the main engine powering the orbiter, which uses three of these engines; the external tank holding propellants for the main engines during launch and ascent; and the solid-fuel rocket boosters to be jettisoned after burnout and recovered by parachute for future use. MSFC would make structural tests of the external tank and boosters, development tests to prove design concepts of the main engine and external tank, and dynamic tests simulating flight conditions to be encountered by the Shuttle during launch. (MSFC Release 76-196)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced shipment of the first production segment of a motor case for the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket motor from the manufacturer (Ladish Co. of Cudahy, Wis.) to the Cal-Doran Metallurgical Services plant at Los Angeles, where it would undergo heat treatment and cleaning before being forwarded to Rohr Industries at Chula Vista, Calif. Rohr—subcontractor to prime contractor Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. in Utah—would process the cylindrical segment, with a finished weight of about 5060 kg, for delivery to Thiokol in Sept. 1976. Thiokol would load the solid propellants into 4 motor-case segments over 3 m in dia. and 45.5 m long, each holding about 500 000 kg of propellant. The 4 segments joined would stretch to more than 35 m and constitute about three fourths of the solid-fuel rocket booster. Each launch of the Shuttle would use 2 boosters, burning from ignition on the pad to burnout at an altitude of about 42 km; at that point, the SRBs would be separated and descend by parachute into the ocean for recovery, refueling, and reuse. (MSFC Release 76-76)
A small-scale model of the Space Shuttle and its launch pad would be used in a test program begun at MSFC to reduce noise during a Shuttle launch. Sound energy could damage sensitive instruments or other payloads carried in the Shuttle orbiter, and reducing launch noise by modifying the launch facility would be more economical than redesigning the launch vehicle itself or its associated payloads to tolerate anticipated levels of noise. The model would test various designs that sprayed water into, above, and below the rocket exhaust; firing the engines into a water spray would convert acoustic (sound) waves into thermal energy, which would dissipate as steam. Use of the water technique had significantly reduced—but not eliminated—the damaging noise. (MSFC Release 76-33)
Dr. Bruce T. Lundin, director of Lewis Research Center, received the 1976 Astronautics Engineer Award from the National Space Club at its 19th annual Dr. Robert H. Goddard memorial dinner in Washington. The award, made by a group of judges including former NASA scientist Dr. Wernher von Braun, was for outstanding leadership in development and operation of the Centaur high-energy rocket stage, and the Atlas-Centaur and Titan-Centaur launch vehicles. The Atlas-Centaur launched all NASA’s Surveyor spacecraft in the 1960s and many others such as OAOs, the recent Intelsats, Mariners, and Pioneers. The Titan-Centaur, largest U.S. rocket, launched West Germany’s Helios spacecraft toward the sun and the Viking spacecraft to Mars. A NASA employee since 1943, Dr. Lundin became director of LeRC in 1969 after a year and a half at NASA Hq as Deputy Associate Administrator and Acting Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology. As leader in the development and operation of the Centaur vehicle, he built the Centaur staff at Lewis and made the decisions that set the character and style of the whole project. (Lewis News, 19 Mar 76, 1; LeRC Release 76-11)
Part of a Soviet satellite—the rocket body from Cosmos 854, tracked by North American Air Defense Command radar—had fallen in Montana earlier this week, DOD sources reported. The rocket body, which had not been recovered, looked like a meteor as it passed over Washington State and Idaho and fell south of the Canadian border. DOD said debris from Soviet space vehicles had dropped on the U.S. previously, but usually in small pieces. (WStar, 10 Sept 76, A-5; Av Wk, 13 Sept 76, 30)
MSFC announced completion of 2 of 8 major facilities for production of Space Shuttle solid-propellant rocket motors at Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. in Brigham City, Utah. Thiokol was selected as prime contractor by MSFC for development of the solid-fuel rocket motor, main element of the reusable solid-fuel rocket booster being developed by MSFC. The 2 completed units were a nozzle-bearing test facility, used to test a flexible bearing allowing the rocket-motor nozzle to turn up to 8° in any direction for thrust-vector control in steering, and an x-ray facility for inspecting propellant after casting into the motor-case segments. A case-preparation building, where motor cases would be prepared for propellant loading by sandblasting, cleaning, refining, and painting, was reported 95% complete. Three facilities for loading the propellants— casting pit 1, a casting house, and casting-pit covers—were about half completed. A case-refurbishment facility to handle the motor cases after recovery would be under construction shortly. (MSFC Release 76-151) 15 August: In an attempt to predict the weather on the planet Jupiter, Dr. Gareth P. Williams, researcher at NOAA’s Fluid Dynamics Laboratory at Princeton Univ., applied a computer model of earth’s atmosphere to Jupiter and found that it not only reproduced patterns known to exist there but also provided new explanations of visible features such as the Great Red Spot and horizontal stripes, as well as revealing a 4-yr cycle of heat transfer. Using a set of equations describing physical processes that produce atmospheric behavior on earth, Dr. Williams fed in conditions known to exist on Jupiter—the planet’s enormous size, amount of sunlight it receives, and rate of rotation (which dominated the behavior of the Jovian atmosphere)—and found that the basic behavior of atmosphere was “quite similar.” The purpose of atmosphere, he said, was to transfer heat from the equator to the poles; the terrestrial heat cycle took about a month, but the NOAA model revealed a corresponding cycle on Jupiter that took 4 yr. Whereas the earth received its heat from the sun, Jupiter received only 4% as much solar heat as earth, but the infrared measurements showed that the planet was warmer than it should be if its only heat source were the sun. Scientists believe that the planet generates heat of its own in an amount about equal to what it receives from the sun; this extra heat complicated the job of modeling Jupiter’s atmosphere because there was no way of telling how it might be distributed, but it also provided a confirmation for the model. Atmospheric motions on Jupiter tended to perpetuate themselves instead of dying out, as they do on earth because of interaction with the earth’s surface. Jupiter has no “surface” as we know it, Dr. Williams noted; “it just gets denser toward the interior and motions gradually dissipate downward....” Circulation patterns producing eddies in the planet’s atmosphere seem to be stable; the Great Red Spot had been apparent since the 17th century, when it was first sighted. The researchers hoped that Pioneer 11, now about halfway between Jupiter and Saturn, might provide a positive test of the Princeton model; “we think Saturn is like Jupiter, but we don’t know,” said Dr. Williams. “Maybe it has a red spot.” (NOAA Release 76-170)
A new device developed by the USAF Rocket Propulsion Laboratory at Edwards AFB, Calif., would permit an annual “physical examination” of the motors of intercontinental ballistic missiles while the missiles were still in the silo. The practice of removing the motors for inspection had resulted in high costs for handling and transportation as well as high risk of damage to the motors. The AF Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) at Los Angeles asked AFRPL to find a compact, safe, and economical means of inspection, and acoustical holography was selected. The system when fully developed would be able to scan the outside of an intact missile top to bottom, probing the propellant inside its motors. The device worked much like sonar, transmitting high-frequency sound waves and registering reflected vibrations; the reflected waves, processed electronically, would reproduce any flaws in the propellant on a cathode-ray tube for instant viewing or photographing, and the information would be stored in a computer for later evaluation. Future uses of acoustical holography might be made in medical science, improving on current x-ray techniques. (AF Release OIP 174.75) the advantages of space environment—earth overview, zero gravity, vacuum, heat and waste disposal, and uninterrupted solar energy—for future uses, concluding with a prediction of a growing tourist industry in space. The symposium concluded 26 May at the annual banquet of the Ala. AIAA with an address on “Space Industrialization as a Concept” by Dr. Krafft Ehricke, science advisor for North American Space Division, Rockwell International Corp. Sessions of the symposium dealt with space habitation, space transportation, space processing of materials, and space power. The symposium was organized to disseminate recent information on expanded space operations after the advent of the Space Shuttle to all segments of the scientific and technical community; participants included NASA centers, other government agencies, industry and universities. (NASA Release 76-81; MSFC Release 76-64, 76-79; Disher text)
U.S. intelligence sources reported the third failure of the USSR this year in testing an antisatellite system, when a Russian Hunter satellite failed to stay in orbit 21 July. The Hunter’s mission was to destroy the Cosmos 839 launched into orbit 12 days earlier; U.S. analysts did not know what was causing the Soviet problem. Soviet efforts to develop an antisatellite system dated back about 10 yr, with only 5 successful launches out of more than 20 attempts before testing stopped in 1971. All 3 attempts since testing resumed in Feb. 1976 had been failures, the U.S. intelligence sources said. The satellite-destroyer was reported to be about 8 m long and to weigh about 2.5 tons at launch; equipped with 5 main rocket engines, the interceptor was said to be able to close on a target at about 4 km per sec and to get as close as 30 m to the target before exploding on ground command. The Associated Press report noted that the U.S. had not tried to develop a similar system since the 1960s; Dr. Malcolm Currie, DOD Director of Defense Research and Engineering, said last winter that “we are very much concerned about satellite vulnerability.” (W Post, 27 July 76, A-2; C Trib, 27 July 76, 2)
Marshall Space Flight Center forecast completion by 1 April of a unique facility—one of the largest and most significant construction jobs undertaken in the past 10 yr—at the Center, an x-ray test facility costing about $4 million. The new facility included a 305-m-long stainless steel x-ray path guide tube nearly a meter in diameter, connecting the x-ray source with a 6-m-diameter instrument chamber housing the telescopes and other instruments to be tested. Work began in January 1975, and would be completed on schedule. The facility, the only one of its size and type, would be used first to test instruments for NASA’s High Energy Astronomy Observatory (HEAO) program; later it would be used in x-ray verification testing and calibration of mirrors, telescope systems, and instruments, for rocket payloads in x-ray stellar studies and similar projects. After checkout, the facility would be turned over to MSFC’s Science and Engineering Directorate. (Marshall Star, 31 Mar 76, 4; MSFC Release 76-53)
Forecasts of NASA activity in 1977 included plans to launch 19 missions, with a possible four backup spacecraft in case of trouble with current missions. The 19 included eight comsats (NAT0-3B; Palapa-B; OTS, an operational test satellite developed by ESA; Intelsat IVA-C; Sirio, an Italian experimental spacecraft; Intelsat IVA-D; FLTSATCOM, part of a Navy-Air Force operational near-global system for command and control of all DOD forces; and Japan’s CS, a comsat to be placed in synchronous orbit); six scientific satellites (HEAO-A, a high-energy astronomical observatory; CEOS, an ESA mission to study geomagnetic phenomena from synchronous orbit; MJS-A and -B, two Mariner spacecraft scheduled to fly by Jupiter and Saturn,’and possibly Uranus; ISEE, a two-spacecraft international sun-earth explorer mission developed by NASA and ESA; and IUE-A, the international ultraviolet explorer spacecraft also developed jointly by NASA and ESA); three metesats (COES 2, to be launched for NOAA into synchronous orbit; CMS, a Japanese geosynchronous meteorological satellite; and Meteosat, ESA’s synchronous-orbit weather spacecraft, scheduled for 0° longitude); one navigational satellite, the Navy’s Transit 19, with R&D modifications not common to other Transits; and one applications satellite, Landsat-C, third in its series of earth resources technology spacecraft. The backup launches to be scheduled only if replacements were needed were comsats RCA-C and a spare OTS; navsat Transit 20; and metesat ITOS E-2, on standby in case of trouble with Noaa 4 or Noaa 5, already in orbit. Of the 19 scheduled launches, all but two would be from Cape Canaveral, using 12 Delta rockets, 3 Atlas-Centaurs, and 2 Titan III-E-Centaurs. The other two launches, both from Vandenberg AFB, would use one Delta and one Scout rocket. MSFC forecast for 1977 that facilities for assembling and testing the Space Shuttle orbiter would be completed, as well as test firings of the Shuttle’s solid-fuel motors and main engines. (Av Wk, 13 Dec 76, 26; KSC Release 492-76; MSFC Release 76-218)
Astronaut Eugene A. Cernan, last man to leave footprints on the moon’s surface when he commanded Apollo 17 in 1972, would leave government service 1 July. Cernan, a Navy captain, would complete 20 yr in the Navy in June and would retire from both the Navy and the astronaut corps. Selected as a NASA astronaut in 1963, Cernan had had 3 space missions (including 2 (lights to the moon) and was the second American to walk in space, when he was pilot of Gemini 9 in June 1966. As lunar-module pilot of Apollo 10 in May 1969, he and Astronaut Thomas P. Stafford had flown the module within about 15 km of the moon’s surface in a full-scale rehearsal of all but the final moments of the first lunar-landing mission 2 mo later. In Dec. 1972, Cernan and Astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt landed at Taurus-Littrow during the last scheduled manned lunar mission. In 1973, Cernan became special assistant to the Apollo program manager, working on the joint U.S.-USSR Apollo-Soyuz Test Project; in Sept. 1975, he became chief of training operations in the astronaut office. (NASA Release 76-47; JSC Release 76-20; W Star, 16 Mar 76, A-2)
The U.S. Air Force Systems Command announced that its space and missile systems organization (SAMSO) had completed tests at MSFC to define effects of sound waves and shock waves on the Space Shuttle during launch, using a 6.4% scale model of the launch pad proposed for Vandenberg AFB. The model launch pad, measuring roughly 13m long by 6.5 m wide by 2 m high and weighing more than 27 000 kg, underwent engine-induced overpressure and noise environments simulated by Tomahawk solid-fuel rocket motors and high-pressure gaseous hydrogen-oxygen engines. Shock waves from rocket-engine ignition interacted with exhausts on the launch pad to direct overpressure back to the launch vehicle; the flow rate also created an acoustic field causing turbulence in the surrounding atmosphere. The altered environments were modified during testing by altering the configuration to produce the most acceptable design of launch vehicle and payload. (AFSC Release OIP 170.76)
Marshall Space Flight Center and Dryden Flight Research Center officials signed an agreement to conduct jointly a comprehensive program of tests on the parachute recovery system for the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster. The program, to begin early in 1977, would consist of drogue-parachute tests and main-parachute tests, using single parachutes, and test deployment of the 3-parachute cluster (actual flight configuration) to be used in recovery of the solid rockets, largest ever flown. The parachutes, some 36.5 m in diameter, would be the largest used in the space program; Apollo spacecraft parachutes were about 24.5 m in diameter. The Dryden center would provide the B-52 aircraft for the test drops, as well as the flight and maintenance crews, and would perform the tests over the National Parachute Test Range about an hour’s flight from Edwards AFB in Calif. MSFC engineers would evaluate the test data to determine the adequacy of the system. (NASA Release 76-94; DFRC Release 6-76; MSFC Release 76-87)
A $4.5-million structural test data-acquisition system to be used for tests on Space Shuttle components was nearing completion of installation and checkout at Marshall Space Flight Center, MFSC announced. Developed by Avco Electronics, the system included a central facility with a computer system, 6 line printers, 5 graphics display units, a printer-plotter, 2 card readers, and 4 video hard-copy units; 4 data-selector units; and 24 static-input units. The central facility, to be located in MSFC’s Test Laboratory, was designed for a lifespan of 10 yr and would combine extreme accuracy with high reliability and ruggedness. Testing the external tanks, solid-fuel rocket booster, and other parts of the Shuttle for structural integrity would require monitoring up to 6000 channels of data simultaneously, fed into the computers from test hardware elsewhere at the Center. The Avco contract also provided for training MSFC personnel to operate the system when completed late in 1976. (MSFC Release 76-73)
Scientists all over the world had been invited to propose experiments for the second Spacelab mission, NASA announced, asking that they submit by 1 Oct. their letters of intent to propose, with actual proposals due by 3 Dec. Final selection of experiments would be made in Aug. 1977; proposals would be evaluated in the areas of space science (including life sciences), applications, and space technology. Primary intent of the second Spacelab mission would be to evaluate the laboratory’s system and subsystem performance, but space and resources would be available for experiments. Second objective of the The 26-m “Venus disk" at NASA's Goldstone tracking station near Barstow, Calif., in use with rectenna (in. background) for solar-energy conversion experiments. (NASA 76-H-685) mission would be to demonstrate the broad capabilities of Spacelab for scientific research, especially in astrophysics (astronomy, high-energy astrophysics, and solar physics). Proposals should designate a principal investigator as the point of contact with NASA, to manage the efforts of any other persons involved in the experiments. As the second mission payload would not include a pressurized module as the design for Spacelab 1 did, instruments would be mounted on pallets exposed to space with a remote manipulator system available if needed. Experiments would be controlled remotely by persons at the payload-specialist station in the Space Shuttle orbiter’s aft flight deck. Power, data distribution, and thermal control would be available from flight subsystems in a pressurized igloo on the forward pallet. Spacelab, a reusable space laboratory, was under construction in Europe by the European Space Agency for NASA. Marshall Space Flight Center was the lead center for Spacelab development, as well as for the Shuttle main engine, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket booster. (NASA Release 76-152)
Test pilot William H. Dana had been chosen to receive the AIAA 1976 Haley Space Flight Award, the DFRC X-Press announced. Dana would receive the award at the IAF conference banquet 15 Oct. Named for Andrew G. Haley, one of the founders of the Am. Rocket Society, the award is for “outstanding contribution ... to the advancement of the arts, sciences or technology of astronautics.” Dana would be honored for his service as test pilot on the HL-10, M2-F3, and X-24B lifting bodies, and his 16 flights as project pilot of the X-15 rocket-powered research aircraft. (DFRC X-Press, 8 Oct 76, 2; LA Herald-Examiner, 12 Oct 76, 3; Lancaster, Calif. Ledger-Gazette, 7 Oct 76, 10)
The Marshall Space Flight Center announced 3 Sept, the start of hot-firing tests of the steering system for the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB). First series of tests, which would continue into Oct., would confirm design of the thrust-vector control steering system developed by MSFC engineers as part of the center’s responsibility for SRB design and development. The system under test would provide power to move the nozzle of the SRB in any direction, steering the Shuttle in the first 120 sec of flight during SRB burn. Data from the first series of tests would be evaluated to refine the system design; after any needed modifications, a second series of tests would certify the system. Thrust-vector control units would be provided in 1978 to Thiokol Corp., MSFC contractor for the SRB solid-fuel rocket motor, for testing under actual firing conditions. (MSFC Release 76-163) —MSFC announced it had delivered the first production case segment for the SRB motor to Thiokol’s Wasatch Div. in Utah on 27 Sept., beating the schedule by 3 days. All case segments for the first motor were to arrive at Thiokol by the end of 1976. The delivered segment, almost 4 m in diameter and 4.2 m long, weighed more than 5990 kg. Eleven segments would be used in each motor; joined, the segments and nozzle would measure more than 38 m long, over three fourths of the total SRB length. (MSFC Release 76-173) —MSFC announced 30 Sept, that personnel of the Rocketdyne Div., Rockwell Inti. Corp., had fired a developmental test engine for the Space Shuttle for 650 sec, longest test to date. The same engine had been fired for 300 sec 2 days earlier. The tests, at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratory in Bay St. Louis, Miss., would produce component- and system-operation data from extended-duration firings at increasing power levels. (MSFC Release 76-174)
A proposal for consolidating about 60 current federal programs— in areas such as health, education, child nutrition, and social services—into “block grants” to the states, with few strings attached. Proposed spending for defense represented a turnaround of sorts: defense spending had fallen for a while after Vietnam, then rose again in FY 1975 with the end of the draft and conversion to higher priced all-volunteer armed forces with an upward pressure on wages. The outlay in FY 1977 would be for weapons; more than half the recommended increase would go for procurement, research, and development. Defense at $101.1 billion would constitute a fourth of the total budget, as in recent years, and Social Security about another fifth. Interest on the public debt would add a tenth; these three items would account for more than half. Five other basic budget items—Medicare-Medicaid, unemployment compensation, civil service retirement, and veterans benefits—would make up three fourths of the total, leaving only a fourth of the total budget for all remaining government spending. Science, represented by $23.5 billion in federal R&D spending proposed for FY 1977, would use more than half that amount for military projects; the space program would get $3.6 billion, only 4% more than the current year and much less than price escalation. Highest priorities for increases in civilian spending on science would be colleges and universities, which would get $2.6 billion in research funds, and the National Science Foundation, which would get $812 million. NASA, under the proposed budget, would postpone purchase of one of the Space Shuttles for a year, and would drop its plan for a Mars-Jupiter-Saturn explorer. At the height of spending for the Apollo program 10 yr ago, civilian and nonspace science got 20% of R&D funding; in FY 1977, it would get 37%. (W Star, 21 Jan 76, A-l, A-10, A-ll; W Post, 22 Jan 76, A-l, A-l4, A-15, A-16; NYT, 22 Jan 76, 1, 24, 25, 26) At a hearing on solar power from satellites conducted by the subcommittee on aerospace technology and national needs of the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, NASA Deputy Administrator George M-Low and Dr. John M. Teem, ERDA’s Assistant Administrator for Solar, Geothermal, and Advanced Energy Systems, were questioned closely by Sen. Wendell H. Ford (D-Ky), subcommittee chairman, on the ERDA and NASA responsibilities for the program. Testimony revealed that ERDA had prime responsibility for solar, as well as other, power-generating concepts, and that NASA had not requested funds for developing an independent program but was working on solar-power ideas to use in satellite missions. Primary goal of ERDA’s program, Dr. Teem testified, was development and demonstration of terrestrial solar-energy applications that were commercially attractive and environmentally acceptable: solar thermal electric, photovoltaic, wind, and ocean-energy conversion. Dr. Teem pointed out that the FY 1977 budget included no direct funding for energy R&D for NASA, as the basic responsibility rested with ERDA. Dr. Low added that, when ERDA decided that research should proceed, NASA would do the work with ERDA funding. (Text, pp. 192-227)
First of 4 U.S.-West German rocket launches to investigate the source of the aurora borealis, in a study called Project Porcupine, would be fired to an altitude of 500 km from northern Sweden, NASA announced. Two identical 250-kg payloads would be flown at twilight between 17 Mar. and 4 Apr. when moonlight interference would be at a minimum; a second pair of rockets would be launched in 1977. The instrument packages would have 12 quill-like booms sticking out to gather data for aurora-probe experiments beyond the orbits of the U.S. Skylab and USSR Salyut space stations. At about 450 km altitude, canisters of barium would be exploded to identify magnetic-field lines and plasma drifts; a NASA jet from Ames Research Center would be in flight over Greece to photograph the clouds released from the rockets. Data from Project Porcupine would be compared with energetic-particle and magnetic-field data gathered by NASA’s Ats 6. The payloads, largest and most complex to be fired on sounding rockets, would he the first flown on the new Aries rocket, modified from Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missile parts provided by the U.S. Air Force. Project Porcupine would be part of the 1976-78 International Magnetospheric Study, a 40-nation effort to explore the upper atmosphere. (NASA Release 76-44; NYT, 28 Mar 76, 21)
MSFC announced that it had modified its Saturn facilities to accommodate Space Shuttle work, having completed remodeling of a giant test stand used in the 1960s for static test firing of the Saturn V first stages. The stand would be used in structural tests of the liquid-hydrogen tank portion of the Shuttle external tank; the hydrogen tank measured 29.3 m long and 8.5 m in diameter. Stand modifications included work platforms, changes in the stand structure including pressurization, and an instrumentation and control system. Holddown arms were removed and a flame deflector that channeled rocket exhaust away from the area was taken from under the stand. Liquid-oxygen storage facilities used for Saturn had been converted for liquid-hydrogen storage needed for Shuttle testing, instead of building new storage. The contract with Algernon Blair of Montgomery, Ala., by the Huntsville Div., Corps of Engineers, was for approximately $4 million. (MSFC Release 76-195)
The 2000th major missile launch from Cape Canaveral took place at 4:30 pm EDT when an Army Pershing missile was launched by troops of Battery C, 3d Battalion, 84th Field Artillery, of the U.S. 7th Army from Europe. First launch from “the Cape” had occurred 26 yr previously on 24 July 1950, when Bumper 8, a captured German V-2 rocket capped by a WAC Corporal second stage, lifted off the then sparsely settled area. (KSC Spaceport News, 12 Nov 76, 1)
NASA announced that a task team headed by Marshall Space Flight Center, and including representatives from Kennedy Space Center and Johnson Space Center, would assist the Air Force’s Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) in evaluating industry proposals for validating the development of the Space Shuttle interim upper stage (lUS). The IUS, an expendable solid-fuel rocket stage capable of launching one or more spacecraft, would be carried into low earth orbit in the bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter; after deployment, it would be fired to carry the spacecraft into orbits of from 800 to 35 000 km, or to earth-escape trajectories for interplanetary missions. The basic IUS developed to meet DOD objectives would be altered as needed to meet NASA-unique requirements (planetary missions, or economical delivery of several smaller satellites). MSFC would be responsible for establishing the NASA-unique requirements; its task team would be responsible for planning and coordinating NASA’s IUS activities; KSC would be responsible for IUS launch operations, and JSC for lUS-orbiter integration and flight operations. The Air Force was expected to award a contract for IUS development by Sept. 1976. (MSFC Release 76-89)
Steam might be the power behind rockets of tomorrow, the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science was told by Dr. Freeman Dyson of the Princeton Institute for Advanced Study. Steam engines of the future would be powered not by coal but by laser beams so powerful that they could instantly turn water into superheated high-velocity steam that could carry a 1-ton spacecraft into earth orbit. Basic research on laser propulsion had already been done by Dr. Arthur Kantrowitz of the Avco Everett Research Lab. in Cambridge, Mass. A laser beam with energy of 1 million kw would be needed to carry a rocket and its spacecraft away from earth; this laser would be 10 times more powerful than any developed so far. Ideally, the laser and rocket would be located on a mountain at 3-km altitude, where air would be free of water vapor that would reduce laser efficiency. Development of laser propulsion would take money, Kantrowitz said, but not as much as other rocket engines have cost. (W Post, 23 Feb 76, A-2)
Successful testing of a solar receiver developed with heat-transfer technology used by Rocketdyne Division, Rockwell International Corp., for the U.S. space program was “a major step forward in development of solar electricity generating systems,” said Dr. Jack Silverman, director of energy systems for Rocketdyne. Using a large field of mirrors individually focusing the sun’s rays to a central receiver on a high tower, where the concentrated heat served to boil water into superheated steam, the system generated the steam at 1366 K and 738 newtons per cm". The central receiver was exposed to high heatflows approaching those encountered in rocket engines, and many times higher than those in conventional steam boilers. The development program was sponsored by the Energy Research and Development Administration; Rocketdyne was also under contract to McDonnell Douglas and ERDA to develop a similar receiver and thermal storage subsystems for a 10 000-kw solar electricity-generating pilot plant to be in operation by the end of the decade. (Rockwell Release RD-9) called Comstar D-l after achieving orbit. (NASA Release 76-75; NYT, 13 May 76, 51; Comsat General Release CG 76-115; MOR M-491-201-76-01 [postlaunch] 27 May 76)
MSFC announced the successful launch on a Black Brant VC research rocket at White Sands Missile Range, N.M., of the first containerless experiments in materials processing ever attempted on a spacecraft. NASA’s third space-processing applications rocket, SPAR III, carried a five-experiment payload, two of these using acoustic and electromagnetic suspension devices, or levitators. Materials suspended in a levitator could be melted and resolidified without touching a container, resulting in a degree of purity never before achieved in high-temperature processing, as the melt in a conventional container would be contaminated to some extent by the container itself. The rocket flight provided about 5 min of near-weightlessness for performance of the experiments, which were recovered by parachute for experimenter analysis. Experimenters were Charles Schafer, MSFC; Jerry Wouch, GE; Dr. John Papazian, Grumman Aerospace Corp.; Dr. David Lind, Rockwell Inti. Science Center; and Dr. Donald R. Uhlmann, MIT. Conclusions as to the success of containerless processing would await analysis of telemetry, inflight film, and experiment results. (MSFC Releases 76-207, 76-212)
The Air Force Systems Command announced completion of vibration and performance tests at Arnold Engineering Development Center on a small solid-propellant rocket motor scheduled to boost the Inti. Ultraviolet Explorer spacecraft into orbit in 1977. The motor, Thiokol Corp.’s TE-M-604-4, would be fired about 24 hr after launch to move the IUE into a near-synchronous orbit at altitudes of from 24 000 to 48 000 km. IUE, a cooperative research program shared by NASA, ESA, and the U.K. Science Research Council, would carry a 45-mm-diameter ultraviolet telescope to investigate characteristics of stars and planets. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 76, 4)
The USSR launched a geophysical rocket, Vertikal 4, from an undisclosed site “in the medium latitudes” of European Russia to an altitude of 1512 km. Carrying “more than 10 complex and diverse scientific instruments” developed and built by specialists from Bulgaria, East Germany, Czechoslovakia, and the USSR, the rocket was designed to sample a vertical cross section of the neutral upper atmosphere and ionospheric plasma in a 15-min time period. In a Pravda interview, Academician B. N. Petrov noted that composition of the atmosphere and ionosphere changed with height, the lighter gases being at the top. None of the previous Vertikal rockets (launched in 1970, 1971, and 1975) had reached altitudes of more than about 500 km, the oxygen section of the ionosphere. Vertikal 4 had reached the hydrogen region, or protonosphere, and had measured properties of the plasma affecting radio-wave absorption and investigated effects of shortwave solar radiation on the earth’s atmosphere. Results of the investigation would extend knowledge of weather and climate, Petrov said. (FBIS, Tass in English, 14 Oct 76; Pravda in Russian, 17 Oct 76; Moscow Domestic Service in Russian, 29 Oct 76) At what the NY Times described as “a restricted press conference before liftoff,” the rookie cosmonauts said their mission was to concentrate on practical scientific uses of the Soviet space stations, especially extraterrestrial manufacture of metals, glass, and pharmaceuticals. Rozhdestvensky said that every ruble invested in space exploration had “already been returned tenfold to the national budget in one way or another.’,’ Tass announced at noon Moscow time on 16 Oct. (5 am EDT) that the docking of Soyuz 23 with Salyut 5 had been cancelled “because of the off-design regime of [the] approach control system,” and the crew had been ordered to return to earth. The NY Times noted that this was “the first occasion on which the Russians have made public their problems before the completion of a space flight.” Usually no announcement had been forthcoming until the crew had returned to earth. At 8:46 pm Moscow time (1:46 pm EDT)—almost exactly 48 hr after liftoff—the descent module landed 195 km southwest of Tselinograd in Kazakhstan “on the surface of Lake Tengiz” in a heavy snowfall. The search and rescue teams, working under difficult nighttime conditions, recovered the descent module and the cosmonauts from the first splashdown in the 15-yr history of Soviet manned space flight. Announcement of the adverse conditions of the landing was not made until 12 hr afterwards, a delay suggesting some difficulty in locating the capsule. Lt. Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, director of cosmonaut training, said that helicopter and amphibious craft had aided the recovery. Residents of the nearby town of Arkalyk welcomed the returned cosmonauts at the airport and made them honorary citizens. The crew returned to the Baykonur cosmodrome by plane on the morning of 17 Oct. The splashdown of Soyuz 23 resulted from chance rather than planning, said the newspaper Izvestia on 18 Oct., describing fears at recovery-team headquarters that the landing craft might have gone into swamps near the lake, after a report that the craft had tilted on impact, putting the porthole below the water’s surface. The pilot of a plane had reported the capsule’s position and a helicopter had towed the capsule to shore amid fog, snow, and broken ice. The official comments were regarded as “an effort to avoid blaming the astronauts for the mission’s failure,” said the NY Times. The Soyuz 23 difficulty marked the fourth failure of a Soyuz mission to rendezvous; radar trouble had forced the crews of Soyuz 3, Soyuz 8, and Soyuz 15 to return to earth without docking. The Wash. Post noted that about one in three Soyuz flights had failed to carry out its mission: Soyuz 1 and Soyuz 11 resulted in the deaths of one and three cosmonauts respectively, and two cosmonauts on an unnumbered mission in April 1975 had been forced to abort their flight before reaching earth orbit. (NYT, 15 Oct 76, A 13; 16 Oct 76, 6; 17 Oct 76, 29; 18 Oct 76, 32; 19 Oct 76, 17; W Post, 15 Oct 76, A-21; 17 Oct 76, A-17; 18 Oct 76, A-16; C Trib, 15 Oct 76, 1-5; 17 Oct 76, 1-3; 18 Oct 76, 1-8; WStar, 17 Oct 76, A-14; FBIS, Tass in English, 14-17 Oct 76)
The Peoples Republic of China launched an unidentified satellite from the Shuang-Cheng-Tzu site into an orbit with 483-km apogee, 170-km perigee, 59.5° inclination, and 91.1-min period. Aviation Wk and Space Technology magazine reported that mission characteristics indicated the vehicle was in the 2700- to 4500-kg class and that the launch vehicle was a CSS-X-3 booster. Hsinhua News Agency, whose launch announcement the Tass agency picked up, reported 10 Dec. that the satellite had returned to earth “with precision according to plan,” with no further details. This was PRC’s seventh satellite launch. (FBIS, Tass in English, 7 Dec 76; CSFC SSR, 9 Dec 76; FBIS, Peking NCNA, 10 Dec 76; Av Wk, 13 Dec 76, 29; SBD, 14 Dec 76, 234)
Space-related technology would serve to monitor municipal water pollution and dispose of solid wastes, NASA announced, describing systems for electronic monitoring of water quality in cooperation with the Gulf Coast Waste Disposal Authority and for sewage treatment at a plant midway between Los Angeles and San Diego. Johnson Space Center at Houston developed under contract with Boeing a trailer-mounted automated system to process data from up to 40 different water sensors for rapid indications of pollution, temperature, turbidity, and similar items. The current procedure was to sample city water at regular intervals and send the samples to a laboratory for analysis, with results available days later. JSC and the Goddard Space Flight Center developed a biosensor to give total bacteria count directly, by adding chemicals that caused bacteria to radiate light; this sensor could both detect and quantify living or dead bacteria in a continuous-flow water sample. At Langley Research Center, scientists working on Skylab environmental control had developed an electronic sensor that could detect human or nonhuman fecal coliform bacteria in a few hours, rather than a few days; the device would permit public health authorities to act quickly if large quantities of disease-producing bacteria entered a water supply. The automated monitoring system would eventually include a device to detect known carcinogenic chemicals—chloroform and carbon tetrachloride, for instance—already found in the drinking water of cities surveyed for the project. Some of the pollutants were thought to be byproducts of chlorine added to city water to guard against waterborne diseases. A gas-chromatograph technique developed at Ames Research Center to extract minute samples of organic materials from the atmospheres of other planets would be valuable to concentrate the harmful chemicals detected in city water for rapid onsite analysis. Another Ames system, attaching fluorescent dyes to bacteria so that their presence could be recorded by electronic sensors, could be applied to detection of waterborne viruses. As for sewage disposal, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory used for the new million-gallon-per-day treatment plant at Huntington Beach, Cal., a process invented by Marshall Humphrey, a JPL engineer working on lightweight materials for insulating rocket motors. Using a pyrolytic converter to produce activated carbon by chemical changes induced by heat, he found that sewage solids were excellent raw material for production of carbon. The new process would convert solid sewage to activated carbon, which could then be used to remove impurities from incoming waste water and recycled and reactivated with new incoming sewage. Gases generated from sewage solids would serve as fuel for the converter. Dry black odorless powder of carbon and ash would be the only residue from the process. Even the billion-dollar secondary sewage-treatment plants in compliance with EPA standards had not solved the problem of solid-waste disposal; primary treatment of sewage had left about 40% solid waste in water leaving the plants and discharged into rivers and offshore waters. The JPL process would exceed EPA standards for ocean discharge and reduce capital costs of processing systems as much as 25%. (NASA Release 76-57; KSC News, 4 Mar 76, 2)
NASA launched Lageos—a laser geodynamic satellite—from Western Test Range on a Delta rocket at 3 am CDT (0800 GMT) into a nearcircular orbit with 5940-km apogee, 5845-km perigee, inclination of 109.8°, and period of 225.5 min. Lageos, resembling a “cosmic golf-ball” 60 cm in diameter and weighing 411 kg, would act in space as a sophisticated mirror reflecting laser beams directed at it by stations on the ground; scientists timing the round trip of the laser beams would be able to detect movement of the earth’s surface as small as 2 cm. The 3-yr phase 1 of the Lageos mission would validate laser-ranging techniques as compared with long-baseline interferometry and lunar laser ranging; phase 2 would consist of application of phase-1 techniques continuously for the usable life of the passive satellite. Although Lageos was not expected to fall back to earth for at least 8 million yr, and contained no moving parts or electronics to wear out, the 426 laser reflectors on its surface would be eroded in the space environment probably within 50 yr. (NASA Release 76-67; MSFC Release 76-82; MOR E-639-76-01 [prelaunch] 28 Apr 76, [postlaunch] 27 May 76; ATT, 5 May 76, 30; W Post, 5 May 76, A-8)
The 50th anniversary of Dr. Robert Goddard’s successful launch of the world’s first liquid-fueled rocket at his aunt’s farm near Auburn, Mass., was observed in a re-enactment at the launching site—now marked by a granite monument—and in 15th anniversary ceremonies at the Goddard Space Flight Center, which also launched a commemorative rocket. Dr. Goddard had written on space navigation while still in high school; his early theoretical writings prompted the New York Times to print an article on its editorial page in 1920 saying that Dr. Goddard was ignorant of elementary physics if he thought a rocket would work in the vacuum of space. The Times ran a correction on 17 July 1969, the morning after the Apollo astronauts were launched toward the first lunar landing. The original rocket launched by Dr. Goddard in 1926 was about 3 m high, traveled a little more than 12 m upward, and attained a speed of 56 m in 2.5 sec. powered by a combination of gasoline and liquid oxygen. By contrast, the Saturn V rocket with its Apollo payload stood over 110 m tall and could cover 25 km in 2.5 sec powered by a mixture of kerosene and liquid oxygen, a fuel remarkably similar to that used by Dr. Goddard. Although, as GSFC Director Dr. John F. Clark pointed out at the Center re-enactment, “Not a line appeared in a single paper about the Auburn flight ... In fact, the attention he did get in the early 1920s was adverse . . .,” Dr. Goddard continued his work in New Mexico in the 1930s and flew his rockets to heights over 3 km and at speeds up to supersonic. Of Dr. Goddard’s concepts, Wernher von Braun said: “Goddard did most of the basic research and development that made possible rockets such as the Saturn V.” Dr. Goddard had died in 1945, but his widow had attended the dedication of the Center when it opened in 1961; she had planned to attend the re-enactment in Auburn, but a heavy snowstorm swept New England 16 Mar. and seriously curtailed attendance at the event. Astronaut Eugene Cernan, principal speaker at the Mass, ceremonies, had reached Boston’s Logan Airport only an hour before it was closed down by the storm, and was taken by car to the scene as the scheduled helicopter could not fly. (ATT, 16 Mar 76, 16; W Post, 17 Mar 76, C-2; GSFC News, Mar 76, 1; Worcester Telegram, 17 Mar 76, 1; report of commemorative committee, Auburn Rotary Club, 19 Mar 76)
The U.S. Senate, by a vote of 78 to 6, confirmed the nomination of Dr. H. Guyford Stever to be director of the newly created Office of Science and Technology Policy in the White House. Dr. Stever, director of the National Science Foundation, had been under criticism for NSF actions in reviewing applications for research grants; also, conservative senators had objected to social-science textbooks prepared under NSF auspices in the 4 yr that Dr. Stever headed that agency. The confirmation marked reestablishment of aWhite House science advisory post after its elimination by President Nixon early in 1973. On 7 Nov. 1957 President Eisenhower had announced appointment of Dr. James R. Killian as special assistant to the President for science and technology, whose prime role was to speed rocket and missile development in the wake of the first satellite a month earlier. Dr. George B, Kistiakowsky, who succeeded Dr. Killian, wrote later that the science advisory committee set up in the White House helped President Eisenhower make major military decisions. The Natl. Science and Technology Policy, Organization, and Priorities Act of 11 May 1976 would also provide 4 new executive-branch agencies: the Office of Science and Technology Policy, whose director would advise the National Security Council upon request, but would mainly assist the Office of Management and Budget in decisions on funding federally supported R&D and would prepare an annual science and technology report for Congress as a counterpart of the State of the Union Message; the President’s Committee on Science and Technology, consisting of 8 to 14 specialists in a wide range of fields who would study for 2 yr and report on the nation’s science, engineering, and technology policies, and disband after submitting the report unless the President chose to continue it; the Federal Coordinating Council for Science, Engineering, and Technology, to deal with interagency problems, chaired by the Science Adviser; and the Intergovernmental Science, Engineering, and Technology Panel, consisting of the Science Adviser as chairman, the Director of the NSF, and at least 10 members representing state interests, to define civilian problems at state, regional, and local levels which could be resolved by science, engineering, and technology. Dr. Richard T. Atkinson, Deputy Director of NSF, would act as Director until the end of the present administration in January. (CR, 9 Aug 76, S 13954-13963; NYT, 6 Aug 76, Al; 10 Aug 76, A3; 15 Aug 76, 4-6; 24 Aug 76, 28)
In Washington, the Smithsonian Institution’s new National Air and Space Museum was opened with a speech by President Ford, in observance of the U.S. Bicentennial. The President and Vice President Rockefeller were escorted through the $41-million museum by museum director Michael J. Collins, who had piloted the Apollo 11 spacecraft. At a signal given 18 min previously by the Viking 1 spacecraft in orbit around Mars, a 3-m metal arm was activated to cut a red, white, and blue ribbon to officially open the building. “That’s the most expensive scissors in history,” the President commented as he began his dedication. The museum was “a perfect birthday present from the American people to themselves.” During the next century, he said, the best of the American adventure lay ahead; it could find out how to harness and preserve the forces of nature, explore the “uncharted frontier” of the oceans, turn space into a partner for control of pollution and improvement of worldwide communications, draw more energy from the earth and sun, develop new agricultural technologies, and conquer cancer and heart disease. The President noted that just 100 yr ago Alexander Graham Bell first publicly demonstrated his telephone. Progress, he said, can be measured “not only by the extent of our knowledge but by increasing awareness of all that remains to be discovered.” Described by Smithsonian Institution Secretary S. Dillon Ripley as “a chic hangar” and by Washington Post architectural writer Wolf von Eckardt as “a work of art” with “a beautiful, natural quality” and “a modest timelessness about it,” the museum occupied 3 blocks on the Mall, stretching more than 200 m and standing about 26 m high. The first 2 floors contained more than 10 acres of exhibit space; the third floor contained offices, a library, and a cafeteria. The design called for a structural-steel frame covered with thin slabs of the same Tennessee pink marble used for the National Gallery of Art directly across the Mall; the building was divided into 7 bays—4 marble boxes connected by 3 bronze-glass bays facing the Mall. The center entrance bay, “Milestones of Flight,” contained the only permanent displays: the Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk flyer, Lindbergh’s Spirit of St. Louis, the Bell X-l (first supersonic plane), and the North American X-l5. The problem, said the New York Times, was to design a building that “couldn’t possibly hold” all it was meant to display; the Saturn V rocket measured 4 times as high as the building, and a Boeing 747 fuselage was longer than the building’s width. “Space Hall” in the east bay contained the full-size rockets formerly on display near the Smithsonian “castle”; a pit had been dug and the floor lowered to accommodate the 22-m missiles, and the 30-ton backup Skylab had been cut out so that visitors could walk through the astronauts' living area. The west bay was for “Air Transportation”; more than 100 spacecraft and 64 aircraft, nearly 10 times as many as were previously on display, would be exhibited in the new building. Chartered by Congress in 1945, the new museum had been quartered in temporary structures until after the Vietnam war. All the stories on the opening noted that it was constructed on time and within its budget. The Smithsonian had begun its aeronautical collection 100 yr previously with a group of Chinese kites presented for the 1876 Philadelphia centennial exposition; Its interest in aeronautics had begun even earlier. Joseph Henry, first Secretary of the Smithsonian, had sponsored a balloon ascension from the Mall in 1861 to encourage President Lincoln to use balloons for military observation. In 1916, the Smithsonian had begun its 29-year association with Dr. Robert H. Coddard, father of the liquid-fuel rocket. The museum expected 7 million visitors a year; opening date had been changed from 4 July to accommodate the Bicentennial crowds expected in D.C., and the museum lobby on Independence Ave. had been open to the public since 2 Feb. {CSM, 14 May 76; W Star, 25 June 76, C-l; 1 July 76, A—1; WPost, 27 June 76, E-l; 1 July 76, B-l; 2 July 76, A-1; NYT, 2 July 76, B12; 4 July 76, 22; C Trib, 2 July 76, 4-16; Newport News (Va) Daily Press, 25 Apr 76) A NY Times editorial mentioned “super technology” in the taking and transmitting of Mars photographs that led to selection of an alternative landing site, “an extraordinarily impressive example” of the potential of “robot explorers of the solar system.” (NYT, 3 July 76, 20) Argon gas detected by Viking 1 in the Mars atmosphere suggested that Mars had experienced major volcanic periods that might still be in progress. Carbon dioxide, the only gas previously identified in the Mars atmosphere, had obscured the presence of argon, which had a similar molecular weight. As Viking instruments had detected a reduction in atmospheric temperature approaching the south polar cap, colder than had been forecast because of pure carbon dioxide, the explanation was a dilution by another gas that would conform to the low temperatures, identified as argon. Only about 1% of earth’s atmosphere was argon, but Viking had revealed the Mars atmosphere to be as much as 8% argon above the south polar cap. (W Post, 3 July 76, A-2) The new landing space chosen for Viking 1 in the Chryse region was about 80 km north of an island formed millions of yr ago by flood waters rushing from the canyon areas near the Martian equator. (WPost, 4 July 76, A-4) New data received from Viking 1 had provided more questions than answers, such as the reason for unexpected readings of Martian temperature and atmospheric moisture. The Mars south pole proved colder than earlier believed, below the condensation point of carbon dioxide, and had as much as 40 to 50 microns of water in the atmosphere, more than expected. The newly selected landing site would contain sufficient moisture to provide ground fog, frost, or even snow. (W Star, 4 July 76, A-12) The Viking project demonstrated that man had not lost his “primal urge to explore,” said a NY Times editorial 4 July, even with little immediate prospect of economic gain or space colonization. People might worry about the expenditures and priorities of such endeavors, said Dr. Bruce C. Murray, Director of JPL, “but very few say the product itself, the discoveries, is unworthy or immoral.” On the Bicentennial Day it was proper to remember that the U.S. was a product of the urge to explore. Whatever it learned about Mars, Viking 1 proved that there was robust life on earth. (NYT, 4 July 76, 4-1) Failure to find life on Mars would mean a cut in funding for the space program, NASA biologist Dr. Harold Klein predicted. Although he estimated odds at 50 to 1 against Viking’s finding life on Mars, he noted that the issue would not be settled because the experiments had built-in limitations. Whether or not life was detected on Mars, most scientists believed life existed elsewhere in the universe, the NY Times added. (NYT, 6 July 76, 15) JPL released the best photographs to date of the “Martian Grand Canyon,” a gorge 10 times the size of Ariz.’s Grand Canyon but relatively small by Martian standards. The Capri Chasm was as much as 32 km wide and nearly 2 km deep, compared to Ariz.’s which was no deeper than 1.6 km, no more than 21 km wide, and about 350 km end to end. The length of the larger canyon of the Valles Marineris on Mars had been estimated at more than 3200 km. Rockslides detected in the Viking 1 photographs indicated either massive quakes on Mars, meteor impacts, or effects of winds reaching speeds over 480 kph, JPL scientists said. (TVPost, 7 July 76, A-10) The Viking 1 landing on Mars was put off until at least 20 July after radar observations indicated the alternative landing site was rougher than previous Viking photographs had shown. The spacecraft’s orbit would be shifted to permit examination of an area west of the previously selected landing point. (TV Post, 8 July 76, A-2) An altered orbit put Viking 1 over an area called Plateau of the Moon, third to be scouted in the search for a smooth landing site. Radar echoes, which had revealed dunes or boulders on the Plains of Chryse invisible to the Viking cameras, showed the plateau to be “twice as smooth as the plains.” (TV Post, 7 July 76, A-2) A JPL spokesman said preliminary pictures of another landing site proposed for Viking 1 showed Martian terrain as rugged as that in 2 spots previously rejected. Viking 1 was scheduled to take more photographs of a region called West-Northwest, beyond the area that controllers last wk said was too rough for a landing. (TVStar, 12 July 76, A-6) 6 July-24 Aug.: A 2-man spacecraft, Soyuz 21, was launched from the Baykonur cosmodrome at 3:09 pm Moscow time (8:09 am EST) to carry out “joint experiments” with the USSR’s Salyut 5 station in orbit, launched 22 June. Col. Boris Volynov, 41, who flew on Soyuz 5 during the first Soviet linkup in 1969, was commander, accompanied by flight engineer Lt. Col. Vitaly Zholobov, 39, 35th Russian to fly in space. Soyuz 21 orbital elements were: apogee, 253 km; perigee, 193 km; inclination, 51.6°; period, 88.7 min. The docking with Salyut 5 occurred 7 July and the 2 spacecraft would remain linked for 48 days, the crew returning safely 24 Aug. On board Salyut 5, the crew performed experiments on the development and behavior of fish, melting of metal and growing of crystals in weightlessness, and environmental studies. In April 1975 a Soyuz crew had failed to link with the Salyut 4 station, reportedly because of a rocket malfunction, but a second crew was successful in May and spent 63 days aboard. Although Soviet authorities offered few details on mission plans, the Salyut 5 had 2 docking ports, making it possible for 2 Soyuz craft to be docked at once. U.S. sources speculated that the mission might try to break the record of 84 days in space set by the third crew of Skylab in 1974. Tass reported 10 July that Volynov and Zholobov were using an exercise device that allowed them to “run” in the weightlessness of outer space; a report from the cosmonauts recorded on that date described a mass-meter installed on Salyut 5 to measure the crew’s weight in space through a vibration mechanism. On 28 July a report from the flight-control center said the cosmonauts were checking whether their training on the running track and other activities producing “microshocks” would affect the formation of crystals aboard the station. (FBIS, Tass in English, 6-30 July 76; TV Post, 7 July, A-22; TV Star, 7 July 76, A-2; ATT, 8 July 76, 23; Spacewarn, SPX-273, 20 July 76, 2; Spaceflight, Jan 77, 36-37)
At 0300 CMT (12:30 pm local time) the Japanese ionosphere sounding satellite Ume was launched from the Tanegashima site on the 3-stage liquid-fuel N rocket to an orbital altitude of about 1000 km. The cylindrical satellite weighed 139 kg, had a diameter of 94 cm, and was 82 cm high. Its estimated lifetime was 1.5 yr. This was the second successful launch with the new N rocket. (FBIS, Kyodo 29 Feb 76)
The U.S. Air Force announced selection of the Boeing Aerospace Corp., a unit of the Boeing Company, to design and produce an interim upper-stage (IUS) solid-fuel rocket motor for the Space Shuttle, to lift Shuttle craft from low earth orbit to higher mission altitudes. Boeing, chosen over Martin Marietta, Lockheed, and General Dynamics Corp., still had to negotiate a contract, estimated to be ultimately worth about $300 million. (ATT, 10 Aug 76, 45; WSJ, 10 Aug 76, .3)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced a number of activities, centered on the Space Shuttle, including testing, procurement, and completion of facilities. —During July, MSFC awarded 14 contracts each of which totaled more than $50 000. (MSFC Release 76-155) —MSFC completed preparation of a 2.8% scale model of the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB) that would be tested in Ames Research Center wind tunnels (the 2 supersonic facilities and the 4.2m transonic facility). MSFC had used a 0.5% scale model in its smaller trisonic (over mach 3) wirid tunnel to develop preliminary environmental data; the smaller tunnel ft as cheaper to operate, and a smaller model was cheaper to alter. Data from the ARC tests would be use in SRB component vibration and acoustic design and in establishing qualification-test criteria, and finally for generation of data on the acoustic environment for reentry of an actual full-scale SRB. (MSFC Release 76-120) —Completing the first phase of acoustic testing that used scale models of the Space Shuttle with models of the Kennedy Space Center launch pad, MSFC announced that it had begun another test program using a scale model of the Vandenberg AFB, Calif., launch pad and a Shuttle model having working main engines and solid-fuel rocket boosters to the same scale. The Vandenberg launch pad differed from that at KSC, but MSFC said that much of the information obtained since Aug. 1974 in 150 test firings to evaluate different acoustic methods for the KSC launch pad would be useful in suppressing noise at the Vandenberg site. The tests were made to determine the best way to control noise and ignition overpressure when Shuttle engines and boosters were ignited at launch; uncontrolled pressures and acoustics could damage the Shuttle or its payload. Tests were scheduled for completion in Dec. 1976. (MSFC Release 76-117) —MSFC announced award of a $247 363 contract to Rockwell’s Space Div. for a 12-mo study of Shuttle booster and external tank options that could reduce cost per flight and increase payload weight capability. (MSFC Release 76-118) —MSFC announced that the first flight-configuration nozzle for the Shuttle main engine under development by Rockwell’s Rocketdyne Div. had been completed and successfully proof-tested. Completion of the nozzle represented a significant design and manufacturing achievement; the nozzle consisted of 1080 precisely formed tapering tubes brazed to a shell and stiffened by bands. It was about 3m tall and 2.7m in diameter, weighing about 454 kg. Attached to the main combustion chamber of the main engine, the nozzle would allow exhaust gases to expand to obtain maximum thrust, contributing to highly efficient burn. (MSFC Release 76-128) —MSFC announced completion of tests conducted with KSC to determine the effects of salty and brackish water on materials used in elements of the Space Shuttle. Recovery of 2 Shuttle boosters after each launch would require towing the boosters in the salty Atlantic Ocean and into the brackish waters of a Fla. river. The studies used an integrated test bed constructed from the same materials and covered with the same sealants and paints planned for use on flight rockets, carrying samples of electrical and electronic equipment and hydraulic systems being considered for Shuttle use. The test bed, shipped to KSC, was put into the ocean for 7 days and in the Banana River for 3 days, at a depth that closely simulated actual booster-recovery conditions. Returned to MSFC, the test bed had been subjected to study by engineers and technicians to discover the effects of the ocean and river environments, and to look for corrosion or marine biological growth. After this study, the refurbished test bed would be used again for tests in the ocean by KSC personnel. (MSFC Release 76-131) —MSFC announced it had requested bids from industry on development of range-safety receivers for the Space Shuttle. Each Shuttle’s 2 booster solid rockets would carry 2 receivers and the external tank 1, a total of 5 for each launch. The receivers would be part of a safety system that would let the range safety officer destroy the vehicle in case of a malfunction at launch. NASA planned to reuse the receivers up to 20 times, recovering and returning the equipment to the manufacturer for testing before it was shipped to the assembly contractor for reuse. (MSFC Release 76-132) —MSFC announced that assembly of the first Space Shuttle external tank had begun at the Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans. Assembly should be completed and the tank delivered to the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories at Bay St. Louis, Miss., in mid-1977 for use in the test program for the main propulsion engine. The tests would use the tank, three Shuttle main engines, and other components in actual firings to verify the design and operation of the main propulsion system. The program would consist of 15 test firings, 11 at or near the full 8-min duration. (MSFC Release 76-137) —MSFC announced preparations for the arrival of the first Space Shuttle orbiter in mid-July for a series of tests at MSFC’s dynamic test facility. The orbiter would arrive at the Redstone airfield in 1978 atop a modified Boeing 747 and be off-loaded by KSC personnel. On the ground, the orbiter would become the responsibility of MSFC personnel, who would move it to the test facility and mate it with the rest of the Space Shuttle elements for vibration tests. This would be the first time all elements of the Shuttle were united. Tests were scheduled to run from spring to winter of 1978. (MSFC Release 76-141) —MSFC announced completion of tests on minitank 5, a small aluminum tank coated with a spray insulation that would be used to protect the Space Shuttle’s external tank and its highly volatile liquid hydrogen contents from engine exhaust or aerodynamic heat. This was the fifth of 13 such tanks to be tested at MSFC. The tests were to determine the effectiveness of Martin Marietta’s foam insulation against stress encountered during Shuttle launch and space flight. Besides acoustic and vacuum tests, the minitanks would undergo pressure, boiloff, and holding tests with liquid hydrogen; the hold test would determine the effect of a 7-hr idle period on a full tank’s insulation system. The test period of 7 hr was estimated to be the longest time a fueled Shuttle would have to wait on a launch pad before liftoff. %ISFC Release 76-142) —MSFC announced completion^, the only totally new structure built exclusively for testing the Space Shuttle external tank: the pneumatic test facility at Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans, which would accommodate the tank measuring 47 m long (more than half the length of a football field) and 8.4 m in diameter. Empty, the tank would weigh about 34 000 kg. The pneumatic facility would be used for proof tests and leak tests of the external tank’s liquid hydrogen tank; the proof test would pressurize the tank with gaseous nitrogen and apply a series of external loads with 9 hydraulic cylinders. The leak test would verify that no out-of-specification leaks existed. Martin Marietta Aerospace was prime contractor at Michoud for external tank production. (MSFC Release 76-143)
Gerald A. Mossinghoff, NASA’s Assistant General Counsel for general law since Jan. 1974, was appointed Deputy General Counsel effective this date. He joined NASA in 1963 as a patent attorney in the Office of General Counsel; in 1966 he was named director of the Office of Legislative Planning at the U.S. Patent Office, and returned to NASA in Dec. 1967 as Director of Legislative Liaison. He received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1971. A registered patent attorney, Mossinghoff had received a B.S. in electrical engineering from St. Louis University and a J.D. with honors from George Washington University. (Admr.’s announcement, 31 Mar 76) During March: Launch of RCA’s Satcom 2 this month was the second launch of a Delta vehicle using 9 large Castor IV solid rocket boosters instead of the standard 9 Castor IIs. (First to use the larger rockets was the Delta that launched Satcom 1 on 12 Dec. 75.) RCA had underwritten development expenses of adapting the NASA “workhorse” Delta to use the larger rockets, in a unique NASA-customer-launch vehicle contractor arrangement that had enabled RCA to design its domestic comsat to be the heaviest to date without having to use a larger and more expensive launch vehicle. The Castor IV boosters would permit a Delta to put into synchronous orbit a payload weighing about 900 kg, compared to about 700 kg for a vehicle equipped with the Castor IIs. NASA was thinking of the more powerful Delta as a standard launch vehicle for other customers who could use the increase in permissible weight of about 29% in many areas of spacecraft design: weather forecasting, scientific exploration, and communications. (Spaceport News, 18 Mar 76, 1)
SPAR II, a Black Brant VC sounding rocket carrying materials-processing experiments, was launched from the White Sands Missile Range in the second of a series of 15 planned during the next 5 yr in the SPAR (space-processing applications rocket) program managed by Marshall Space Flight Center. The 225.7-kg payload consisted of 10 experiments, 6 similar to those carried on SPAR I launched 11 Dec. 1975; the rocket reached an altitude of 188 km, providing about 5 min of nearweightlessness during the coast phase, and the payload was recovered by parachute and delivered to the investigators for analysis. MSFC employees Carolyn Griner and Dr. Mary Helen Johnston were principal investigators for 2 experiments, both on dendrite remelting and macrosegregation. Other experimenters were Robert B. Pond (Johns Hopkins University), 2 experiments on solidification of lead antimony eutectic; Dr. James W. Patten (Battelle-Northwest Research Institute), 2 experiments on producing closed-cell metal foams; Dr. S.H. Gelles (Battelle Memorial Institute), agglomeration in immiscible liquids; Dr. H. Ahlborn (University of Hamburg), behavior of aluminum alloys under zero gravity; and Dr. Louis Raymond (Aerospace Corp.), 2 experiments in casting thoria dispersion-strengthened composites at zero gravity. (MSFC Release 76-83, 76-94)
According to a story in the Chicago Tribune, the USSR on an undisclosed date had fired a submarine-launched missile farther than ever before. An SSN-8 missile had landed in mid-Pacific slightly more than 9000 km from its launching point, presumably a submarine in the Barents Sea. (The longest-range U.S. submarine-launched missile could reach just under 4700 km.) U.S. intelligence sources were reported unsure whether the additional range of the SSN-8 resulted from extra rocket power or a lighter warhead; SSN-8 had previously been identified as a single-warhead weapon used in the USSR’s 17 new Delta-class missile submarines. Commenting on the report, the New York Times said the Soviets’ test shot was “good news paradoxically” for the U.S. and the whole world: in contrast to large land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles, the submarine-based missiles were neither large enough nor accurate enough for effective first-strike counter-silo use, and their concealment and mobility would make them ideal second-strike weapons useful only as deterrents. As long as the USSR had no submarine-launched missile, there was little possibility of lowering the ceilings set in a previous agreement to a level that would head off a Soviet first-strike capability. The ceilings had allowed each side to have 2400 strategic bombers and missiles, of which 1320 could carry multiple warheads; if the USSR should agree to deploy half its multiple-warhead missiles at sea as the U.S. did, such an agreement could eliminate the possibility of either side’s constructing a high-confidence first-strike force and would help ensure stability of the nuclear balance for a long time. The NYT favored such an agreement, which would call a halt to ongoing missile programs. (C Trib, 4 Dec 76, 2-5; NYT, 6 Dec 76, 32)
A 3-yr International Magnetospheric Study that began 1 Jan., sponsored by the International Council of Scientific Unions, would be coordinated by a steering committee set up by the Special Committee on Solar-Terrestrial Physics, chaired by Juan G. Roederer, professor and senior research physicist at the University of Denver. The 20 or more countries participating in the study had already submitted more than 1000 individual research programs, including ground-based, balloon, rocket, aircraft, and spacecraft experiments as well as networks of magnetic, auroral, and other geophysical observatories. Among major spacecraft projects planned by the European Space Agency, Japan, the Soviet Union, and the U.S. would be use of ESA’s Geos spacecraft in geostationary orbit. ESA and NASA would join in an International Sun-Earth Explorer (ISEE) program to measure properties of different parts of the magnetosphere simultaneously. About 40 other spacecraft launched before and during the study period were expected to contribute sun-earth physics data to the study. Roederer told the National Academy of Sciences that the international coordination differed from that used in the International Geophysical Year, relying on interlocking spacecraft missions and quick and active exchange of information and scheduling. (NAS News Report, Mar 76, 1) April 1976
Ceremonies at GSFC honored 45 members of the team responsible for NASA’S Delta rocket, the “workhorse” of the agency’s most dependable launching systems. NASA Administrator James C. Fletcher and Deputy Administrator George M. Low participated in the event. Delta placed NASA’S first communications satellite (Echo 1) into orbit 12 Aug. 1960; through January 1976, 119 Deltas had been launched. The Delta’s reliability and economy had made it the primary vehicle for commercial spacecraft, international users, and operational meteorological systems. The number of reimbursable launches for non-NASA users had increased over the years; of the 11 Delta missions scheduled for 1976, all but 2 would be launched for foreign or commercial users on a reimbursable basis, better than 80% of the total. Delta’s payload capability had risen from 68 kg to 910 kg. As Dr. Fletcher remarked, “Delta is becoming a standard against which to measure the conduct of NASA’S business in the future.” (NASA Release 76-27)
A simple, inexpensive, and effective method of suppressing noise in windtunnel testing of space vehicles would be patented by two MSFC engineers, MSFC announced. While developing an acoustic environment for reentry of the Space Shuttle solid rocket booster, Paul W. Howard and Luke A. Schutzenhofer of MSFC’s Systems Dynamics Lab. found their acoustic data distorted by background noise reflected at transonic speeds from the walls of the wind tunnel, causing shock waves. The primary aerodynamic cause of the background noise was found to be the edgetone effect of high-velocity windflow over holes in the perforated walls of the tunnel; covering the perforated walls with wire screening minimized direct contact between the airstream and the edges of the holes, and the noise was greatly reduced. The temporary fix proved so successful that the screens were permanently installed, and the patent should be issued to the public by early summer. (MSFC Release 76-44)
A British Aircraft Corp. team had successfully launched the second of a series of Skylark 12 high-altitude research rockets from the Andoya Range in arctic Norway to investigate auroral activity for the U.K. Science Research Council and other groups investigating the intense phenomena above the Arctic Circle, the London Press Assn, reported in a broadcast. The rocket reached an altitude of more than 680 km, sending scientific data to ground receivers for 14 min of the flight. First launch of the new three-stage Skylark, capable of carrying payloads to three times the altitude of earlier versions, took place 21 Nov. (FBIS, London Press Assn., 17 Dec 76)
Atomic reactor waste buried in the Ural Mountains had exploded in 1958, killing hundreds and affecting thousands with radiation sickness, according to an exiled Soviet scientist whose article in the British New Scientist was reported by Associated Press. Zhores Medvedev, a biochemist and geneticist who had been a wellknown dissident in the Soviet Union, had been allowed to go to Britain in Jan. 1973 but became an exile when Soviet authorities refused to allow him to return. His article said that reactor waste buried for many years in a deserted area had overheated and erupted “like a violent volcano,” and that strong winds had blown the resulting radioactive clouds for a long distance; however, no one had been evacuated from the area until after symptoms of radiation sickness appeared. Many Ural towns with medium to high levels of radiation had never been evacuated, he said, adding that the area was among several that were off limits to Western correspondents. Medvedev said several biology research stations had been built in what was “the largest area of gamma radiation in the world” to study the damage to plant and animal life. In 1974, a Soviet official denied reports of explosions at the the Shavchenko nuclear power station on the Caspian Sea, at the same time that Pravda, the Communist Party newspaper, was assuring the public that radioactive wastes had been stored safely. Another Soviet disaster had occurred in Oct. 1960, Medvedev said, when then-Premier Nikita Krushchev ordered the launch of a moon rocket to be timed with his arrival in New York City for a session of the UN General Assembly. When the ignition button was pushed, nothing happened; under normal procedures, Medvedev said, workers would drain the fuel from the rocket before inspecting to find the cause of the failure. However, Marshal Mitrofan Nedelin, then head of Soviet rocket forces, felt himself “under an obligation to fulfill the ambitious order” issued by Krushchev and decided to investigate immediately. While dozens of engineers and other experts were examining the rocket and its support systems, the ignition suddenly started to work, but the rocket could not take off because of “the forest of inspection ladders.” The rocket toppled over and turned the Soviet cosmodrome into a holocaust, killing many persons in the area, including “some of the best representatives of Soviet space technology,” Medvedev said. AP noted that the Soviet media routinely ignore all disasters, whether natural or manmade. (WPost, 7 Nov 76, A-1; WStar, 7 Nov 76, B-8; Av Wk, 15 Nov 76, 20)
Instruments left on the moon’s surface during the Apollo program were continuing to transmit information from 13 experiments, JSC announced. The Apollo 12 mission (Nov. 1969) accounted for 2 of the experiments; Apollo 15 (July-Aug. 1971), for 3; Apollo 16 (April 1972), for 3; and Apollo 17 (Dec. 1972), for 5. Findings included the discovery that the moon did in fact possess an atmosphere, only about a millimeter thick and composed of ions of light minerals, and that the first two layers below the moon’s surface consisted largely of basaltic rock and silicon. Data transmitted by 5 of the nuclear transmitters still operating were sent to stations at JPL, Pasadena, Calif., and GSFC, Greenbelt, Md., where they were analyzed by 10 scientists. (NYT, 7 Nov 76, 45)
A joint U.S.-British astronomy project to study the remnant of an exploded star failed when a rocket-motor malfunction kept the x-ray telescope aboard from acquiring its target, a supernova remnant called Puppis A some 10 trillion km from earth. An English Skylark sounding rocket fired from the Woomera Rocket Range in Australia carried a NASA-designed flight telescope, fabricated and assembled at Marshall Space Flight Center, to obtain information on evolution of stars and the formation of neutron stars. Although the telescope assembly, as well as the detectors and electronics supplied by the United Kingdom, worked perfectly, a hole burned through one side of the rocket’s aft end produced more spin than the despin device could offset, said Richard Hoover of MSFC, principal U.S. investigator for the project. “Even with the residual spin, we scanned a portion of the sky in the area of the prime target and acquired data on the diffuse x-ray background [a secondary objective] . . . but we couldn’t lock on Puppis A in order to get a high-resolution map as desired.” The payload was recovered by parachute about 160 km down-range in excellent condition, Hoover said. (NASA Releases 76-62, 76-92; MSFC Release 76-54; MFSC Star, 17 Mar 76, 3)
Tass announced that the USSR expedition Polar Experiment North-76 had begun work in the high latitudes of the Arctic. Using 10 scientific ships, as well as planes, radar, and installations for rocket probing of upper atmosphere layers, a team of scientists would observe ice floes in the polar basin, including the geographic North Pole. The expedition, said to be the largest in the history of Arctic exploration, would simultaneously determine the heat balance deep in the ocean, in the atmosphere, and in floating ice in the North Pole area. Ice floes in the polar basin had been found to forecast climate changes in the densely populated and economically developed areas of the northern hemisphere. From the beginning of the century to the 1940s, the floes had receded from continental coastlines, indicating a relative rise in global temperature; they had begun to appear further south again, indicating a cold phase, and the appearance had been correlated with difficulties in northern navigation and fisheries and unusually snowy winters in western Europe, droughts in Asia, and unexpected cyclones and hurricanes. (FBIS, Tass in English, 7 Apr 76)
Astronomers at the University of Massachusetts had clocked pulsars— superdense remnants of collapsed stars—at speeds over 2 million kmh, making them the fastest movers in earth’s galaxy, the National Science Foundation reported. Some of the objects exceeded galactic escape velocity, meaning they could pull free from the Milky Way and spin off into intergalactic space. First discovered in 1968, pulsars were defined as dense bodies in which a sun-size mass had been compressed into a sphere 16 km in diameter. The material was said to be so dense that a teaspoonful would weigh a billion tons. With its collapse, the body would spin increasingly faster and its magnetic field would increase in intensity; the newly formed pulsar would send out electromagnetic signals that pulsed like a radio beacon with each turn (hence the name pulsar). The high velocities were thought to be caused by the intense magnetic fields, up to a trillion times that of earth’s magnetic field: a slight displacement of the pulsar’s magnetic field could release large amounts of electromagnetic energy in one direction, upon which the pulsar would move in the opposite direction as would a rocket. (Pasadena Star-News, 9 Apr 76, 5)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced award to Martin Marietta’s Denver division of a cost-plus-incentive-fee/award-fee contract for $9 282 667 to deliver parachute decelerator subsystems for recovery of 12 solid-fuel rocket boosters from 6 Space Shuttle flights. The contract, effective through Dec. 1980, covers design, development, manufacture, and refurbishment of the subsystems. Work was authorized to start 6 July at Martin’s plant in Colorado and at Pioneer Parachute Co. of Manchester, Conn., subcontractor. (MSFC Release 76-135)
