Reporting on the end of the Inti. Aeronautical Federation’s 28th conference in Prague, FBIS quoted “American scientist O’Neal” [Gerard K, O’Neill] on whether “his project of big settlements on near-terrestrial orbits was not too remote from reality”: “Mankind will never give up the idea of settlements in space . . . The question is only how fast will space industry and rocket technology reach the necessary level to enable people of the earth to start building the first cities in orbit.” The congress discussed for the first time the efficiency of space research, concluding that spacecraft created in different countries would inevitably have a uniform appearance, depending on their use. The idea of merging engineering ideas was “a dominant one.” Marcel Barrere of France was reelected president of the organization. (FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 1/77)
NASA announced that the Soviet ship expected to participate in comparisons of atmosphere-measuring instruments [see July 1] would arrive off the Virginia coast about Aug. 7 to serve as the platform for USSR rocket launches. The tests would consist of paired launches of about 22 U.S. Super Lokis and about 33 USSR M-lOOBs, plus 6 Super Loki sphere systems to be launched by Wallops; statistical evaluation would require from 14 to 22 successful paired launches. (WFC Release 77-8; NASA Release 77-151)
NASA announced it would conduct sounding-rocket tests with the USSR Hydromet Service for 2wk in Aug. to compare U.S. and Soviet measurements of upper-air temperatures and detect discrepancies in their meteorological instruments. NASA would launch a series of rockets from Wallops Flight Center and the Hydromet representatives would launch rockets from the research ship Akademik Korolev off the U.S. east coast. Under a 1971 agreement on space sciences and applications, the two nations in 1972 had begun exchange of data that had shown the temperature field in the eastern hemisphere to be consistently colder than that of the western hemisphere. Both sides had evaluated their rocket systems for sources of error; direct comparisons made in 1973 at Kourou, French Guiana, had again shown discrepancies in temperature and wind data. Improvements in instruments and techniques since 1973 had made further comparisons necessary, NASA said. (NASA Release 77-133)
The Apollo program was a tough act to follow, Space Shuttle pilot Lt. Col. Charles Fullerton said in a Today wire service report. Acknowledging the declining public interest in space, Fullerton noted that, after Apollo, “Everything else has to be anticlimactic.” {Today, Apr 4/77,1A)
MSFC announced it would conduct on Dec. 1 at the Natl. Parachute Test Range in Calif, the third airdrop test of a parachute system designed to recover the Shuttle’s reusable solid-fuel rocket boosters. Royce Mitchell of MSFC said the test article, a 48 0001b (21 773kg) dummy booster carried under the wing of a B-52 aircraft, would encounter 30% more dynamic pressure than the system should experience during a real deployment. To test the durability of the drogue chute that would open first to pull out the main chutes, fins added to the test article would increase its speed and reduce drag. The drogue would deploy at a speed of about 420mph (676kph) 20sec after the plane released the dummy booster at an estimated speed of 230mph (370kph) and an altitude of about 19 400ft (5913m). The 2 boosters to be used on each Shuttle launch would separate after burnout at an altitude of about 27mi (43.5km), descending slowly by parachute into the ocean for recovery and reuse. (MSFC Release 77-221)
MSFC announced award of a $279 714 contract to Sperry Support Services, a division of Sperry Rand Corp., Huntsville, Ala., for design, construction, and delivery of equipment for the mated vertical ground-vibration test (MVGVT) of the Space Shuttle, scheduled for 1978. The test would confirm the theoretical model used in dynamic analyses of the Space Shuttle, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket boosters. (MSFC Release 77-39)
The Shuttle orbiter Enterprise made its second free flight at Edwards AFB in Calif., a 5min unpowered glide from about 24 000ft altitude, during which it reached a speed of more than 330mph and performed several maneuvers to test its handling before air brakes slowed it to a landing at 250mph. Separation from the Boeing 747 carrier was delayed 3min because a power failure at DFRC made mission control in Houston lose radio contact; the delay caused no problems. For about 50min before separation, pilots Joe Engle and Richard Truly took turns at the controls and the computer to monitor the orbiter’s behavior at various speeds. Pilots of the 747 were Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., and Thomas C. McMurtry. The flight had been postponed from Aug. 30 because of a tropical storm [see Sept. 1]; a third test was set for late Sept. (Postflight rpt, free fit 2, SpSh orbiter ALT; WPost, Sept 14/77, A6) September 13-November 9: NASA announced that the Delta vehicle on which it had launched ESA’s orbital test satellite OTS at 7:21pm Sept. 13 from ETR had exploded 54sec after liftoff. The booster and 5 strap-on motors [see Sept. 7] had performed properly before the explosion. On Sept. 14 John F. Yardley, NASA’s associate administrator for spaceflight, had appointed a failure review board whose investigation concluded from flight data analysis, photo records, and “substantial” vehicle debris recovered near the launch site that the no. 1 strap-on motor had failed from causes unknown. NASA had scheduled an OTS backup launch for April 1978. (MOR M-492-210-77-01 [postlaunch] Nov 9/77; NASA newsrm rept Sept 14/77; W Post, Sept 14/77, A9; NASA Release 77-193)
FBIS reported that the USSR had completed a series of rocket launches in cooperation with France to compare procedures and instruments used by the two countries in high-altitude atmosphere sounding. The rockets were launched simultaneously from the French space center at Kourou, French Guiana, and offshore from the Soviet research vessel Akademik Korolev recently at work with the U.S. off the Atantic coast. (FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 27/77)
MSFC announced it had successfully tested the recovery system for the Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters June 15 at the Natl. Parachute Test Range. Engineers had used an SRB simulator, a drop-test vehicle weighing more them 21 773kg (48 0001b) released from beneath the wing of a B-52 aircraft at a speed of about 85 meters per sec (190mph) and an altitude of about 5500m (18 000ft). Primary purpose of this test was to measure the maximum load on the drogue chute that would open first to stabilize the vehicle and pull out the other chutes. The measured load, about 114 000kg (a quarter of a million lb), was about that expected. The next test, scheduled for late July or early Aug., would measure loads on the other parachutes. Each Shuttle launch would use two SRBs, jettisoned at about 43km (27mi) altitude to descend by parachute into the ocean and be towed to shore for reuse. (MSFC Release 77-115)
KSC reported successful conclusion of the first open-sea tests on Shuttle retrieval equipment staged Dec. 5-16 from Port Everglades, in strong winds and seas from 3 to 6ft that had hampered operations both wks. Test manager Bob Everette said the hugh waves created conditions vital to the test although “it was hard even to stand up on the boat” and the aft section of the 158-ft offshore-support vessel was often under a ft of water. The first group of tests simulated parachute recovery; retrieval of the 6 main parachutes and 2 drogues would use 2 support vessels, each responsible for recovering 3 main chutes and a drogue. The second series of tests was to verify performance of the nozzle plug in open waters. The plug was designed to “swim out” from the ship to a booster casing floating vertically, dive to the bottom of the casing, secure itself to the aft portion and pump out the water. The booster, rotating to a horizontal position, would be ready for tow to the Spaceport for refurbishing. The tests were also to confirm the deck layout of the support vessels and how they kept position while the plug was docking with the booster. Everette said retrieval gear would be modified according to the test results. More ocean tests would follow about lmo before the first launch of the Shuttle, pre-mission exercises to train personnel who would work on the recovery. Everette praised the teamwork of the support agencies taking part in the test: staff from KSC and MSFC; Tracor Marine, operator of the support vessel; Everglades Towing Co.; the Naval Ocean Systems Center; U.S. Booster, Inc.; Battelle Memorial Institute; Pioneer Parachute Co.; the U.S. Navy supervisor of salvage; and Martin Marietta. (Spaceport News, Dec 23/77, 4) •
A KSC spokesman said work was proceeding slowly on dismantling the Delta vehicle that had lost one of its solid-fuel rocket boosters May 18 while waiting on the launch pad at Cape Canaveral, Today newspaper reported. The second stage of the Delta had already been removed to clear the way for detaching the boosters from the Erst stage and then removing the first stage, damaged when one of the 9 boosters crashed 12ft through a support platform. The accident, which interrupted an ESA comsat launch scheduled for June, had also delayed launch of a U.S. weather satellite. {Today, May 25/77, 12A)
MSFC announced it had completed modifications of the Saturn test stand used in the 1960s for static-test firings of the first stages of the Saturn 1 and IB and scheduled for structural tests of the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster. The tests would use a short-stack SRB (lacking two center segments, measuring 18.3cm less than the actual boosters) to simulate prelaunch, flight, and recovery reactions. Each Shuttle launch would need two SRBs each simultaneously generating 11.79-million newtons (2.65 million lb) of thrust at liftoff; separating at burnout from the external tank, the casings would parachute into the ocean for recovery and reuse in as many as 20 flights. (MSFC Release 77-95)
NASA launched Intelsat IVA F-5 from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas Centaur that exploded less than a minute after launch, dropping the 33321b spacecraft into the Atlantic Ocean. This Intelsat and an identical craft scheduled for launch in Nov. were to replace two Intelsat IVs now in orbit over the Indian Ocean and provide 6000 telephone channels and 2 television channels for use by 40 countries, compared to 4000 telephone and 2 TV channels offered by the Intelsat IV spacecraft. At 60sec into the flight a range safety officer destroyed the secondary Centaur stage which had separated prematurely from the Atlas. Failure of the $49.4 mission was similar to the Sept. 13 explosion of a Delta rocket carrying a $42 million orbital test satellite (OTS) NASA was launching for ESA. (NASA Release 77-214; W Post, Sept 30/77, A-3) An investigation concluded that a leak in the high-pressure gas generator system had ignited combustibles in the Atlas 35sec after launch, damaging engine components and terminating the flight. (MOR E-491-633-77-04 [postlaunch] Jan 5/78)
KSC reported that the 10th anniversary of the maiden flight of Saturn V, world’s most powerful rocket, had passed without fanfare. Apollo 4 had lifted off Nov. 9, 1967, from KSC’s Complex 39A in a successful demonstration of Saturn V’s flightworthiness and the Apollo spacecraft’s ability to withstand the intense heat of reentry. (KSC Spaceport News, Nov 11/77, 2)
Wallops Flight Center announced it would welcome visitors to the rocket launching facilities on Wallops Island Apr. 23-24 as part of a special observance by federal activities in the area. Assateague Natl. Seashore Park, Chincoteague Coast Guard Base, Chincoteague Natl. Wildlife Refuge, the Natl. Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and Wallops Flight Center had all planned special exhibits or tours. Visitors to Wallops Island could drive their own cars to see launch pads, rocket storage structures, long-range tracking radars, weather towers, blockhouses, rocket assembly shops, actual launch vehicles, and related range facilities. Cameras would be welcome. The main NASA base would not be included in the visit. (WFC Release 77-2)
NASA announced that the next launch of an Atlas Centaur rocket from KSC would be no earlier than Jan. 6, 1978, carrying an Intelsat IVA commercial comsat. Originally scheduled for launch in Nov., the mission was first delayed for investigation of a previous Atlas Centaur launch that failed Sept. 29. That investigation was almost complete; the associate administrator for transportation systems, John Yardley, was to receive a report in early Dec. The postponement to Jan. was not caused by the investigation, NASA said, but by discovery of faulty feedback transducers in the Atlas engine-control actuators during routine testing. The new date would allow removal and replacement of components from that manufacturing batch and revalidation of the engine systems. (NASA Release 77-241)
MSFC reported it had fired for 2min the largest solid-fuel rocket motor ever developed, at Thiokol Corp.’s installation 24mi from Brigham City, Utah, and 2mi from the nearest occupied building. The Thiokol motor, the propulsive part of the Space Shuttle booster, contained 302 454kg (more than 1.1 million lb) of propellant, half again as much as the next largest motor ever fired at the site. A composite fuel, mixed and poured into the 4 segments of the SRM, had been cured for 4 days before the segments were joined horizontally at the test site by special handling devices. The segments would go by rail to KSC for vertical assembly. Each Shuttle launch would use two of the boosters, designed for reuse up to 20 times. (MSFC Releases 77-125, 77-133; NASA Release 77-142)
NASA announced plans to launch NATO III-B, second in a new series of comsats to serve the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, from the Eastern Test Range at Cape Canaveral, Fla., on Jan. 27 as NASA’s first launch of 1977. The three spacecraft in the Phase III series, funded entirely by NATO, were built by Ford Aerospace; the third would be launched in 1978. The Delta rocket provided by Goddard Space Flight Center that would put NATO III-B in orbit had successfully launched three previous NATO satellites: Nato II-A and -B, in March 1970 and Feb. 1971, and Nato III-A in April 1976. (NASA Release 77-5)
NASA announced a new way to control the flight of its sounding rockets and point their instruments more accurately in astronomical and other scientific studies: a small TV camera in the nose cone would allow an operator on the ground to remotely aim the onboard attitude-control system precisely at the desired stellar object. In the first use of “manned” rocket observation Apr. 15 at the White Sands Missile Range, N.M., scientists from Johns Hopkins Univ. had made the first sighting of a quasar in the ultraviolet spectrum. The quasar (quasi-stellar object, a celestial source resembling a star but probably a galaxy) was 3 billion light-yr from earth; it was the faintest and most remote object observed from above earth’s atmosphere. Dr. Arthur Davidsen of JHU’s department of physics had operated the rocket controls while watching the TV screen; his colleagues were Professors William G. Fastie and George Hartig. Observations in the ultraviolet range would let scientists compare properties of relatively near and more distant quasars. (NASA Release 77-131)
MSFC announced it had awarded Martin Marietta Aerospace’s Denver division a $928 217 contract for construction work on a test stand for the Space Shuttle program. Modification of the giant hydrodynamic support system last used for Saturn V dynamic tests in the 1960s would allow mating all elements of the Shuttle for vertical ground tests scheduled to begin in 1978. The complete vehicle (orbiter, external tank, and two solid fuel rocket boosters) would occupy the stand together for the first time. (MSFC Release 77-79)
Postlaunch reports on the Voyagers said both were functioning as expected. The one launched first, called Voyager 2 because it would arrive second at Jupiter and Saturn, had had difficulty with attitude control as well as with its science-platform boom; its data showed that the craft was merely obeying faulty software, which ground control had corrected. The boom was stable enough to capture satisfactory star-field images. Voyager 1, launched later, had not achieved the proper velocity during two trajectory corrections; Jet Propulsion Laboratory engineers said rocket exhaust was apparently pushing against the craft, and had changed the procedure accordingly. (NASA Release 77-209; MOR S-802-77-01/02 [postlaunch] Oct 6/77)
The U.S. Air Force announced plans to launch an Honest John-Hydac rocket from Santa Rosa Is. near Pensacola, Fla., after sunset on Feb. 22 to release a high-altitude multicolor cloud visible throughout the Southeast. Release of a 48kg payload of barium 72km above the Gulf of Mexico would reveal whether or not the resulting cloud would interfere with radio signals between an airplane and a comsat, a USAF spokesman said. A similar test Dec. 1, 1976, created a colored cloud visible as far away as Tennessee. (W Post, Feb 18/77, A23)
Newspapers and news services reported the death June 16 of Dr. Wernher von Braun, 65, former director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, whose name had become synonymous with “America in space” when the team he headed used a Jupiter-C rocket developed by him for the U.S. Army to launch Explorer 1, the western world’s first earth satellite, on Jan. 31, 1958. Dr. von Braun had undergone surgery in 1975; he had spent most of his time since Oct. 1976 in the hospital. Dr. von Braun, an enthusiast of space travel and astronomy from his childhood in East Prussia (now part of Poland), in his early teens came across a picture of a rocket traveling to the moon that illustrated an article by Hermann Oberth, pioneer rocket theorist who later was part of the von Braun team at Huntsville, Ala. When von Braun obtained Oberth’s book on rocketry, he realized he would need mathematics to progress in his studies, and went on to obtain a doctorate in physics from the Univ. of Berlin in 1934 at the age of 22 with a thesis on rocket engines. He had continued his interest in the amateur Society for Space Travel (Verein fur Raumschiffahrt, VfR) whose rocket experiments impressed the German army seeking weapons not forbidden by the Treaty of Versailles that ended World War I. Employed by the ordnance department after 1934, von Braun had continued his work with rockets, up to the success of the V-2 used against Britain, until 1945. The von Braun team at Peenemunde then decided to go south and surrender to U.S. forces rather than be captured by the Soviet army. About 120 of von Braun’s associates were taken with him to the U.S. in Operation Paperclip to demonstrate their achievements with captured V-2 rockets. The group went to the U.S. Army’s Redstone Arsenal in 1950 to work on a ballistic rocket called Redstone. When Sputnik 1 went into orbit in 1957 and the Navy’s Vanguard rocket blew up on its pad, a version of von Braun’s Redstone called Jupiter-C (Juno 1) put Explorer 1 into orbit for the U.S. in 1958, and another version carried Alan B. Shepard, Jr., on the first U.S. suborbital flight in 1961. Weeks later, when President Kennedy called for a moon landing within the decade, von Braun got the task of creating the rocket; his Saturn V won the race to put a man on the moon’s surface in 1969. When NASA was established in 1958, Dr. von Braun and his team had transferred to that agency from the army and he had become director of the Marshall Space Flight Center at Huntsville, Ala. After the moon landings, Dr. von Braun went to NASA Hq in 1970 as deputy associate administrator to promote post-Apollo space activities for the U.S. But public interest and support had declined, and Dr. von Braun resigned in May 1972 to become vice president for engineering and development at ORIGINAL PAGE IS OF POOR QUALITY Dr. Wernher von Braun, director of MSFC, photographed in 1969 near the actual Saturn V rocket AS-506 that would launch the first U.S. astronauts to the moon. (MSFC 9-00841) Fairchild Industries, Inc. In 1975 he founded and became first president of the Natl. Space Institute, a private group to increase public understanding and support of space activities; in 1976, when illness overtook him, he remained chairman and was active: in formulating policy. He had resigned from Fairchild late in 1976, effective in Jan. 1977. At a memorial service June 22 in Washington Cathedral, tributes came from former astronaut Michael Collins; Dr. Ernst Stuhlinger, longtime associate of von Braun in development of rockets; and Dr. James C. Fletcher, former NASA administrator. An editorial in the W Post that described Dr. von Braun as “an American national hero in the 1960s after being an American national enemy in the 1940s” said that his life should be judged “as one of the new breed of international scientists . . . You can think of him as a hired gun if you like. But you can also think of him as he apparently thought of himself—as a man indentured only to a dream . . . And, unlike most of us, he saw a large part of it come true.” (MSFC Release 77-111; AP wire service obit, June 17/77, nos. 17 & 20; WStar, June 17/77, A-l; NYT, June 18/77,1; WPost, June 18/77, A7; June 23/77, Cll, A24 (ed); C Trib, June 18/77, 1; Today, June 18/77, 1A; June 23/77, 8A)
MSFC reported successful completion of structural tests on the Space Shuttle external tank’s intertank section, carrying the attach points for the Shuttle’s two solid-fuel rocket boosters and subject to heavy loading both on the launch pad and during flight while the boosters were thrusting. MSFC engineers would now proceed with vibration tests on the forward portion of the external tank, the liquid-oxygen container, attached to the intertank. Structural tests would follow later in 1978. (MSFC Release 77-212) •
JSC announced that three life sciences specialists would begin a 7-day simulation of a typical Spacelab mission planned for the Space Shuttle in the 1980s. Living aboard a high-fidelity mockup of the Spacelab and Shuttle-orbiter crew deck would be physician Dr. William E. Thornton, mission specialist, and Dr. Carter Alexander, payload specialist, both of JSC, plus payload specialist Dr. Bill A. Williams of ARC. Dr. Thornton would perform medical monitoring and health services for the simulation crew. ARC had shipped a rack of 20 life sciences experiments to JSC for the simulation, and JSC had provided 6 other experiments. Life sciences payloads like the simulation experiments would be flown on the Spacelab missions to show the effects of space on living organisms, improve health care for the crews of actual missions, and help in designing life-support systems for space and earthbound clinical research and health care. (JSC Release 77-32) May IS: NASA announced the expected arrival of a USSR research ship off the Virginia coast near Wallops Flight Center about June 1 to participate in a series of rocket launches to investigate ionization sources in earth’s upper atmosphere. The research ship Professor Vize would operate offshore as the Soviet launch platform. The joint American-Soviet particle intercalibration (JASPIC) project would compare techniques used by both nations to measure the intensity of electrons and protons entering the lower ionosphere, and to define the role of these particles in nighttime ionization of the lower ionosphere in the midlatitudes, thought to cause high-latitude auroras. The researchers would base comparisons on results of 4 sounding-rocket launches from Wallops and 5 Soviet MF-12 rocket launches from the ship. One of the NASA rockets would release a chemical cloud that might be visible over the east coast. A similar joint activity in Aug. 1976 had launched 22 pairs of rockets over a 2wk period. U.S. and Sov et scientists had decided in 1975 that discrepancies shown by the scientific literature in measurements of ionosphere energetic particles might arise from instrumentation differences, and had agreed to joint measurements and subsequent comparisons at the same time and place. (NASA Release 78-71)
NASA Activities reported on international cooperation in space. Dr. Alan M. Lovelace last year had signed an agreement with the USSR Academy of Sciences, effective May 11 when signed by academy president A.P. Aleksandrov, to study joint operation of Shuttle and Soyuz-Salyut spacecraft in scientific and applications “objectives of merit,” and the potential uses of a space platform and developing such a platform bilaterally or multilaterally. By the end of 1978, within a yr of beginning work on space-platform proposals, two study groups would bring in recommendations. The publication cited U.S.-USSR cooperation in rocket instrument tests during Aug., the U.S. biological experiments carried on a Soviet launch, and the arrangement for delivery to NASA of 7 lunar soil samples from the Soviet Luna 24 mission. NASA’s mandate called for “cooperation by the United States with other nations and groups of nations . . . and in the peaceful application of the results of that cooperation.” Best known current example would be Spacelab, funded by 10 member nations of ESA, and the concurrent development by Canada of the Shuttle’s remote manipulator system. NASA’s Landsat program had made data available to 130 countries, 7 of which had agreed to set up ground stations for direct reception of Landsat information. A joint NASA-AID project based on Ats 6 broadcasts of instructional TV to some 5000 remote villages in India had sent special films and live discussions to 27 countries in Asia, Africa, the Middle East, and Latin America. Other joint efforts included solar-terrestrial studies, solar probes, infrared astronomy, the Space Telescope, and a satellite-assisted global search-and-rescue project. A major benefit to the U.S from such cooperation would be a favorable balance of payments resulting from foreign purchases of data from reimbursable launches. (NASA Activities; Sept 77, 14)
U.S. aviation experts had changed their minds about the USSR’s MiG-25 “Foxbat” interceptor plane and now considered it superior to western planes of its type, the Chicago Tribune reported. New Scientist magazine had quoted aviation experts who had examined the Foxbat flown to Japan last Sept, by defecting pilot Viktor Belenko; their conclusions were completely opposed to earlier assessments that described the Foxbat as crude and outdated. Shortly after its landing in northern Japan, the Foxbat had been described as a “manned rocket” less advanced than previously thought. The magazine said that U.S. officials now considered it unsurpassed in ease of cockpit maintenance and a masterpiece of standardization unmatched in the U.S. The experts said they were impressed not only with the speed and rate of climb, but also with the electronics on the Foxbat, now believed to have the most powerful airborne fire-control radar in the world as well as a highly sophisticated computerized flight-communications system that could perform most of the missions without the pilot [see Jan. 26]. U.S. and Japanese experts had examined the Foxbat for 2mo before returning it to the USSR; Belenko, now in the U.S., was still being debriefed. (C Trib, Feb 7/77, 1-2) Orbit parameters reported Feb. 8 were: 281km apogee, 218km perigee, 89.2-min period, 51.6° inclination. This first manned launch of the year was part of a USSR program of earth-orbital research using the Soyuz capsules on a one-mission basis, according to NY Times reporter Christopher S. Wren, who noted that the USSR had continued manned flights while the U.S. was waiting until the Space Shuttle became available in 1979 or 1980. Thomas O’Toole reported in the W Post that the cosmonauts might stay in orbit as long as 2mo; both pilots had been trained for space walks, and the choice of an all-Air Force crew indicated that Soyuz 24 might be a military mission. Tass reported successful docking and occupation of the Salyut 5; it later described housekeeping and biological experiments, plus communications with ocean-going vessels, studies of crystal growth and surface tension, and use of an infrared radiometer for long-distance nighttime observation of earth’s surface and temperatures. The cosmonauts continued exercising with special equipment to measure body functions. On Feb. 21, they tried a new system for recharging the space station atmosphere: Tass said the air was satisfactory, but the test would verify the system for future prolonged flights. A multifunctional system would supply compressed air to control stabilization or to compensate for leaks in the compartments. Tass announced Feb. 23 that the crew had begun preparations for leaving the station. (The unexpectedly early termination of the Soyuz 24 mission recalled reports that the Soyuz 21 mission ended ahead of time because the Salyut 5 environmental-control system had produced an “acrid odor” that “became unbearable” [A&A 76, Oct 18].) A commentary recorded by Gen. Shatalov for broadcast Feb. 24 on the Moscow Domestic Service noted “a whole series of cyclones and strong winds with snow” over the landing site in Kazakhstan. However, the cosmonauts landed safely at dusk Feb. 25 on a farm near Arkalyk on the Kustanay steppe, and were brought to the local airport by helicopter and flown from there to Baykonur. They held a press conference at Baykonur Feb. 24, in which Glazkov called the Salyut 5 spacecraft “a fine old work horse” that had brought them home safely. (NYT, Feb 9/77, 11, B6; WPost, Feb 8/77, A16; Feb 9/77, A12; C Trib, Feb 9/77, 1:12; FBIS, Tass in English, Feb 7-26/77; Moscow Dom Svc Rusn, Feb 10-25/77; Moscow Inti Svc Rusn, Feb 9-25/77; W Star, Feb 25/77, A4)
The USAF launched the Navy’s navigation technology satellite Nts 2 from Vandenberg AFB on an Atlas F booster into a 12hr circular orbit of 63° inclination at about 11 600mi altitude. First of a system to be called NavStar, the Nts 2 carried two cesium-beam time standards (atomic clocks) to produce precise time signals and 14 solar-cell experiments for its builder, the Naval Research Laboratory. The joint-service NavStar system upon completion would consist of 24 satellites (8 in each of 3 circular-orbit planes) to provide users with longitude, latitude, and altitude information around the clock in any weather. It would give a customer his location within 33ft, his speed within about 4in/sec, and the correct time. Uses of NavStar would include tactical-missile navigation and precision delivery of weapons; aid to space, air, land, and sea travel; grid mapping and geodetic surveys; aerial rendezvous and refueling; and search-and-rescue operations. The USAF had announced plans to launch five of its own satellites later in 1977 and 1978 for NavStar testing. (D/SBD, June 20/77, 279; June 27/77, 320; AvWk, Oct 11/76, 47; NRL Release 20-7-77C; AFSC Newsreview, Aug 77, 3)
MSFC reported it had purchased 5 large solar collectors to heat an exhibit at the Ala. Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. The collectors would provide 70% of the heat for the Lunar Odyssey, a space voyage simulation in a modified Saturn launch vehicle. (MSFC Release 77-65)
NASA announced that Dr. David R. Scott, director of Dryden Flight Research Center, would leave the agency Oct. 30 to form with others a firm in Los Angeles specializing in technology transfer. Deputy Director Isaac T. Gillam would be acting director until a replacement was selected. Before becoming director of DFRC in 1975, Dr. Scott had been deputy director since 1973. He had left the astronaut corps in 1972, having flown on Gemini 8, Apollo 9, and as spacecraft commander of Apollo 15 (fourth manned lunar landing, during which he was first to visit the moon’s Hadley rille and Apennine mountains). He had also been technical assistant to the Apollo program manager at JSC and special assistant in the Apollo spacecraft program office. (NASA anno Oct 12/77; NASA Release 77-217; DFRC Release 34-77)
MSFC reported its engineers had prepared electronic simulations as dress rehearsals of Shuttle orbital missions set for 1978, with computers in the roles of major hardware. The simulations, carried out at JSC, would check out Shuttle avionics (electrical and electronic systems controlling the Shuttle during flight and sending signals to pilots and ground controllers monitoring the mission). MSFC’s engineers would deliver to JSC in Jan. 1978 the Marshall mated-elements system (MMES) simulating items for which MSFC was responsible: main engines, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and external tank. JSC would provide an orbiter , - simulator and a computer to simulate Shuttle dynamics, a system called SAIL (Shuttle avionics integration laboratory) able to simulate a Shuttle flight beginning 20min before launch under normal or abnormal conditions. The MMES could simulate failure of almost any MSFC element to see how the systems would react with one main engine out or if high temperatures or pressures should occur in vital areas. (MSFC Release 77-208)
Press reports said a 23 9001b solid-fuel rocket had fallen off a Delta launch vehicle standing on its pad at KSC May 18 awaiting the mid-June launch of ESA’s high-frequency communications test satellite (CTS). In its 12ft fall, the booster had plunged through a platform and damaged the Delta’s liquid-oxygen tank; the entire assembly would have to b£ removed for repairs. Cause was probably failure of one of the attachments holding the motor in place, a spokesman said; an investigation was under way. The Delta had on its first stage 9 of the solid-fuel boosters, each more than 36ft tall and 4ft in diameter, normally jettisoned about a minute and a half into flight. (Today, May 19/77, 8A; photo, 1A; AvWk, May 23/77, 27)
ESA announced it had postponed launch of its experimental comsat OTS (orbital test satellite) originally scheduled ta go June 16. The spacecraft had left Amsterdam’s Schiphol airport May 9 headed for prelaunch checkout at ETR; it had not been mounted on its launch vehicle at the time when one of the solid-fuel booster rockets fell off and damaged the first stage [see May 19]. An inquiry into the April 20 malfunction of a Delta carrying ESA’s GEOS had already delayed the OTS launch for at least a wk. (ESA release May 24/77)
MSFC announced that United Space Boosters, Inc., the firm that would assemble and check out the solid-fuel rocket for the Space Shuttle, had begun a manpower buildup that would eventually include about 150 employees. The present contractor work force of about 60 had been housed in Bldg. 4666 at the center. The firm, a subsidiary of United Technologies Corp. of Sunnyvale, Calif., had received in Dec. 1976 a contract for work at both MSFC and KSC to include stacking, launch operations, and refurbishing the reusable rockets. Responsibilities would include designing tools for applying thermal-protection materials to the boosters, electrical and instrument-verification testing, and installing instrumentation on the booster structure and on the booster aft skirt for tests scheduled at MSFC and at the Thiokol plant in Utah. Employees of USB doing MSFC work at KSC later in 1977 would number from 150 to 200, but the contractor would keep a cadre of about 80 at MSFC through the Shuttle test period. (MSFC Release 77-26)
MSFC announced receipt from Bendix Corp., Teterboro, N.J., of the first two integrated electronic assemblies for the Space Shuttle’s solid fuel rocket boosters. Each SRB would contain 2 electronic assemblies to control communications and internal power distribution. (NASA Release 77-68)
Analysis of telemetry data and flight films from the SPAR III mission launched Dec. 14 at White Sands Missile Range indicated successful performance of the electromagnetic levitation device designed to provide the first “containerless” way to process materials in space, MSFC announced. Containerless processing, in which materials could be suspended, melted, and resolidified without touching a container, was thought to permit a degree of purity never before achieved in high-temperature processing, as the material in a conventional container would always exhibit contamination in some degree from the container itself. Apparatus used on SPAR III to process beryllium satisfied all operational requirements, like two other items in the payload: thermal migration of bubbles, and liquid mixing. An apparatus anomaly resulted in only “probable” success of an experiment on epitaxial growth; a fifth experiment, on coalescing of viscous bodies, apparently failed but would be carried again on a later flight. SPAR III rocket flights could offer 5min of nearweightlessness in suborbital coast. (MSFC Release 77-23)
Today newspaper reported that two launch failures in Sept, at Cape Canaveral (explosions of an Altas Centaur and a Delta rocket) had altered the schedule to include launch of a Meteosat Nov. 17 on a Delta; an Intelsat Dec. 8 on an Altas Centaur; and the Japanese comsat (originally scheduled for launch Dec. 8) Dec. 14 on another Delta. ESA’s Meteosat, originally scheduled to go on Nov. 15, had been put off 2 days for further checkout of the Delta; the Intelsat was put off from Nov. 10 to Dec. 8 for further checkout of the Atlas Centaur. The 15 missions scheduled for launch from the Cape next yr had risen to 17: a FltSatCom launch for the Navy originally scheduled for Dec. 15 had been pushed forward to 1978, and a launch of ESA’s OTS backup had been added to replace the one that failed. (Today, Nov 5/77, 1A)
The USAF Rocket Propulsion Laboratory had successfully test-fired small solid-fuel rocket motors having nozzles molded into the end of the propellant grain instead of externally mounted, AvWk reported. Use of integral nozzles would reduce costs of manufacture and would allow more propellant per rocket. (AvWk, Mar 28/77, 11)
MSFC announced it had begun the first of a series of tests on the external propellant tank of the Shuttle to verify its ability to stand the structural stresses of launch. The proportions of the tank required conduct of the test in phases; the first tests would check out the intertank structure joining the two main segments of the external tank and containing the forward attach points for the two solid-fuel rocket boosters carried by the Shuttle. The heaviest loading would occur at these points, both while the Shuttle was on its pad and while the boosters were thrusting during flight. The tests would apply upward loads as great as 4.35 million lb to the intertank cylinder subjected to opposing downward forces. The loads would come from computer-actuated hydraulic jacks, 28 on the forward end of the test article and as many as 10 in the center section. Chuck Verschoore, MSFC test engineer, said the forces exerted by the jacks could simulate bending and twisting effects as well as straight up-and-down loading, and could go as high as 140% of the tank’s design limits. Test engineers would receive data from as many as 2800 measurement channels. Follow-on tests would check the external tank segments containing the liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen propellants. (MSFC Release 77-149)
Central Florida officials who had counted on Space Shuttle employment to stimulate the local economy hoped it would differ from the boom-and-bust cycle of the Apollo program, the NY Times reported. The Apollo program had brought about 26 000 employees to KSC, but the economy declined with layoffs when the missions ended. NASA had estimated an 11 000-employee strength at KSC for the first Shuttle mission; the Shuttle program should continue for at least 5yr, agency officials said. (NYTApr 26/77, 13) April27: A series of Stanford Univ. experiments had apparently verified the existence of quarks, hypothetical fundamental pieces of matter possessing fractional electric charges, the NY Times reported. Dr. William Fairbank, professor of physics at Stanford, described the findings—first evidence of quarks since their theoretical exposition in 1964—at the Am. Physical Society annual meeting in Washington, D.C. If matter consisted of protons, electrons, and neutrons (carrying charges of +1, -1, and 0, respectively), quarks—the building blocks of these particles—would have fractional charges of +1/3, -1/3, +2/3, and -2/3. Fairbank emphasized that the results were not final, and that the university had scheduled follow-up tests. (NYT, Apr 27/77, A18)
The Washington Post reported that NASA had asked Congress to let it use $100 million of Space Shuttle production funds to pay for higher costs and delays in developing the first two Shuttles. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA Administrator, told the appropriations subcommittee headed by Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) that $65 million would bring production up to schedule and the other $35 million would go into contingency reserves that had run between $100 and $150 million; they were “down near zero right now,” Frosch said. Associate Administrator John ip. Yardley said the rocket to put the Shuttle into orbit was 5mo behind schedule; also running behind were computer controls and fuselage parts. Asked why NASA requested a fund shift that might cause problems in the future, instead of a supplemental appropriation, Frosch noted that twice when NASA had asked Congress for supplemental budget increases, it had had to wait until the next fiscal year for approval. (W Post, Dec 2/77, A-2) •
MSFC announced it had awarded to Contractors Cargo Co., South Gate, Calif., a $227 120 fixed-price contract for moving the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise eight separate times during its testing at MSFC in 1978. Now in the midst of approach and landing tests (ALT) at DFRC, Enterprise would fly on its Boeing 747 carrier to MSFC on March 17, 1978, to be mated with an external tank and solid-fuel rocket boosters and erected on a dynamic test stand for vertical ground-vibration testing. The contract called for design, testing, and delivery to MSFC of an orbiter ground-transporter to travel about 6 km between the airfield and the pretest-preparation building, a trip to be completed within 2hr on March 18, 1978. The “prime mover,” a 480-hp tractor with 10 wheels, would be attached to 2 rear dollies each having 32 wheels and a forward dolly with 16 wheels. The segments would be joined by a “strongback” construction, and the entire rig would weigh about 24 000kg (52 9001b). Length of the transporter would be nearly 50m (about 160ft), the width of about 24m would accommodate the orbiter’s wingspan, and the height from ground to top of a vertical stabilizer would be about 16m (about 54ft). For an operating demonstration before the arrival of the orbiter at MSFC, the transporter would carry a weightload of nearly 100 000kg (220 0001b), half again the weight of the orbiter. Contractors Cargo was the same firm that had moved Enterprise from the Rockwell plant at Palmdale, Calif., to DFRC in Jan. 1977. (MSFC Release 77-106)
The Univ. of Toyko’s Inst, of Space and Aeronautical Science launched a 13kg experimental satellite called Tansei 3 from the Uchinoura space center into an orbit with 3940km apogee, 826km perigee, using a 3-stage MU-3H rocket developed at the university. The rocket, used in preparation for next yr’s launch of Japan’s 5th aurora-observation satellite, was 23.8m long and weighed 49 tons. The MST-3 satellite, 7th launched by the university and 9th by Japan, carried control equipment for testing and would sent back scientific data for an estimated 15 days. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 10/77)
Marshall Space Flight Center announced it had resumed the atmospheric variability experiments (AVE) begun in 1964 to study processes associated with the onset and development of severe storms. Originally conducted to aid in scheduling Saturn rocket firings at MSFC, the experiments were designed to detect unusual weather conditions common to different localities before sever^ storms occurred, to improve short-term predictions based on data from weather balloons, weather satellites, and ground-observation posts. Sixth of the AVE series recently conducted over 24hr in an area including Texas, Alabama, Illinois, and North Dakota had monitored severe storms with hail and tornadoes in Missouri and western Tennessee, and a frontal system with low-pressure disturbances in Alabama. (MSFC Release 77-122) PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NO' rr m' PAG1 llL INTENTIONALLY BLANK
NASA reported KSC was preparing its facilities for next yr’s Space Shuttle arrival and prelaunch work, more than 3yr after it last launched a Saturn rocket from Complex 39. In Oct. 1978, Shuttle orbiter 102 would fly in from Calif, on its Boeing 747 carrier, with the main engines, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket boosters due in Nov. and Dec. for assembly and test before launch March 1979. KSC’s orbiter landing strip had been completed in Aug.; support facilities to be completed by April 1978 would include a device to unload the orbiter, plus a microwave landing system to guide it to an automatic landing. An orbiter-processing facility to store fuels and handle payloads was the only new construction except the landing strip, the rest being modifications of Apollo facilities. (NASA Release 77-253)
MSFC reported that parachutes to recover the Space Shuttle’s reusable solid-fuel rocket boosters (SRB) were undergoing dynamic testing at Martin Marietta Corp., Denver, Colo. Scheduled for completion Mar. 31, the tests simulated in-flight parachute deployment from the SRB. (MSFC Release 77-44)
MSFC reported NASA’s Michoud assembly facility had shipped the first of four major pieces of test hardware for the Space Shuttle external tank, an intertank structural-test article scheduled to arrive by barge at MSFC about Mar. 5. It would go from New Orleans to Huntsville by way of Mississippi, Ohio, and Tennessee Rivers, the route NASA had used to ship Saturn stages for testing during the Apollo program. The other test articles (liquid-hydrogen tank, liquid-oxygen tank, and another intertank) would arrive later in 1977. The external tank, one to be used for each Shuttle mission, would hold containers for liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen, connected by the intertank; the combined assembly would measure about 47m long. Test data would serve to verify the intertank’s structural integrity before static test firing of the Shuttle’s main propulsion system at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories later in 1977. The test firings would use a full-size external tank, three Shuttle engines, and an Orbiter aft-structure simulator, attached to the test stand through the intertank. (MSFC Release 77-30)
JPL announced that NASA had selected an ion-drive propulsion system rather than the solar sail [see June 21] for use by automated interplanetary shuttles in earth’s solar system toward the end of this century. NASA scientists had studied the concepts for a yr before making the choice on the basis of lower risk and greater potential for growth. LeRC had orbited ion rockets, forerunners of the ion-drive spacecraft, in 1969 as part of SERT (space electric rocket tests). Those rockets were still operating in space. An ion-drive ship would carry a cluster of mercury-ion engines and generate power from solar-cell arrays converting sunlight to electricity. First use of the ion-drive system might be a Halley’s Comet rendezvous in 1986 by a spacecraft launched from the Shuttle in 1981 or early 1982. (JPL release Sept 12/77; NASA Release 77-187; WStar, Sept 13/77, A-6)
Japan’s Natl. Space Development Agency announced rescheduling to Feb. 23 of the launch of a 3-stage N rocket carrying the first geostationary meteorological satellite to be orbited by Japan. The launch had been postponed because of trouble with the system controlling the rocket’s first stage. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 21/77)
MSFC reported that the number of visitors to the center in 1976 had increased 11 °7o over the previous yr to a total of 95 529, representing each of the 50 United States and several foreign countries. The guided bus tours of the center, cosponsored by MSFC and the Alabama Space and Rocket Center, last year added new items and increased activities at some of the former Saturn test sites. The tour stop presenting the story of the Space Shuttle and its payload had added a full-scale mockup of the Shuttle main engine. Tourists could also enter a full-scale mockup of Skylab to see how the astronauts lived in orbit; and the east and west test areas being converted for Shuttle testing were now available for viewing. The Redstone test stand already on the tour route had been refurbished and was added to the Natl. Register of Historic Places. (MSFC Release 77-3)
The Washington Post reported that NASA would try to save the Skylab space station “which is moving closer to earth and may fall in bits and pieces over the next few years.” The Space Shuttle would launch a “remote-controlled rocket” to Skylab to push the station to a new orbit, where it would be available for future astronaut visits. The 118ft Skylab launched in 1973 had been circling the globe every 1,5hr at a 200mi altitude. It had been home for three 3-man crews for as long as 12wk at a time; its last 84-day manned mission in 1974 was still the world’s endurance record for time in space. (W Post, Oct 30/77, A-10)
FBIS carried the official report by L.A. Aleksandrov, chairman of the USSR-U.S. group on space meteorology, that the joint rocket launches over the Atlantic to compare instrument results [see July 1] had been a success. (FBIS, Krasnaya Zvezda in Russian, Sept 4/77)
Japan’s Natl. Space Development Agency announced that launch of a three-stage “N” rocket carrying an engineering test satellite had been postponed to Feb. 14 because of trouble in the control system of the rocket’s first stage. Launch had been scheduled originally for Feb. 6 from the space center at Tanegashima Is. (FBIS, Hong Kong AFP in English, Feb 10/77)
The Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science at the Univ. of Tokyo announced postponement (until Feb. 15 or later) of the launch of a satellite-carrying MU-3H rocket, because of mechanical trouble. An inspection had revealed problems with the rocket’s attitude-control system, the announcement said. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 1/77)
Reduction of data from NASA’s 1976 gravity probe (GP-A) experiment had confirmed the equivalency principle, a cornerstone of Einstein’s general theory of relativity, MSFC reported. Using data from two identical atomic maser clocks, principal investigator Dr. Robert Vessot of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (SAO) in Cambridge, Mass., had demonstrated that time actually went faster in a weaker gravitational field, one removed from the earth’s mass. The clock that had been carried aboard a rocket to an altitude of 10 000km had run faster. (MSFC Release 77-41)
NASA launched two international satellites, the U.S. ISEE-A and ESA’s ISEE-B, on a single Delta rocket at 9:53am EDT (1353hr GMT) from ETR at Cape Canaveral into a highly elliptical orbit ranging from about 138,000km apogee to 280km perigee, 28.7° inclination, and 2.4-day period. The ISEEs had separated an hr after launch, the A craft (/see 1) spin axis perpendicular to the ecliptic and the B spacecraft (Isee 2) spin axis parallel to the ecliptic to permit magnetometer calibration and boom extension. The satellites would measure earth’s environment, assisted by a third spacecraft ISEE-C scheduled for launch in 1978. (NASA Release 77-123; ESA Release Oct. 24/77; MOR S-862-77-01/02 [prelaunch] Oct 11/77, [postlaunch] Oct 25/77; WPost, Oct 23/77, A13; W Star, Oct 23/77, A-2)
MSFC reported that a new pattern of painting Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters for orbital flight tests in 1979 and 1980 could save the agency an estimated $300 000. The center’s system dynamics laboratory had changed the 6 black stripes running the length of the giant motors to 4 large rectangles in a spiral pattern that would let engineers measure roll and pitch rates of the boosters on reentry. (MSFC Release 77-150)
NASA announced that the largest Space Shuttle component—its external propellant tank—would roll off the assembly line in New Orleans Sept. 9. The huge tank would then go by barge to the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories in Miss, for the first static firing of the Shuttle main engines. The external tank consisted of 2 propellant tanks and an intertank structural connector; the forward tank would contain liquid oxygen, the larger aft tank liquid hydrogen. It would be the main structural member carrying the orbiter and the two solid-fuel rocket boosters. At launch, the tank would feed cryogenic propellants to the three main engines on the orbiter; the solid-fuel rocket boosters on each side of the external tank would use their own fuel and would separate about 2min into flight for later recovery. The mated orbiter and external tank would thrust for another 6min, separating just before the Shuttle reached orbital velocity. The complete external tank was 47m (154ft) long; the Shuttle orbiter it would carry was 37.2m (122)ft long. (NASA Release 77-179)
The Shuttle orbiter Enterprise made its first free flight at Edwards Air Force Base in Calif, with a “flawless landing” on a runway in the Mojave desert 53min 51sec after taking off at 8am local time (11am EDT) and 5min 22sec after release from its 747 carrier. Astronauts Fred W. Haise, Jr., and Charles Gordon Fullerton were the Enterprise pilots; veteran test pilots Thomas C. McMurtry and Fitzhugh L. Fulton, Jr., flew the Boeing 747. Spectators, estimated to number about 70 000, had begun arriving the previous night (Thursday, Aug. 11) to cheer the landing just after 9am local time with the desert temperature nearing 100°F. The orbiter had separated from its carrier 3min late because the heat of the air had slowed the climb. The 747 had “strained its engines” to carry the 73ton Shuttle as high as possible; it had climbed to 27 000ft (8100m) before it started downward, in order to gain speed. The 122ft-long orbiter, released at 22 100ft (6738m) altitude, had soared one way, the 747 another, to ensure separation. Pilots of the T-38 chase planes following the flight had assured the crews of the 747 and the orbiter that they were clear of each other. “Thanks for the lift,” Haise told the 747 crew as the craft separated. Haise had rehearsed the free flight the previous day in a small twin-engine jet modified to behave like the Shuttle. Actual separation, which could not be rehearsed in advance, was the only way to prove that the Shuttle would lift cleanly over the tall vertical tail fin of the 747. Separation had occurred without difficulty, however, and both pilots reported themselves delighted with the orbiter, which had handled in unORIGINAL PAGE- 53 ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1977 QF POOR QUALITY Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise separates from its Boeing 747 carrier in first free flight, August 12, 1977. (NASA 77-H-552) powered flight as easily as design engineers had predicted. It was “a lot like flying a Concorde,” according to Haise, and Fullerton described it as a "very crisp, very stable airplane.” On the orbiter’s way down, Haise had pulled up in three inflight “flare” maneuvers to test its landing characteristics. One of the identical redundant computers on the orbiter had failed at separation, cutting off flight-control accelerometers, without affecting the flight. The Enterprise landed like a glider, without engines, relying on its battery of computers and “the most advanced control system ever installed in a spacecraft.” It had approached the ground at an 11° angle, more than 3 times as steep as a commercial jetliner’s approach, and at a speed of 338kph (210mph) compared to a typical 747 landing speed of 170mph. The orbiter had touched down a mile in front of the aiming point, because Haise underestimated its glide capability; it had rolled another 2mi before stoppping. For this first free flight, the orbiter wore a tail cone over its three aft rockets; on the fourth flight, scheduled for Oct., NASA would remove the cone, causing the orbiter to land more steeply (as it would upon returning from space). In regular use, the Shuttle as a weight-saving measure would have no power after firing its rockets to deorbit, no airbreathing engines for maneuvering in the atmosphere; it would be slowed by air friction only and would glide down at 200mph or more to a landing. For the actual spaceflight early in 1979, the Shuttle would ride into orbit pushed by solid-fuel rocket motors on a giant external tank and by the liquid-fuel rockets on its tail. Purpose of the free flight exercises was to verify the orbiter’s subsonic airworthiness, the operation of the integrated system, and the pilot-guided vs. automatic approach and landing capabilities. The ability to land at an airport instead of parachuting into the ocean gave the Shuttle the “versatility and economy required to make space operations routine in the next decade,” according to the W. Star. (NASA Release 77-160; NASA Actv., Aug/77, 2; NYT, Aug 13/77, 1; WPost, Aug 13/77, Al; WStar, Aug 13/77, A-3; B Sun, Aug 12/77, 7; C Trib, Aug 13/77, 1-1; Time, Aug 22/77, 64)
FBIS reported a Tass interview with Boris Petrov, chairman of the Intercosmos council, on the high points of the program, including cooperation with capitalist countries in exploration of space. France 1 lyr ago was the first capitalist country to cooperate; India’s satellite Aryabhata had orbited on a Soviet booster 2yr ago; Soviet-Swedish cooperation was developing; and the U.S. and USSR would work together on space biology, medicine, meteorology, environment, and the moon and planets. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 16/77)
MSFC announced completion of pressure and structural-load tests on the liquid hydrogen tank that would be part of the Shuttle external tank being built at the Michoud assembly facility by Martin Marietta Aerospace. The tests to certify that the tank met design and manufacturing standards included filling the tank with nitrogen at 42psi for 14hr and applying hydraulic loads as high as 600tons where the orbiter and solid-fuel rocket boosters would be attached. Largest of 3 major elements of the external tank, the hydrogen container about 30m (97ft) long and 8.3m (27.6ft) in diameter would now go for cleaning, corrosion protection, and insulating. (MSFC Release 77-83)
About 300 people had assembled at Cape Canaveral, the W. Post reported, to celebrate the anniversary of the launch of Apollo 11, the mission that first landed humans on the moon. On July 16, 1969, a Saturn V rocket launched from Kennedy Space Center had carried 3 astronauts, none of whom attended the observance. (fV Post, July 17/77, A-18)
Researchers from the Soviet ship Akademik Korolev, anchored off the coast of Virginia near Wallops Flight Center for joint U.S.-USSR rocket launches, had discovered the charms of the Eastern Shore and were enjoying their contacts with the natives, according to reports in the Washington Star and Washington Post. The meteorological soundings had been completed by the last week of August, the newspapers said, and the 134 Russians waiting on the ship for results to be correlated had time to visit the mainland on trips planned by local officials in cooperation with NASA. Coming ashore in groups of about 50, the visitors (mostly young) had seen Pocomoke City, Md., a small U.S. city; the village of Chincoteague, Va.; the Assateague wildlife refuge; and a tour of Accomack county that included a visit to a private home, a farm, and a chicken-processing plant. Through NASA interpreters, the visitors asked scores of questions on topics from labor relations at the plant to the history of local buildings. They had joined in a Frisbee game with local youngsters, eaten largely of the local seafood, and bought out the entire beer supply of a local general store. Capt. Oleg Rostovsev, commanding officer of the 409ft research ship, said he had found the visit “a very interesting experience.” His assistant for scientific affairs, Evgeny Nelepov, said that many of the researchers had visited U.S. cities before, but that major cities everywhere had become more and more alike, “losing the individual characteristics and cultural tradition ... To find these national characteristics one must go to the small villages and rural areas where traditions and local culture endures. That is why this visit here has meant so much to us.” The Russians had held a press tour and reception on the Akademik Korolev as a thank you before the ship departed for Baltimore. (WStar, Aug 28/77, D-1; W Post, Sept 1/77, A-l)
The Washington Post reported Senate confirmation of 11 high-level nominees to the new Dept, of Energy. Among those confirmed was Dale D. Myers, former NASA associate administrator for space flight, as undersecretary of DOE. Myers, an aeronautical engineer with North American Rockwell since 1943, had joined NASA in Jan. 1970; he had been a vice president and manager of the Apollo program at Rockwell. (W Post, Oct 21/77, B-5)
ESA announced that NASA would launch the orbital test satellite OTS, ESA’s first comsat, from Cape Canaveral Sept. 13 or 14 on a Delta. The European launcher Ariane would launch the operational European comsat system to follow OTS between 1981 and 1990, carrying domestic telephone, telegraph, and telex traffic besides relaying Eurovision TV. OTS would operate in the 11- and 14-GHz bands, an advantage over the European 4- and 6-GHz links subject to radio interference in regional service. OTS’s original June launch date had slipped because a motor prematurely separated from the vehicle sitting on a launch stand in May. NASA had redesigned the bolt that failed, and had replaced the damaged motor and vehicle booster. (ESA Release Sept 7/77; MOR M-492-210-77-01 [prelaunch] Sept 8/77; NASA Release 77-168)
LeRC announced it had awarded a $2 895 750 contract to Teledyne Industries, Inc., of Northridge, Calif., for management, engineering, and repair services to Centaur digital computers and remote multiplexers. The cost-plus-fixed-fee contract would run for lyr beginning Nov. 1. The digital computer would work with the Centaur inertial guidance system to compute and adjust flight without ground command, permitting the Centaur to deliver its payload to a preselected orbit; the remote multiplexer would work with the digital computer to supply inflight data during launch. Centaur, first U.S. liquid hydrogen/liquid oxygen high-energy rocket, had been a second stage on both Atlas and Titan III. Recently it had assisted the launch of the Voyagers, and was scheduled during the coming yr to launch several commercial comsats and the Pioneer mission to Venus. LeRC would manage the Atlas-Centaur and Titan-Centaur through all phases of manufacturing, testing, and launch. Teledyne would perform its job as contractor both at Northridge and at KSC in Fla. (Lewis News, Dec 9/77, 2)
DFRC announced it would drop-test at the Natl. Parachute Test Range, El Centro, Calif., the parachutes for recovering the reusable solid-fuel rocket boosters on the Shuttle. The tests would be a series of air drops to evaluate design, deployment, performance, and structural integrity of full-scale parachutes loaded with two configurations of drop-test vehicles offering various limit and overload conditions for the drogue and main parachutes at reefed and full open-canopy shapes. Engineers from Marshall Space Flight Center, which had responsibility for developing the Shuttle boosters, and from Martin Marietta, developer of the parachute system, would use the results to evaluate the adequacy of the system. (DFRC Release 21-77; MSFC Release 77-98)
The Marshall Star reported that, before the real Shuttle orbiter arrived in Ala. next year, a homemade orbiter constructed of scrap rocket parts and steel beams would stand in for it during practice lifts into the tower where the real thing would be tested. The stand-in would first make use of the device that would remove the Enterprise from its 747 carrier, then follow the route to be taken by the real orbiter, in order to check clearances on the sides. Its major tryout would come when MSFC engineers put it into the 430ft (131m) test stand to see what effect the wind would have on installation. The simulator, basically a motor casing from a Titan solid-fuel rocket 10ft (3.04m) in diameter and 80ft (24.39m) long with added framing, collars, nose and tail structures, and wings plus aluminum sheeting for the outer skin, would closely match the Enterprise in size, shape, weight, and center of gravity. After its performance at MSFC, it would go by barge to KSC to take part in launch-procedure checkouts, and from there to Vandenberg AFB for DOD use in preparing Shuttle launch facilities. (Marshall Star, Nov 23/77, 4) •
The U.S. Air Force launched a pair of “jam-proof’ Triple-7 defense satellite communications system spacecraft from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station at 10:27am on a Martin Marietta Titan 3C booster, largest developed by the USAF, into an elliptical parking orbit with 35 943km (22 333mi) apogee, 285km (177mi) perigee, and 26.6° inclination. At 5:30pm the USAF confirmed that the two 13001b spacecraft had separated and had been fired by the Titan third stage into stationary orbit at about 22 300mi where they would remain for 2mo above the Galapagos Islands in the Pacific for system checkout. The two satellites (fourth attempt in 6yr to launch a Triple-7 package, but only the second successful one), with a DSCS already in orbit and another pair scheduled for launch in November, would form a global communications network that the USAF had been trying to establish for several yr. A Titan 3C malfunction in 1975 had prevented an earlier pair of spacecraft from achieving orbit. {Today, May 12/77, 12A; May 13/77, 1A; C Trib, May 14/77, 1-9; NYT, May 11/77, 19; AvWk, May 16/77, 19)
