Work on the dynamics test stand had begun in preparation for the next series of Space Shuttle mated vertical ground-vibration tests, the Marshall Star reported. After changing the configuration inside the stand from a “hanging” to a “sitting” arrangement, MSFC engineers would adjust the platform to fit the vehicle assembly. For the first series of tests, the orbiter and external tank had been suspended from airbags on a truss structure high in the stand, to simulate the Shuttle after the solid-fuel rocket booster had separated and before external-tank jettison. The next series would test the ET, orbiter, and SRBs mated in the liftoff configuration; the SRBs would sit on a hydrodynamic support system to which the ET and orbiter had been attached. (Marshall Star, Aug 2/78, 1)
FBIS reported that the USSR and India had signed a protocol for launch of a second India satellite. The two countries were working on a flying model of the spacecraft and preparing ground stations. Representatives of the USSR Academy of Sciences and India’s outer-space exploration organization had discussed satellite plans for several yr. The second India spacecraft, like the first, would be launched from Soviet territory, and the carrier rocket and launching complex would be provided gratis by the USSR. (FBIS, Tass in English, Nov 3/78)
MSFC reported that a new 0.8km (0.5mi) antenna range had operated satisfactorily in testing Space Shuttle antennas for range safety. The new range had a 27.4m (90ft) transmit tower and a 22.8m (70ft) model test tower. Antenna tests had begun in May on a 1/15-scale model of the Space Shuttle orbiter, external tank, and two solid-fuel rocket boosters installed in the tower. Engineers had measured radiation patterns of the six range-safety antennas (two on the ET and two on each of the 2 SRBs) to ensure that a signal from the range-safety officer would reach the vehicle at any altitude. The range-safety antenna system was interconnected to immediately relay to the ET and both SRBs a destruct signal received on any one of the six antennas. Future Shuttle tests possibly requiring antenna-pattern measurements included the teleoperator retrieval system, 25kw power module, large space structures, and satellite power systems. (Marshall Star, June 28/78, 1)
On Dec. 12, the U.S. Coast Guard would receive its first lightweight portable firefighting module, developed under direction of MSFC’s Technology Utilization Office, the Marshall Star reported. The manufacturer, Northern Research and Engineering Corp. of Cambridge, Mass., would deliver it to NASA representatives in Boston for transfer to the Coast Guard on completion of an acceptance test. Since MSFC had developed technology for lightweight highly efficient pumps in rocket engines, the Coast Guard had requested help in designing a unit small enough to be lowered onto the deck of small craft but capable of pumping hundreds of gallons of water per min. The module was 4ft wide, 5ft high, and 6ft long, and weighed 2500 lb, including fuel for 3hr of operation, and all equipment stored internally. Two people could set it up rapidly without tools, and it could deliver full output flow within lOmin.; a special feature was a pair of fiberglass water cannons, or monitors, weighing 401b. The module could draw water from the sea through a lift up to 20ft long and pump at least lOOOgal per min through each monitor. Commercial applications included use on light trucks by local fire departments, on docks and ships for harbor fires, and for forest, offshore oil rig, and high-rise building fires, as well as an emergency booster pump for municipal water and for flood control and military operations. Aubrey Smith, head of TU activities at MSFC, said the firefighting module showed “how NASA-developed technology and expertise can be adapted for down-to-earth uses.” (Marshall Star, Dec 6/78, 1)
The AFSC Newsreview reported that the USAF’s Geophysics Laboratory (AFGL) had successfully completed a rocket test flight of equipment to cope with lightning-like discharges that could affect earthorbiting satellites. These high-voltage discharges could interrupt transmissions of information to earth stations from geosynchronous satellites. A sudden rush of electrical current could confuse control circuits, causing a satellite to behave erratically or fail to function. Scientists were still analyzing information from the 160mi-high rocket flight, but preliminary results showed that the electrical buildup—which could reach thousands of volts—could be controlled by emitting negative or positive charges from the spacecraft. An Astrobee F sounding rocket carried equipment that released either negative charges (electrons) or positive charges (ions) as the electrical charge built up on the rocket body. This either kept the charging to a low voltage or provided an electrically conductive path around the rocket body so the charge could leak off slowly. The rocket payload contained instruments nearly identical to those scheduled for orbit in Jan. on a SCATHA (spacecraft charging at high altitudes) satellite as part of a test program managed by SAMSO, Los Angeles. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 78,9)
NASA announced it would participate in a joint American-Soviet particle-intercalibration (JASPIC) project to compare techniques used by both countries to measure intensity of energetic electrons and protons entering the lower ionosphere. At a 1975 meeting of the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics in Grenoble, France, U.S. and Soviet scientists had agreed that the first question to be resolved was instrument credibility. Joint measurement of energetic electron and proton intensity at the same time and same place would be a first step in reconciling the conflicting results reported in the scientific literature. A Soviet research ship, the Professor Vize, off the Va. coast near Wallops Flight Center would serve as the Soviet launch platform. The researchers would study the role of the particles in creating ionization in the lower ionosphere at night at mid-altitudes. They would compare data from 4 sounding-rocket launches from Wallops Island and 5 Soviet MR-12 rocket launches from the ship. One of the Wallops-launched rockets would release a chemical cloud possibly visible to east coast residents. Each organization would be responsible for its own countdown and launch operations. (NASA Release 78-71)
NASA announced plans to launch from Cape Canaveral no earlier than Mar. 23 an experimental Japanese direct-broadcast communications satellite capable of sending television programs directly into an individual’s home. The satellite, technically named Medium-Scale Broadcasting Satellite for Experiment Purposes (BSE), had been a project of Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA). As agreed by the U.S. and Japan, NASA would launch BSE on a Delta rocket; NASDA would reimburse NASA for the cost of the launch vehicle, launch services, and other administrative costs. NASA’s worldwide Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (STDN) would track BSE until it achieved final orbit, when NASDA would take over tracking. Present Japanese TV, though covering 97% of the main islands, had not been economical for remote islands and mountain regions; also, tall buildings had degraded TV reception in large cities. NASDA had designed BSE to transmit high-quality color television to the Japanese islands and Okinawa at lower cost; user antennas could be as small as 1 to 1.6 meters (3.3 to 5.2ft), with production costs estimated at $200 per unit. The high power of BSE could transmit directly to individual TV sets even in bad weather, making TV available to Japanese living on the offshore islands and in inaccessible mountain areas. Goddard Space Flight Center would manage the Delta vehicle for NASA’s Office of Space Transportation Systems, and KSC would manage launch operations. General Electric Co., Valley Forge, Pa., had built the BSE under contract to Tokyo Shibaura Electric Co. The Japanese Broadcasting Corp., the Japanese Ministry of Post and Telecommunications, and the Radio Research Laboratories of Japan would sponsor or participate in the program. (NASA Release 78-33; MOR M-492-212-78-01 [prelaunch], Feb. 28/78; Spaceport News, Mar 17/78, 1)
NASA announced that it and the U.S. Army Aviation Research and Development Command at WFC had accepted the first rotor systems research aircraft (RSRA) to provide the U.S. with a sophisticated and much needed research facility for continued development of rotary wing technology. NASA and the Army would obtain data from the RSRA helicopters to verify and to investigate technology of existing and advanced rotor systems. RSRA would make unnecessary costly and extensive modification of helicopter aircraft for flight investigations of each new rotor design, and could produce precise measurements of a variety of rotors under repeatable test conditions. RSRA featured the first helicopter-crew emergency-escape system (an active isolator/balance system) and could be configured as a helicopter, compound aircraft (helicopter with fixed wings), or fixed-wing aircraft. The active isolator/balance system’s main rotor vibratory forces and moments could provide wide band attenuation of vibrations to the fuselage, permitting installation of different rotors without retuning the fuselage. The emergency-escape system allowed upward extraction of the crew, using tractor rocket motors to sever the main rotor blades and separate and fragment the canopies. The system, consisting solely of mechanical and pyrotechnic components, was insensitive to electromagnetically induced radiation and lightning. Acceptance marked completion of the design, fabrication, and flight test of the second RSRA delivered in helicopter configuration. The first RSRA had been scheduled for acceptance after completion of flight tests in the compound configuration. Sikorsky Aircraft Div. of United Technologies Corp. had built the RSRAs for NASA and the Army. (NASA Release 78-148)
The U.S. reconnaissance-satellite program had apparently moved into a new phase emphasizing fewer satellites and longer orbital stay-time, Aerospace Daily reported, despite the fact that the USSR had an operational antisatellite program that might have influenced President Carter’s backing of a U.S. ASAT project. An Aerospace Daily study of worldwide satellite launches since the early 1960s indicated the U.S. had stopped using satellites for a close look at specific ground targets. These satellites, launched by the Titan 3B/Agena booster combination, had previously flown simultaneously with an area-surveillance class launched by Thor/Agena. The U.S. had apparently withdrawn its area-surveillance models from service in 1972 and substituted a type able to do both area and close-look surveillance—Lockheed’s so-called Big Bird—and dropped the original close-look type. It had retained Big Bird, with 14 launches to date, complemented by an even newer type that might have had the same dual mission but performed better. Only two of the latest models had been launched, one in December 1976 and one on June 14, 1978. This model could have been the subject of a controversy over alleged theft by a former CIA employee of an operating manual for a satellite code-named KH-11, which had an orbital life at least three times that of Big Bird, which had grown to an impressive 179da. The new model might have had a nominal lifetime of 540da; the first one launched was approaching 24mo in orbit. This extended orbital life meant that the USSR and other countries were under constant surveillance; however, as the U.S. had only one or two satellites operating at any one time, the vulnerability of its monitoring effort had probably increased. (A/D, Nov 9/78, 44)
LaRC announced it had selected Dr. Larry Pinson, aerospace engineer in its structures and dynamics division, to participate in the President’s executive interchange program, designed to foster improved relations between the government and private industry by yearly having 50 to 75 middle management executives from both sectors spend a yr in the opposite sector gaining in-depth on-the-job experience. The program had trained more than 450 executives since its inception under President Lyndon Johnson. Pinson had begun his term with the Aerospace Corporation, Los Angeles, in August. He had received awards for work on vibration of space vehicles, and had been a consultant during the Apollo program on various studies of light problems. He had received a Ph.D. in engineering mechanics from the Va. Polytechnic Inst, and had begun his NASA career at LaRC in 1963. (LaRC Release 78-51)
NASA announced that the USAF Space and Missile Test Command at Vandenberg AFB would launch SeaSat-A on a modified Atlas-F booster no earlier than June 26. Anthony Calio, associate administrator for space and terrestrial applications, noted that NASA had established a launch date of May 17, 1978, early in the program, and had maintained it even when a resolicitation of bids became necessary because of adding a sensor to the original complement. The launch date had slipped from May 17 to June 10 because of a late start of thermal-vacuum testing, and subsequent replacement of a cracked alumina substrate in the power amplifier of the data link. The launch date had then slipped to June 24, then to June 26, because of Atlas-F booster problems [see June 12]. The USAF had grounded the entire Atlas-F fleet for analysis and testing, but this had not delayed NASA’s schedule, as rework had continued while the vehicle remained on the stand. (MOR E-655-78-01 [prelauch] June 23/78; Spaceport News, June 23/78,1; Lewis News, June 23/78,1; Marshall Star, June 21/78, 1; Langley Researcher, June 30/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, June 16/78, 3; JPL Universe, June 23/78, 1; Nature, June '22/78, 586)
NASA announced plans to launch NATO-IIIC, third and final comsat in a new series to serve the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), on Nov. 15 from Kennedy Space Center. A U.S.—NATO agreement had specified launch on a Delta rocket, and NATO would reimburse NASA $8.9 million for the launch vehicle and services. A Delta had previously successfully launched Nato IIA and IIB in March 1970 and February 1971, respectively; Nato IIIA in April 1976; and Nato IIIB in January 1977. NATO-IIIC would provide in-orbit backup to Nato IIIA and IIIB in the NATO Integrated Communications System (NICS). At a geosynchronous orbital altitude of 35 900km (22 300mi), NATO-IIIC would orbit earth once every 24hr synchronized with earth’s 24-hr rotation period, keeping the satellite on station over the same spot above the equator. Once in its transfer orbit, the satellite would be controlled by U.S. Air Force Satellite Control Facility network on behalf of NATO., The U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) served as satellite contracting agency for NICS. Ford Aeronautic and Communications Corp., Palo Alto, Calif., built NATO III. (NASA Release 78-171; MOR M-492-207-78-03 [prelaunch], Nov 15/78; Spaceport News, Nov 10/78, 1)	,
Marshall Space Flight Center engineers reported completion of tests simulating checkout of a solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB) using flight-type hardware interfaced with the launch-processing system (LPS) and tests run by computer. The tests would verify compatibility of SRB hardware and demonstrate use of the LPS to checkout the SRB system. Flight equipment removed from simulated SRB hardware had been relocated in equipment racks to simulate a left-hand SRB configuration; next use of the LPS would be to checkout the left-hand SRB. United Space Boosters, Inc., would perform the checkouts, then move the equipment to Kennedy Space Center for use in future SRB checkouts. (Marshall Star, Mar 1/78, 2)
FBIS reported the USSR announced it had fired a geophysical rocket, Vertikal 7, to a height of 1500km for research on the ionosphere and on shortwave radiation. The instrument package, which separated at 175km on the ascent trajectory, contained equipment prepared by scientists from Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, and the Soviet Union. Launch apparently took place from the facilities at Kapustin Yar, site of previous Vertikal launches. (FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 3/78)
Although to most people “aviation” would mean airliners and military aircraft, with a sprinkling of light planes, most of the aircraft in service and about two-thirds of the miles flown were in branches of flying known collectively as “general aviation,” Lewis News reported, including private ownership for travel or sport; air taxi and commuter operations; agricultural flying; prospecting and exploration; law enforcement; firefighting; air ambulance; and pilot training. About 230 000 aircraft of varied types did jobs in the Free World, more than 90% of them in the U.S. General aviation had served all 13 200 U.S. airports, compared to the airlines’ 42%. In 1977 general aviation had provided transportation for 100 million Americans, using less than 0.7 of 1% of all fuel used for transportation in the U.S. and less than 6% of fuel used by all aviation, while carrying a third of all intercity air passengers. The general aviation industry had provided jobs for more than a quarter of a million Americans in the manufacture, sales, and service of its products; grossed about $1.5 billion in new aircraft sales; and exported about 30% of its total production, contributing more than $500 million to the U.S. balance of trade. {Lewis News, Mar 31/78, 3) During March: NASA announced arrival of the Space Shuttle orbiter, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket booster at MSFC for first assembly as a complete vehicle for ground-vibration tests. Using a facility originally designed for Saturn V moon-rocket testing, engineers would begin in early spring to evaluate the structural dynamics of the assembly and their effect on the Shuttle’s system. The mated vertical ground-vibration tests would consist of “floating” the Shuttle in the tall test tower and applying vibrations with exciters powered by amplifiers similar to those found on home stereo sets; sensors on the skin would record characteristics of the vibrations passing from one area to another. The resulting data would verify system-design and mathematical models of the control-system’s reaction to severe vibrations expected during launch and flight into orbit. The first test-article configuration would include an orbiter and external tank to simulate the high-altitude portion of a mission after separation of the boosters. The second test configuration would consist of solid-fuel rocket boosters filled with inert propellants, stacked in the stand along with the orbiter and tank to simulate liftoff conditions. The third test configuration would be the same as the second, except that boosters would be empty, simulating a mission just before booster separation. Tests would continue through most of the year stopping only to change test configurations. (NASA Release 78-47)
Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. had used an airfilm material-handling system at its Brigham City, Utah, plant to move and position Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket-motor components weighing up to 300 0001b, AvWk reported. The size of components for the Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket motors and the large number of Shuttle missions expected had led Thiokol to try new types of material-handling systems. Heaviest load moved had been a solid-fuel rocket-motor casting segment loaded with propellant weighing about 300 0001b on a transporter dolly weighing an additional 50 0001b, for a combined total of about 175 tons moved. (The motor would consist of four segments individually cast with solid rocket motor fuel in one of several pits at the Thiokol facility.) The airfilm system used compressed air to inflate urethane pads (bearings) attached to the bottom of specially-designed dollies; air forced into the bearings and seeping between them and the floor had created a space of two or three hundredths of an inch—enough to “float” the transporter and its load on a film of air. (AvWk, Jan 30/78, 56)
The Washington Post reported the Carter Administration had decided to allow the Peoples Republic of China to buy an American communications satellite launched by the U.S. The administration was waiting for the Chinese to reconfirm interest in the deal, the most sophisticated technology transfer so far between two countries. Several yr ago the Chinese had reserved a slot for a communications satellite with the U.N. agency monitoring the field. Discussions were still tentative, as the Chinese would have to negotiate with the few U.S. comsat manufacturers and would have to buy an undetermined number of ground stations. A satellite would cost $15 to $17 million; placing it in orbit would cost $13 to $23 million, depending on the rocket used. Regardless of any military implications, the satellite sale would probably annoy the USSR, which had repeatedly warned of danger in Washington’s “playing the China card” (cultivating closer Chinese ties while Peking-Moscow relations were strained). (WPost, Oct 13/78, C-14)
MSFC reported it had successfully conducted a first major test firing of the three Space Shuttle main engines during a 15sec run at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories in Bay St. Louis. MSFC had already successfully fired one of the modified engines for 520sec at 100% thrust, more power than needed for the first Shuttle mission. Test results would aid in establishing countdown procedures. More than 300 contractor and NASA employees had worked on the test series, described by, program officials as the most complex large propulsion-system evaluation undertaken in the U.S. space program. Test budget for firings and facilities was $52 million. Main propulsion-test articles were the Martin Marietta external tank containing propellant for firing tests, just as it would during Shuttle missions; the Rockwell Inti, orbiter simulator; three Rocketdyne main engines; and the Rockwell Inti, shuttle avionics test set, replacing the Shuttle-orbiter computers during tests. Key Shuttle launch and flight parameters to be verified by propulsion-test data were the cryogenic boil-off rate of external-tank propellants on the launch pad; rate of external-tank self-pressurization; engine-prestart requirements, such as pressure and temperature milestones; starting, throttling, and cutting off the engine, using external-tank propellants with the engines operating in close proximity; engine gimbaling; control-system response; loads placed by the engines on the orbiter; and launch acoustic data. Flight-dynamics engineers had been especially interested in verifying control-system models with the main propulsion-test data. Test 1, scheduled for 2.35sec, had been terminated at lsec because of an instrument problem. Test 2, scheduled for 15sec with the engines at 70% thrust, would assess propellant-flow paths from the tank through the orbiter and into the engines under thrust conditions. Test 3, planned for 15sec at 90% thrust level, would reverify overall propellant-system operation, and effect of the engine plumes on the test stand’s flame deflector. Test 4, planned for 40sec at 90% thrust, would define propellant flow and flame-deflector hot spots. Firings 5 through 7, lasting 500 to 600sec, would duplicate Shuttle flight profiles; firings 8 through 10 would run for long durations with flight-rated 77:1 nozzles; and firings 9 through 13 would have the 35:1 nozzles reaffixed for engine throttling, to demonstrate the effect on flight profiles. Although the main engine had taken the blame for Shuttle launch-date slip, the external tank and solid-fuel rocket booster tests also had failed to support a March launch. (Marshall Star, May 24/78, 1, May 17/78, 1; JSC Roundup, May 12/78, 1; AvWk, May 22/78, 55; May 29/78, 49)
A space processing applications rocket, SPAR V, was launched at 11am CDT September 11, from White Sands, N.M., the Marshall Star reported. The SPAR V science payload contained 4 experiments to be processed during about 4min of near-zero gravity achieved by the suborbital flight. The flight appeared, from limited data, to have gone extremely well, lasting about 15min and reaching a height of around 102.5 statute mi. The payload was recovered about 55 to 60mi down range in a low mountain area. The payload had no external damage and had been returned to the missile range. Two of the experiments studied resolidification of molten materials in low gravity, from photographs made at 1-sec intervals during the process. Another experiment verified results of a SPAR II experiment during which an immiscible liquid processed in an electric furnace exhibited unexpected massive separation. The fourth experiment both melted and crystallized several samples of materials during the low-gravity processing period, while a camera recorded particle behavior. (Marshall Star, Sept 13/78, 1; 6/78, 1)
MSFC reported that electronic simulators for Space Shuttle main engines, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and external tanks had passed tests designed to check the Shuttle’s avionics during simulated missions. JSC would conduct Shuttle-flight simulations in a Shuttle avionics integration laboratory (SAIL) for which MSFC engineers had provided a mated elements system. All Shuttle avionics would work together in the SAIL for the first time in Shuttle-flight simulation that would include part of the countdown under normal, abnormal, and certain failure conditions. (Marshall Star, July 5/78, 2)
MSFC announced it had test-fired Sept. 6 at the White Sands test facility a version of the rocket engine that would maneuver the Space Shuttle orbiter. The lOsec-duration burn was the first firing of the 6000-lb thrust engine in combination with propellant tanks, feedlines, and other components of the orbital maneuvering subsystem (OMS) pod. OMS engines using nitrogen tetroxide and monomethyl hydrazine as oxidizer and fuel had been designed for reuse in up to 100 space missions, with 1000 starts for a total firing lifetime of 15hr. The engines would provide thrust for final orbital insertion at the end of launch phase, orbit circularization, orbit transfer, changing and rendezvous maneuvers, and deorbit bums. (Marshall Star, Sept 27/78, 2)
The third of four Space Shuttle solid-propellant booster motors (DM-3) to be tested during the development phase had been fired successfully the previous week at Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Division in Brigham City, Utah, the Marshall Star reported. First of a prototype solid-fuel rocket motor (SRM) to be tested in flight configuration, the DM-3 included several features not tested in earlier firings: The motor aft skirt, containing a thrust-vector (directional) control-actuation system for the nozzle was on the motor for the first time. Also part of the overall test was recording data on the pressure inside the exhaust plume (flame), showing how much force would impact the launch platform at liftoff, that JSC and KSC would use in launch-facility studies. An onboard hydraulic system powered the thrust-vector control, moving the nozzle to change vehicle direction, for the first time in an SRM development test. Final event was a test of the linear-shaped explosive charge that would sever the nozzle aft-exit cone from the motor about 25mi above earth during Space Shuttle flights. (Marshall Star, Oct 25/78, 2; JSC Roundup, Oct 27/78, 1)
Wallops Flight Center announced that NASA, the Army’s Atmospheric Sciences Laboratory (ASL), the Air Force Geophysical Laboratory (AFGL), and the National Research Council (NRC) of Canada would undertake a joint scientific and technical support program to study the total solar eclipse of Feb. 26, 1979, last observable from North America in this century, and its effect on earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere. Aimed at improving predictions of atmospheric responses to a variety of disturbances, the program would include sounding rockets to be launched from a NRC/ASL small rocket site at Cochinour and from the NASA/ASL large rocket site on the Chucuni River, both in Canada, that would obtain measurements necessary for a quantitative description of the middle-atmosphere response. NASA would be lead agency for the U.S.; NRC would provide construction, ground- and flight-safety systems, launch coordination, and other launch-site support. WFC had planned 7 launches during the eclipse: 3 payloads with joint experiments for the Univ. of Illinois and the Univ. of Bern, Switzerland; 1 payload with experiments for Cornell Univ. and NRL; 1 payload for the Univ. of Pittsburgh; and 2 payloads for Penn. State Univ. Site preparation had begun in June; launchers would be installed in Sept. WFC would provide mobile instrumentation systems to support launching, tracking, and data acquisition. (WFC Newsletter, Oct 1/78, 5)
A Saturn IB rocket, twin of the one that launched Skylab and Apollo/Soyuz test project (ASTP) astronauts into space, would begin a barge journey from KSC to Tokyo Apr. 5, KSC announced. The Saturn IB, part of the largest group of U.S. space hardware ever displayed overseas, would be only one of hundreds of artifacts borrowed from NASA centers across the U.S. for a Japanese space science exposition scheduled to begin July 16, ninth anniversary of the launch of Apollo 11. The U.S. display would include full-scale Mercury-Redstone, Mercury-Atlas, and Gemini-Titan rockets; a lunar rover; Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo spacecraft that had actually flown in space; a detailed mockup of the Viking lander; and an ATS-6 (applications technology satellite) communications satellite. The Association for the Space Science Exposition, an umbrella organization for the Japan Science Society and the Japanese Maritime Science Promotion Foundation, had organized the exposition at an estimated cost of $21 million and would defray all costs of dismantling, loading, round-trip shipping, reloading, and reinstalling artifacts. The National Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution had coordinated the loan of the space artifacts. (KSC Release 38-78; Marshall Star, April 19/78, 2)	•
The remote location of the White Sands Test Facility (WSTF) just east of Las Cruces, N.M., had made it ideal for testing space-propulsion and power systems and for investigating the behavior of propellants and other hazardous chemicals, said the JSC Roundup in a feature article. “We have no environmental limits for testing Shuttle programs,” said WSTF Technical Manager Louis Gomez. “We recently added seven square miles of buffer along the western boundary of the facility as we saw various types of land use creeping our way from Las Cruces.” Valued at $75 million in 1973 dollars, WSTF had been designed to operate with 1000 people; current facility population was 670, of which 74 were NASA employees, most of the others being Lockheed Electronics Co. employees on a facility-maintenance and test-operations contract. Rockwell and McDonnell Douglas also had employees at WSTF for orbital-maneuvering and attitude-thruster testing. Currently on the test stands were a version of the orbital-maneuvering subsystem pod and the orbiter’s forward and aft reaction-control subsystems. OMS engines had been rated at 6000-lb thrust. Steam ejectors that could produce a vacuum of 120 OOOft-equivalent altitude in two of the propulsion test chambers would simulate engine firing in a near-space environment. Liquid oxygen and alcohol fed to three modified X-15-type rocket engines would produce a plume quenched with water, making high-velocity steam to aspirate the altitude chambers. Another lab would burn, stretch, pound, heat, and immerse complex samples of materials and substances that were candidates for use in space, to record how the materials responded to such punishment. Some tests were on flame propagation in pure oxygen at varying pressures; others might be for flashpoints and impact ignition. When the tracking and data relay satellite (TDRS) designed to work with the space transportation system (STS) would arrive on station in geosynchronous orbit, a new ground station at WSTF would collect data and voice transmissions to and from orbiters and other spacecraft. Three 60ft-diameter Ku-band TDRS antennas and a control center/support building were under construction there. WSTF would relay Shuttle data and voice to other geosynchronous satellites; the transmission would bounce back from an adjacent RCA ground station to the two 30ft-diameter RCA dishes at JSC, then to mission-control at Houston. Western Union would employ about 100 people at the ground station after it had become operational in 1980. (JSC Roundup, Aug 18/78, 4)
NASA announced plans to conduct the first full design-limit test of the parachute-recovery system for Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters. A B-52 aircraft flying at an altitude of 21 000ft would drop a 48 0001b dummy booster over the National Parachute Test Range at El Centro, Calif. Three main parachutes plus the pilot and drogue parachutes would deploy to slow the rate of descent. Primary objective of the test would be to simulate at a high dynamic pressure the loads that the main cluster of parachutes would encounter in actual use. MSFC would be responsible for the solid-fuel rocket boosters; Martin Marietta Corp. had been under contract to develop the recovery system; and DFRC would be responsible for B-52 operations. (Marshall Star, Apr 19/78, 3; DFRC Release 10-78)
Aeritalia and the Italian ministry of research and technology had discussed a new Italian telecommunications-satellite program, Av Wk reported. Most of Italy’s annual space budget had been devoted to ESA programs, but Italian government and industry had continued a limited number of strictly domestic projects, including the Sirio experimental comsat launched from KSC and the Alfa 2-stage booster that had qualified in three successful test firings from Italy’s Saito di Quirra experimental test range. Current discussions of future satellite programs could lead to detailed telecommunications project studies this year, and development work beginning in 1979. A major space undertaking for Aeritalia was the ESA Spacelab; Aeritalia had been responsible for the structure of the pressurized Spacelab module. (AvWk, Feb 13/78, 41)
NASA reported that John Yardley, associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems, had testified before the House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications on Space Shuttle status. Yardley said a detailed program review of cost, schedule, and performance had indicated substantial progress that year. He cited successful completion of approach and landing tests of Orbiter 101 (Enterprise), which had been shipped to MSFC for mated ground-vibration tests; mission-duration test firings of the main engines at the rated power level; and completion of the first phase of the 3-engine main-propulsion configuration testing. A review of the Shuttle schedule had shown that all program elements could be ready for a Sept. 28, 1978, first manned orbital flight (FMOF), if all planned tests were successful and if adjustments to the orbiter’s maneuvering-system pod and the solid-fuel rocket motors were complete. Unforeseen problems or unsuccessful tests could delay the schedule; however, NASA believed the probability of flying the FMOF during CY1979 was high. Significant Shuttle problems disclosed by the review had been in the main engine and in vehicle weight. Engine development, although slower than desired, had produced a design that, if tests went well, could be flight-certified by Sept. 1979. The weight problem had not affected early flight tests, but might hamper both the Galileo mission to Jupiter and certain USAF missions. Measures to reduce weight in the orbiter and external tank could satisfy all mission requirements until mid-1984, and performance augmentation options now under study could meet Shuttle mission requirements after that time. NASA would need additional funding to support the revised FMOF schedule, and to complete the Shuttle design and development test and evaluation program. Funding requirements had arisen not from any single program element but from several items (including the main engines, solid-fuel rocket boosters, external tank, and thermal-protection system), on which more work was needed than had been estimated. Shuttle development costs in FY79 and FY80 had exceeded previous plans, and current estimates of total Shuttle development costs were 8 to 9% higher than the earlier estimated $5.2 billion (1971 dollars). NASA had discussed Shuttle funding with OMB .as it affected the FY80 budget, and had reviewed with DOD the potential impact if additional Shuttle development funds were unavailable in FY79. Preliminary assessments had shown the first FMOF would be delayed an additional 6 to 9mo beyond the Sept, date, and delivery of production orbiters would be delayed up to lyr. (NASA Release 78-145; NASA testimony, US Sub-comm on Sp Sci & Appl, Sept 28/78; JSC Roundup, Sept 29/78, 1; Marshall Star, Sept 27/78, 1)
The Marshall Star reported that MSFC had begun ground-vibration tests of the Space Shuttle in its liftoff configuration in the dynamic-test stand, first test of the Space Shuttle with all elements mated in flight configuration. The test phase would run through November. Test-preparation crews from Bendix worked around the clock to prepare the stand, the Shuttle, and the shaker systems for the second phase of ground-vibration testing. The Space Shuttle’s weight rested on the aft skirts of the two solid-fuel rocket boosters bolted to hydrodynamic support systems at the base of the test tower. When pressurized, the support systems would allow adequate vertical, lateral, and rotational movement of the entire Space Shuttle. Test engineers had predetermined a total of 83 shaker positions for the combination of Space Shuttle elements; using a spacecraft computers system to drive the shakers, the engineers could select different positions to determine vehicle response. The computerized system would automatically control up to 24 shaker channels from the 61 that were available, rated at 10001b, 1501b, and 501b force. (Marshall Star, Oct 25/78, 1)
The Air Force had launched at 7:45pm the previous Thursday a secret payload aboard an Atlas-Agena rocket from Cape Canaveral, Today reported. The launch, not previously announced, resembled previous unannounced launches that had carried various spy satellites. The launch followed 3 consecutive unsuccessful military missions. In Feb., an experimental Trident fleet ballistic missile had failed after launch from a land pad at the Air Force station; in Mar., DOD officials had destroyed both a Titan III-C rocket carrying 2 Triple 7 defense communications satellites and a Poseidon fleet ballistic missile. {Today, April 7/78, 1A)
The USAF reported it had mapped and measured on the most detailed Shuttle models tested so far at AEDC the air pressures and loads to be encountered by the Space Shuttle during launch. The 6wk program had been the first to use mockups of the complete Shuttle orbiter, external fuel tank, and solid-fuel rocket boosters in AEDC’s 16-ft transonic wind tunnel. NASA would compare results of these comprehensive tests with data obtained at AEDC and elsewhere on smaller, less detailed models. NASA would follow up on the AEDC transonic tests with supersonic tests of the same models at Ames Research Center. AEDC had recorded surface pressures on a 3% scale model with 1646 measuring points scattered over its surface, one of the most comprehensive pressure models ever used there. It had tested a 2% scale model in the aerodynamic-force part of the study using 9 measuring instruments, the most ever installed on an AEDC model; and had measured air pressure at 25 points around the base of the Shuttle model. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 78, 4)
Av Wk reported award to Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. of a $34.5 million USAF contract to design and build a space platform using long wavelength infrared radiation for space surveillance of relatively cool objects. Designated space test program mission P80-2, to be managed by USAF’s Space and Missile Systems Organizations (SAMSO), the platform would go into orbit from WTR in Jan. 1981. Principal payload for the P80-2 mission would be a satellite infrared experiment (SIRE) developed for USAF by Hughes Aircraft Co., to operate in the 8- to 12-micrometer region of the spectrum, detecting and tracking objects such as a spacecraft or booster after burnout. The platform would also carry an autonomous navigation system built for USAF by Martin Marietta and a solar-flare isotopic-composition experiment designed by the Univ. of Chicago. The contract provided that Lockheed would integrate the payload (for which it had no responsibility) with the space platform. {AvWk, Feb 27/78, 39)
Lewis Research Center reported it had signed a $24 million 1 yr contract with Honeywell, Inc., Avionics Division, St. Petersburg, Fla., for management and engineering support of Centaur inertial guidance. This automatic self-contained navigation and guidance system with a digital computer unit would permit Centaur to compute and adjust its flight for delivery of a spacecraft to a preselected orbit without ground command. The nation’s first high-energy liquid-hydrogen liquid-oxygen rocket, the Centaur, as an upper stage on both Atlas and Titan III boosters, had helped launch Voyager 1 and 2, scheduled to fly by Jupiter and Saturn in 1979 and 1980. (Lewis News, Jan 6/78, 2)
The USAF had sent a destruct signal Mar. 19 to a Titan rocket carrying a pair of military comsats, the W Post reported, aborting an $80-million mission 8min after liftoff from Cape Canaveral. Air Force officials said a range-safety officer had sent the destruct signal when the rocket suddenly began slowing down and falling back to earth. Debris from the 31 0001b space mission, rocket, and satellites had fallen into the ocean, although the exact location was unknown. (WPost, Mar 20/78, B-9)
Wallops Flight Center announced it had launched a two-stage solid-propellant sounding rocket, the Taurus-Tomahawk, at 2:47p.m. Oct. 31. Both the Taurus and Tomahawk rocket motors were currently in use, but this was the first test flight of the combined configuration, which would be used for future NASA sounding-rocket launches. Peak altitude was 554km (344 statute mi), and the successful test flight qualified the vehicle to launch scientific payloads. First operational launches would be in March 1979 from Poker Flat Research Range in Fairbanks, Alaska, to carry a 27.4kg (601b) payload to an altitude of 575km to conduct scientific experiments in the near-earth environment. (WFC Release 78-21)
NASA announced it had planned, weather permitting, to have its Project Cameo release large bluish-white luminescent clouds of barium in the skies over Alaska beginning Saturday, October 28, and lithium over northern Scandinavia at a later date [see Sept. 19]. The agency said Project Cameo clouds should be visible to residents of Alaska, eastern Russia, western Canada, and the northwestern U.S. The chemicals would have been released from the orbiting second stage of a Delta rocket that would have launched the Nimbus 6 satellite into polar orbit Oct. 24. Of the many high-altitude sounding-rocket chemical-cloud launches conducted by NASA throughout the world, this would be the first from an orbiting vehicle; the Delta second stage was in a circular near-polar orbit at about 950km (590mi) altitude. (NASA Release 78-169)
The W Star reported that spokesmen for four government agencies using portable nuclear-power generators could not respond immediately to charges that the federal government lacked adequate control over the use or whereabouts of such devices. Charges came from members of the House Commerce Committee who said the public had not been informed of potential hazards to health, safety, and the environment posed by the devices or how they were used. Committee members had sent President Carter a letter asking for a public accounting of portable nuclear devices used by the U.S. around the world. Of major concern was a device called SNAP (system for nuclear auxiliary power) generating from any of three radioactive and highly toxic fuels—cesium, strontium, or plutonium—heat that the device could transform into electricity for satellites or other remote power needs. Designed in the early 1960s primarily as a power source for space satellites, SNAPs had later been applied to terrestrial uses including a CIA project in which a SNAP, left on a Himalayan mountain to monitor China’s missile testing, was apparently buried by an avalanche. After a 1964 mishap when an Air Force spy satellite powered by a SNAP reentered and burned over the Indian Ocean, spreading radioactive fallout over a wide area, DOD had ordered manufacture of SNAPs in case-hardened containers that would remain intact if a satellite carrying one should fall from orbit. In 1968, a rocket launching another spy satellite from Vandenberg AFB had misfired and dropped two SNAP generators into the Pacific just off the southern Calif, coast; a 6mo search had recovered the SNAPs. (W Star, May 17/78, A-18)
JPL announced that more than 100 scientists from universities and corporations in the U.S. and Europe had attended its solar-probe science workshop at CalTech May 22-23 to discuss the proposed closest encounter with the sun. The proposed mission, being studied at JPL under NASA’s Office of Space Sciences, would launch a uniquely designed spacecraft in 1985 into an orbit 2 100 000km (1.3 million mi) above the sun’s surface, arriving in 1989. Scientists had theorized that the sun probe would yield valuable new insights into solar physics, providing data on solar wind, solar particles, the solar magnetic field, and interplanetary dust. The workshop had reviewed new technologies needed for a spacecraft orbiting so close to the sun. JPL had begun studies of a new heat shield design, a high-powered telecommunications system with dual X- and X-band frequencies, new selenide-isotope power generators, and a drag-free spacecraft whose small rocket motors could counteract opposing external forces to keep the craft in correct solar orbit. (JPL Universe, May 26/78, 1)
NASA reported it had launched Isee 3 from ETR on a Delta rocket at 11:12am EDT Aug. 12, 1978. Eleven days into the mission, the spacecraft had traveled approximately 900 000km in a transfer trajectory out from earth to a halo orbit about the sun-earth libration point. All scientific instruments had been activated and were operational; all spacecraft appendages had been deployed except the + / - Z-axis antennas, which had partially deployed. The international sun-earth explorers (ISEE) project, a NASA/ESA joint contribution to the International Magnetospheric Study (IMS), consisted of two missions using three spacecraft to study solar-terrestrial relationships, NASA providing ISEE-A and -C and ESA providing ISEE-B. NASA had launched ISEE-A and -B (Isee 1 and 2) on Oct. 22, 1977, on a single Delta vehicle into the same highly elliptical earth orbit, where they were both operating. Isee 3, just launched toward a heliocentric orbit near the sun-earth libration point, had carried a scientific payload of 16 detector systems and associated electronics provided by 12 principal U.S. and European investigators to measure the solar wind and its fluctuations in detail. Whereas ISEE-A, -B, and -C were capable of contributing individually to scientific knowledge, the greatest return would result from acquiring data from all three spacecraft: ISEE-C in its heliocentric orbit would measure the sun’s input function unperturbed by the earth’s influence, while ISEE-A and -B were measuring the effect of this input on the region surrounding the earth. At the time the ISEE-C entered its halo orbit in November 1978, it would become the world’s first libration-point satellite. (MOR S-862-78-03 [postlaunch] Aug 24/78, [prelaunch] July 31/78; Marshall Star, Aug 30/78, 2; Spaceport News, Aug 18/78, 1; ESA release Aug 10/78; Nature, Aug 17/78, 630; D/SD, Aug 17/78, 630; Aug 14/78, 199)
The Marshall Star reported on a unique suspension system that would use air bags and cables to hang the Space Shuttle’s orbiter Enterprise and its external tank in the test tower, for the first phase of 1978 ground tests scheduled to begin in Apr. The system would consist of a large overhead truss fitted with air bags and cables, installed like a crossbeam at the 65.8m (216ft) level between two walls of the tall test stand. Although the orbiter and external tank would weigh about 544 320kg (1.2 million lb), the suspension system would allow the freedom of movement needed to obtain test data. Suspension of the orbiter and tank in this first phase of testing would duplicate as nearly as possible the flight conditions of the Shuttle at high altitudes, after the solid rocket boosters drop off at 43.5km (27mi) 2min into the mission. Later tests of the entire Shuttle assembly would use a different suspension system. The first Shuttle test phase would begin with the external tank temporarily fastened by knee braces to the stand, the orbiter lowered into place and mated as it would be for an actual flight. With the orbiter in place, engineers would install the suspension system overhead, attach cables from the air bags to the external tank, and remove the knee braces so that the cables would take the weight of the orbiter and external tank; lateral restraints would prevent sideways movement. The design of the truss, 25.3m (83ft) long and weighing 63 504kg (70 tons), would permit less than 2.5c (lin) deflection when fully loaded. Supporting members were of high-strength steel. (Marshall Star, Mar 29/78, 4)
The AFSC Newsreview reported that, pending arrival of the age of the Space Shuttle, the USAF Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAM-SO) was modifying a Titan III 34D booster to ensure prime and backup launch capabilities during Space Shuttle transition. The 34D was a modified Titan HID that the USAF had put into operation in 1971; SAMSO had recommended it in 1975 to the Defense Science Board studying how DOD could manage an orderly transition from expendable to reusable launch vehicles. Instead of a variety of boosters, the 34D would use a common Titan III core for east- and west-coast launches, with the option of dedicating a 34D launch vehicle to either coast as late’ as 6mo before launch. The 34D also was compatible with the new inertial upper-stage (IUS) vehicle, another SAMSO project in full-scale development by Boeing Aerospace Co. During the Space Shuttle backup era beginning in 1980, the 34D/IUS combination would be contingency booster for top-priority defense payloads. Plans called for development of seven 34D boosters to be used first for launching two defense satellite communications system (DSCS) spacecraft in July 1980 from Cape Canaveral. Four of the seven vehicles would serve east coast launches using the IUS, and three would serve polar launches from Vandenberg AFB. Differences between the 34D and Titan HID included solid-fuel rocket motors lengthened 5 ft each to align with new common-core attach points and payload fairing modified to extend from 40 to 55ft. The new fairing would make the 34D payload environment nearly identical to that of the Shuttle orbiter cargo bay, a step toward upper-stage commonality. The 34D program was in final design stage under contracts with Martin Marietta Aerospace, McDonnell Douglas Corp., and United Technologies Corp. (AFSC Newsreview, Dec 78, 9)
NASA and ESA announced selection of experiments for the proposed 2-spacecraft solar-polar mission planned for launch in 1983 and designed for first-time observation of the sun from the unique perspective of its polar regions. The solar-polar mission would explore one of the remaining frontiers of the solar system: the third dimension of space, out of the plane of the orbits of the planets. All previous interplanetary space probes had flown in the orbits of the planets, essentially intersecting the sun’s equatorial regions. Congress had not yet approved the project, but early selection of scientific participants and investigations would allow a prompt start on approval. NASA and ESA would each provide one spacecraft, and the combined scientific payload would be divided between U.S. and European investigators. The Space Shuttle would launch both spacecraft simultaneously using an inertial upper-stage booster, directing them on a trajectory in the ecliptic plane (the plane containing all the planets) toward Jupiter. Swinging around Jupiter, the craft would use the gravity of that planet to move out of the ecliptic plane and back toward the sun in trajectories, one northbound and one southbound, essentially mirror images of each other. After passing over the north and south solar poles, the spacecrafts would swing through perihelion (the distance closest to the sun) in the ecliptic plane, pass respectively over the other solar poles, then fly back to the vicinity of Jupiter’s orbit. The period from launch until shortly after the second pair of polar passages would be approximately 5yr. The mission should provide important new knowledge about the solar wind, cosmic rays, and the 3-dimensional structure and evolution of the sun’s corona (the outermost solar atmosphere), and increase understanding of solar phenomena that shape and control earth’s space environment. In anticipation of a FY79 Congressional authorization of the mission, NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, manager of the mission for NASA, had undertaken studies of the U.S. spacecraft, payload, and mission design concepts. More than ISO American and European scientists would participate in solar-polar investigations. (NASA Release 78-39; ESA Release Mar 13/78; JPL Universe, Mar 17/78, 1)
The Air Force Systems Command noted that Atlas launches planned at Vandenberg AFB as well as at Cape Canaveral in 1978 would use one of the oldest booster systems still working: first use of Atlas as a launch vehicle was in 1958. Atlas launches planned from Space Launch Complex 3 would support the USAF NavStar global-positioning system and space-test program; 2 NASA-sponsored satellites, Sea Satellite-A (SeaSat) and Tiros-N, would also use Atlas vehicles. (AFSC Newsreview, Apr 78, 3)
On the day Soyuz 30 cosmonauts had docked with Salyut 6, the USSR had launched from Plesetsk another satellite in what was believed to be its early warning satellite system, followed by launch of a new space-mission series, Defense/Space Business Daily reported. On June 8 Tass had announced launch of eight Cosmos satellites (Cosmos 1013-1020) on one booster rocket. The early-warning spacecraft, Cosmos 1024, had gone into a Molniya (communications satellite) type of orbit with parameters of 630/40 000km, 62.8° inclination, and 12hr 6min period. It was the first of this type of mission launched in 1978; three had been launched in 1977. The USSR had initiated a new spacecraft-mission series with the launch of Cosmos 1025, put by observers in the general category of military monitors but following a regime used by special-research missions. This was the 45th Soviet space mission in 1978, three more than at this point in 1977. The 1978 missions had been 77% military (not including the four Soyuz missions that had direct military application in manned reconnaissance/surveillance). (D/SBD, June 30/78, 307; FBIS, Tass in English, June 8/78) During June: NASA reported that the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) had awarded Dr. Jose Chirivella and Wesley Menard of JPL the 1977 Manly Memorial Award for the best annual paper dealing with engines. Dr. Chirivella, principal investigator of hydrogen enrichment in the aircraft piston-engine program, and Menard, supervisor of JPL’s combustion research group, had achieved fuel savings of 10 to 20% in aircraft piston engines. The aeronautical-propulsion division of NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology had supported the research. (NASA Activities, June 78, 11)
NASA announced the successful launch of Landsat 3 (formerly Landsat-C), third of a series, from WTR at 12:54pm EST on March 5. Orbital parameters were: apogee, 913.96km; perigee, 897.3km; period, 103.108min; and inclination, 99.134°. Landsat was part of a U.S. program to develop remote sensing for improved earth resources management. The total program included development of remote-sensing instruments; data-analysis research using data from spacecraft, aircraft, and ground-truth sites; and a spaceflight program. Landsat 3 carried two piggyback payloads, the larger (approximately 34kg) being a plasma-interaction experiment (PIX) by Lewis Research Center to measure plasma-coupling current and negative-voltage breakdown of a Solar-array segment and a gold-plated steel disk. Objective of PIX was to. establish design guidelines, materials, devices, and test methods for controlling detrimental interactions between high-voltage systems and the space-plasma environment. The PIX would remain attached to the second stage of the Delta vehicle. The second piggyback payload, the 27.3kg Amsat Oscar communications-relay satellite built by radio amateurs, ejected from the second stage approximately 12.3min after Delta separation from Landsat 3, would be available to amateur operators for science education, communications experiments, and search-and-rescue systems tests. The Oscar D carried two communications transponders having 1 to 2 watts of power output, and was magnetically stabilized. Changes in the Landsat 3 payload included alteration of the return-beam vidicon system to produce higher resolution panchromatic images for detailed ground mapping, and inclusion in the multispectral scanner (MSS) of a fifth band in the emitted terrestrial infrared radiation region. Objective of the MSS was to acquire multispectral high-spatial-resolution (80m) images of solar radiation reflected from earth’s surface, emitted infrared-radiation images of 240m resolution, and panachromatic RBV images of 40m resolution. The MSS would obtain contiguous images about once every 18 days, weather permitting. The multispectral images would aid research and operations demonstrations in agriculture and forestry resources, mineral and land resources, land use, water resources, marine resources, cartography, and the environment. Applications would include surveying land use; measuring factors causing stress on crops and forest; inventorying crops and forests; assessing crop vigor and health; classifying areas by geological or geomorphic characteristics; delineating promising areas for mineral exploration; determining water-runoff patterns and extent of snowcover; monitoring population movements and environmental hazards to man; mapping sea ice; and analyzing shorelines. Demonstration projects called Applications Systems Verification and Transfer (ASVT), focusing on landcover inventory for federal, regional, state, and private users, would also use Landsat 3 data. The Landsat-C spacecraft (basically a Nimbus design modified to accommodate Landsat instruments and mission requirements) had the following parameters: weight, 90kg; mission margin, 51.4kg; stabilization type, 3-axis earth-oriented; stabilization accuracy, 0.7° pointing error, 0.04° per sec rate; average power available for experiments, 375 watts; thermal range, 10 to 30C; data storage capacity, 60min of video data (25.2 million bits). Launch vehicle was a 2-stage Thor Delta approximately 116ft long and 8ft in maximum body diameter. The first stage was a McDonnell Douglas extended long-tank Thor booster incorporating 9 strap-on Thiokol Castor II solid-fuel rocket motors; second stage was powered by the TRW TR-201 liquid-fuel pressure-fed engine gimbal-mounted to control pitch and yaw through second-stage burn. A nitrogen gas-system using 8 fixed nozzles provided roll control during powered and coast flight, as well as pitch and yaw control after second-stage cutoff. Two fixed nozzles fed from the propellant-tank helium-pressurization system provided retrothrust after spacecraft separation. Total cost of the Landsat program (excluding costs of the launch vehicles, and including tracking and data network-systems support) would be $43.9 million through 1979. (MOR E-641-78-03 [postlaunch] Mar 8/78, [prelaunch] Feb 22/78)
Although the U.S. and USSR had signed separate treaties in 1963 and 1967 prohibiting test and deployment of nuclear weapons in space, western observers had interpreted the USSR’s Cosmos series as an antisatellite development program, Farooq Hussain reported in a Nature article. Killer satellites had exploited the poor resistance of satellite components (particularly solar cells) to intense heating and radiation damage; they could aim at satellites’ high energy-lasers or ion beams to cause arcing and discharge through instrumentation. Precision-guided missiles could destroy satellites either by colliding with them or by detonating conventional explosives close to a target. One explanation of recent Soviet tests had been China’s development of reconnaissance satellites. The only U.S. test of an antisatellite had occurred in 1963 when a modified McDonnell Douglas Thor missile had been fired against a missile booster in low earth orbit. Recent advances had indicated that killer satellites might carry high-energy continuous-wave or pulsed lasers to destroy target satellites; both sides had used ground-based lasers for several years to interrogate reconnaissance satellites. In Sept. 1977 the Air Force had awarded to Vought Corp., Dallas, Tex., a $58.7 million contract for development of a killer satellite. To avoid the cost of this arms race, the article said, both the U.S. and USSR had been willing to agree on limiting development of killer satellites. (Nature, Jan 26/78, 293)
Latest word on Progress 1 refueling of the Salyut 6 propulsion system in orbit indicated that redesign of the space station had been more extensive than the USSR had previously revealed, Av Wk reported. The Soviets had made a fundamental change in the station’s rocket engine and fuel system by switching to pressure-fed from turbine-driven main engines, and adopting a common hypergolic propellant for both the main propulsion and reaction-control system engines. Before Salyut 6, the Soyuz and Salyut propulsion systems had been the same: in the reaction-control system, hydrogen peroxide thrusters had provided attitude adjustments and hydrogen peroxide had also driven turbines pumping hypergolic oxidizer and fuel to the main propulsion system. Fuels in the main propulsion system were a form of nitric acid and of hydrazine. This arrangement had required 3 sets of propulsion lines and tanks: 1 for the hydrogen peroxide, 1 for the main-engine oxidizer, and 1 for the main-engine fuel. Changing the Salyut 6 had allowed both the main engines and the reaction-control thrusters to use propellants from the same tanks, permitting much simpler and more effective orbital refueling than if it had to include hydrogen peroxide. The change had required design of an entirely new internal-tanking and propellant-line fuel system, and development of the pressure-fed engines and the hypergolic-thruster system. The aft section of the station containing the main engines and a concentration of reaction-control-system engines could now accommodate docking at that end by a second Soyuz transport vehicle. The Salyut’s standard forward port was able to accept both Soyuz and Progress-tanker spacecraft. (AvWk, May 1/78, 1)
NASA announced launch of ESA’s orbital test satellite 2 Ots 2 at 6:59pm EDT, May 11, from Cape Canaveral toward a stationary orbit 22 300mi over Gabon in West Africa. A Delta vehicle had put the satellite into synchronous-transfer orbit with apogee of 36 042km, perigee of 185km, and inclination of 27.4°. An apogee boost motor fired 37hr after launch at fifth apogee had circularized the orbit so that Ots 2 could drift to its final location above the equator at 10°E. Ots 2 would remain for 6 or 7yr relaying telecasts among nations of the European Broadcast Union and carrying as many as 7000 telephone calls at a time. This new comsat was one of two experimental models built by ESA to test performance in orbit; their descendants, European operational com-sats, would serve in the 1980s as satellite links for intra-European telephone, telegraph, and telex traffic and would provide western Europe with television relay. The first launch of an Ots from Cape Canaveral Sept. 13, 1977, had failed when the Delta first stage exploded 55sec after liftoff. The probable cause (burn-through of a solid-propellant strap-on Castor IV motor at the bottom of the first-stage Thor booster) had been avoided for further flights by increasing the thickness of insulation between the solid propellant and the exterior motor case. Industries in Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and Spain had built the spacecraft under ESA supervision; prime contractor was British Aerospace Dynamics Corp. Under an agreement with the U.S., ESA would reimburse NASA for the cost of the Delta launch vehicle, launch services, and other administrative costs totaling $417 million. GSFC had provided technical direction of the Delta project; Kennedy Space Center’s expendable vehicles directorate was responsible to GSFC for launch operations. (MOR M-492-210-78-02 [prelaunch] Apr 27/78; NASA Release 78-53; W Post, May 12/78, B-6; ESA Release Apr 7, 12/78; May 8, 17/78)
For 4yr, the LaRC Space Systems Div. and Flight Dynamics and Control Div. had analyzed the Space Shuttle orbiter’s entry guidance and control system at the request of JSC, the Langley Researcher reported. The system had been designed to control the orbiter from deorbit until landing, regulating both the aerodynamic surfaces and a reaction control system (RCS) composed of small rocket thrusters such as those on Apollo spacecraft, so that orbiter control had turned out to be a hybrid between aircraft and spacecraft control. Onboard computers could direct the entire orbiter entry without pilot input, or a pilot could take over control if necessary. A primary tool in the LaRC analysis had been a reentry flight dynamics simulator (RFDS) that permitted evaluation of the onboard-control system in both the automatic and the manual modes. It had also aided in developing alternate control systems to be used by the pilot if the main control system could not handle a situation. The simulator cockpit, though not an exact representation of the orbiter cockpit, did contain all the instruments and controls necessary to simulate flight: cathode-ray tubes (CRTs) showed displays identical to those on board, changing guidance information automatically as the orbiter entered various flight regimes. Push buttons and toggle switches would permit the pilot to take over any of the control functions. LaRC investigators had found that the system was dangerously sensitive to possible sensed angle-of-attack errors in the automatic mode at hypersonic speed. Shuttle astronaut Col. Henry Hartsfield had been unable to maintain vehicle control in the manual mode. This and other problems had led to major system redesign that had been tested at LaRC and found to solve the sensed angle-of-attack problem. Investigators had then begun work on other system problems. (Langley Researcher, June 16/78, 1)
NASA announced that fabrication and testing of components was continuing at various locations throughout the U.S. in preparation for a scheduled first manned orbital flight of the Space Shuttle September 28, 1979. NASA had accelerated production and installation of thermal protection system (TPS) tile for Orbiter 102, had increased staffs at both the Rockwell facility and the Lockheed plant where the tiles were made, and had obtained new tile-inspection equipment. Testing of the Space Shuttle main engine (SSME) continued at the Natl. Space Technology Laboratories; between Sept. 10 and Oct. 12, two engines had been test-fired for a total of 3794sec. Ten of the tests reached rated power level (RPL), accumulating 3096sec. Engine firings through Oct. 11 totaled 350 for 26 530sec total time, including 8909sec at RPL. NASA had scheduled full-duration testing of the three-engine cluster forming the main propulsion system for early in 1979, when the first manned orbital-flight configuration engines would become available. The third static-test firing of a solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB) motor occurred Oct. 19 at Thiokol Chemical Corp.’s test site near Brigham City, Utah. Early data indicated the test firing and gimbaling of the motor nozzle were satisfactory. MSFC had mated all the Space Shuttle elements—two SRBs, an external tank, and an orbiter (101)—for the first time in vertical vibration testing to verify that the structure would perform as predicted during various stages of flight. (NASA Release 78-162)
NASA announced successful completion of the second full-duration ground-static firing of a huge solid-fuel rocket motor to be used in Space Shuttle flights beginning in 1979. Thiokol Corporation’s Wasatch Division, prime contractor for MSFC development of the motor, had conducted the firing at Brigham City, Ut. The 125ft-long (38.1m) motor on the test fixture had fired for more than 2min, reaching a thrust level of 28321b (12 596 736 newtons). The test firing had used 1 102 4001b (500 048kg) of propellants. The contractor had gimballed the motor nozzle early in the test and again later in the firing for about half the total burn time; the solid-fuel rocket booster’s motor nozzles during Shuttle launches would provide directional control for the entire Shuttle assembly. MSFC had scheduled the next test for early summer. (MSFC Release 78-6; Marshall Star, Jan 25/78, 1)
Av Wk reported that U.S. Air Force ground controllers had begun to bring the second NavStar global-positioning system satellite up to full operational status, after its successful launch on an Atlas F May 13 from Vandenberg AFB. The 9551b spacecraft had gone into an 85 x 10 900nm elliptical orbit, and its solid-fuel rocket motor had fired 2days later, putting it in a circular orbit; thrusters would shift it to its final station. Modifications of the rubidium-vapor atomic clocks had delayed launch of NavStar 2 for a day; when ground tests indicated a malfunction of the NavStar frequency-divider circuit, the USAF had ordered modifications of all three clocks on NavStar 2 to prevent a similar occurrence in orbit. The USAF planned to launch a third NavStar from Vandenberg in Aug. (A v Wk, May 22/78, 24)
Av Wk reported that the Carter administration had planned an intensive $400- to $500-million program of killer satellite technology to overcome the USSR’s 10-yr lead. The USAF Flight Test Center at Edwards AFB, Calif., announced it had sought proposals for an air-launched space booster usable in an antisatellite program. Vought Corp. had undertaken work on killer-satellite technology under a $58.7-million contract. Such a non-nuclear warhead system could consist of small rocket tubes clustered around an optical-sensor package containing a small digital computer; this device would use the rocket-propulsion tubes as the kill mechanism. In the antiballistic-missile mode, a warhead’s terminal homing device would detect the target, and the computer would govern maneuvers by firing the tube-mounted rockets. Once the device approached within range of the target, the rocket tubes would separate and fire into the path of the object, destroying it. President Carter revealed that the U.S., in addition to the “hot-metal” kill mechanism, had been working on lasers as possible spaceborne defense against Soviet killer-satellite attacks. At the same time the USSR had pushed forward with laser-equipped killer-satellite systems, the U.S. had jeopardized its negotiating position in upcoming killer-satellite limitation talks by failing to convene a cabinet-level interagency group to decide between State Dept, and DOD negotiating strategies, marked by differences in opinion on verification and on impact on U.S. systems proposals. (AvWk, Feb 6/78, 18)
MSFC announced plans for two runs by a high-speed sled in Feb. at the Sandia sled track, Albuquerque, N.M., to test the “broadside deployment phase” of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster parachute-recovery system. The sled tests would deploy only the pilot chute to determine if the nosecap when ejected would clear the vehicle without becoming entangled, as boosters would come in flat, not sideways like an arrow, and air would flow across the nose cone at right angles. MSFC had developed the SRB and its recovery system. (Marshall Star, Jan 25/78, 4)
After 2 decades as key booster in NASA’s space program, the Atlas Centaur would remain “old reliable” for a variety of planetary, commercial, and military payloads launched in the 1980s, Lewis News reported. The Centaur project had begun in November 1958 when DOD’s Advanced Research Project Agency (ARPA) awarded the first contract to General Dynamics after a study recommending a high-energy upper stage for the Atlas launch vehicle. Before the study, Pratt and Whitney had received a contract for a hydrogen/oxygen rocket engine. Since Centaur would be the first space-launch vehicle to use a liquid-hydrogen/liquid-oxygen combination, a whole new technology was needed for handling materials, behavior, fabrication, and testing of liquid hydrogen in a space environment, not only to make Centaur a success but also because this fuel was to be used for the upcoming Apollo program. In 1958 Centaur received its first mission assignment, definition of geosynchronous orbit, and in 1960 its first deep-space mission. The creation of NASA resulted in transfer of the Centaur program from ARPA to NASA in July 1959. LeRC, which had pioneered research in hydrogen technology and had fired an experimental liquid-hydrogen/liquid-oxygen engine with 50001b thrust as early as 1953, received technical management of Centaur in 1962. The first successful flight of an Atlas Centaur in Nov. 1963 included the world’s, first inflight ignition of a hydrogen/oxygen rocket engine. Centaur had proved its operational capability in 1965 by successfully injecting a dynamic model of the Surveyor spacecraft into a prescribed transfer trajectory, resulting in a simulated lunar-target impact. After successfully launching Surveyor (for the first soft landing on the moon) and Pioneer 11 (for a flyby of Jupiter), NASA in the mid-1960s had directed its efforts to integrating the Centaur with the USAF Titan booster. General Dynamics had built an improved Centaur adaptable to both the Atlas and the Titan boosters; Martin Marietta had conducted studies for NASA on integrating the Titan booster with an improved Centaur, and on modifications needed to the Titan launch facility at ETR. Atlas Centaur missions had included earth-orbiting spacecraft such as the applications technology satellite, orbiting astronomical observatories, Comstar, high-energy astronomical observatories, and FltSat-Com. Atlas Centaur, used for future missions with HEAO and FltSat-Com spacecraft, would remain one of NASA’s prime launch vehicles until the Space Shuttle became fully operational. (Lewis News, July 21/78, 1)
NASA announced it had made several personnel changes. Richard Smith, deputy director at MSFC, had been appointed deputy associate administrator for Space Transportation Systems at NASA Hq for a one-yr tour of duty beginning August 15. Smith had transferred to NASA in 1960 from the rocket research and development team at the Army’s Redstone Arsenal, when the development operations division of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency had become the nucleus of MSFC. He had managed the Saturn program, and in January 1974 had become director of science and engineering, and later deputy director, of the center. Smith had received NASA’s exceptional service medal for contributions to the Apollo and Skylab programs as well as the medal for distinguished service. (NASA Release 78-112; NASA anno July 19/78) NASA had named Harry Sonnemann deputy chief engineer at Hq, responsible to the chief engineer for managing program assurance, safety and environmental health, and the systems engineering divisions. Sonnemann had come to NASA in October 1977 from the office of the assistant secretary of the Navy, where he was special assistant for electronics and special assistant for antisubmarine warfare and ocean control from 1968 to 1977. He had also worked on the development of large seismic arrays as assistant director for field engineering in DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency’s nuclear test detection office from 1964 to 1968. (NASA anno July 20/78) Scientist-astronaut Dr. Joseph Allen had returned to active flight status at JSC’s astronaut office. From August 1, 1975, until his return to JSC, Allen had been director of the office of legislative affairs at NASA Hq; and he would continue those duties in addition to his astronaut duties until a replacement was named. He had returned to JSC as senior scientist-astronaut and was eligible for selection as a Space Shuttle crewman. NASA had selected Allen as a scientist-astronaut in 1967; he had completed the initial academic training and a 53-wk course in flight training at Vance AFB, Okla. Allen had been mission scientist as a member of the astronaut-support crew for Apollo 15, and was staff consultant on science and technology to the President’s Council on International Economic Policy. (NASA Release 78-33) NASA announced it had appointed Dr. Edward Ifft chief of international programs policy at Hq. Dr. Ifft had been a U.S. Foreign Service reserve officer, whose last assignment was director of the State Department’s office of disarmament and arms control. While a graduate student, Ifft spent a yr at Moscow State Univ. under a U.S.-USSR cultural exchange program doing research on low-temperature physics. He had joined the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in 1967; then moved to the State Department where he had been deputy chairman of the U.S. delegation that negotiated the threshold test-ban treaty in Moscow in 1974; and had participated in negotiations with the U.S. and USSR for a comprehensive test ban. (NASA Actv, July 78)
MSFC had been responsible for a variety of ground tests around the U.S. to prove flightworthiness of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster, the center newsletter reported. Each Shuttle mission would use 2 of the 578 097kg (6Q0ton) SRBs, 45.46 meters (149ft) long and 3.7 meters (12ft) in diameter, each providing 12 232 550 newtons (2.75 million lb) of thrust for about 2min from the launch pad to burnout and separation at an altitude of 45.3km (27mi). Tests at MSFC had put loads on a “short” version of the booster to duplicate load conditions encountered on the launch pad, in flight, during parachute deployment, and in water impact and recovery. Other MSFC engineers had tested the flight system designed to gimbal (or swivel) the motor nozzles at the lower end of each booster to guide the Shuttle on a proper course. Engineers at United Technologies Corp.’s Chemical System Div. near San Jose, Calif., had tested 8 small solid-fuel booster-separation motors, fired simultaneously to separate each SRB and move it away from the Shuttle during flight. Each end of the two boosters would carry 4 motors, a total of 16 on each flight. These would have about 88 960 newtons (20 0001b) of thrust and would fire only about 1 sec each to accomplish separation. The separation motor had completed development testing; the Calif, test series would qualify it for flight. Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. near Brigham City, Utah, had run full-duration full-thrust static firings on the SRB; high-speed sled runs in New Mexico had tested one phase of the SRB’s parachute-recovery system (deployment of the pilot chute only) to see whether the nosecap of the system, when ejected, would clear the vehicle without becoming entangled; and the National Parachute Test Range at El Centro, Calif., had conducted airdrops of the entire parachute system. Other tests of SRB’s electrical system and prelaunch checkout system were in progress. (Marshall Star, Mar 8/78, 4)
NASA announced it had accepted the review board’s final report on failure of the Delta launch vehicle carrying ESA’s orbital test satellite OTS-A that exploded after liftoff from Cape Canaveral Sept. 13, 1977. The review board had concluded that the failure resulted from a defect in the propellant of the solid-fuel strap-on Castor IV motor No. 1: either incomplete mixing and curing of propellant ingredients, or introduction of a contaminant, most likely water. The board’s findings had led to changing the design of the Castor IV solid-fuel rocket motor by putting additional insulation between the propellant and motor case to protect against such defects. NASA had also revised procedures for mixing and curing the propellant, and had improved the contractor and government test, inspection, and manufacturing surveillance procedures. New Castor IV motors incorporating the corrective actions had been manufactured and requalified. A second orbital test satellite, OTS-B, to replace OTS-A had been scheduled for launch May 4 from Cape Canaveral. (NASA Release 78-61)
Almost all major structural elements and systems of the first two flight-model solid-fuel rocket boosters for the Space Shuttle had either been delivered to KSC or were scheduled to arrive shortly, the Marshall Star reported. Delivered elements included eight booster-separation motors for one SRB, with eight for the other SRB due within the wk; all major components of the thrust-vector control (TVC) subsystems except the actuators, which were to arrive on Nov. 23; frustums and nosecaps for both boosters; the forward and aft skirts for the left-hand SRB (the aft skirt for the right-hand booster was en route by rail, and the forward skirt was scheduled for delivery Nov. 20); and most of the electrical-systems components. The parachute-recovery subsystem for the left-hand booster was at KSC; the system for the right-hand booster was due Nov. 22. (Marshall Star, Nov 15/78, 4)
MSFC announced it had successfully completed at the National Parachute Range May 23 an airdrop test of the parachute system designed to recover Space Shuttle’s reusable solid-fuel rocket boosters after launch. This was the fourth drop test in which a dummy booster had been carried aloft beneath the right wing of a B-52 aircraft; the recovery system’s three main parachutes had all deployed, and all had functioned as expected. The dummy booster had landed virtually undamaged. NASA engineers planned two more airdrops before certifying the system for flight. (.Marshall Star, May 31/78, 2) During May: The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, announced that a 15-member U.S. aerobatic team would travel in Aug. to Ceske Budejovice, Czechoslovakia, to compete in the ninth World Aerobatic Championships sanctioned by the Inti. Aeronautic Federation (FAI). The 1978 U.S. team would be all male, as no woman had qualified in competitions to determine team members. Three-time U.S. national champion Leo Loudenslager, an American Airlines pilot, said, “We have high expectations. We have even better trained pilots and more sophisticated aircraft than we did in 1976, and we are more knowledgeable about what to expect.” The 1976 U.S. team had lost to the USSR the titles it had captured in France in 1972: top team, best male, and best female. Loudenslager would fly his experimental modified version of the 200hp Stephens Akro, the Laser 200. Henry Haigh might fly the modified Pitts Special biplane in which he had competed in 1976, basically the same design flown by the remainder of the team. The five aircraft for the competition, disassembled Aug. 8 at Kennedy Inti. Airport for transport to Frankfort, would be reassembled and flown to Peine near Braunschweig in West Germany for 2wk of intensive practice, then to Budejovice for the competition. The championship event would mark nearly two decades of U.S. participation in FAI-sanctioned precision aerobatic competitions, first held in 1960 in Czechoslovakia. The event also would commemorate two-thirds of a century since the first recorded aerobatic flight: Lt. Peter Nesterov of the Imperial Russian Air Service was credited with performing in 1913 the first inside loop in a Nieuport monoplane. NAA, the aero club representing the U.S., had sanctioned as the official team representing the U.S. at the world championships the group selected by the Aerobatic Club of America, which would also be the only team competing in Czechoslovakia without government financing. (NAA newsletter, May 78, 1)
Dryden Flight Research Center commemorated the final flight lOyr ago of the X-15, piloted by Bill Dana, that reached in its 1 lmin free flight a top speed of 3716mph (5.38 times the speed of sound) and peak altitude of 255 000ft. This chapter in aeronautical history would be celebrated by the Edwards, Calif., AIAA section at a dinner meeting featuring Bill Dana. The article in DFRCX-Press concluded: “Recent press reports call the Space Shuttle engines the first reusable liquid rocket engines. How soon they forget.” {DFRC X-Press, Oct 20/78, 2)
After each Space Shuttle flight, parachutes used to slow the descent of the Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster (SRBs) would have to be washed, dried, and repaired before reuse; and KSC had modified for this purpose a facility formerly used as a news center and to refurbish Gemini parachutes, Spaceport News reported. Recovery vessels at sea would pull the parachutes from the water and wind them like fishing line on large deck reels for delivery to the facility, where they would be unwound, defouled, and hosed down. A chute arranged on hooks on an overhead monorail would proceed through the world’s largest automatic washer and dryer [see March 8] to remove any traces of corrosive sea water. Next the chute would be inspected for damage, with rips mended on special sewing machines. The chute then would be stretched on a worktable almost the length of the 220-ft building, and each individual panel would be systematically folded into place resulting in a tubular shape. A monorail would guide the bundle to a wedge-shaped packing canister. Depending on conditions, one parachute could move through the entire operation in less than 50hr. (Spaceport News, Nov 10/78, 3)
Dryden Flight Research Center reported it had aborted the first design-limit test of the parachute recovery system for the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket boosters (SRB), when the 48 0001b dummy booster scheduled for airdrop from a B-52 flying over the National Parachute Test Range would not separate from its aircraft. After several unsuccessful attempts, pilots returned the B-52 to DFRC without incident and rescheduled the flight for the week of May 5. (DFRC X-Press, May 5/78, 2)
NASA reported it had launched a 2-stage Nike-Apache sounding rocket at 1:30 am EDT Sept. 27 from Wallops Island to investigate ionization sources in the upper atmosphere during geomagnetic activity. The experiment had been postponed day to day since June 2, awaiting an intense magnetic storm that usually followed solar flares. The rocket payload had reached a peak altitude of 183km (114 statute mi), and preliminary results indicated that all instrumentation performed satisfactorily and obtained good data. The launch was the last in a series for the Joint American-Soviet Particle Intercalibration (JASPIC) Project to compare U.S. and Soviet particle-measuring instrumentation [see May 15]. The two nations had jointly conducted eight rocket-borne experiments in June from the Wallops range and the Soviet research ship, Professor Vize, located off Va.’s eastern shore. (WFC Release 78-1)
ESA announced that its Geos2 scientific satellite, launched from Cape Canaveral July 14 on a Delta and placed in geosynchronous orbit, had reached its scheduled position of 6°E on July 26. It would move during ’ its 2-yr mission from its first operational station in geosynchronous orbit 35 900km above the equator through a zone extending from 0° to 37°E longitude. On July 26 the European Space Operations Centre at Darmstadt, West Germany, had switched on the S-band telemetry system and the magnetometer experiment, and would switch on six other experiments progressively until the satellite had become fully operational in early Aug. All data confirmed that Geos 2 was functioning correctly. The satellite, positioned on magnetic field lines linked to the earth’s auroral zones, could correlate those data with similar data acquired from associated auroral stations by ground-based balloon-borne or rocket-borne instruments. NASA had expected that the Geos 2 data, correlated with data acquired by the already launched Isee A and B and by the ISEE-C scheduled for launch in Aug. 1978, would constitute a substantial body of information on the magnetosphere to aid in understanding the effect of interplanetary-space processes on the near-earth environment. (ESA Release July 31/78) During July: The USAF announced it had launched a second prototype satellite in DOD’s NavStar global-positioning system from SAMTEC facilities aboard an Atlas F booster. The 955-lb navigational satellite working with a previously orbited NavStar satellite would be part of the program’s concept-validation phase using six satellites to test navigation capability at the Army’s Yuma, Ariz., proving grounds. When fully operational in the 1980s, the 24-satellite NavStar system would provide precise worldwide navigation coverage 24hr a day. The Air Force’s global-satellite control network, managed by SAMSO’s Air Force Satellite Control Facility at Sunnyvale, AFS, Calif., would track and operate the satellite. (AFSC Newsreview, July 78, 12) The USAF announced it had launched a third defense meteorological satellite from SAMTEC facilities at Vandenberg AFB on a Thor LV-2F into a near-polar sun-synchronous orbit 450mi above the earth. The 1131-lb satellite carrying visual and infrared instruments had joined two previously orbited spacecraft in providing high-priority weather forecasts to U.S. military commanders worldwide. The sensors could detect and observe developing weather patterns and could track existing weather systems over remote areas, including oceans. After 30 days of on-orbit tests, the satellite was orbiting the earth every lOlmin, scanning a 1841-mi area on each pass and photographing the entire earth over a 12-hr period. It would transmit weather imagery in real time to ground and shipborne terminals around the world for military purposes and, through NOAA, to the civilian community. (AFSC Newsreview, July 78, 1)	'
Early analysis of Space Shuttle liftoff-configuration vibration-test results at Marshall Space Flight Center had revealed two primary deviations, the Marshall Star reported: excessive movement in a forward section of the solid-fuel rocket boosters that contained guidance gyros, and a problem with transfer of loads (or forces) at the attach points between the boosters and external tank. After installing brackets to strengthen the boosters at the gyros location, NASA would conduct individual tests on that booster section at a test facility used for smaller components. Additional studies of load distribution at the attach points would determine if additional tests were necessary. After the most recent test phase, engineers found that about 80% of the test modes had verified predictions of hardware behavior during flight. The final test phase, beginning early in 1979, would simulate the Space Shuttle configuration just before burnout and separation of the solid-fuel rocket boosters at an altitude of about 43.5km (27mi). (Marshall Star, Dec 6/78, 1)
NASA announced that mission controllers at ARC had completed final course adjustments for the Pioneer 11 encounter with Saturn Sept. 1, 1978. Controllers reported Pioneer 11 had locked on a trajectory that would bring it within 30 000km (18 OOOmi) of the edge of Saturn’s outer ring; any approach closer to the ring edge would risk impact with fragments in the ring. Pioneer 11 would then swing under the plane of the rings to a point 25 000km (15 OOOmi) from the planet’s surface. Without the course correction, Pioneer 11 would have flown by Saturn at a much greater distance (100 000km or 60 OOOmi). Pioneer data transmitted to NASA tracking stations indicated the spacecraft had responded perfectly to a day-long series of commands calling for timed rocket thrusts to alter its trajectory. (NASA Release 78-113)
MSFC reported that 17 scientists had signed contracts to develop materials-processing experiments, first to be conducted in the weightless environment of the Space Shuttle and Spacelab and partially based on results of investigations during the Apollo, Skylab, Apollo-Soyuz, and SPAR (space processing applications rocket) programs. Among the products of interest to the scientists were improved medicines; electrolyte materials for smaller, higher capacity batteries; and larger, more perfect crystals for electronic applications. The $12 million program, covering a 5yr initial period, should produce significant scientific results for developing specific useful materials and products in space. NASA had aimed the programs at science and technology in both research and manufacturing activities leading to privately funded materials-processing in space. Five of the 17 scientists would have a chance to fly their experiments on an early orbital test of the Shuttle in a materials-experiments assembly (MEA) package that would not only produce valuable scientific data but would also define further experiments and hardware needed before the first extended flight on Spacelab or Space Shuttle. A Shuttle satellite-deployment mission would fly four of the MEA experiments again, along with five others; the fifth would fly again on the third Spacelab mission devoted almost exclusively to materials processing. Four more of the scientists would have experiments on this mission. (Marshall Star, May 31/78, 1)	'
NASA reported that Cornell Univ. scientists had for the first time turned xenon, rarest of stable rare gases, into a metal by applying tremendous pressure on solid xenon. David Nelson, Jr., and Professor Arthur Ruloff of Cornell’s department of materials science and engineering, in work sponsored by LeRC, reported pressures of 320 000 atmospheres applied to a tiny amount of solid xenon at - 241 °C (- 402°F) ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS, 1978	.	NOVEMBER ORIGINAL PAGE IS OF POOR QUALITY NASA's second high-energy astronomy observatory, heaviest manned earthorbiting spacecraft, undergoing checkout before launch on a mission of general sky survey, mapping x-ray sources and measuring low-energy gamma-ray flux, (NASA photo 78-H-623) had produced the metal. Xenon frozen solid would not conduct electricity; however, at the pressures applied in the Cornell experiment, the electrical conductivity of the frozen xenon increased more than a hundred billion times—that is, it behaved like a metal. Because the xenon returned to the insulating (nonconductive) state when the pressure was removed, no engineering applications were apparent. However, Ruloff noted, “The production of metallic xenon is of considerable scientific interest. Furthermore, the development of these techniques is a step forward in high-pressure research.” Ruloff believed that his group could make oxygen and krypton metallic, and possibly nitrogen, argon, and even hydrogen. If frozen hydrogen could be made metallic and remain in that state when the pressure was removed, it might have practical use as an extremely powerful rocket propellant, a superconductor, or an improved source for fusion energy. NASA would explore the possibility of making metallic hydrogen. (NASA Release 78-174)
NASA announced it would celebrate Jan. 31 the 20th anniversary of the first U.S. artificial earth satellite, Explorer 1, which had ushered the western world into the space age. Principal scientific achievement had been discovery of the Van Allen radiation belts surrounding the earth. Weighing 13.9kg (30.81b), measuring 15.2cm (6in) in diameter and 203.2cm (80in) long, and shaped like a stovepipe, Explorer 1 had been the product of two other organizations now elements of NASA: the development group of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency (ABMA) at Huntsville, Ala., and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) of CalTech at Pasadena, Calif. In 1960 ABMA had become the nucleus of MSFC; JPL had gone under contract to NASA in Dec. 1958. ABMA had provided the modified Redstone booster and the basic satellite design, and JPL had furnished the solid-propellant upper stages of the carrier vehicle and had packaged and tested the payload. Explorer Vs launch from Cape Canaveral, Fla., on a Jupiter C vehicle at 10:48pm EST, Jan. 31, 1958, had come 45 days after DOD had given the Army the go-ahead to prepare a backup to the existing U.S. Navy Vanguard project. Explorer 1 had continued to transmit information on the space environment until May 23, 1958, when its batteries were exhausted; it had reentered March 31, 1970. Dr. James Van Allen had designed the scientific package that discovered the radiation belts named for him. The Explorer 1 launch had been part of U.S. participation in the International Geophysical Year. (NASA Release 78-13; MSFC Release 78-9; JPL Release Jan 27/78; NRC News Report, Feb. 78, 1; Spaceport News, Jan 9/78, 2; Jan 20/78, 3; JPL Universe, Jan 20/78, 1; Marshall Star, Jan 25/78, 2)
MSFC reported that the final airdrop test of a system to retrieve Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters by parachute had demonstrated that the system could save the boosters for reuse. The sixth and final airdrop Sept. 12 had successfully tested a main parachute under forces exceeding those expected during flight. A test vehicle released at about 6100m (20 000ft) altitude from beneath the right wing of a B-52 aircraft had deployed a test parachute when vehicle speed reached about 660km per hr (410mph). Although actual booster recoveries would use three main parachutes each, the test had used only one because the test vehicle weighed only about a third as much as a booster would during recovery, and the B-52 aircraft could lift only 22 700kg (50 0001b). Use of only one parachute had sufficed for the main parachute structural test, however, as it had sustained' the necessary load. Actual weight of the boosters to be recovered after Shuttle launches would be about three times the present world-record weight of 24 948kg (55 0001b) for parachute recovery; each empty booster would weigh about 78 000kg (172 0001b) during descent. MSFC engineers had conducted all six drop tests at the National Parachute Test Range, El Centro, Calif. (Marshall Star, Sept 19/78, 1)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel had recommended elimination of the Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster’s thrust-vector control (TVC) system and modification or replacement of the Shuttle orbiter’s auxiliary power unit (APU), Aerospace Daily reported. The panel said its proposals should make the Shuttle a safer system during its operational phase. With “emphasis shifting to the problems of reusable operation from those of technical breakthrough,” it said in a summary report, “. . . it is not too soon for NASA to review the Space Shuttle design from this point of view.” The report concluded that the recommendations were “not reservation on the panel’s part as to the readiness for SS-1,” but rather said the Shuttle “will fly well, and probably on the scheduled date.” Modifications could be expensive, and panel members noted that such work might absorb the expected “Shuttle dividend,” funds from declining Shuttle development costs that might be devoted to other programs. NASA Administrator Robert Frosch responded that NASA might apply the panel’s proposals in designing its next space transportation system, instead of modifying the present system. (A/D, Dec 5/78, 148)
NASA reported that about 7da after a Delta rocket was scheduled to launch Nimbus-G into polar orbit from WTR, the second stage of the Delta would separately release two chemicals. Project Cameo (chemically active materials ejected in orbit) would consist of a single 90sec release of lithium over northern Scandinavia and a separate release of barium over northern Alaska, to study solar energy and plasma flows and electric fields in Arctic regions. Release of the lithium would create a huge bright-red cloud visible from Greenland, Scandinavia, and other parts of Europe for a maximum of 5min. Release of the barium would create a bluish white cloud visible from the Soviet Union, Canada, and northwestern parts of the U.S. for a maximum of a half hr. NASA had timed the releases during Arctic twilight or early morning, to ensure best lighting for ground-based and aircraft photography to pinpoint the position and configuration of each cloud as a function of time. Primary objective of (he barium experiment was to trace the flow of plasma (ionized particles) in and above the earth’s ionosphere, with particular emphasis on the transition in earth’s electric field between the polar ice cap and the auroral zone over Alaska and Canada. Primary objective of the lithium experiment was to detect electric fields oriented parallel to the earth’s magnetic field. (NASA Release 78-142)
Wallops Flight Center announced that an attempt to recover in midair an experiment launched on a single-stage meteorological rocket had been successful. The experiment (to obtain vertical profiles of nitric-oxide concentrations in the middle and upper atmosphere between 50 and 30km up) would later provide in situ measurements for use by Nimbus-G satellites from launch sites in the northern hemisphere. The payload launched Aug. 29 on a Super Areas rocket at 3:38pm EDT had reached an altitude of 66km (216 000ft); the 8.7kg payload ejected at apogee deployed the parachute immediately as programmed. Radars at WFC had vectored the fixed-wing Sky Van aircraft to an intercept position to snare the package in midair about 4km (13 000ft) up and about 13km (7 nautical mi) offshore from Wallops Island. (WFC Release 78-13).
Emme had been founding chairman of the history committee of the Natl. Rocket Club (later the Natl. Space Club) and had served on the history committees of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the American Astronautical Society. He had been a corresponding member of the Inti. Academy of Astronautics, a fellow of the American Association for Advancement of Science, the British Interplanetary Society, and the AAS; and he was an associate fellow of AIAA. (NASA Release 78-63)
NASA announced it had launched the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) from KSC at 12:36pm EST on Jan. 26, 1978, aboard a Delta rocket. KSC had delayed the launch for 4hr to secure an access door on the Delta heatshield. The Delta had injected IUE into a transfer orbit with 46 342km (28 784mi) apogee, 167km (104mi) perigee, and 28.7° inclination. IUE was part of a joint program by NASA, ESA, and the United Kingdom’s Science Research Council (SRC); more astronomers (200 from 17 countries) would use IUE than had used any previous satellite. The satellite’s telescope, aimed by ground controllers, would examine the ultraviolet spectrum between 1 150 and 3 200A, a region inaccessible to study from the ground. Studies would range from planets in earth’s solar system to some of the most distant objects in the universe, including quasars, pulsars, and black holes in space. Astronomers would study a wide range of stars to learn how they were born, live, and die; the material between these stars from which they are formed and are still forming; strange objects emitting radio waves or x-rays, or both; the sedate nearby galaxies and the violent distant quasars; and earth’s planetary neighbors and their satellites. IUE would complement and extend current NASA observations from the two orbiting astronomical observatories, OAO 2 and Copernicus, and ESA’s TD 1 satellite. IUE’s follow-on would be the 10-ton Space Telescope (ST) to be launched by the Shuttle in 1983. The IUE spacecraft was an octagonal cylinder approximately 1.5m tall and 1.3m between opposing faces. Overall length of 4.2m included a telescope tube at the forward end and an apogee motor extending from the rear. Solar arrays on opposite sides of the spacecraft when unfolded in space would measure 4.3m (14ft) wide. Spacecraft weight was 14791b, of which 2721b was scientific instrumentation. After stabilization, the spacecraft would continuously point one of its two solar arrays at the sun. Goddard Space Flight Center would have a constant view of IUE; ESA’s Villafranca station near Madrid, Spain, a view at least lOhr per day. GSFC had designed, integrated, and tested IUE and provided U.S. ground-support facilities; ESA had built the solar array and the Madrid ground facilities. SRC, in collaboration with Univ. College, London, had provided four television camera detectors to transform spectral displays into video signals for transmission to the ground. The joint agreement had allocated 16hr of viewing time a day to NASA, 8hr to be shared jointly by ESA and the United Kingdom. The U.S. had spent $57 million on the spacecraft, Delta rocket, and other items; ESA had spent $21 million; SRC and Univ. College had spent $9 million. (NASA Release 78-8; MOR S-868-78-01 [prelaunch] Jan 19/78, [postlaunch] Feb 2/78; NYT, Jan 27/78, A-8; ESA Release Jan 20/78; Goddard News, Jan-Feb 78, 1)
Av Wk reported that Europe’s aerospace industry would probably get a sizable slice of procurements for the emerging global maritime satellite-communications system (variously designated as the second-generation system, the Marisat 2 system, or the pre-Inmarsat system). Great Britain’s ambassador Peter Jay and France’s ambassador Francois de Laboulaye had made strong representations on Europe’s behalf to U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher. The fact that all prime contracts (and most of the dollar volume of procurement) for the first global satellite communications system, owned and operated by INTELSAT, had gone to U.S. firms had been a sore point in U.S.-Europe relations for more than a decade. ESA’s Marecs satellite scheduled for launch on an Ariane booster would figure in both plans for the new global system that had received most-favored consideration, as U.S. government agencies (led by the State Dept.) and ComSatCorp struggled to formulate a U.S. position. One plan favored by the U.S. for the interim system was to combine maritime communications packages on three Ford Aerospace-built Intelsat 5 satellites with two or three Marecs satellites. The other favored plan was to combine commercial communications packages on the Leasat system being established by Hughes Communications Services, Inc. for the U.S. Navy with two or three Marecs satellites. (AvWk, Nov 27/78, 13)
DOD’s top command, control, and communications official, Dr. Gerald Dinneen, had characterized the use of satellite-borne lasers to communicate with submarines as costly and inefficient, Aerospace Daily reported. In testimony before the House Committee on Armed Services, Dinneen had said such a scheme would require “a number of satellites.” Spreading out a laser beam would lose energy, so the beam would have to be relatively narrow to maintain contact with an antenna on the surface of the water. This would require either a large number of satellites, or scanning the beam around the surface of the water to communicate with other submarines. Dinneen had downplayed the idea of piggybacking blue-green laser kits on satellites (suggested as a possibility by 1981 or 1982) because very few satellites, communications or navigation, had excess capacity: “If you are going to put something on,” he added, “you have to take off something else.” (A/D, Aug 31/78, 276) During August: The USAF reported that NavStar 2, within seconds of reaching orbit after its May 13 launch, had been tracked by one of SAM-SO’s stations. “About one hour after launch we made initial contact with the satellite,” said 2nd Lt. Joe Fury, satellite operations controller. “Controllers then tested the satellite’s systems to assure their operation before beginning other on-orbit checks to make the spacecraft function.” In its initial 6-hr orbit, the NavStar had “talked” with ground controllers around the world, each of whom fine-tuned the satellite as it passed overhead. Two days after launch NavStar 2’s internal rocket motor, activated by a command from a satellite controller, had shifted it from an egg-shaped orbit into a circular 12-hr orbit; as it arrived there, the NavStar was spun up to 89rpm to stabilize it. For 1.5da, controllers sent computer-coded signals to gradually slow the spin rate to zero. After stabilization, controllers had deployed the two folded solar-array panels and began to warm up the navigation payload to receive computer data transmitted to the satellite, giving it the intelligence it needed to carry out its military mission. Three wk after launch, controllers had positioned NavStar 2 in a 10 900-nautical-mi drift orbit, slowly moving it toward the final position most suitable for the NavStar program. By the mid-1980s the NavStar system of 24 satellites would give users highly accurate data on position, velocity, and time in all weather, anywhere in the world. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug 78, 3)
Av Wk reported that the Soviet Union had launched its 15th killer-satellite test since 1968, less than a mo before the scheduled start of antisatellite-limitation talks with the U.S. The USSR had launched on May 19 an interceptor, Cosmos 1009, toward a target, Cosmos 967, launched Dec. 13, 1977, which had also been target for the USSR’s 14th unsuccessful killer-satellite test Dec. 21, 1977. (AvWk, May 29/78, 23) May 30-June 1: NASA launched Pioneer Venus 1 from Cape Canaveral at 9:13am EDT May 20 atop an Atlas Centaur rocket. It would launch a Venus lander toward the planet 3mo later, about Aug. 7. Pioneer Venus 1,	an orbiter, should reach its destination by Dec. 7, 1978; Pioneer Venus 2,	a multiprobe spacecraft, would arrive 5days later after splitting into a bus and 4 atmospheric-entry probes 13 million km (8 million miles) and 20days out from the planet. Most engineering systems and the interplanetary experiments had signaled normal operation. “Performance so far has been extremely good,” said Marshall Johnson, Venus-orbiter flight director at ARC. “Of course, we have 300 million miles and 6mo to go,” he added. At 9am PDT June 1 the spacecraft was 4 800 000km (2 890 OOOmi) from earth and had traveled toward Venus at 16 580kph (10 296mph). Controllers would make the first midcourse correction June 8, changing velocity to 12.6kph (7.8mph) to aim the Pioneer at the exact point for Venus orbit insertion. Pioneer Venus 1, a spin-stabilized spacecraft with its spin axis perpendicular to the ecliptic plane, consisted of a cylindrical thrust tube serving to transmit acceleration loads into the spacecraft; a 97.5in-diameter circular equipment shelf for mounting electronic units and scientific instruments; a lOOin-diameter cylindrical substrate 48in long for mounting the solar-cell array; and a despun mast assembly supporting three antennas, including a high-gain antenna. A single-piece fitting that would remain on the Centaur at spacecraft separation would be the mechanical/ structural interface with the launch vehicle. Payload was 12 scientific instruments with a total weight of 1001b, using average power of 58watts and peak power of 85watts. The instruments could handle 75 redundant discrete commands and 6 redundant quantitative commands, as well as 17 serial-digital, 24 bilevel, and 31 analog telemetry channels. Three of the instruments would use pyrotechnic firing pulses for various functions. The magnetometer had been put at the tip of a 15.7ft beam to isolate it from spacecraft magnetic fields. The Pioneer Venus 1 launch vehicle was an Atlas SLV-3D Centaur D-14 131ft tall, weighing about 328 6401b at liftoff. The nosecover protecting the spacecraft, a conical/ cylindrical fiberglass fairing about 29ft high attached to a 56in-high aluminum split barrel, had been designed for jettison early in the Centaur burn. NASA had launched Pioneer Venus 1 into an ascent trajectory varying from 3° to 18° south of due east during the first 15days; the 7mo flight to Venus would take the spacecraft more than halfway around the sun (through about 200°), covering about 480 million km (300 million mi). The orbiter would take 3mo longer for the trip than the multiprobe, and would have a slower speed upon arrival at Venus, requiring less power from the orbit-insertion motor. For the first 82 days after launch, Pioneer Venus 1 would fly outside the earth’s orbit. In Aug. it would return inside earth’s orbit and, during the last 4mo of the journey, would cross 42 million km (26 million mi) on a long curving trajectory between the orbits of the earth and Venus. The orbiter’s flight path would resemble that of the Venus multiprobe, to be launched a few days after the orbiter crossed back inside earth’s orbit. NASA had designed the flights to answer questions such as: Why had two planets with about the same mass, formed of similar materials and situated at comparable distances from the sun, evolved different atmospheres? Why had the surface of Venus baked in searing heat, while earth had climate friendly to life? Answers would aid in understanding the evolution of Venus and earth atmospheres and the forces affecting earth’s weather. The Pioneer Venus flights, first devoted to studying another planet’s atmosphere and weather on a global scale, would use the largest number of vehicles devoted to such studies and would make measurements at the greatest number of locations. The flights would record characteristics of Venus’s upper atmosphere and ionosphere, as well as of the lower atmosphere, and interactions of these regions with the solar wind (the continuous stream of ions and electrons flowing outward from the sun) and with the solar magnetic and electric fields. Circling the planet for at least 80mo, the Pioneer Venus orbiter would make the longest observations of Venus to date and would be the first U.S. spacecraft to orbit the planet. A NASA-contractor team under KSC’s expendable vehicles directorate had been responsible for preparing and launching Pioneer Venus I. Hughes Aircraft Co. had built the spacecraft and radar mapper. (Ames Release 78-21; MOR S-825-78-01 [prelaunch] May 15/78; [prelaunch summary] May 11/78; NASA Release 78-68; NASA press brief May 9/78; Marshall Star, May 17/78, 1; May 24/78, 1; Lewis News, May 26/78, 1; JSC Roundup. May 26/78, 1; DFRC X-Press, May 19/78, 2; C Trib, May 21/78, 1-3; W Post, May 21/78, A6; NYT, May 22/78, A10; W Star, May 21/78, A-2)
NASA officials had unveiled the prototype of a parachute-cleaning machine strongly resembling a carwash operation, Today reported. If approved, the facility would become part of KSC’s system to refurbish Space Shuttle parachutes. Each of the Shuttle’s two solid-fuel rocket boosters jettisoned into the Atlantic Ocean shortly after launch would carry 4 nylon parachutes; both the boosters and the parachutes were designed for recovery and return to KSC for another launch. The carwash-type facility would rid the parachutes of salt water before washing and drying them in large machines. The current system had rinsed parachutes in the same water they were washed in; the new system would save some of the 20 OOOgal of water now used by the washing machine. In the carwash-type system, parachutes would move along an overhead rail, rinsed 3 times by water sent through high-pressure nozzles. The 3 main parachutes were 230ft long and 115ft in diameter, weighing 16001b dry and 20001b wet; the fourth parachute measured 145ft in length and 54ft in diameter, and would weigh 12001b dry and 14001b wet. On completion, the new system should require 2hr to wash and 2hr to dry each parachute. (Today, Mar 8/78, 8A)
MSFC reported the first-time assembly of all elements of a Space Shuttle—two solid-fuel rocket boosters (SRBs), an external tank, and an or-biter—in the dynamic-test stand at MSFC. Next step would be resumption of mated vertical ground-vibration testing, with the upcoming series of tests being in launch configuration, the Marshall Star reported. National and regional press representatives were present to film and report on the historic first assembly of the entire vehicle. The SRBs would undergo launch-configuration tests filled with inert propellant, replaced by empty units for configuration tests representing the vehicle just before SRB separation. (Marshall Star, Oct 11/78, 1)
Thiokol Corp.’s Wasatch Div. had delivered the last of eight empty solid-fuel rocket motor-case segments to MSFC for use in the final burnout phase of Space Shuttle ground-vibration tests scheduled for early 1979, the Marshall Star reported. Current vibration testing was in the “liftoff’ phase using motor cases filled with inert propellant; this phase would be completed and the Space Shuttle elements removed from the dynamic-test stand by the end of 1978. All the elements would be returned to the stand, including the empty motor-case segments, for final vibration-test phase simulating the actual Space Shuttle situation just before solid-fuel rocket-booster separation after expending the solid propellant. (Marshall Star, Nov 15/78, 1)
NASA announced plans to launch orbital test satellite OTS-B, forerunner of an operational system, for ESA from Cape Canaveral no earlier than Apr. 27. This new comsat was 1 of 2 experimental models built by ESA to test satellite performance in orbit, with its operational descendants expected to provide satellite links in the 1980s for routing portions of intra-European telephone, telegraph, and telex traffic and providing TV relay services for Western Europe. Under an agreement between the U.S. and ESA, ESA would reimburse NASA for Delta launch vehicle, launch services, and other administrative costs totaling $17 million. NASA had launched Ots 1 Sept. 13, 1977, on a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral; the Delta first stage exploded 55sec. after liftoff. A burn-through of one of the solid-propellant strap-on Castor IV motors, subsequently modified, had caused the explosion. (NASA Release 78-53)
NASA announced it would launch on or about Aug. 7 from Cape Canaveral the second of two Pioneer spacecraft designed for direct measurement of Venus’s dense searing atmosphere, making the 354 million km (220 million mi) flight to Venus on an Atlas Centaur rocket. Pioneer/Venus 2, 20da out from Venus, would separate into five atmospheric-entry craft. Four would enter Venus’s atmosphere at points over the earth-facing hemisphere, two on the day side and two on the night side, and the fifth (the transporter bus) would enter on the day side. The Pioneer/Venus 2 entry probe would arrive five days after the Pioneer/Venus 1 orbiter. The 30 experiments aboard the two Pioneers, a coordinated observational system, would employ the most spacecraft (6) ever devoted to one planet. NASA has designed the flights to study atmosphere and weather on another planet on a global scale as an aid to understanding the forces driving earth weather, and had issued a fact sheet (NASA Release 78-100) giving details on the surface, atmosphere, and stratosphere of Venus. (NASA Release 78-101)
