KSC reported another step toward Space Shuttle launch: mating of the first two segments of the solid-fuel rocket motors to aft skirt assemblies. The first major element of the system, the orbiter, was in the KSC processing facility being prepared for launch: the three main engines had been installed, and work was in progress on other items, especially installation of the thermal protection tiles. The second major element, the huge external tank, had been delivered to KSC for checkout before being mated to the rest of the system. The third major element, the two solid-fuel rocket motors that would fire in parallel with the orbiter engines at liftoff, had been built in sections to be assembled at KSC and were designed for reuse after cleaning, refurbishing, and reloading. Before the first test flight in 1980, the remaining tiles would be installed; orbiter systems checked out; remaining motor segments delivered and stacked; major elements mated on the mobile launch platform; assembly rolled out to the launch pad; and three main engines actually test-fired, in a final systems checkout. (KSC Release 174-79)
The New York Times said that Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, NASA’s associate administrator for space science, had told a House subcommittee that problems with the Space Shuttle would delay flight of the Galileo mission for two years. NASA now planned to launch the mission in 1984 in two parts: one Shuttle flight would take a Galileo orbiter into Earth orbit for launch toward Jupiter, and another Shuttle flight would take another spacecraft for launch into the atmosphere of Jupiter carrying instruments to record its composition. Earlier mission plans were for a 1982 Shuttle launch carrying a single Galileo package including orbiter and Jupiter probe; the change would add more than $184 million to the cost of the project, previously estimated at about $450 million. NASA had had problems not only with the Shuttle insulating tiles but also with the rocket engines. An improved engine was to be standard after the first test flights. Angelo Guastaferro, NASA’s head of planetary programs, said that the 4,600-pound Galileo spacecraft would be too heavy for the Shuttle to carry into Earth orbit without the improved engines. (NY Times, Oct 18/79, A-15)
MSFC reported completion of a number of Shuttle tests precedent to qualifying the engine and combined elements of the configuration for flight later in 1979. Thiokol Corporation, prime contractor to MSFC for Shuttle motor development, completed static firing tests of the solid-fuel rocket motor February 17 at its Wasatch Division in Utah. During the two-minute firing, the motor thrust reached about 3 million pounds, and the system gimbaling the nozzle for guidance underwent the most severe duty cycle expected to occur during flight. This motor, more than 35 meters long and 3.5 meters in diameter, was the largest of its type ever developed for space flight and the first built for use on a manned craft. Qualification tests later this spring would check out production, assembly, and firing cycle to support a full flight schedule. Each launch would use two of the motors, separated at burnout and parachuted into the ocean for recovery and reuse. On February 23, MSFC also concluded ground vibration tests of the complete Shuttle configuration, assembled for the first time to provide data on liftoff and flight conditions. (MSFC Releases 79-18, 79-19, 79-21)
FBIS reported a Tass announcement that the Soviet Union had launched a geophysical rocket for shortwave solar-radiation research. Vertikal 8 was launched at 6:20 a.m. Moscow time from an unspecified point in European Soviet Union to an altitude of 505 kilometers. At 100 kilometers on the upward trajectory, a high-altitude astrophysical probe carrying instruments from Poland, Czechoslovakia, and the Soviet Union separated from the rocket; a recoverable package containing measurement results separated from the probe at 95 kilometers on the downward flight path and launched by parachute. Tass said the participating countries would process the information obtained from the probe. In an interview on Moscow domestic service, a Vertikal experimenter, Academician S.L. Mandelshtam, said some of the equipment was unique and could obtain a television image of the Sun in the shortwave band, which they had never done before. Evaluation of the magnetic tapes had been “a weak point with us,” he said, sometimes requiring a year or two, but must be dealt with in five to seven months because “it is the active year of the sun.” (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 26/79; Moscow Dom Svc, Sept 26/79) September 26-October 3: After a two-month delay, a 100-foot high balloon with a crew of four took off Wednesday, September 26, from Tillamook, Oreg., to try a nonstop balloon crossing of the United States. The planned six-day 229-mile trip of the DaVinci TransAmerica carrying 8,488 pounds of gear under 216,000 cubit feet of helium had lasted out continuous westbound instead of eastbound winds, court battles between two major television networks, and investigation by a federal agency, said the Washington Post. The crew consisted of Vera Simons, German-born artist and balloon pilot from McLean, Va., who had been planning the flight since 1971; Dr. Rudolf J.	Engelmann, director of the DaVinci project and an employee of NOAA at Boulder, Colo.; Dr. Fred Hyde, an eye surgeon from Prairie Village, Kans.; and Randy Burch, a cameraman for NBC television. In August ABC television had sued the group to prevent NBC from having exclusive coverage of the flight; the suit was thrown out of court, but Simons said it had upset her and delayed flight preparations. The flight, originally called a blend of science and art, had lost its science aspect two weeks previously when NOAA reclaimed $28,000 of equipment for measuring air pollutants, ozone levels, and radiation on the cross-country flight. NOAA said it had acted because “an agency employee” might have sought “personal gain,” and agency lawyers were investigating any illegal conflict of interest. Englemann said he knew of no conflict of interest, calling charges against him “a helluva thing,” according to the Washington Post. The 7-Up Company, which put 100 empty containers on board for distribution after the flight, would cover most of the $250,000 cost. Other sponsors included NBC; Louisiana Pacific, a wood and paper combine whose small balloons DaVinci would drop for finders to exchange for free trees; and camera manufacturer Nikon Inc. The transparent plastic balloon “larger than the Goodyear blimp” had lifted off at 8:16 a.m. September 26 into strong westerly winds, rising 300 feet per minute and drifting at about 50 mph toward the western slope of the Rockies. Over the Teton mountains of Wyoming the crew had to don oxygen masks and stay 4,000 feet above the peaks, to escape downdrafts that could put the balloon into an irreversible drop. In this “most dangerous” part of the flight, the crew found that its 9-radio system was not working and they could communicate only on a radiotelephone with meteorologists in Massachusetts; they guessed that an antenna on the balloon had snagged in the rigging during launch. The private meteorologists in New England reported that crew members, frequently on oxygen, sounded “strange.. .not as sharp, like having a couple of drinks”; they had postponed discussing plans until the craft descended to lower altitudes. Traveling at between 17,000 and 18,000 feet, DaVinci had gone down to about 10,000 feet over Denver, Colo., but dropped ballast to regain altitude east of that city. More than 500 miles south of their planned route, the crew on Saturday was flying at 1,000 feet over Kansas, having covered more than 1,380 miles in 4 days. Governor John Carlin tried to radio thanks for DaVinci’s visit “even if they didn’t intend to come.” DaVinci stayed over Kansas for 2 days, about 24 hours behind schedule for an arrival at Norfolk, Va., or Kitty Hawk, N.C. The crew complained of small planes flying close to the balloon: the FAA told them to note the registration numbers so that the agency could “deal with” the offending pilots. (Under federal rules, balloons—lighter-than-air craft—had right of way over all other aircraft.) The balloon had unexpectedly crossed the Mississippi River at St. Louis, Mo., world headquarters of the 7-Up Company that was major sponsor of the flight; officials had thought the route would be 50 miles north. Air traffic controllers at St. Louis’s Lambert Field (11th busiest in the United States) had diverted airline flights because of the balloon, which had right of way over all other aircraft. On its stray southward, DaVinci set a new long-distance record for balloon flight over the United States: 1,084 miles at Denver, breaking a 1,058-mile record set in 1924. As it sailed over Kansas and Iowa in a more northerly direction toward its original course, it also passed the 100-hour mark to approach the 137-hour endurance record set by Double Eagle II in August 1978 on its transatlantic crossing. While the crew ate its Sunday dinner over Nebraska wheatfields, waiting for good winds, they got a call from Boston: Maxie Anderson, the Albuquerque balloonist who had been aboard Double Eagle II on the first transatlantic balloon trip, said “We’re pulling for you.” Nearly six days after takeoff, at 11:56 p.m. Monday, October 2, DaVinci was forced down in a northwest Ohio bean field after a thunderstorm chased it across Missouri, Illinois, and Indiana, caught it in the dark (after 11 p.m.), and dumped snow and heavy rain into the gondola. Three of the crew came down safely, but Vera Simons fractured her left leg. DaVinci had not broken Double Eagle II’s endurance record (which would have occurred at 4:23 a.m.), but it had achieved the longest overload wind-borne balloon flight, 2,003 miles, surpassing the nearly 1,897 miles flown 65 years ago by a European balloon. (W Post, Sept 26/79, B-l; Sept 27/79, A-l; Sept 30/79, A-l; Oct 1/79, A-22; Oct 2/79, A-l; Oct 3/79, A-l; W Star Sept 28/79; Oct 1/79, A-3; Oct 2/79, A-l; NY Times, Oct 3/79, A-16)
The Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS) reported Japan’s successful launch of an experimental communications satellite Ecs, also called Ayame, from Tanegashima Space Center on an N-l rocket at 5:46 p.m. local time. Early orbit elements were 34,411-kilometer apogee, 193-kilometer perigee, 604-minute period, and 24.1° inclination. Designed for communications tests at very high frequencies, Ayame would later be maneuvered into stationary orbit, the National Space Development Agency said. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 6/79)
NASA reported that scientists and engineers from five countries (Australia, Canada, India, Japan, and the United States) had met at WFC to compare techniques of gathering data on ozone in the stratosphere. Instruments in use worldwide had used different techniques of measurement and had never compared for system errors or other biases. The joint effort was sponsored by the World Meteorological Organization, FAA, and NASA. Over a 14-day period beginning October 21, the group would perform 20 rocket-borne experiments to establish instrument precision and comparability; the resulting information should define ozone variability during the period. Measuring instruments would fly on four kinds of rockets (Orion, Nike Orion, Super Areas, Super Loki) scheduled to coincide with orbiting-satellite passes, to compare rocket measurements with those from the satellites. Ozone data would also come from meteorological rockets and balloons as well as from ground-based equipment. (NASA Release 79-130; WFC Release 79-17)
The Library of Congress Science and Technology Division’s NASA support project issued two news alerts, the first on a Soviet “space mini shuttle” like the French project Hermes, reportedly designed to carry five or six crew members (or the equivalent in cargo) to visit and replenish orbital stations. The vehicle would use a normal expendable Soviet rocket for launch and make a gliding reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. The translation pointed out that the Soviet concept differed from the United States reusable Shuttle, more closely resembling the CNES manned hypersonic glider. The second notice covered government and CNES decisions affecting the scope and timing of Hermes. The French Council of Ministers on March 7 had approved a Hermes launch capability of seven tons to carry a materials-processing program called Minos, using a space transport vehicle like a mini shuttle to bring back products made in the space factories. A Hermes would be launched by the last of five versions of the Ariane vehicle; development of the Hermes and the Ariane 5 would take from seven to eight years. (LC/S&T Alerts 5498, 5499)
The Washington Star reported that faulty aluminum might have been built into the Space Shuttle and newly constructed military and civilian aircraft. A German aircraft firm, Fokker, had discovered the problem in May; Reynolds Aluminum Company, the manufacturer, told a high-level team of officials from NASA, DOD, and FAA that the plates might have “soft spots” because they were not cooled properly during fabrication. Walter Williams, NASA chief engineer, said that, until records of the disposition of the faulty aluminum were located, “we have to worry about everything.” The agency suspected that the large external tank (which would carry the Shuttle during blastoff) might contain some of the metal, as might the Shuttle itself, as well as its solid-fuel rocket engines. External-tank strength was crucial because it bore the weight of the liquid-oxygen and liquid-hydrogen fuel under high pressure, as well as the solid-fuel rockets during liftoff. Spokesmen for Reynolds and the Pentagon were “vague about the amount of aluminum involved,” the Star said, but an internal NASA memo said it was about 15 million pounds of aluminum plates. {W Star Aug 7/79, 1)
DOD launched a Block 5D defense meteorological satellite (DMSP) from Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif., at 11:22 a.m. local time on a Thor booster into an orbit with 837-kilometer apogee, 818-kilometer perigee, 101.5-minute period, and 98.8° inclination. DOD made no announcement, but Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that the 1,131-pound spacecraft would be tested for about 15 days before being put into operation in its nearpolar Sun-synchronous orbit. (NASA wkly SSR, May 31-Junc 6; AvWk, June 18/79, 56) June 7; The Soviet Union launched Bhaskara, an Earth-observation satellite, for the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) from the Kapustin Yar cosmodrome at 2 p.m. local time on an SS-5 Skean vehicle into an orbit with 541-kilometer apogee, 518-kilometer perigee, 50.7° inclination, and 95.2-minute period. Named for an ancient Indian astronomer, the 1,000-pound India-built spacecraft was the second launched for India by the Soviet Union; it carried television cameras and equipment for studying hydrology, meteorology, and forestry. India’s first satellite, launched about four years ago, was still in orbit and functioning well. (NASA wkly SSR, June 7-13/79; Spacewarn SPX-308; WPost, June 8/79, A-15; AvWk, July 23/79, 59; D/SD, June 11/79, 200; July 3/79, 10)
The North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) issued a fact sheet on satellite decay predictions by its Space Defense Center, watching over more than 4,500 man-made satellites in orbit around the Earth. The Tracking and Impact Predictions (TIPs) gave time and position for large items such as payloads and rocket motors that might survive reentry and impact on Earth; for smaller objects likely to burn up without reaching the ground, the center would compute only a probable date of decay. Predictions would depend on many variables but were necessary under a 1971 pact between the United States and the Soviet Union that both nations would help identify objects that might reenter over the other’s territory; TIPs would prevent mistaking a reentering object for an incoming warhead and triggering warning networks. (PAO, Peterson AFB, Apr 15/79)
NASA reported that the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, which arrived at KSC April 10-after a piggyback flight from MSFC, would be rolled out to Launch Complex 39 on May 1 as part of an exercise to clear the way for launch of its sister ship, Columbia, which had arrived at KSC March 24 for checkout and final installation of thermal tiles. This would be the first time a complete Space Shuttle configuration had been put together in the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) and moved to the launch pad; use of the Enterprise would confirm compatibility of assembly and launch facilities and ground support equipment with elements of the Shuttle and would rehearse KSC staff in Shuttle handling operations. On April 17, a 15-story external tank was mated with two inert solid-fuel rocket boosters on a mobile launcher platform in high bay 3; more than 75,000 visitors to the center viewed the assembly moving down the 2-mile towway to the VAB, into which Enterprise was moved April 18. The delta-wing orbiter would be mated with the external tank in a 19-hour operation before its 3.5-mile ride to Pad A, former site of Apollo lunar launches modified for Shuttle operations, where it would remain until the first week of June. (NASA Release 79-50)
NASA reported that four organizations in the United States and Canada had formed a joint sounding-rocket program to study this month’s total solar eclipse and its effect on Earth’s atmosphere and ionosphere. The February 26 event, visible in totality only in the northwestern United States and central Canada, would be the last one in this century observable from the North American continent. Working from two launch sites in western Ontario north of Minneapolis, Minn., NASA, the Army’s Atmospheric Sciences Laboratory, the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory, and Canada’s National Research Council (NRC) would gather data or predicting atmospheric responses to such disturbances. NASA, through WFC, would be the U.S. lead agency for seven rocket launches during the operation. The NRC in Canada would provide construction, ground and flight safety, launch coordination, and other support. The Army lab would sponsor an experiment measuring electron densities, and the U.S. Air Force lab would operate a mobile observatory to measure infrared radiation from the upper atmosphere. (NASA Release 79-18)
Continuing flight tests of the orbiter Columbia were halted December 18 after two technical failures. Simulated liftoff occurred at 4:30 p.m. EDT with backup crew members Joe Engle and Richard Truly in the cockpit, but two minutes later they failed to receive signals of the simulated separation of the solid-fuel rocket boosters; 8 minutes 50 seconds into the flight, they foiled to receive a signal showing successful separation of the external tank. (W Star, Dec 19/79, A-4)
NASA launched UK 6 from WFC at 7:26 p.m. EDT on a Scout into an orbit with 656 kilometer apogee, 607-kilometer perigee, 55° inclination, and 97.5-minute period. Under the terms of a contract of March 16, 1976, between NASA and the U.K. Science Research Council, the launch was the second on a fully reimbursable basis, at an estimated cost to the United Kingdom of $4,956,733, including booster, support services, tracking and data acquisition, and use of U.S. facilities. The British-built spacecraft, weighing 340.6 pounds carried an experiment to measure the charge and energy spectra of galactic cosmic rays, and two X-ray astronomy experiments on structure and position of low-energy sources and on fluctuations in X-ray emission from low galactic latitude sources. UK 6 would carry two experiments for the Royal Aircraft Establishment to study performance in orbit of new types of solar cell and the susceptibility of metal-oxide semiconductor devices to radiation in a space environment. NASA judged the mission successful as of October 1979. (NASA Release 79-61, 79-78; NASA MOR M-490-301-79-02 [prelaunch] May 14/79, [postlaunch] Oct 18/79)
NASA launched for the U.S. Air Force a satellite called SCATHA (spacecraft charging at high altitudes) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station at 4:42 p.m. EST on Delta into a transfer orbit pending its boost into operational orbit February 2. Later orbit elements were 43,297-kilometer apogee, 27,512-kilometer perigee, 1,416.6-minute period, 6.5° inclination. SCATHA carried twelve experiments, three provided by NASA, to collect data on high-energy solar-wind particles causing false signals from satellites by building up electrical charges on their surfaces. Military and commercial satellites in geostationary orbit over the Earth at 35,900 kilometers (22,300 miles) had been the major sufferers; the charges could effectively disable vital communications by causing equipment failure, false recording of unachieved events, or initiation of unplanned events. SCATHA would meet the greatest challenge of its planned 1-year lifetime during a solar eclipse period beginning in March, when electrical charging would reach its height; Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) had included an electric-field detector, a pair of 50-meter antennas to be extended in opposite directions in March to form a single instrument longer than a football field. Extension of the antennas might effect the spacecraft’s dynamics. The USAF’s Space and Missile System Organization (SAMSO) would reimburse NASA about $9 million for the launch. (NASA Release 79-3; NASA MOR M-492-303-79-01 [prelaunch] Jan 17/79, [postlaunch] Oct 25/789; O Sen Star Jan 31/79, 1; Today, Jan 20/79, 8A; Jan 22/79, 6A; Jan 30/79, 10A; W Star Jan 23/79, A-6) During January: The ESA announced that it planned to launch one of its Intelsat V communications satellites on Europe’s Ariane booster. The first four of this series of seven would be launched from mid-1979 to late 1980 on U.S. Atlas Centaurs; ESA’s board opted for a 1981 Ariane launch of its sixth Intelsat V and for Shuttle launches for the other two. (ESA Release Jan 1979, 1)
MSFC announced that on June 13 it would begin flight-qualification testing of a Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster at the Thiokol range near Promontory Point, Utah, to demonstrate the production, assembly, and firing cycle for a full series of Shuttle flights. Assembled from four segments, the 35-meter-long motor would first be static-fired to demonstrate “ablative safety factors” of the motor nozzle, which would be gimbaled to simulate control during a launch. Designed to move 8° in any direction, the nozzle would be part of the Shuttle guidance system. Insulation and ablative materials would protect the motor from heat during firing. (MSFC Release 79-54) The first flight-qualification firing of a Shuttle motor was “quite satisfactory,” said George Hardy, manager of the booster project at MSFC. After witnessing the firing in the Utah desert, Hardy said that the amount of thrust developed and the performance of the steering nozzles was “well within specifications.” The motor and igniter had been modified as a result of test firings of four development motors during the past two years. Static tests of the flight-configured solid-fuel rocket booster that each Shuttle mission would use in pairs would complete qualification testing. (MSFC Release 79-60)
The Washington Post reported that India's “problem-plagued space program” had suffered another setback August 10 when a seven-story-tall launcher, product of 11 years of work, crashed 5 minutes 15 seconds after liftoff and dropped its payload into the Bay of Bengal 300 miles from the takeoff point. The failure was a real disappointment, following USSR launches of two India satellites, both of which developed serious problems: the first, orbited in April 1975, lost power after a few days. A much more complex satellite launched in June 1979 from a Soviet site would have mapped India’s surface using television cameras to record mineral deposits, water reservoirs, forests, and Himalayan snowcover; the cameras failed to switch on, and scientists got only the data from lesser experiments on oceans. This launch was India’s first attempt to orbit its own spacecraft on its own launcher from its own site (the small island of Sriharikota north of Madras, whose residents were moved to the mainland as a precaution). Though reporters were not allowed to attend, government cameramen were present. All publicity on India’s space program discussed mineral location and other social uses, but the Washington Post noted the military element: India was trying to join the “club” that included the United States, France, the Soviet Union, China, and Japan; India had lost a border war with China in 1962 and had been at war with Pakistan three times in the past 30 years. A rocket able to orbit a spacecraft could give India intermediate-range ballistic-missile capability; a satellite transmitting television images of mineral resources could also monitor troop movements. The lost booster was a four-stage rocket with solid-propellant motors designed to orbit an 88-pound satellite. The launch had been successful until first-stage burnout; the anomaly had occurred in second-stage flight. (W Post, Aug 11/79, A-13)
FBIS carried a story from Tokyo Kyodo in English that a Japanese fact-finding mission to the People’s Republic of China cited as evidence of the PRC’s “superior space technology” its CSSX-4 rocket fueled by liquefied oxygen and hydrogen, able to carry up to 700 kilograms; Japan’s latest could carry only about 130 kilograms. As vehicle for an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM), the CSSX-4 could take a 3-megaton nuclear warhead more than 10,000 kilometers (6,000 miles), in range of both the United States and the Soviet Union. The three-stage rocket, 43 meters long, and 3.3 meters in diameter, reportedly weighed about 200 tons. (FBIS, Kyodo in English, Nov 11/79)
MSFC reported that it had delivered most of the hardware that would be needed by the first Shuttle mission: main engines, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket boosters. All three main engines had arrived at KSC; two had been installed, and the third was scheduled for next week. The first external propellant tank had been barged to KSC and installed in the VAB to await arrival of Columbia from the processing facility nearby. Flight hardware for two solid-fuel rocket boosters, except for the loaded motor segments, had been delivered to KSC, and the loaded parts were to arrive about September 20. (MSFC Release 79-82)
NASA announced that a special staff of consultants appointed in May 1979 to assess Shuttle management had submitted its report to Deputy Administrator Dr. Alan M. Lovelace. The report contained eight major conclusions (and comments). 1) When the Shuttle program began, NASA managers took an economical approach to space transportation. Subsequent budgets challenged managers to bring in a difficult technical program with limited funds. —(NASA originally envisioned a S5.15 billion program, predicting first manned orbital flight in 1978.) 2)	Shuttle management had achieved “a commendable level of accomplishment. . .considering fiscal constraints placed upon the program since its inception.” (Though this report necessarily focused on deficiencies, it noted that Shuttle-program personnel had individually and collectively achieved a great deal in a large and very complex program,) 3)	Shuttle management, in an effort to proceed toward completion even under funding limitations, had set up work schedules demanding more performance than could be delivered. (This approach had resulted in deferment of some of the planned work each year, as funds required exceeded those available. When critical new work became necessary within a fiscal year, as technical problems came up, even more scheduled work had to be deferred. This resulted in continual planning adjustments that precluded establishment of a stable baseline and led to program inefficiency. (Example: subcontractor work increased or decreased repeatedly as funding changed in critical areas such as tile manufacturing. Program changes and associated up-and-down expenditure rates had led to termination of experienced contractor and subcontractor personnel, who became unavailable later because of aerospace industry demand. The subsequent employment of inexperienced personnel reduced overall efficiency. The report called this a major cause for concern, especially in the production phase of the program, also, costs due to delays in solving technical problems had increased.) 4)	Long-range planning and status reporting were lacking: emphasis was on the current fiscal year with only secondary attention to work remaining to be done. Near-term planning took so much attention that long-term impact of deferred work was not integrated into the budgets. (Effective long-range planning requires clear understanding of what has been accomplished, plus accurate prediction of remaining work. Shuttle management faced budgets showing unrealistic costs of its goals, with no effective status-reporting system. Most program planning consisted of constant near-term replanning to count up expenditures in a timely manner, although measuring the work achieved through these expenditures and estimating work still needed were weak. Management tools lacking in some major Shuttle contracts, such as cost reporting integrated with work measurement, were useful but did not provide an automatic solution. (The only available means of assessing even the partial funding requirements of the Shuttle was an agencywide budget plan called POP [program operating plan] inadequate for program control: it appeared only twice a year and contained little pertinent data between July and March. NASA needed a reliable way—lending itself to independent evaluation—to know program baseline and status, with realistic cost and schedule projections. Management must overcome the cumulative impact of previous constraints and pressures, while making allowance for the need to rely on contractor input.) 5)	The Shuttle organization functioned well from a technical standpoint but not in the areas of schedule and budget. Organization needed strengthening, and two-way communications needed improvement. (The original concept of Shuttle organization was a Level 1 program director at NASA Headquarters, a Level 2 [integration] program manager at JSC, and Level 3 separate program offices at the various centers: JSC for the orbiter; MSFC for the main engine, external tank, and solid-fuel rocket booster; and KSC for checkout and launch. Prime contractor support to project offices would be Level 4. Time had altered the concept: the Headquarters Level 1 associate administrator had become the de facto program director, who required the directors of JSC, MSFC, and KSC to take more part in activities reporting to them; responsibility for funding shifted from Level 2 to Level 1. This seemed a feasible arrangement, but the report said “none of the management levels in Rockwell and NASA had a good grasp” of undone work and other items needing completion before shipping Columbia to KSC. Investigators said Level 1 “broad and detailed involvement” with technicalities meant less time for cost and schedule. NASA needed cost awareness “independent of contractor input” and sensitivity to “lower-level cost trends.”) 6)	Schedule changes were no longer a valid way to cope with reduced program or funds; fixed delivery schedules and milestones in the initial operating program not yet achieved required a new management approach. (Work schedules and budgets must allow for modifications required after the first few Shuttle flights. Users must recognize that initial operations would include development; NASA should make Shuttle users aware of realistic performance and schedule commitments, with priority to successful completion of development.) 7)	Transition to the operational phase remained to be worked out; management should ensure that current organization alignments for Shuttle operations are appropriate. The NASA/DOD interface needed clarification. (NASA Headquarters managed program operations, with operations offices at JSC, MSFC, and KSC; cooperation between the operations and program offices was evident, but transition from development to operations would need work. Since needs and plans of the DOD user community would affect NASA planning and budget, management to forestall problems should maintain “high-level near-term understanding” of DOD plans.) 8)	The potential was high for unexpected technical problems, schedule slips, and cost growth. All program planning should include appropriate reserves. (Although the report noted that some parts of a total management-control and information system were in place and functioning well, significant potential for problems would remain until deficiencies cited in the report were corrected.) (Shuttle Program Management Assessment rept, Sept 12/79 [issued to press Oct 18/79], HistOfc fls; NASA note to editors NE79-20; JSC Roundup, Sept 21/79, 1)
ESA announced that it had scheduled the first test flight of its Ariane launcher for December 15 from Kourou, French Guiana. Firing of an Eridan sounding rocket November 14 had confirmed operational status of the launch base and downrange stations in Brazil and on Ascension Island. (ESA Info Bltn 32)
MSFC said the propellant tank for Columbia’s engines was ready for flight and would leave the Michoud Assembly Facility June 29 for KSC, where it would be fitted to the orbiter and two solid-fuel rocket boosters. The Martin Marietta-built 154-foot tank with 140,000 gallons olTiquid oxygen and 380,000 gallons of liquid hydrogen was the only part of the Shuttle assembly that was expendable; like the boosters, it would separate from the Shuttle at about 75 miles altitude and drop into the ocean but would not be recovered. (MSFC Release 79-66)
Astronauts interviewed in Las Vegas, Nev., on the eve of an Apollo 11 10th anniversary commemoration noted the lack of funding and support for the space program on the part of the U.S. government. James McDivitt, who commanded Apollo 9, said that he foresaw nothing like the Apollo program coming along. Ron Evans, command-module pilot for Apollo 17, said that spectacular space events were not in the cards for the next 20 years. Charles Duke, 10th man to walk on the Moon; Al Worden, Apollo 15 command-module pilot; and Dick Gordon, Apollo 12 command-module pilot, said the Shuttle system was not as safe as craft used in previous manned programs, as “Congress isn’t ready to give NASA the money it needs.” (Today, July 15/79, 20A; W Post, July 15/79, A-4; P Inq, July 17/79, 11)
NASA announced a number of personnel changes. —Eldon D. Taylor, formerly of the NASA Headquarters Office of Space Science and Applications, most recently assistant director of administration for the NSF was approved by the president July 30 as NASA’s first inspector general. He had also been deputy assistant administrator for resource management at the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) before going to NSF. (NASA anno Aug 3/79) —Dr. Lee R. Scherer, director of KSC since January 1975, would become associate administrator for external relations at NASA Headquarters September 2, succeeding Arnold W. Frutkin, who retired June 22. Scherer, who retired in 1964 from the Navy as a captain, was program manager for the lunar orbiter manned spacecraft while on assignment from the Navy in 1962 and was director of DFRC 1971-1975. (NASA Release 79-106; NASA anno Aug 8/79) —Succeeding Scherer as KSC director would be Richard G. Smith, the deputy director since 1974 of MSFC who had been on detail to Headquarters as deputy associate administrator for STS (the Shuttle program). Smith had been in charge of operations during the Skylab reentry. At MSFC, he had been program manager for the Saturn 5 rocket engine that made Apollo possible. (W Post, Aug 9/79, A-ll; NASA anno Aug 8/79) —Dr. Walter B. Olstad, chief of space systems division at LaRC since July 1975, would become deputy associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology at NASA Headquarters effective October 1, succeeding Dr. John M.	Klineberg, who became deputy director of LeRC July 1. Olstad had begun as a research engineer at the NACA Langley laboratory in 1954, working first with transonic tunnels, then in reentry physics. (NASA Release 79-110) —JSC announced that Clifford E. Charlesworth had become acting deputy director August 10, succeeding Sigurd A. Sjoberg, who retired May 18. Charlesworth for three years had been deputy manager of the Shuttle payload integration and development program office, responsible for coordinating JSC technical management and Shuttle users. He was deputy manager of the Skylab program 1970-1972, then manager of JSC’s Earth-resources program office. He joined JSC as a flight controller in 1962, working on Gemini and Apollo missions and was one of the flight directors during Apollo ITs 1969 Moon landing. (JSC Release 79-51)
