JSC described a simulated Shuttle mission ending in a return-to-launch-site abort, as one of a series run in the Shuttle avionics integration laboratory (SAIL) in preparation for launch later this year. The SAIL resembled a full-size orbiter stripped of its skin, with wires and connectors bared, configured with the same flight-qualifiable hardware and electrical systems being used on the real orbiter at KSC. SAIL employees would run test sequences on a 24-hour basis to check' out the complex Shuttle avionics system; a typical test would begin with a nominal phase (all systems operating normally), then engineers would inject failures to see if the flight system could cope. The Shuttle dynamic simulator would feed equations for aerodynamics, environment, and motion of the orbiter, solid-fuel rocket booster, and external tank into the test system. More than 300 mock missions would fly in the JSC lab before the projected November launch. (JSC Release 80-016)
INTELSAT announced that Guinea became the 105th member in a ceremony at the U.S. State Department when Ambassador Mamady Lamine Conde signed the operating agreement. Guinea planned to operate a ground station using the Intelsat spacecraft located over the Indian Ocean. (INTELSAT Release 80-15-1) July 15.'The Wall Street Journal said that ESA would go ahead with a $125 million probe of Halley’s comet because original plans for a $370-$470 million joint mission with NASA had become impossible due to U.S. budget cuts. The original plan called for launch of a Space Shuttle that would have sent a satellite to Halley’s as well as to Tempel 2, a comet much farther out in space. NASA had to scrub the two-comet mission because it couldn’t get the money for a new kind of space engine to make the flight; the Wall Street Journal said that it was still studying a stopgap plan to use an old-fashioned rocket to shoot a spacecraft past Halley’s when it approached Earth. ESA now planned to put up a 750-pound satellite, Giotto [see July 10], from Kourou in July 1985 to rendezvous with Halley’s in March 1986. (IKS'/, July 15/80, 30) July i7.The Washington Star reported that discovery of a “serious potential safety defect” in the nation’s most widely used jet engine had led the FAA to order mandatory inspections for two-thirds of the short- and medium-range commercial jetliners in the United States. The engine was standard on three major planes: the medium-range Boeing 727, with three engines, and two short-range planes with two engines each, the Boeing 737 and the McDonnell Douglas DC-9. Each FAA-ordered inspection on a Pratt & Whitney JT8D engine would take 170 hours to disassemble it to the point where it could be checked. Some of the engines were nearly new; others had been serving for several years: a JT8D would normally be retired after 20,000 cycles in service. When a Hawaiian Airline DC-9 blew up on takeoff at Honolulu June 15, FAA inspection revealed that a portion of the engine was subject to metal fatigue and failure because of the factory machining of the metal. No serious injuries occurred in the Hawaii incident. However, random FAA checking showed that other planes equipped with JT8D engines had cracks in the same engine spot as the Hawaii plane. The potential flaw in the engines was the eighth compressor hub, a 591-pound wheel with an array of blades located in the middle of the 3,000- to 4,000 pound engine. Each engine had 13 compressor hubs, each with a successively smaller set of fans to collect air and force it through smaller areas into the fuel-combustion chamber. Machining of a flange on the eighth compressor hub was ground against the grain of the metal, putting unusual strain on that part. FAA spokesman Dennis Feldman could not estimate the cost of the inspection programs, thought to be in tens of millions of dollars; nor could he give any definitive answer as to whether the manufacturer or the airline would have to cover the cost. (W Star, July 17/80, A-l)
The Wall Street Journal said that the Ariane rocket failure in its second test flight was a blow to western European development of a competitor for the U.S. Shuttle. ESA experts had not solved the mysterious engine shutdown that dropped the Ariane into the ocean after launch from Guyana [see May 23]. The difficulty seemed to be with the Ariane feature they valued most, the first-stage engine that had been fired 200 times on the ground and had worked flawlessly during test flights. The same engine had been highly reliable in the French rocket Diamant, now being phased out after years of successful use. ESA and France (which paid 64% of Ariane expenses and had done much of the development) hoped to put Ariane into service in mid-1981, ahead of the Shuttle, which was able to orbit six times the weight of an Ariane payload and return to Earth for reuse. Shuttle problems had put NASA behind, but the Wall Street Journal said prolonged delay in Ariane development would have “serious consequences” for ESA. The Europeans had bid vigorously for launching assignments for Ariane because it would be available earlier as well as less expensive, but engine problems could undermine the claim. (US/, May 28/80,20)
NASA announced an MSFC award to Martin Marietta and Aerojet Liquid Rocket Company of contracts to define a liquid-propellant boost module for the Shuttle external tank, to increase its cargo-carrying capacity to 5,400 kilograms (12,000 pounds). Under the new terms, modifying initial program-definition contracts let earlier in 1980, the two firms would study adapting Titan hardware and systems to the boost module. They had been building Titans for years; the U.S. Air Force had used Titan 2 in the mid-%1960s to launch Gemini and was still using it. Martin Marietta, under a contract valued at $1.18 million, would carry out follow-on studies and design activities on the overall system; Aerojet, under a contract for $782,500, would work on modification of the Titan 3 stage 1 engine. A modified version of Titan had launched communications satellites and other Earth orbiters as well as deep-space Viking and Voyager payloads. The first use of the augmenting booster would be in 1986. (NASA Release 80-154; MSFC Release 80-126)
July 7NASA said that it had agreed with ESA to let two European scientists enter the mission-specialist training program for Shuttle astronauts at JSC [see May 30]. The Europeans, Claude Nicollier of Switzerland and Wqbbo Ockels of the Netherlands, were both ESA employees and, as Spacelab 1 payload-specialist candidates, had undergone a screening and selection process like that of U.S. candidates. NASA agreed to train them in view of Spacelab delay and in recognition of ESA’s contribution to the STS in funding Spacelab development; ESA would reimburse NASA for the cost of training the two. (NASA Release 89-106; ESA Info 19) July S.WFC observed the 35th anniversary of the launch on July 4, 1945, of its first research rocket, a 17-foot Tiamat. Since it became a rocket range, Wallops Island had seen the launch of about 12,000 research vehicles of from 1 to 7 stages, sent as high as 19,000 miles above the Atlantic at speeds over 38,000	mph, and the launch of 19 satellites. From Wallops, rhesus monkeys Sam and Miss Sam rode into space on a Little Joe booster in 1959-60 to test the Mercury spacecraft before Alan Shepard took it into space; first test of the Echo balloon also occurred here. Early research at Wallops collected aerodynamic data at transonic and low supersonic speeds as part of the push to break the sound barrier; today, the launches gathered data on space, aeronautics, and characteristics of aerospace flight and tested ideas and devices for future spaceflight. NASA’s predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), put its Pilotless Aircraft Research Station on Wallops Island under the direction of LaRC; its mission was aeronautical research to supplement wind-tunnel and laboratory work at LaRC. When NASA came into being in 1958 and took over LaRC and other field centers and research facilities, it put the Wallops station directly under NASA Headquarters and renamed it Wallops Flight Center in 1974. (WFC Release 80-8)
The People’s Republic of China launched a long-range missile May 18 capable of delivering a nuclear warhead as far as Moscow or the west coast of the United States, Xinhua press agency announced. Australian navy ships reported the rocket’s splashdown in the ocean about 750 miles northwest of Fiji. Diplomatic sources in Beijing said the rocket may have been fired from a complex about 1,000 miles west of there, or from the Lop Nor nuclear-arms test area in northwest China. If so, the rocket made a flight of 5,000 miles or more. (W Star, May 19/80, A-6; FBIS, Xinhua in English, May 23/80; Hong Kong AFP in English, May 18/80; Moscow World Svc in English; Tass in English, May 16-25/80)
LaRC, manager of the Scout program, announced that NASA had awarded Hampton Technical Center (a division of Kentron International, Inc., of Dallas) a $2.2 million,contract modification calling for ten Algol 111A Scout rocket motors by March 31, 1981. Prime contractor for Scout was formerly Vought Corporation, also of Dallas; the modification was made with the same parent firm, Ling Temco Vought. Name changes and other corporate restructurings would streamline the work done for NASA, with estimated savings of about $1 million to be gained by contracting with a subsidiary already qualified to build and load the motors. To be qualified, a firm must have fired two or three launch vehicles, a process costing about $1 million. Scout, NASA’s smallest vehicle, was a four-stage solid-propellant rocket that had launched payloads for NASA, DOD, and several foreign countries. (LaRC Release 80-15)
NASA reported results of a coordinated balloon and rocket launch at WFC August 13 to measure fair-weather electric fields. A balloon carrying Aerospace Corporation instruments measured vector electric fields on six booms and evaluated the data with an on-board COSMAC microprocessor. At 30-kilometer altitude, it saw unexpectedly large fields for about one hour. Rockets carrying payloads from Cornell and Penn State Universities launched 20 minutes apart during the balloon flight, both saw anomalously large electric fields that peaked near 70 kilometers. The results would call for revision of present theories, as they suggested that some other generator of electricity was active in addition to the thunderstorm-driven system and the ionospheric system. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 23/80)
KSC reported on steps taken by NASA to ensure survival of an endangered species, the manatee or sea cow, whose entire U.S. population estimated at about 1,000 lived in Florida waters. Brevard County, site of KSC, had the highest incidence of manatee deaths in the state. KSC included the site of the Merritt Island National Wildlife Refuge containing hundreds of species of plants, birds, mammals, and reptiles; 12 of the latter were endangered, more than in any other single site in the 48 states. About 20% of the nation’s manatees spent part of the year on the Space Center, and KSC activities had been arranged for minimum interference with the indigenous wildlife. Aerial surveys over KSC furnished information about group migratory habits, feeding grounds, and times for scheduling work in areas when the manatees would be elsewhere. Space technology provided tracking devices to monitor the routes traveled by individual animals. Ships that recovered spent Shuttle boosters docked in the Banana River, a prime manatee feeding ground. NASA had fitted its ships with a propulsion unit to maneuver them without use of large propellers found to be highly dangerous to the slow-moving and air-breathing manatee; the unit proved to be better at retrieving booster parachutes without tangling the lines. (KSC Release 95-80)
MSFC reported that it had shipped two segments of a Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket motor, used during 1979 in mated vertical ground vibration tests, to Thiokol’s Wasatch division in Utah to be refurbished and loaded with propellant for use as a flight motor after being combined with other segments shipped earlier in January. (MSFC Release 80P-12)
NASA reported that a final test firing of the Shuttle solid-fuel booster motor February 13 in the Utah desert was successful, and the motor would be ready for flight as soon as test-data results were available. Tests of this motor had begun in July 1977 with static firing of the first of four prototypes; three more development tests followed, the last Februaiy 17, 1979. A series of test firings of flight-type motors began June 13, 1979, to qualify them for manned flight; the test just concluded was the third and final firing of that series. Robert E. Lindstrom, manager of the Shuttle projects office of MSFC, said completion of the tests meant that the solid-fuel booster motors would perform successfully in flight. After propellant burnout, the boosters would separate and plunge into the ocean for retrieval and reuse. Two of the solid-fuel boosters were already on the launcher at KSC awaiting integration with other components (external tank and the orbiter itself) in preparation for the first Shuttle flight later this year. The assembled motor, major component of the booster, was more than 35 meters (115 feet) long and 3.5	meters (12 feet) in diameter, largest rocket motor of its type developed for space flight and the first built for manned spacecraft; it would generate 3 million pounds of thrust. (MSFC Release 80-18; NASA Release 80-25)
NASA noted the 20th anniversary of the first research of the X-15 rocket plane that opened up the realm of hypersonic flight and contributed significantly to the U.S. space program. The X-15 made 199 flights in a joint NASA-U.S. Air Force-Navy research program between 1960 and 1968, during which it set the standing records for altitude and speed of winged aircraft: altitude of 1,796 kilometers (354,200 feet, more than 67 miles), and on another flight 7,274 kilometers per hour (4,520 miles per hour), or 6.7 times the speed of sound. X-15 pilots included Scott Crossfield, the first; astronaut Joe Engle; and Neil Armstrong, first man on the Moon. In 1954, at the beginning of the X-15 program, hypersonic flight had many unknowns: effects of weightlessness, high heat rates, steep reentry angles, attitude control in space—questions that only actual flight could answer. The program would also explore capabilities and limitations of a human pilot in an aerospace vehicle; analysis of the first 44 flights showed that 13 would have failed without a human pilot. Positive result of the program was the finding that human capabilities of sensing, judging, coping with the unexpected, and using a variety of acquired skills remained undiminished in all key problems of aerospace flight. A significant X-15 contribution to the space program was to demonstrate that simulators could be used for crew training: no X-15s had two seats, so the pilots had to train in simulators. Success of this method led to all-out use of simulators for the space program. Total cost of the program, including construction of three X-15 aircraft, was about $300 million. (NASA Release 80-37; NASA Actv, May 80, 8)
NASA reported award to United Space Boosters, Inc., subsidiary of United Technologies Corporation, of a contract for a two-ship recovery force to retrieve used Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters from the Atlantic Ocean. This supplemented a contract under which the firm assembled and processed solid-fuel rocket boosters for flight. The ships would locate and retrieve expended booster casings, parachutes, and other equipment from the Atlantic and deliver them to a disassembly facility at Cape: Canaveral Air Force Station. The disassembly facility was on the eastern shore of the Banana River, a shallow area where an endangered species, the sea cow or manatee, made its home. The ships would use a 425-HP waterjet stern thruster instead of propellers that could maim or kill the manatees [see May 29]. The ships, UTC Liberty and UTC Freedom, were being built and would be delivered in October 1980 and January 1981; both would be used on each Shuttle mission, each retrieving one booster and its components. At liftoff, the boosters would bum simultaneously with the three-engine cluster on the Shuttle. After about two minutes they would be jettisoned and land in the Atlantic about 257 kilometers (160 miles) downrange from KSC, their descent being slowed by three parachutes on each casing. Each vessel would carry four parachute-rollers to handle the three main and single drogue parachutes on each booster and cranes to hoist aboard the collateral flight equipment. The ships would carry equipment to plug the nozzles, pump water out of the casings, and ready them for towing to the disassembly facility, where they would be cleaned and taken apart for shipment to Utah and reloading with solid-fuel propellant. Each casing could be used for up to 20 missions, reducing the cost of flight operations. The ships would also have sophisticated electronic communications and navigation gear such as radars, sonars, loran, direction finders, fathometers, and gyrocompasses. (NASA Release 80-89)
FBIS carried a Tokyo Kyodo story that Japan’s Space Development Council had decided that the failure last February of its Ayame 2 communications satellite was caused by malfunction of the apogee motor. The ground station lost contact with Ayame 2 three days after launch when engineers tried to fire the motor to put it into proper orbit. The council report called for domestic production of the apogee rocket and other major satellite components in future; the apogee motor had been made in the United States. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, June 12/80)
WFC reported the successful launch July 31 or a two-stage sounding rocket to test both the vehicle system and a “mother-daughter” two-part payload, an electrodynamics package to be used in a series of three launches from Norway later in 1980. Launched at 8:18 a.m. on an Honest John-Orion rocket, the 216-kilogram (476-pound) instrumented payload was programmed to separate at about 95 kilometers (59 miles) altitude and measure the electric field and profiles of ion density and conductivity in the atmosphere. (The three experiments to be launched in Norway would measure energetic-particle and X-ray fluxes and ultraviolet light from the aurora in addition to the electric field and ion density and conductivity.) Telemetry showed that the payloads separated as planned and both the sections reached peak altitude of 111 kilometers (69 miles). The “daughter” payload, a sphere with six 1-meter booms extending from it, performed well and exhibited good stability until descent. At 73 kilometers (45 miles) on the way down, a 65-foot-diameter mylar parachute deployed from the “mother” section; this was a lower altitude that planned, resulting in a faster fall than planned, but the section’s stability allowed it to acquire usable data. This section also contained a movie camera to film parachute deployment; recovery of the section from the Atlantic was in progress. (WFC Release 80-9)
KSC reported final preparations under way for moving the orbiter Columbia from VAB to pad A, Launch Complex 39, within the week. Mating Columbia in the VAB to its external propellant tank and solid-fuel rocket boosters November 24 was followed by tests of ground-support connections for checkout, fueling, and launch, and of the entire flight system. December 23 should see completion of the installation and checkout of ordnance (any explosive devices for parting components like the boosters and external tank from the vehicle in flight). Gap-filler work needed before rollout would be complete by December 27; the crawler-transporter would take its place under the mobile launch platform December 28. Senior NASA managers would review the VAB tests and pad A status before rollout to make sure no constraints existed. (KSC Release 275-80)
Newspapers reported the launch at 8:04 a.m. local time of the 771-pound.Rohini 1 by India’s space research organization (ISRO), making India the sixth country in the world to build and launch its own satellite. Rohini 1 was launched from Sriharikota Island near Madras on a four-stage SLV-3 solid-fuel rocket into an orbit with a 919-kilometer apogee, 306-kilometer perigee, 44;7° inclination, and 97-minute period. “This is a great day for India,” said Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, who estimated the cost of the launch vehicle at $25.2 million.	. The Washington Post said that the launch was remarkable “for a country that still used bullock carts as a prime mode of transportation.” Despite its poverty, India had the world’s third largest pool of technically trained personnel; Dr. Satish Dhawan, head of ISRO, said that the successful launch would pave the way. for liquid-fuel rockets carrying larger payloads up to 1,300 pounds. India’s 17-year-old space program had had setbacks, including a failure in August 1979, when its rocket dropped into the Bay of Bengal about 5 seconds after liftoff because the second stage failed to ignite. Launch of Rohini “underscored India’s place as the most powerful nation of the South Asian subcontinent,” said the Washington Post. (WPost, July 19/80, A-13; W Star, July 19/80, 4; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, July 21/80)
KSC reported that Shuttle orbiter Columbia, mated with other elements on a mobile launcher in the VAB, was ready for its first major test as a unified system. On November 24, Columbia moved 300 yards from the VAB to the orbiter-processing facility where solid-fuel rocket boosters and external tank had been assembled on the mobile platform. A Shuttle-interface test running more than two weeks would check electrical and mechanical connections between elements and on-board flight systems. Interface tests originally scheduled earlier this week were delayed by problems including failure of a device providing umbilical link with the orbiter. This was the first flow of flight hardware through KSC processing facilities: the orbiter Enterprise, not built for spaceflight, served as “pathfinder” through the facilities in 1979 but lacked many of the systems installed in Columbia. Individual Columbia systems had passed checkouts in late 1979 and early 1980, but the,upcoming test would check the entire Shuttle system as a unit with the prime and backup crews taking part in simulations of ascent to orbit, abort, and descent to landing. William H. Shick, chief of prelaunch test operations, noted that this would be the first time the astronauts had occupied the cabin with the vehicle in a vertical position; they would “get a feel of what they can and can’t reach,” he added, to assess crew comfort while awaiting launch. (KSC Release 206-80)
KSC reported that the Shuttle interlace tests were coming to an end. This first major checkout of the integrated flight system was to close with a series of four simulations using prime and back-up crews of the first launch to validate computer programs that would serve cn-board flight systems during the first STS mission in 1981; the last two simulations were scheduled for December 18. Tile work and processing of gap fillers was continuing, with only a small amount of gap-filler work to be completed after the Shuttle moved to Pad A of Launch Complex 39. At the pad, filling of the liquid-oxygen storage tank was to be complete December 17, as would insertion and removal of dummy payloads to test the service structure. Tests of UTC Liberty retrieving solid-fuel rocket casings from the ocean would continue through December 19, and sister ship UTC Freedom would begin sea trials later. (KSC Release 268-80) The Washington Star carried a UPI report that astronauts Richard Truly and Joe Engle had put Columbia through its third rehearsal of the week December 18 “as slick as silk,” improving chances of launch March 14. (W Star, Dec 19/80, A-5)
MSFC reported that July 21 had marked the end of an era: Gustav A. Kroll, last of the original 118-man “von Braun team” to leave the center, retired just six weeks short of having 35 years of U.S. government service. He had headed the structures division of MSFC’s Structures and Propulsion Laboratory. Kroll arrived in the United States in 1945 in Operation Paperclip and worked at Ft. Bliss, Tex., with the von Braun team, which transferred to Huntsville in 1950. Kroll became a U.S. citizen in 1954. He received NASA’s exceptional service medal in 1976 for “guiding the overall structural design of the solid rocket boosters,” two of which would be used in the first two minutes of flight on each Space Shuttle launch, recovered, and refurbished for reuse. He had worked in structures throughout his career: “all of them—every one of Marshall’s projects—Redstone, Jupiter, Saturn, Shuttle—all of them,” he said. Looking back, “there are no favorites, but the highlight would have to be the Saturn V flight and landing on the moon.” (MSFC Release 80-101)
The New York Times and Aerospace Daily said the Soviet Union tested a “killer satellite” in space, ending a two-year gap in testing antisatellite weapons. (A killer satellite is an orbiting vehicle designed to wreck other satellites by hitting them in direct collision or exploding nearby, or by directing a force such as a laser beam against them.) Cosmos 1174, launched from Tyuratam April 18, apparently neared its target (Cosmos 1171, launched from Plesetsk April 3) on its first orbit and exploded. Sources said the test was a failure. The Soviet Union first tested an antisatellite weapon (ASAT) in 1963 and apparently was successful in destroying targets at altitudes up to 150 miles. The Soviet tests aroused concern because of U.S. dependence on satellites for a number of military uses: reconnaissance, communications, and early warning of attack. Though many U.S. satellites orbit 20,000 miles or more from Earth’s surface, many systems for reconnaissance and electronic intelligence might be vulnerable. In 1978 Defense Secretary Harold Brown announced that the Soviet Union had an operational ASAT capability; after launching a killer satellite in May of that year, it had suspended tests when talks began on controlling such weapons. U.S. sources said Moscow stopped the tests as proof of its interest in a treaty to limit strategic bombers and missiles. A treaty was signed, but President Carter asked the U.S. Senate earlier this year to hold off action because of Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. Talks on limiting ASATs was also suspended. A U.S. antisatellite system in preparation but not expected before 1982— the Vought miniature homing craft carrying a heat-seeking guidance unit—was a small rocket for launch from high-altitude aircraft. The DOD was also working on a laser-powered system for possible deployment in the 1990s. With talks on limiting ASATs now suspended, and the outlook for arms control increasingly bleak, officials said the Soviet Union might have decided to revive its space weapons program. Any agreement in the near future was said to be unlikely. (NY Times, Apr 19/80, 28; A/D, Apr 21/80, 280)
The Washington Post reported that two Florida launches had lit up evening skies with brilliant colors and a streak of light that prompted calls to authorities from as far away as Nashville, Tenn. In the second of four tests to see whether ionized clouds blocked communications among aircraft, satellites, and ground stations, a U.S. Air Force rocket from Eglin Air Force Base in the Florida panhandle sprayed the ionosphere 116 miles above the Gulf of Mexico with 106 pounds of barium Sunday, December 6, creating a pink, green, and purple haze monitored by scientists on the ground and in airplanes. One aircraft was positioned so that the barium cloud passed between it and an experimental satellite in orbit 25,000	miles up. About 30 minutes later, the Intelsat 5A F2, largest communications satellite ever built, roared into orbit with the rocket trail familiar to Space Coast residents. (W Post, Dec 8/80, 4)
WFC reported that it had made nighttime electric-field measurements in the “middle atmosphere” from balloon ceiling to the ionosphere (30 to 100 kilometers), to extend measurement capability into this region, and to compare techniques simultaneously on a worldwide basis. During the past decade scientists had become able to obtain reliable data elsewhere in the atmosphere (troposphere, stratosphere, ionosphere, magnetosphere, and even in deep space) but not in the middle region. WFC used rockets and a balloon for its local experiments; radars in Massachusetts, Alaska, Peru, Puerto Rico, France, and Scandinavia made supporting ground measurements. At 8:35 p.m. EDT August 13, WFC launched a hundred-thousand cubic-foot balloon inflated with helium, carrying a 21-kilogram (46-pound) payload to measure AC and DC electric fields from to 10 kHz in the middle atmosphere. The mission ended 10 hours, and a chase plane located the payload near Roanoke, Va. At 10:40 p.m. EDT, WFC launched a two-stage Nike-Orion rocket carrying a 232-kilogram (510-pound) payload that reached peak altitude of 90.2. kilometers (56 miles) and recorded data during both ascent and descent. The payload included a water-recovery system; it was recovered at 11:58 p.m. and returned to WFC. At 11:11 p.m. EDT, WFC launched a single-stage Super Areas to reach 90 kilometer (58-mile) altitude, carrying an experiment called Blunt Probe to measure electric fields as well as positive and negative conductivity in the middle region, for comparison with balloon and Nike-Orion measurement. (WFC Release 80-11)
MSFC noted the arrival of the age of automation in its Materials and Processes Laboratory, where industrial robots were improving manufacturing techniques in Space Shuttle hardware production. Robotics, integrated into totally computer-controlled systems, would help meet high launch-rate fabrication and between-flight refurbishment requirements of reusable Shuttle items. One of the two MSFC robots was helping spray foam insulation for thermal protection on booster structures such as forward and aft skirts or nosecones. The second, currently used for advanced welding, would serve in a thermal protection process for the external tank. A third robot to arrive in December would run a high-pressure water blaster to strip insulation from reusable Shuttle hardware. (MSFC Release 80-138)
The Washington Post reported that NORAD in Colorado Springs, Colo., had identified a flaming object that streaked across the sky and plunged into the Gulf of Mexico earlier in the week. The object was apparently the remains of a Soviet rocket, probably Cosmos 549, that had been in orbit for seven years. (W Post, Sept 19/80 A-5)
NASA said that the Shuttle orbiter Columbia would move out of the orbiter-processing facility at KSC no earlier than November 23 for tow to the VAB and mating with the external fuel tank and solid-fuel rocket booster. Actual date would depend on results of final inspections now in process; NASA would issue an update November 22. (NASA Release 80-173)
The Washington Post reported the death of Walter R. Dornberger, 84, who as a German general had supervised Wernher von Braun’s work on the V2 rocket during World War II. Cause of death June 26 was not given in either the Washington Post or Aviation Week & Space Technology. Dornberger was visiting in West Germany. He had come to the United States in 1947 after two years in a British prisoner-of-war camp; like more than 100 other German-born rocket scientists who worked for the U.S. Army and U.S. Air Force, he became a U.S. citizen. He also worked for Bell Aerosystems Company, where he was a vice president. A volunteer in the imperial German army of World War I, Dornberger was a career soldier to the end of the second war. In 1932 he was given charge of a group of scientists working on rocket concepts and moved to Peenemunde in 1937. When the first test of the V2 October 3, 1942, was successful, Dornberger asked von Braun: “Do you realize what we accomplished today?” Von Braun said “Yes, today the spaceship was born.” In 1958, nearly three years before President Kennedy voiced the goal of landing a man on the Moon by 1970, Dornberger predicted that man would be on the moon in 10 years: “whether he is Russian or American depends on how much money Congress is willing to spend,” he said. (W Post, July 2/80, B-6; AvWK, July 7/80, 25)
The Washington Post quoted a White House source as saying that “We’re running out of patience on the Space Shuttle.. .There’s a feeling here that we can’t tolerate any more delays in the Shuttle program.” Noting the six postponements that had done “serious harm to the space agency’s credibility,” the Washington Post said that “in fairness.. .the delays caused by engine and tile troubles are not all its fault.” When Pratt & Whitney lost the engine contract to Rocketdyne, it sued NASA, delaying engine tests for a year; lack of money also caused delay. JSC Director Christopher Kraft pointed out that money cutbacks in 1978 meant that “we delayed building the tiles, and that naturally delayed our test procedures, which naturally delayed us from getting at the answers we now have.” The custom-built tiles, each shaped to fit a specific place on the fuselage, took 25 hours apiece to install. After many were attached, NASA found that half had lost their strength in the bonding process; technicians had to remove and coat the tiles before replacing them. When NASA shipped the Shuttle orbiter piggyback on its Boeing carrier from Palmdale, Calif., to Cape Canaveral in 1979, only 10% of its 30,922 tiles were in place, and some of those fell off during the trip. NASA enlisted a force of 1,200 workers to install the tiles, working two 10-hour shifts six days a week at the Cape. When the coating problem developed, the crews were attaching 750 tiles a week but removing 100. About 5,000 cavities on the frame remained to be filled, and NASA forecast August as the finishing date for the task. The other technological challenge was the Shuttle’s engine cluster, three liquid-hydrogen engines, each 10 times as powerful as the largest jet engine and burning 1,000 degrees hotter than any engine before it. These were the first liquid-fuel rockets designed for reuse; said Shuttle program manager Robert Thompson: “We had to expect that in heating it and stressing it with repeated use we were going to run into problems.” During tests, engines had caught fire and even blown up; 6 of the last 12 tests of the three engines firing together had to be stopped because of overheating. By summer’s end the tests would have cost $1 billion more than the $500 million NASA estimated. NASA’s costs by the time the first Shuttle flew would be $264 million for solid-fuel rocket engines; $381 million for tiles; $442 million for the external fuel tank; $1.5 billion for development of the main liquid-rocket engine, amounting to an overrun of almost $1.6 billion. Money was a lesser concern, however, than the slips in schedule. The Shuttle was the first civilian vehicle designed to carry surveillance satellites for the DOD; those due to fly in 1983 were the biggest and most sophisticated ever built, weighing up to 25 tons each, too big to be carried by any other rocket including DOD’s Titan. Former astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.), ranking Republican on the Senate subcommittee on space, said that DOD would have to alter its craft to fit on the Titan if they could not fly on the Shuttle in 1983. (W Post, June 3/80, A-2)
ESA said that the six groups investigating the malfunction at the Ariane L02 launch ended four weeks of study on one of the four first-stage engines. They reported that the suspect engine recovered from the sea [see June 17] had a foreign body at the injector level: an identification plate was found near the injection orifices, and they were trying to determine if it was there at launch or got there during the engine’s immersion in the sea. Analysis of engine noise showed differences from results recorded at ground tests in Europe; also, engine start-up parameters (combustion-pressure build-up time) showed abnormal dispersions, but researchers had not been able to link them to observed phenomena. ESA said that the L03 test flight originally set for November 1980 might not occur until February 1981, and the fourth test flight by midyear, to qualify the rocket for operational launch. (ESA Info Bltn 17)
The Space Shuttle Columbia, OV-102, rolled out of KSC’s orbiter-processing facility at 6:01 p.m. and moved to the VAB for mating to its external tank and solid-fuel rocket boosters. Next rollout, from VAB to launch pad, would occur late in December. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt Nov 26/80; NASA anno Nov 24/80)
Since Mt. St. Helens erupted May 18, NASA reported what it called the most complete observations to date of volcanic aerosols in the stratosphere. Large volcanic eruptions had previously changed Earth’s weather (short-term) and climate (long-term). ARC had collected Mt. St. Helen’s data for its aerosol climate effects (ACE) program, using the U-2 aircraft in sampling missions on May 19, 22, and 27, and June 14 and 17. A preliminary analysis of the volcanic plumes showed solid ash and sulfuric acid, the proportions varying in different samples. The acid in the stratosphere was several hundred times greater than before the eruptions. The first flight found ash particles as large as 30 microns, of composition similar to ash on the ground near the volcano. (Largest particles found on later flights were about 3 microns.) Gaseous sulfur dioxide also increased: levels on the first flight were 10 to 1,000 times ambient levels, and on the second flight were 100 times normal. The second flight found water vapor in the plume to be 10 times the normal amount, showing that volcanic water was injected into the stratosphere. A July 1979 ACE flight over Alaska gave baseline levels for comparison with conditions after the eruption. On the day of the eruption, one of NASA’s SAGE teams in Wyoming launched instruments on a balloon to enter and measure the dust plume; it detected dust concentrations 400 to 1,600 times normal in the stratosphere. The SAGE satellite launched in 1979 tracked the Mt. St. Helens’ clouds as it had those of two previous eruptions. WFC sent an Orion P-3 a plane on an “underflight” as the cloud went over North Carolina and the Atlantic Ocean, along with a Super Loki rocket; these flights gave scientists simultaneous data readings from above and below the atmosphere. By late June, LaRC scientists decided that, although Mt. St. Helens could have boosted stratospheric aerosols by 50%, there was as yet no sign of adverse climate change. (ARC Release 80-62; NASA Release 80-107) July 22.NASA unveiled the first scientific and applications payload for the STS (Shuttle) at GSFC’s clean room, where instruments were installed in the package planned as an alternate payload on orbital test flight 4, scheduled for April 1982. (Prime payload for this flight belonged to DOD.) Called OSS-1 for NASA’s Office of Space Science, the entire payload was designed, built, tested, and integrated by a team of GSFC engineers and scientists headed by Ken Kissin, OSS-1 mission manager, and Jon Busse, project manager for Shuttle payload integration and rocket experiment. Project scientists were Drs. Siegfried Bauer and Werner Neupert. The seven principal OSS-1 experiments were in the disciplines of space plasma physics, solar physics, astronomy, and life sciences, each represented by one or more instruments. (NASA Release 80-114, 80-117)
NASA launched an eighth space-processing applications rocket, SPAR 8, November 18 from the White Sands missile range in New Mexico. Its payload, developed and tested by MSFC, was three experiments processed in about five minutes of zero gravity in the coast phase of the suborbital flight, using a three-axis room-temperature acoustic levitator; a single-axis acoustic-levitator furnace to produce 1,575 °C; and a specialized processing furnace. All experiments had apparently performed as expected: two were on acoustic levitation (use of soundwaves to keep liquids from contamination in touching the walls of a container), one of them to produce a high-temperature glass; the third experiment studied movement of bubbles in molten glass. The payload, damaged at impact on Earth, was recovered for damage assessment and study by the investigators of the results. (MSEC Release 80-148)
The British Interplanetary Society’s Spaceflight announced that Skylark 12, a rocket launched from Natal, Brazil, by British Aerospace, reached a record altitude of 834 kilometers (SF, Apr 4/80, 177) Spaceflight reported a discovery by USSR scientists that the lunar regolith (the dust covering the Moon’s surface) contained nonoxidized iron. Lunar samples proved to be corrosion resistant when exposed to terrestrial atmosphere. The finding, registered at the USSR Committee for Inventions and Discoveries, was confirmed at other USSR and U.S. laboratories. This unusual form of element resulted from the action of the solar wind on the Moon’s surface, said Dr. Valery Barsukov, director of the Institute of Geochemistry. Particles from the solar wind “seize the oxygen of the lunar matter and carry it away into space,” leaving pure metal on the lunar surface. The iron had not oxidized during the eight years since the Luna 16 expedition. (SF, Apr 4/80, 164)
NASA reported award of contracts to Martin Marietta and Aerojet worth $750,000 and $350,000, respectively, for a liquid-propellant boost module to increase the cargo-carrying capacity of the Shuttle’s external tank. The goal would be to provide additional thrust by adapting portions of the Titan, still used by the U.S. Air Force as its heaviest intercontinental ballistic missile. The companies, which had been building the Titan and its engines for the U.S. Air Force, were considered the logical choice for adapting the booster to the Shuttle. The studies, managed by MSFC would be completed by the end of September 1980. (NASA Released 80-32; MSFC Released
