NASA officials began a “tanking exercise” of the Shuttle on its KSC launch pad to see if newly installed water-pressure systems would prevent recurrence of shockwaves produced by booster exhaust during the April 12 liftoff. The New York Times quoted officials as saying that shockwave reduction was “mandatory” before Columbia could head for space again. Columbia, already erected on the pad for its second mission, contained a payload of five experiments and a 50-foot mechanical arm put aboard in June when the cargo bay was “closed out,” the New York Times said. NASA might remove a package of scientific experiments rather than risk damaging it during liftoff. (NY Times, Sept 15/81, C-2) —MSFC said September 8 that the Shuttle’s external tank was “successfully filled with liquid propellants” in a cryo-loading test at KSC designed to check out ground and vehicle systems. The success was “a major milestone” toward the second Shuttle flight, now scheduled for October 9. (MSFC Release
The Washington Post said that a USSR satellite that fell into the sea off the coast of China August 23 might have “lost its way to the Moon.” The Soviet foreign ministry said that Cosmos 434 was not nuclear-powered and posed no danger of nuclear contamination: the Washington Post said that the Soviet Union seemed eager to allay any fears of radioactive debris like that Cosmos 954 strewed over Canada’s “sparsely inhabited” Northwest Territories in January 1978. The Soviets said that the reentered craft was an “experimental lunar cabin.” This description tallied with a long-held belief that Cosmos 434 was relic of an unsuccessful manned lunar mission planned in the 1960s by the Soviet Union to rival the U.S. Apollo program, which had put 12 men on the Moon by the time it ended in 1972. Between November 1970 and August 1971, the Soviet Union had launched four unmanned satellites that performed complex maneuvers in Earth orbit simulating those of a lunar-landing mission. A two-volume book on the Soviet space program published in 1979 by the American Astronautical Society said that the satellites (Cosmos 379, Cosmos 382, Cosmos 398, and Cosmos 434) seemed to be practicing acceleration toward the Moon, braking into lunar orbit, landing on the Moon, and returning to Earth. The Soviet Union never disclosed the purpose of the satellites, but U.S. analysts believed them to be flight tests of a propulsion unit for manned lunar spacecraft. As the 50th anniversary of the 1917 Bolshevik revolution neared, observers thought it likely that the Soviet Union would mark 1967 by putting a man on the Moon; in 1968; the year before the first U.S. moon landing, Soviet cosmonauts were saying that, when the Americans reached the Moon, Russians would be there to greet them. The Soviet program apparently had a series of setbacks that “cooled the leadership’s enthusiasm,” the Washington Post said. In June 1969 the first attempt to launch the G rocket (a giant new booster like the U.S. Saturn 5) was said to have ended in a mammoth explosion demolishing the launch complex. It also apparently exploded in the early stages of flight during two other tests, in the summer of 1971 and on November 24, 1972. (W Post, Aug 30/81, A-25)
WFC reported the launch of a coordinated balloon, plane, and rocket experiment to study electric fields in thunderstorms. Five vehicles simultaneously measured the fields from troposphere to ionosphere for a number of firsts: first multiple flight of electric-field devices, first simultaneous direct observations of ionosphere lightning, and first measures of lightning waveforms in the stratosphere. (WFC Release 81-11)
FBIS reported the launch at 9:30 a.m. local time of Astro-A, a scientific experimental satellite, by the University of Tokyo’s Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science. The launch from Kagoshima had been postponed twice, from February 18 to 19 and again to February 21, because of rain. NASA’s Space Tracking and Data Network (STDN) supported both this launch and that of Comsat 4. Called Hinotori (fire bird) in orbit, the new satellite was Japan’s 22d object to orbit and its 7th scientific satellite. It was the heaviest (190 kilograms) ever launched on the MU-3S rocket. In an elliptical orbit with 695-kilometer apogee, 568-kilometer perigee, and 37-minute period, Hinotori would study X-rays, gamma rays, and other aspects of solar flares. Its data would be of particular value because the Solar Max satellite launched by the United States in February 1980 on a similar mission was having instrument trouble. (FBIS, Kyodo in English, Feb 21/81; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Feb 23/81)
Lewis Research Center (LeRC) said that it had awarded four contracts totaling more than $7 million for design and development of a modified Centaur launch vehicle and components to be used as a Shuttle upper stage. A $1,545 million contract with Teledyne Industries called for five digital computer units and nine remote multiplex units. A $1,593 million contract with Honeywell was for three inertial-measurement groups, part of an automatic navigation and guidance system. A $3,412 million contract with General Dynamics was for design and development of two modified Centaur vehicles. A $.933 million contract with United Technologies Corporation would cover building four RL10-3-3A rocket engines, two of which would provide primary thrust for one Centaur. Work under these contracts would con PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED tinue through September 1981; they were all to support the Galileo mission to Jupiter, scheduled for launch in 1985, and the international solar-polar mission in 1986. The Centaur for these missions would resemble the one used over the past 15 years as an upper stage for Atlas and Titan boosters on Mariner missions to Mars and Venus, Pioneer missions to Jupiter and Venus, Viking and Voyager missions, and the cooperative Helios missions with West Germany. It had carried low Earth-orbit missions for NASA, such as the Heao series and commercial and military geosynchronous satellites. (LeRC Release 81-26; NASA Release 81-75)
The European Space Agency (ESA) reported on the May 23, 1980, failure of Ariane flight L02. The cause was “clearly identified” as inherent instability in one of the four launch-vehicle engines. All external causes had been excluded, and the manufacturer was able to reproduce the failure at a single-engine test stand. Devices for fuel injection in the combustion chamber provided unstable despite positive tests during development. The fault, “unfortunately a very common phenomenon with liquid-fuel rocket engines,” had occurred in “most rocket programmes. . . notably in the American programmes.” ESA said that it had abandoned the injector in its present form and was working on modifications. The report concluded with a tentative launch schedule to be confirmed after the modifications were validated. (ESA Info Bltn, Jan 28/81 for release Feb 2/81)
NASA announced the establishment of two new divisions within the Office of Space Transportation Systems and the disestablishment of the Expendable Equipment Division. L.M. Weeks, NASA Headquarters deputy associate administrator for space transportation systems, said the change would direct increased attention and impetus to the widebody Centaur program recently approved by NASA. A new Upper Stage Division would manage the widebody Centaur, the inertial Upper stage (IUS), the spinning solid upper stage (SSUS), and the solar-electric propulsion system (SEPS) proposed for use on the Galileo and solar-polar missions. Frank van Rensselaer, director of the former Expendable Equipment Division, would direct the new upper Stage Division. Jerry Fitts would direct a new Solid Rocket Booster and External Tank (SRB/ET) Division. (NASA anno May 26/81)
Columbia, flagship of U.S. Space Shuttles, “proved that at long last it is ready to carry astronauts into orbit,” said the Washington Star, describing “a successful and spectacular firing of its three powerful engines.” At the end of the practice countdown, 8:45 a.m. EST, the three engines at the base of the delta-wing spaceship “flashed to life, spewing torrents of almost invisible flame, steam, and smoke over the launch pad” and sending a thunderclap of sound across KSC. “All engines are up and running,” the control center announced. The world’s most sophisticated rocket machine had generated 1.1 million pounds of thrust for 20 seconds, while the 122-foot-tall orbiter with fuel tank and boosters remained fixed to the pad by eight 3-foot steel bolts. In actual launch, explosive charges would sever the bolts, releasing the orbiter, and the solid-fuel boosters would help lift it to orbit. During the final countdown, 526,000 gallons of fuel were pumped into the external fuel tank. Technical, weather, and procedural difficulties had postponed the firing, a first test of all shuttle systems combined, three times this week. Minor problems had delayed today’s test another hour. The Washington Post said that a labor walkout at KSC immediately after the 8:45 a.m. firing might threaten the April 7 date set for the actual launch of Columbia. About 800 aerospace workers, members of the International Association of Machinists employed by Boeing in spaceport support work, had struck in a pay dispute. Richard Smith, KSC director, said that the strike might jeopardize remaining operations; however, he noted that the union had a legal right to strike because its contract with Boeing had expired some time ago. Columbia crew members John Young and Robert Crippen, who had waited out 2Vi years of delays, viewed the test firing from the air; Young in a Shuttle training jet at 4,000-foot altitude, and Crippen in an identical craft about 1,900 feet higher. (W Star, Feb 20/81, A-l; W Post, Feb 21/81, A-7)
Press reports said that test firing of a rocket built by Space Services Inc. (SSI) seeking to be the first private company to launch satellites for profit, ended with an explosion on the launching pad while 18 of its crew watched. The 53-foot Percheron [see July 23] broke into four major parts, costing the firm more than $1.2 million and delaying the project at least six months. Flight plans had called for the rocket to climb to 14,500-feet and drop into the Gulf of Mexico about three miles from the site. (NY Times, Aug 6/81, B-7, W Star Aug 6/81, A-8)
NASA launched the world’s largest telecommunications satellite, Intelsat V-2, from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas Centaur at 6:42 p.m. EDT into a highly elliptical transfer orbit with 35,960-kilometer apogee, 172-kilometer perigee, 633.9-minute period, and 24.1° inclination. Originally scheduled for May 21, the launch was delayed by computer problems in the rocket’s main safety-control system. The huge communications satellite, weighing more than 2 tons, was second in a new series of nine international communications satellites the first having been launched December 9, 1980, as an on-orbit spare for the Atlantic network, which would eventually consist of four satellites. The first five Intelsat Vs would be launched by Atlas Centaur; the next three, by Europe’s Ariane booster. Average estimated cost of an Atlas Centaur launch was $42 million; that of an Ariane launch was $27 million. Overall cost of the Intelsat V program was $680 million, or some $76 million for each mission; estimated average cost of each satellite was $34 million. Intelsat V-2, after coming on station at 355 °E for a month of testing, would be operational by July at 335.5 °E, handling communications between the Americas and Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. It could transmit 12,000 telephone calls simultaneously in addition to two television color channels, having twice the capacity of Intelsat IV-As previously launched by NASA for INTELSAT. The 106-nation organization jointly owned and operated 12 satellites over the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans in order to handle two-thirds of the world’s overseas communications, from telegrams and telephone calls to television and data. In 1984, INTELSAT would begin a series of three improved Intelsat V-As capable of 15,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two television channels; 1986 would inaugurate Intelsat Vis, each handling more than 40,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two television channels and designed for launch by either the Ariane or the Space Shuttle. (NASA MOR-491-203-81-02 [prelaunch] May 20/81, [postlaunch] June 17/81; NASA Release 81-60; INTELSAT Release 81-10-1; W Post, May 24/81, A-3, D/SD, May 27/81, 140; A/D, May 28/81, 151; Spacewarn SPX-332, June 30/81)
The People’s Republic of China (PRC) launched 3 experiments in space physics on a single rocket, making a total of 11 manmade Earth satellites sent into space by that country since 1970. FBIS quoted PRC press service Xinhua in reviewing the successful series that began April 24, 1970. Previous reports had said the Great March 3 rocket would use a liquid hydrogen and oxygen mixture “slightly less powerful than the European Ariane system,” in which the People’s Republic had “shown close interest.” Both the rocket and its payload were “wholly Chinese manufactured.” (FBIS, Xinhua in English, Sept 20/81; Hong Kong AFP in English, Sept 14/81; Paris AFP in English, Sept 10/81)
Press reports described the rollout of space shuttle Columbia on its eight-tread mobile launching platform from KSC’s VAB to launch pad 39A, a 3.5-mile trip that took about seven hours. New launch date was October 9, only 39 days from rollout; however, Columbia had sat on its pad for 104 days before its first flight, and launch director George F. Page said that all the usual tests should be completed in time. The new schedule allowed for weather delays or new technical problems. The launch pad was modified after last April’s ignition caused shockwaves that buckled struts on the spaceship and endangered other parts; Columbia had “several hundred” of its 31,000 heat-resistant tiles replaced. It would carry a new fuel tank—the only expendable part of the Shuttle assembly—and two new solid-fuel booster rockets to be retrieved from the ocean shortly after liftoff. KSC officials had closed two viewing sites for the next launch because of exhaust fallout. Dr. Albert Koller, chief of environmental management for KSC, said that the fallout problem was a surprise: acid drops in an exhaust cloud produced by STS-l’s boosters had spotted vegetation up to four miles north of the site, but apparently did not harm animals in the area. Hydrochloric acid drops from the cloud might cause reddening and burning of unprotected skin. NASA hoped eventually to send a shuttle back into space within two or three weeks of its previous mission, but Page said “we’re a long way from that ultimate goal.” (NY Times, Sept 1/81, C-3; W Post, Sept 1/81, A-4)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency conducted, for the first time, a successful 30-second firing test of its huge H-l liquid-fuel rocket. Japan’s LE5 engine fueled with liquid oxygen and hydrogen would serve as the second stage of H-l, which was scheduled to launch a 500-ton satellite into orbit in February 1986. Japan was now the fourth country to have a liquid-hydrogen engine,1 in addition to the United States, ESA, and China. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Mar 26/81)
ESA successfully launched its Ariane rocket from Kourou, French Guiana, at 2:33 p.m. local time, carrying Indian-built comsat Apple and ESA’s own Meteosat 2 into an orbit with 36,206-kilometer apogee and 201-kilometer perigee and “breaking a quarter-century two-power monopoly on space achievements,” as the Washington Post and Washington Star agreed. Michel Bignier, ESA’s director of space and transport systems, said “space is no longer the exclusive preserve of a few powerful nations but now belongs to all of humanity.” Pierre Morel, director general of the Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES), said the third Ariane launch “opens the way to European commercial exploitation of space.” ESA had hoped for a third of the 180 to 200 satellite launches scheduled for the next decade; Ariane had firm contracts for 7 launches through 1985 and options for another 14. Ariane’s second launch in May 1980 had ended in failure when the rocket burst into flames moments after leaving the pad. The first test in December 1979 had been successful, but that rocket carried no satellites. The $1.6 billion Ariane program was funded by 10 nations, with France (contributing about 64%) and West Germany (about 20%) as major participants. (ESA Info 10, 11, 12; WPost, June 20/81, A-9; WStar, June 20/81, D-2; Nature, June 25/81, 604)	'
Press reports said that a Texas-based firm called the Percheron project was preparing to launch the first U.S. privately owned space rocket into a 50-mile suborbital flight from Matagorda Island northeast of Corpus Christi. Backers of the project, named for a breed of large French draft horses, hoped to launch their rocket powered by kerosene and liquid oxygen at the end of July, but had run into trouble with the FAA, which said they must seek waiver of air-traffic rules preventing “nonconventional” use of U.S. air space above 12,500 feet. An FAA spokesman said that an application for waiver could take more than two weeks to resolve and could end by restricting Percheron to a flight no higher than 14,500 feet and no further out to sea than the three-mile limit over which FAA had jurisdiction. A flight would also call for extensive coordination with the Coast Guard to protect shipping and oil rigs in the area. Percheron was the idea of Gary C. Hudson, a “self-taught engineer” seeking to head a company pioneering corporate space ventures. In 1979 he met a fellow enthusiast, Houston developer David Hannah, described as “a disciple of Dr. Gerard K. O’Neill,” the Princeton physics professor famous for his ideas about the commercial and social possibilities of space colonies. Hannah, a supporter of the U.S. space program, had developed a slide show on commercial uses of a cheap, privately owned space vehicle; to launch Percheron, he raised $1.2 million from a number of investors including an oilman and rancher who owned part of Matagorda Island. Hudson rounded up a crew of engineers, scientists, and technicians, some from NASA’s JPL, others from private aerospace firms. So much information and so many plans were available that production of Percheron took only six months from final design. The 55-foot single-engine rocket used in clusters might one day orbit a 5,000-pound geosynchronous payload with a conical module able to withstand reentry heat and return reusable components to Earth. (W Star, July 23/81, A-l; July 28/81, A-7; W Post, July 29/81, A-l)
NASA announced that it would shut down on December 1 its three 26-meter (85-foot) tracking antennas operated by the Deep Space Network at Canberra (Australia), Madrid (Spain), and Goldstone (California), because of reductions in the agency’s budget. The stations would operate the 64-meter (210-foot) and 34-meter (112-foot) deep-space antennas as in the past. Loss of the 26-meter antennas would mean a 30% reduction in tracking and data-acquisition and support for NASA’s planetary spacecraft: the network was currently supporting Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, Helios 1, the Viking I lander on Mars, and Pioneers 6 through 72. Shutting down the three antennas would save about $7.2 million per year, beginning in FY83; termination would eliminate 110 positions, 51 in Spain, 26 in Australia, and 33 at Goldstone. The stations in Spain and Australia were operated by government agencies of those countries, which would reduce staff by reassignment and attrition; the Goldstone station was operated by Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, which would also reduce staff by reassignment and attrition. JPL managed the Deep Space Network for NASA’s Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems. (NASA Release 81-171) Liftoff had been scheduled for 7:30 a.m. EDT on November 4, but officials called off the countdown at 9:35 a.m., when rising oil pressures in the Shuttle’s power generators, apparently caused by waxy contaminants, threatened to impair control of the hydraulic system that moved aerodynamic surfaces, such as the elevons, landing gear, and rudder and body flaps, and swiveled the nozzles on the Shuttle’s three main rocket engines. L. Michael Weeks, acting associate administrator for STS, said that the engineers would have to analyze the trouble, correct it, and lay out a plan for resuming countdown; the delay would be “approximately one week.” NASA was considering two courses of action: changing the oil and the filters in the auxiliary power units or replacing them with backup units. Engineers at KSC or JSC were not sure which course would take longer; neither, however, would mean hauling Columbia with its attached fuel tank and booster rockets back from the launch pad into the processing hangar for reworking. The launch team had noticed the lubrication problem while the countdown was halted to grapple with other problems. Pressure in the liquid-oxygen chamber of the external tank had dropped below the limit for launch, and a similar glitch occurred in three smaller tanks feeding the electricity-producing fuel cells inside the Shuttle. Flight controllers decided that they could live with the pressure drops and instructed the control computers to ignore the warning signals. Two of the computers accepted the instruction but “logic got hung up in the system” leading to the third computer, which stopped the clock governing countdown at T minus 31 seconds. This was the point at which Columbia’s on-board computers were supposed to take over control of all remaining steps in the countdown, but—having detected a problem—they refused to continue. Controllers at the Cape and at mission control in Houston called up data displays to locate the trouble, and Shuttle operations director George F. Page finally announced that there would be no launch. Astronauts Col. Joe H. Engle and Capt. Richard H. Truly, who emerged from the Shuttle about an hour after the launch was scrubbed, seemed to take the delay “in stride,” the New York Times said. What persuaded controllers to call off the launch was the Finding that oil pressure for two of the units had stabilized at 100 pounds per square inch, about 40 over normal. Neil B. Hutchinson, a flight director at JSC, said that contaminants in the oil had previously clogged Shuttle filters, which resembled the oil filter in an automobile. However, replacing a filter along with the lubricant it was supposed to keep clean would take far more time than in an automobile. If the auxiliary power units now in the Shuttle were to be used, technicians would have to drain the present oil, change filters, and flush the system before the flight could proceed. This had never been done on the launch pad; engineers would have to go ahead without knowing how long it would take. NASA spokesman Charles Redmond noted that General Motors found out about such problems “at the proving grounds, behind high screens, while we’re doing it in public.” Either changing filters and lubricant or completely replacing the two power units would be time-consuming because the units deep inside the ship would be difficult to reach. The power-unit fuel hydrazine, suspected of gumming up the works by interacting with the lubricating oil, was highly toxic, and the location of the power units would have to be purged with nitrogen. The nitrogen, which also could be fatal, would have to be purged in its turn. The next procedure was the flushing and reservicing of the auxiliary power-unit (APU) gearboxes and installation of new filters. Tests to see what would happen if the APU was operated with a clogged filter (using the oil and filter removed from Columbia) showed that the filter would clear after about 10 minutes of operation, as the temperature increased. Launch was reset for November 12. A second countdown to launch November 12 was delayed 2 hours and 40 minutes by trouble in the cockpit electronics. Engineers discovered November 11 that a 15-pound device, called multiplexer-demultiplexer (MUX/DEMUX), that collected information from all over the spacecraft about its condition to display both on video terminals for the astronauts and on the ground for analysis by engineers, was not working properly; it was quickly replaced with a substitute that did not work as well as the original. Officials sent for two of the instruments from the Challenger orbiter, still unfinished at Rockwell’s Palmdale plant, to be flown to KSC and installed on Columbia. One went into Columbia’s cockpit; the other would be carried as a spare. Countdown was at a built-in hold designed for emergencies such as the one that had occurred; it would resume early November 12 with the loading of 3-million gallons of supercold liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel into the external tank, delaying launch until at least 10 a.m. The latest delays would cost NASA more than $26 million; every day of delay, including the eight in this last series, cost $3 million. The MUX/DEMUX delay cost an extra $2 million from handling, overtime, travel costs, and additional launch and landing tracking report. Launch of the second mission finally occurred at 10:10 a.m. EST November 12.	About 2V4 hours into the mission, during the third orbit, fuel cell one showed a voltage drop; by the sixth orbit, it was so erratic that the astronauts were told to turn it off and use one of the other two. The faulty cell failed when one of the lines feeding hydrogen into it caused a water buildup that spilled onto an electrically charged manifold, breaking down the water into a potentially explosive mixture of gaseous hydrogen and oxygen. The failure took flight directors by surprise, as the cells had been used in 25 manned U.S. spacecraft since 1965 and had never before failed in flight. Hutchinson noted that “the good thing about this” was that the Shuttle could sustain a fuel-cell failure and continue operations. At 10 p.m. November 12, one of the standby cells was producing 7.5 kilowatts of electricity, and the other, 8.5, enough to do nearly everything except run all five instruments while the Shuttle arm was in operation. If the two good cells continued satisfactory, the flight would proceed as scheduled and return November 16 to Edwards Air Force Base in California; if either showed signs of weakening, the crew would return November 13 or 14. {WPost, Nov 2/81, A-3; Nov 6/81, A-9; Nov 13/81, A-l; NY Times, Nov 5/81, A-l; NASA MOR M-989-81-02 [postlaunch] Dec 17/81) The New York Times said that workers were already ahead of schedule November 13 in a 3- to 4-week cleanup of the launch compound at Cape Canaveral. A shock-absorber water-trough system worked “better than expected,” said Merrill Oakley, design engineer on the launch pad, cutting shockwaves to a fifth of the first launch’s intensity. After a washdown and system checks, Oakley said all that remained was replacement of some bricks that blew out of a flame trench and painting. The STS-2 crew flew to Ellington Air Force Base, in Texas shortly after landing the Columbia at Edwards Air Force Base ending “a troubled but scientifically rewarding 54-hour mission,” the New York Times said. Welcomed on their 9:50 p.m. arrival in Texas by about 400 JSC employees, the astronauts breakfasted the next morning with Bush, JSC director Chris Kraft, and the first shuttle crewmen John W. Young and Robert L. Crippen among the 23 guests. Although Bush said “the people here at the NASA complex are a national treasure,” he said that he could not promise any easing of budget constraints on the agency. Preparations were already under way for the third shuttle flight, now scheduled for March 1982. Damage to the launch pad from the second mission was “minimal and superficial,” Oakley said. (Public Papers of the President; WPost, Nov 14/81, A-7; NY Times, Nov 15/81, 35; Nov 16/81, A-l, A-19; JSC Sp NRdP, Nov 20/81, 1)
ESA launched Marecs-A, first European maritime communications satellite, from Kourou in French Guiana at 1:29 a.m. GMT on the fourth Ariane booster into a highly elliptical orbit with 35,820-kilometer apogee, 220-kilometer perigee, 632-minute period, and 10.5° inclination, preparatory to a boost into geosynchronous orbit at 26 °W. The Ariane also carried a technological capsule (CAT 4) enclosing an experiment called Thesee (Theseus) that would remain in the original orbit. The European Space Operations Center (ESOC) would test Marecs before handing it over to INMARSAT, which would lease its communications capacity over the Atlantic Ocean. A Marecs-B spacecraft was being readied for launch in April 1982 for INMARSAT use over the Pacific Ocean. (ESA Infos 29, 31, 32, [81], 1 [82])
NASA launched Space Shuttle Columbia, designated STS-1, from pad A of KSC’s launch complex 39 at 3 seconds after 7 a.m. EST. All launch facilities, systems, and support equipment performed as designed; NASA said that damage to the launch pad was less than predicted. The solid-fuel rocket boosters (SRBs) jettisoned after burnout fell within the predicted impact “footprint” in the Atlantic about 14 nautical miles northeast of KSC, splashing down 7 minutes and 100 seconds after liftoff. All the SRB parts were recovered for reuse except two of the six parachutes. The external tank separated at 8 minutes and 58 seconds into the flight and began to break up at about a 280,000,-foot altitude without tumbling as planned. A tumble system built into the tank to prevent skipping during reentry (and keep debris within a preplanned area) did not work. The Indian Ocean tracking ship, USNS Arnold, said that the tank-debris footprint was larger than expected. Orbit-maneuvering system (OMS) firings (OMS-1 and OMS-2) put Columbia into an orbit with 133.7-nautical-mile apogee, 132.7-nautical-mile perigee, and 40.3° inclination. Ascent went as planned, with all events, through payload-bay door opening, occurring normally. (NASA MOR M-989-81-01 [postlaunch] May 12/81)
Newsreview, published by the Air Force Systems Command, told of a special “bake job” done for NASA by Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., in its Civil Engineering Squadron’s fabrication-branch shop. Ovens there, normally used to harden, soften, or anneal metals, were large enough to treat 75 to 80 thermal tiles from Shuttle orbiter Columbia damaged by a nitrogen tetroxide spill. The heat treatment at 1,100—1,400°F took about 16 hours to burn off contaminant and bonding material. Checking for toxic vapors caused by the heat disclosed none. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 27/81, 8) During November: Administrator James M. Beggs appointed Philip E. Culbertson associate deputy administrator with revised duties, serving as senior staff adviser and directing formulation of NASA policy, strategy, and planning of a facility to constitute permanent U.S. presence in space. Culbertson had served for two years as assistant for space transportation systems. —Robert F. Allnutt, associate deputy administrator since mid-1978, would assume new duties as deputy general counsel for policy review, studying the long-term development of NASA and its relationship to other federal agencies as well as contractual arrangements with future users of the Space Shuttle. (NASA anno, Nov 18/81; NASA Release 81-178, 81-179) —NASA named C. Thomas Newman comptroller to succeed Wiliam E. Lilly, who retired in October. Thomas F. Campbell would replace Newman as deputy comptroller. (NASA anno Nov 25/81) —Frank J. Malina, cofounder of JPL and of the Aerojet General Corporation, died November 9 at his home in Paris. He had moved there to work with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) after retiring in 1947 as an officer of Aeroject and JPL. He had worked for Theodore von Karmann as a researcher for Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory, CalTech, leading to creation of the CalTech rocket-research project in 1936 that later became JPL, which made the first successful U.S. satellites in the 1950s. —William Pickering, who followed Malina as JPL director from 1954 to 1976, said that inventions'that made present-day rockets possible went back to work done at JPL under Malina. A leader in developing jet-assisted takeoff (JATO) rockets used in World War II and co-developer of the WAC Corporal, first U.S. successul stratosphere rocket, Malina had in 1942 joined von Karmann to form Aerojet General, first U.S. manufacturer of rocket engines. He left UNESCO in 1953 to start a studio as a graphic artist, working in a form he invented called “kinetic art.” (LA Times, Nov 11/81; LA Star News, Nov 11/81)
