The Soviet Union was developing a large laser-equipped prototype military spacecraft for launch on its heavy Saturn-5-class booster, which was also competing development, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Soviet scientists were designing the spacecraft to attack U.S. satellites and would launch it on the booster within the next two years. The new booster’s primaiy mission was to place the 300,000- to 400,000-pound Soviet space station elements in orbit, but the U.S. DOD had been concerned for some time that it also could be used for the type of heavy, unmanned, prototype directed-energy weapon known to be under development. (AvWk, Mar 19/84, 13)
Scientists at the University of Chicago announced that a U.S. experiment to analyze the dust of Halley’s comet was riding aboard the Soviet Union’s Vega-1 spacecraft. It was the first known Soviet-U.S. cooperative space venture since the docking of the manned Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft in 1975. The cosmic dust analyzer—and a twin that would be launched aboard Vega-2—were built by university scientists under the leadership of John Simpson, one of the preeminent astrophysicists in the United States, who had designed, experiments for more than 30 space missions over the past 25 years. The joint project was bom at an international symposium in Holland in . September 1983, where Simpson outlined vastly improved comet dust measuring methods. About'a month later, he said, the Soviets surprised him by inviting him to put the analyzer aboard their Vega. Simpson received Reagan administration approval and about $300,000 in NASA funds, which touched off a frantic search for components. “We scoured the U.S. and within two weeks got all the pieces,” Simpson said. Plugging U.S. electronics into a Soviet spacecraft required unusual cooperation. Moscow shared telemetry coding data, and Simpson was able to conduct high-speed computer analysis of Soviet rocket launch characteristics to aid in designing the dust analyzer so it could survive blastoff and flight. “On May 7, we walked into the Soviet space lab with working instruments,” which were then bolted aboard the Soviet spacecraft by U.S. scientists, he said. Simpson said that he had received computer tapes from the instrument during Soviet tests of the device while it awaited launch from the Baykonur cosmodrome and added that the Soviets had invited him to br on hand in Moscow when the comet encounter would begin in March 1986. (W Post, Dec 21/84, A—1; NY Times, Dec 21/84, A-l)
The People’s Republic of China (PRC) announced that it had launched on January 29 a space satellite that achieved “important results,” and the New York Times reported that Western experts speculated that the launch could be the debut of a more powerful Chinese rocket and the nation’s first communications satellite. They added that the launching could mean that China had joined the United States, the Soviet Union, and the European Space Agency (ESA) in its capability to loft satellites into geostationary orbits 22,300	miles above the Earth, the orbit favored for commercial and military communications satellites. There were no details of the satellite launched; only “Close observation is being undertaken of the satellite’s operations,” from China’s official Xinhua new agency. There had been reports as early as 1980 that China was developing a three-stage rocket for boosting heavy payloads. (NY Times, Jan 31/84, C-8) During January: The Washington Post reported, according to declassified documents, that the $100 million Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) that the U.S. Air Force found unusable in April 1983 had lost its bearings and was unable to determine its position. After being launched from the Space Shuttle, the inertial upper stage (IUS) rocket veered so far from course that the TDRS ended up in an orbit almost 10,000 miles closer to Earth than was intended. It took NASA and its contractors three months to get the satellite into geosynchronous orbit above the equator. According to the declassified documents, instructions to the gyroscope in the IUS were in error, causing the guidance computer to ignore them just before the rocket misfired. The Air Force said that the software error had been corrected. At the same time, the guidance computer’s memory became confused, rendering it unable to distinguish between right and wrong information about its location in space. Engineers said that they still did not know what caused this failure. Because of the changes that had to be made in the IUS rocket, the flight of a secret Department of Defense (DOD) satellite aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger would be delayed from July 1 until the end of 1984, sources said. (W Post, Jan 31/83, A-2) —NASA announced that John J. Martin was named associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology. Previously, Martin had served as vice president and general manager at Bendix Advanced Technology Center, Columbia, Md.; at the Institute for Defense Analyses; on the staff of the president’s science adviser at the White House; as associate deputy to the director of central intelligence for the intelligence community; as principal deputy assistant secretary of the Air Force; and as assistant secretary of the Air Force for research, development, and logistics. A graduate of the University of Notre Dame and commissioned by the U.S. Navy, Martin is the author of numerous technical papers and reviews and a book on “Atmospheric Reentry,” published in 1966. (NASA anno, Jan 30/84) —NASA announced that C.A. “Sy” Syvertson would retire on January 13 as director of Ames Research Center (ARC). Syvertson had a major part in the first U.S. research in supersonic and hypersonic flight, both in finding new aerodynamic theory and in development of hypersonic wind tunnels. He designed the first lifting body (a vehicle for flight from orbit to airfield landing and the precursor to the Shuttle) and did planning for major NASA missions in both aeronautics and space. During his tenure, ARC merged with NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and continued advances in aircraft research. Syvertson received the Lawrence Sperry Award for “fundamental understanding of hypersonic air flow and its application to efficient aircraft design.” He received the NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1971 for work as executive director of the joint Department of Transportation (DOT)—NASA Civil Aviation Research and Development (CARD) policy study, which made a series of recommendations for future civil aviation policy. He was named a fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 1976 and of the American Astronautical Society in 1978 and was elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 1981. (NASA Release 84-01) Dr. William F. Ballhaus, Jr., director of astronautics at ARC, was named director of the center, succeeding C.A. Syvertson. who retired January 13. Ballhaus is a nationally known expert in computational fluid dynamics—use of supercomputers to stimulate air flow around flight vehicles. As ARC director of astronautics, Ballhaus had been responsible for interplanetary spaceflight projects, operation of a number of airborne observatories used in astronomy and Earth resources research, development of supercomputer systems, research in computational fluid dynamics and computational chemistry, space science, thermophysics, and materials science. Ballhaus came to ARC in 1971, after receiving his doctorate at the University of California at Berkeley (UCB). He joined what is now the Army Aeromechanics Laboratory at ARC and was assigned to the Computational Fluid Dynamics Branch. He has lectured throughout the United States, Europe, and Asia and has published more than 35 technical papers. (NASA Release 84-5) —Jack Lousma, commander of the Space Shuttle Columbia on its third flight, announced at the state capitol in Lansing, Mich., his campaign for the U.S. Senate. He will seek the Republican nomination to run against Democratic Senator Carl Levin. “Twenty-five years ago, I made a commitment to serve my country—a commitment that has led me from Michigan to the Marine Corps to missions in space,” he said. “That same commitment brings me home today.” He spent 59 days in orbit as part of Skylab’s second manned mission in 1973 and was commander of the Shuttle Columbia in 1982. (W Post, Jan 26/84, C-2)
NASA announced that LeRC awarded a $161 million contract to General Dynamics Corporation, Convair Division, San Diego, Calif., for two Shuttle/Centaur G vehicles tor the DOD. A previous contract included two NASA-unique Shuttle Centaur G-Prime vehicles for the Galileo (Jupiter) mission and the International Solar/Polar Mission (ISPM), scheduled for launch in 1986. The two contracts together totaled $414 million. Centaur was a high-energy upper-stage booster expected to add substantially to the Space Shuttle’s ability to deliver heavier payloads from low-Earth orbit to geosynchronous orbit or interplanetary trajectories. (NASA Release
NASA announced that larger main parachutes, designed to slow the solid-fuel rocket boosters’ final rate of descent prior to impact into the ocean, would be part of the mission 51-A Space Shuttle flight scheduled for launch November 7 from KSC. The new parachutes would be 136 feet in diameter compared to previously used chutes of 115 feet in diameter. The larger chutes would reduce the velocity of the boosters at water impact from 88 feet per second, or 60 miles per hour, to 75 feet per second, or 51 miles per hour. The reduced velocity would relieve the structural loads on the boosters at impact by about 25 %; thus reducing the amount of impact damage sustained by the boosters. Following launch and separation from the Space Shuttle, the boosters were recovered from the ocean, refurbished, and used on a later flight. According to Keith Henson, booster recovery subsystem manager in the Shuttle Projects Office at MSFC, the larger chutes were tested during mission 41-D in August on the Space Shuttle’s right booster. Beginning with mission 51-B, scheduled for January 1985, all future steel case boosters would have the larger chutes. Smaller main chutes would continue to be used on some Space Shuttle missions, including the 51-C mission in December and on missions where lighter-weight filament-wound booster motor segments were used. First use of those segments was planned for October 1985. Martin Marietta Corporation, Denver, Colo., under the direction of MSFC, designed the booster’s deceleration system. Pioneer Parachute Company, Manchester, Conn., provided the parachutes. (MSFC Release 64-90)
Arianespace launched at 10:32 a.m. local time the satellites ECS-2 and Telecom 1 aboard an Ariane vehicle from Kourou, French Guiana. The first data received from both satellites showed satisfactory behavior. They were injected into an orbit with provisional parameters of 199.02-kilometer perigee, 36,091.00-kilometer apogee, and 6.98° inclination. This 10th Ariane launch was the first flight of an Ariane 3 version of the vehicle, whose main characteristics were a higher thrust of the Viking first and second stage, a stretched third stage; greater liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen tank capacities, leading to an increased flight time by approximately 30%; and the addition to the first stage of two strap-on rocket boosters. Ariane 3 could carry 2,580 kilograms into geostationary transfer orbit. (ESA Release Aug 4/84)
USA Today reported that Miss Baker, the squirrel monkey that joined another monkey, Able, in the U.S.’s first spaceflight May 28, 1959, died November 27 of kidney failure. She was buried in the Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville, Ala. (USA Today, Nov 31/84, 3A)
NASA announced the crew assignments for Space Shuttle flights 51-D, scheduled for launch in February 1985, and 61-D, set for January 1986. Brewster H. Shaw, Jr., would command 51-D. Shaw was pilot of the orbiter Columbia on STS-9, the first Spacelab mission flown in November and December 1983. His crew would consist of Bryan D. O’Connor as pilot and mission specialists Mary Cleave, Sherwood C. Spring, and Jerry L. Ross. Mission 51-D would be the 21st Space Shuttle flight and the 9th for the orbiter Challenger. The principal objectives of the six-day flight would be deployment of a SYNCOM communications satellite and retrieval of the free-flying Long Duration Exposure Facility. John M. Fabian, an Air Force pilot with more than 3,500 hours of flying time, would fly as one of the pilots on 61-D. He flew as mission specialist on STS-7 in July 1983 and was scheduled for 51-A in October as a mission specialist. Flight 61-D mission specialists would be James R Bagian, M.D., and Rhea Seddon, M.D., who is also scheduled to fly on mission 41-F in August. Mission 61-D would be the fourth Spacelab flight, focusing on experiments in life sciences during its seven days in space. It would be the ninth flight of the orbiter Columbia. A commander and another pilot for 61-D would be named at a later date. (NASA Release 84-11) —Donald J. Johnston, Canadian Minister of State for Science and Technology, announced that a Canadian would fly as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle mission 51-A, set for launch in October, in addition to two earlier Canadians already scheduled for Shuttle flights. NASA offered Canada the opportunity to fly a payload specialist in keeping with President Reagan’s initiative to increase international cooperation. Shuttle flight 51-A would be a six-day flight, carrying Telesat Canada’s ANIK C-l satellite and a Getaway Special experiment designed by two Canadian high school students. The Canadian crew member and backup for the October flight would be announced in March. (NASA Release 84-12) Seven hours after launch, the astronauts pushed Westar VI, Western Union’s $30 million satellite, out of the cargo bay to join two identical satellites already serving North America. However, NASA officials said that the satellite could not be contacted by radio and was considered lost in space. Officials said that the satellite’s on-board rocket engine, which was to propel it into higher orbit, either misfired or never fired. Radars operated by the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NAADC) later found the satellite in an erratic orbit above and behind Challenger. The radars found two large pieces in an orbit more than 800 miles high at its peak and just over 200 miles high at its lowest point above Earth. On February 5, a large balloon that the astronauts were to chase through space exploded just after it had begun to inflate. Plans called for the astronauts to back up to 120 miles away from the balloon, then move in over the next eight hours to contact it. Instead, the crew spent 90 minutes tracking pieces of the balloon and never got farther than 20 or 30 miles from the debris. The astronauts tracked the balloon’s largest piece with radar for almost 20 miles and used special binoculars and an optical sextant to follow the same piece more than 20 miles by watching sunlight reflected off the balloon’s aluminum surface. The Indonesian satellite Palapa-B2, launched February 6, went into a useless orbit, believed to be caused by the same technical problem that Westar VI suffered. The NAADC located Palapa-B2 about seven hours after its ejection from the Challenger’s cargo bay, but it was in an orbit so low that it “cannot perform its mission,” said Richard Brandes of Hughes Aircraft Company, builder of the satellite. He added that both satellites’ rocket motors apparently shut down 15 seconds early; they were intended to burn for 80 seconds. On February 7, astronauts Bruce McCandless and Robert Stewart left Challenger and flew unrestrained for the first time, adding another milepost to man’s conquest of space. They unhooked their lifelines and rose up more than 100 yards away from the Space Shuttle. Propelled by $10 million jet-powered backpacks, they traveled at 4.8 miles a second, although they had no sensation of speed. The two reentered Challenger after 5 hours and 55 minutes. The exercise was a rehearsal for the next Shuttle flight, when other astronauts would try to retrieve an ailing satellite, bring it into the cargo bay for repair, and release it to orbit again. On February 9 the two took a second walk in space, which lasted 6 hours and 17 minutes. The Space Shuttle made its first landing at KSC on February 11, when it touched down at 7:16 a.m. EST. The Florida landing had been a Shuttle program goal because it would save money and time by eliminating sending maintenance crews to California to prepare the vehicle for a return flight to Florida on the back of a Boeing 747. It was the first Florida landing in two attempts and the first of six planned for the year. Challenger was in relatively good shape following the landing, although its windshield, fuselage, and landing gear were damaged. The windows were hazed and pitted; and 31 of its 33,000	protective tiles, two brake assemblies, and all four tires on the main landing wheels would have to replaced. Repairs should not slow the preparation of Challenger for its next flight in April. (NASA MOR M-989-41-B [prelaunch] Jan 30/84; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Feb 6/84; WPost, Feb 2/84, A-2, Feb 4/84, A-l, Feb 5/84, A-l, Feb 5/84, A-l, Feb 8/84, A-l, Feb 9/84, A-12, Feb 11/84, A-2, Feb 12/84, A-l, Feb 13/84, A-3; W Times, Feb 6/84, 2A, Feb 7/84, 1A, Feb 8/84, 1A; USA Today, Feb 6/84, A-l)
The Washington Post reported that a secret military payload set for launch July 14 on the Space Shuttle had been canceled and that the mission would be scrubbed without it, according to Air Force and NASA officials. A Pentagon spokesman declined to identify the payload or say when it would be flown. Glynn Lunney, Shuttle program manager, said “if they remove the payload, we won’t fly.” The canceled mission left astronauts Thomas Mattingly, Loren Shriver, Ellison Onizuka, and James Buchli without a flight for the second time; they were to have flown the Shuttle in the fall of 1983 on a military mission canceled because of rocket problems. (W Post, Feb 14/84, A-l)
Because of the failure of two telecommunications satellites launched by the Space Shuttle, the insurance industry would receive more than $200 million in claims, and premiums would skyrocket when underwriters resumed writing satellite risk policies, the Washington Post reported. Analysts said that it was too early to determine what impact the satellites’ failures would have on their manufacturer, Hughes Aircraft Company, or McDonnell Douglas Corporation, which built the rocket motors that apparently failed on the two satellites. Western Union, owner of one satellite, was insured for $105 million to cover the cost of the satellite and potential revenue; Indonesia, owner of the other satellite, had $75 million in insurance to cover the cost of building and launching the payload. Robert J. Tirone, vice president of the large insurance broker Alexander & Alexander, said that underwriters would likely hold off issuing any new policies until they found out what went wrong with the two satellites. “Something went wrong,” he said, “and it went wrong twice.” A spokesman for McDonnell Douglas said that the company was puzzled by the apparent failure of the rockets that were supposed to lift both satellites into stationary orbits about 22,300 miles from Earth. The rockets, payload assist modules (PAM), had been successfully used in 16 previous commercial satellite launches—5 from the Space Shuttle and 11 by missiles. At the end of 1983, the insurance industry had collected $205 million in premiums and paid $210 million in claims. As a result of the two recent failures, claims would rise to about $420 million. An insurance broker, who asked not to be identified, said that he expected premiums to quadruple as a result of the loss of the two satellites. (W Post, Feb 8/84, D-2) —The Soviet Union launched today a three-man crew on board the Soyuz T-10 spacecraft, which successfully docked with the Salyut 7 space station on February 9. The crew consisted on Col. Leonid Kizim (commander), Vladimir Solovyev (flight engineer), and Oleg Atkov (cosmonaut-researcher). It appeared that only Kizim had previous space experience, having commanded the Soyuz T-3 in 1980 in the first three-man mission to test and dock the upgraded Soyuz-T and the Salyut 6. Because of the greater amount of instrumentation and power then in place, TASS noted that the current mission “will have broader possibilities for research than any of the previous ones.” Scientific, technical, medical, and biological studies were on the schedule of the current mission, and the cosmonauts were reactivating life support, power supply, and heat control systems and were inspecting on-board equipment as part of their “demothballing” process [See Oct 2/84 for return of crew], (NASA Dly Actv Rept, Feb 14/84; FBIS, USSR Feb 9/84, Ul)
NASA announced that it had selected United Space Boosters Inc. (USBI), Huntsville, Ala., to receive a $274 million cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to manufacture, assemble, and refurbish solid-fuel rocket boosters for the Space Shuttle. The approximately five-year contract would require USBI to manufacture, assemble, check out, and deliver 84 flight sets of solid-fuel rocket boosters and to refurbish them when returned to Earth after each launch. The contract, to be managed by MSFC, also launched two unpriced options, each for the delivery of 60 flight sets, covering a total additional period of performance of about five years. Under a separate contract, USBI would build a new facility at KSC for booster assembly and refurbishment, at a cost of $21 million. In the past, refurbishment had taken place at Kennedy’s Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB), which was used to assemble the entire configuration of orbiter, boosters, and external tank. (NASA Release 84-118; MSFC Release 84-75)
The Washington Post reported that, in testimony to a House subcom-mitte on space science and applications, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said that he feared that an Air Force plan to make more use of large, unmanned rockets to launch Pentagon satellites would undermine NASA’s plans for the Space Shuttle program. “The Air Force has said they plan two flights a year starting in 1988 using expendable launch vehicles as an alternate to the shuttle, and if they stick to that it will have no real impact on us,” Beggs said. “But if they increase that rate to four or five flights a year, as some people suggest they might, it will have severe impact on us,” he pointed out. Beggs went on to say that the Air Force had asked General Dynamics Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation to submit plans for increasing the lifting power of their Atlas-Centaur and Titan 34D booster rockets to launch into space large satellites that currently could be carried only by the Shuttle. He pointed out that NASA stood to lose much of the business of one of its main customers and also that, because he disagreed with the Air Force, having an alternate way of putting its satellite in orbit was an improvement in security. “All.. .that means is they’ll have another launch pad right on the ocean,” he said. Beggs indicated that he was worried that the Air Force would acquire an alternate launch vehicle to use more frequently to make it cost effective. And he expressed concern that the winner of the Air Force contract to build the larger rocket would try to take commercial business away from the Space Shuttle. “Our commercial business has already begun to fall off a little because our commercial customers tended to overbook when we started to fly,” Beggs said. “Our traffic model for 1985 is already down about 10 percent.” (W Post, Aug 1/84, A-20) During July: NASA announced the appointment of C. Robert Nysmith as associate administrator of management, effective August 26, 1984. He would succeed John Boyd, who would return to ARC to become associate director. Nysmith had served as assistant associate administrator for management since January 1984. Before that, he was assistant associate administrator for management support in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 84-107) —NASA announced the appointment of Jesse W. Moore to associate administrator for space flight, effective August 1, 1984. Moore had been serving as the acting associate administrator for space flight since April 15, 1984. He was appointed deputy associate administrator for space flight in February 1983. Moore came to NASA Headquarters in 1978 as deputy director of the Solar Terrestrial Division in the Office of Space Science. In June 1979 he was appointed director of the Space Flight Division. He assumed the position of director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division, in December 1981. Prior to these assignments he was employed at JPL. (NASA Release 84-105) —Effective August 1, 1984, the Interim Space Station Program Office would become the permanent Office of Space Station (Code S), NASA announced. Philip E. Culbertson would be the associate administrator for space station and John D. Hodge would be the deputy associate administrator for space station. The Office of Space Station was responsible for developing the Space Station and conducting advanced development and technology activities, advanced planning, and other activities required to carry out President Reagan’s direction to NASA to develop a permanently manned Space Station within a decade. (NASA anno July 27/84; NASA Release 84-104) —Intervia reported that Transpace Carriers Inc. (TCI) was challenging in the United States the pricing policies of the European multinational company Arianespace. TCI, a Washington-based firm, had earlier received the go-ahead to take over the Delta launcher following completion of existing NASA contracts and subject to the provision that TCI secured three new customers before October 1, 1984. TCI lodged a complaint with the U.S. Trade Representative, alleging that Arianespace was practicing “predatory” pricing by offering users from non-ESA member countries (notably U.S. commercial satellite operators) rates that were up to 33 percent below launch fees quoted for European satellites. So far, both the Space Shuttle and Ariane were generally agreed to have been operating at unprofitable “introductory” prices; NASA had put Delta-class satellites into geostationary orbit for around $15 million, including the PAM-D upper stage. General Telephone & Electronics (GTE) reported paid Arianespace “under $25 million” for the Spacenet 1 launch. The complaint raised by TCI applied only to contracts for launch after 1985, the earliest date it could begin operations. TCI President Tony L. Savoca said that his company would charge between $26 and $32 million, according to launch requirements. He claimed that he had heard of Arianespace bids as low as $22 million for the same time period and added that Arianespace “should be charging” around $64 million for a dual (SYLDA) launch on Ariane III. (Intervia, July 7/84, 643) —George M. Low, president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and a driving force in the Apollo moon landing program, died July 17 of cancer. The White House announced that he would be awarded the President’s Medal of Freedom for his contributions to education and the nation’s space program. In his 27 years with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), Low served as an. engineer and manager in the Mercury and Gemini programs and was put in charge of redesigning the Apollo spacecraft after a fire on the launching pad killed three astronauts in 1967. Later he became deputy administrator of NASA and acting administrator in the early 1970s when he negotiated the initial agreements leading to the joint American-Soviet mission in August 1975. (NY Times, July 18/84, B-8) Also on that day the Progess 23 cargo craft, launched August 14, undocked with the Space Station, following unloading of the cargo craft’s contents. Progress 23 was launched on August 14. On August 8, Kizim and Solovyev made their sixth space walk. The cosmonauts removed part of the heat insulation cover on the back of the service module and shut off a pipe in the fuel line with a special device. This extravehicular activity lasted 5 hours and was the first time that cosmonauts had made six space walks, for a total of 22 hours and 50 minutes, in the course of one trip. (FBIS, Thss in English, Aug 9/84, Aug 14/84, Aug 16/84, Aug 20/84, Aug 24/84)
NASA announced that a six-member team from GSFC was helping to establish the first satellite data link to the South Pole that would make possible real-time collection of scientific data from the pole, which was not possible in the past. The effort was in support of a joint program with the National Science Foundation; the Applied Research Laboratory of the University of Texas, Austin; NOAA; and a number of other government, private, and education institutions. To establish a real-time communications link by any means other than by satellite would cost as much as $35 million compared with approximately $250,000 via satellite, “The project could revolutionize communications in the region,” said Goddard engineer Michael Comberiate. “Currently, scientific data collected from the Pole during the winter months must be stored and shipped out by aircraft during Astral Summer” (November 1-February 1). The link would use existing polar-orbiting satellites to relay data from the pole to McMurdo Sound, which would retransmit the data to a geostationary satellite that, in turn, would transmit the information to the continental United States. This routing was necessary because signals from the transmitter at the Pole (90°S latitude) were too far below the horizon to be acquired by a geostationary satellite. The McMurdo station, however, was located on the edge of the Antarctic (77 °S) and was barely in view of the geostationary satellite. The link with polar orbiting Ixindsat 4 and Landsat 5, with Dynamics Explorer 1 (DE-1), and with Nimbus 7 would allow reliable transmission of routine, high-volume data from scientific investigations being conducted at the Pole by 20 different institutions. (NASA Release, Dec 21/84) —A Titan 34-D rocket with a top-secret payload was launched at 7:02 p.m. local time from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in what might be the final military space mission of the year. An Air Force statement did not indicate whether the payload reached the planned orbit. The next announced DOD launching was scheduled for January 23, 1985, when the Space Shuttle would carry an intelligence satellite into orbit. (NY Times, Dec 23/84, A-14) During December: NASA announced that a publication of infrared celestial objects, presented in a series of catalogs and maps of 96% of the entire sky, was completed by the international science team of the IRAS. This was a milestone in the history of astronomy and would provide a wealth of new information about the universe in a wavelength region that was nearly impossible to study from the Earth’s surface. The IRAS catalogs printed nearly a quarter-million infrared sources—stars, galaxies, and newly forming stars—in addition to entirely new classes of objects. The catalogs and sky maps would be used for decades by astronomers investigating the nature of celestial objects that emitted much of their energy in infrared wavelengths as well as by astronomers seeking to understand objects at other wavelength regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. The catalog contained roughly 130,000 stars, 20,000 galaxies, 50,000 dense condensations within the infrared cirrus, and 40,000 objects of all types within the plane of the Milky Way galaxy. The catalogs were presented in several formats, including a five-volume book containing 5,000 pages of computer printout information on the location and infrared characteristics of 245,839 individual point sources found by the telescopes. The catalogs were also available on microfiche (24 cards) and magnetic tape comprising 60 megabytes of data. IRAS was a joint project of the space agencies of the United States, United Kingdom, and the Netherlands. The telescope satellite was launched by January 25, 1983, and conducted a 10-month all-sky survey of infrared objects from Earth orbit until its supply of liquid helium coolant was depleted November 23, 1984. (NASA Release 84-169) —Paul F. Holloway would become deputy director of LaRC, effective February 3, 1985, succeeding Richard H. Petersen. Holloway had been director for space at LaRC since May 1975 and had joined NASA in June 1960 as an aerospace research engineer. Since that time he had held various agency positions, including acting deputy associate administrator of the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology at NASA Headquarters and chief of the Space Systems Division at Langley. He received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal in 1980 and the NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1981. (NASA anno, Dec 10/84; LaRC Release 84-114) —Krafft A. Ehricke, 67, father of the space-launched Centaur interplanetary vehicle and a leading space scientist for more than 40 years, died December 11 in La Jolla, Calif. Born in Berlin, Ehricke was brought to the United States with other members of the German V-2 rocket team after World War II to launch the U.S. space program. Ehricke worked briefly for Bell Aircraft Company in Buffalo, N.Y., after the war and later for Consolidated Vultee Corporation, which had a contract with the Air Force to develop the Atlas intercontinental ballistic missile. Vultee eventually became part of General Dynamics. The Atlas project produced the United State’s first ICMB, and versions of it were still flying as space boosters. (W Times, Dec 13/84, 8C; W Post, Dec 13/84, D-7; NY Times, Dec 13/84, D-30) —Vladimir N. Chelomei, 70, a rocketry expert who designed the Soviet Union’s first jet engine, died December 8 in Moscow. Tass, which carried the news of his death, did not report the cause. His work was closely connected with the Soviet space program and aircraft design, and he is credited by The Great Soviet Encyclopedia with the 1942 design of the Soviet’s first jet engine. He had headed a major scientific research, design, and development organization for 29 years. (W Post, Dec 13/84, D-7)
Addressing a conference on “Space, Our Next Frontier,” sponsored by the Dallas-based think tank National Center for Policy Analysis, retired Lt. Col. Thomas H. Krebs, former chief of the Defense Intelligence Agency’s (DIA) space systems branch, said that the Soviet Union had obtained blueprints for the Space Shuttle and would within a year or two launch an orbiter that was an “identical copy.” He said that U.S. military experts were not sure how the Soviets obtained the plans but were certain that the Soviet vehicle was made within U.S. blueprints. He indicated that it was likely that they had bought a copy of the Space Shuttle plans. “We’ve seen the [Soviet] orbiter, and it’s identical to ours,” Krebs pointed out. “I can’t tell how far along they are, but in a year or two you can expect to see one launched. Krebs said that the Soviets improved on the U.S. design by adding engines to the bottom of the external fuel tank, thereby increasing the tonnage the Shuttle could carry into orbit. “The space shuttle was totally unclassified. Anyone could buy a set of plans. However, no one has been able to find the requisition,” he said. In Washington, DIA sources speaking off the record said that they knew nothing specifically about the Soviets obtaining Shuttle blueprints. {W Post, June 8/84, A-4) It had been the 62nd launch of an Atlas Centaur rocket, but it was the first of the new lengthened model. The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) had paid NASA $60 million to launch the satellite, which had 12,000 voice channels and 2 color television channels and was to have joined 15 other satellites serving the 108-nation organization. (NASA Release 84-62; W Post, June 10/84, A-13, June 11/84, A-4; W Times, June 11/84, 4A)
MSFC announced that Morton Thiokol’s Wasatch Division near Brigham City, Utah; had successfully static-fired a new, lightweight version of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster at its northern Utah facility. Preliminary results from the two-minute firing indicated that all objectives were met and that the system operated as expected. The case of the new motor was made from a composite material of plastic reinforced with graphite fibers wound into a cylinder. Each of these filament-wound cases weighed about 30,000	pounds less than the current steel case that made up most of the length of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel focket booster. Use of the lighter cases could increase the Space Shuttle payload carrying capacity about 4,600 pounds. Two more of the filament-wound booster motors would be test fired by Motron Thiokol in the spring and summer of 1985. Also in the spring of 1985, flight motor segments containing filament-wound cylinders would be shipped to Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, for use by NASA and the U.S. Air Force in the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg planned for October The test was conducted under the direction of MSFC, Huntsville, Ala. (MSFC Release 84-86; Marshall Star, Oct 31/84, 1) During October: The astronauts of western Europe formed an Association of European Astronauts (AEA), to which all European astronauts who had flown or been selected to train for a specific mission were eligible to join. The group would hold its first meeting on October 5 and 6. The purpose of the association was to encourage get-togethers for the exchange of views on training experiences and the projects concerned. The AEA had seven members: three ESA astronauts, Claude Nicollier, Ulf Merbold, and Wiibbo Ockels; two French astronauts, Patrick Baudry and Jean-Loup Chretien; and two German astronauts, Reinhard Furrer and Ernst Messerschmid. During meetings they planned to exchange experiences, compare USSR, U.S., and European approaches, and discuss future plans for Europe in manned spaceflight. (ESA Release, Sept 24/84) —Dan Germany, crew systems manager at JSC, observed that, after five years and $12 million, the Space Shuttle toilet still did not work, with failures on 10 out of 11 missions. “It’s very disappointing,” he said. On one mission, Robert Gibson had to use a crowbar to free the toilet mechanism; Sally Ride and Fred Hauck employed a camera bracket. NASA would test a new solution in August 1985 in which a bag would fit inside the commode and be removed after every flight. This reminded observers that NASA once spent $1 million to develop a pen to use in weightlessness. An engineer asked later, “Why didn’t you use a lead pencil?” (SF, Sept/Oct 84) —A commemorative envelope sold in the gift shop at JSC gave details and drawings of a U.S. Navy space program so secret that its name could not be used on the telephone, the Washington Post reported Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine as saying. The publication said that the envelopes, called postal cover, carried the words “Project Whitecloud,” accurate drawings of a mother satellite, and drawings of three smaller spacecraft. The envelopes said that the satellite disperses the smaller craft to cover more ocean surface and that it used radar-frequency antennae to detect shipboard radar and communications signals. The Navy had no immediate comment. (W Post, Oct 23/84, A-15) It was later revealed that the information had been taken from the May 1976 issue of Aviation Week & Space Technology.
The second and last of two lithium releases from the Federal Republic of Germany’s IRM was completed, part of the world’s first active probe reaching beyond the Earth’s magnetosphere. Data from the first release on September 11 was being analyzed to determine if the U.S. satellite inside the Earth’s magnetosphere had detected the lithium released outside. NASA launched on August 16 the AMPTE satellites in a stack aboard a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. (NASA Release 84-140) During September: NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced the establishment of the new position of assistant administrator for commercial programs, reporting directly to him, to provide a focus for and facilitate efforts within NASA to expand U.S. private-sector investment and involvement in civil space-related activities. Isaac T. Gillam IV, formerly assistant associate administrator, Office of Space Flight, would assume the new position with L.J. (Bud) Evans Jr., formerly assistant to the deputy associate administrator for commercialization, to serve as his deputy. In announcing the position, Beggs said, “In support of the President’s policy on commercial uses of space, the commercial programs office will be responsible for providing management direction within the agency for our efforts to establish new links with the private sector to stimulate the development of business in space. It will also be responsible for maintaining existing relationships with industry through the functions of industry affairs, technology utilization, and shuttle marketing.” (NASA Release 84-129)
NASA announced that three of its centers would participate with JSC, named earlier in the year to be the lead center, in definition and preliminary design studies of the Space Station. MSFC would be responsible for definition of the pressurized Space Station modules that would be built and equipped with appropriate systems for use as laboratories, the ward room and galley, and logistic transports. Development of this single “common” module design, with provisions for data distribution, power, environmental control, thermal control, and communications systems to be used in all pressurized areas in the station would provide significant savings in the overall program. LeRC would be responsible for the definition of the electrical power generation and conditioning and storage systems. Although most Space Station studies had focused on large solar arrays as the probable power generation system, Lewis would also examine and evaluate a number of alternative systems. GSFC would be responsible for definition of the automated free-flying platforms that would be part of the overall Space Station program and for provisions to service, maintain, and repair these platforms, as well as other free-flying spacecraft. Goddard would also define the provisions for instruments and payloads to be attached externally to the pressurized sections of the Space Station and the pressurized modules as a laboratory. In addition to its lead contractor role, JSC would be responsible for the definition of the structural framework to which the various elements of the Space Station would be attached and for the integration and installation of systems into this structure. The center would oversee the interfaces between the Space Station and the Space Shuttle and be responsible for mechanisms such as the remote manipulator systems. JSC would also manage the attitude control, thermal control, communications, and data management systems and the equipping of a common module for crew use as a ward room and galley. Other NASA centers would support the definition and design activities, particularly in technology areas. KSC would be responsible for preflight and launch operations and be involved in logistic support activities. (NASA Release 84-85) The flight of Discovery was delayed on June 25 for at least 24 hours when its backup navigating computer failed less than 30 minutes before takeoff. Though it was not operational in space, the fifth backup computer was used during ascent to “watchdog” the other computers during the critical first 10 minutes of flight. Four seconds from launch on June 26, the flight of Discovery was automatically aborted by a computer due to malfunctioning of a fuel valve on the rear starboard engine, causing the engine to catch fire. The fire was extinguished after three attempts with heavy sprays of water. NASA placed Hartsfield and his five-member crew on leave for two days after experiencing this first launch abort in 12 Space Shuttle missions and only the second launch abort in American manned spaceflight history. Thomas E. Utsman, Shuttle operations manager at KSC, said that he had no idea when the maiden flight of Discovery could be rescheduled. It depended, he said, on how much damage had been done to the malfunctioning engine that caught fire and to the Space Shuttle’s protective tiles from the high-speed water jets that extinguished the fire on the aft part of the fuselage. Utsman said that the fire may have burned through the heat shield on the engine nozzle, meaning that the entire engine would have to be replaced. NASA announced on June 27 that Discovery’s maiden flight would not be attempted for at least two weeks in order to verify all three main engines. John Talone at KSC said, “I don’t think we’re talking about mid-July before we can get to the point of launching again.” Talone said that the only serious question remaining about the aborted launch was why the valve stayed closed when commanded to start the liftoff firing sequence. When the valve failed to open, a backup actuator automatically started the opening sequence, and the valve opened soon enough for the engine to build full power, although it did not. He said that Discovery probably would have reached orbit, but mission rules said that a Space Shuttle could not lift off without redundant valve, and when the Shuttle’s main computer sensed that one actuator system was out, the computer ordered engine cutoff. Photographic inspection of Discovery showed remarkably little damage from fire that broke out below the main engine nozzles after engine shutdown. The only structural damage to the Space Shuttle’ airframe was the speed brake just below the tail and half of the brake’s protective enamel was scorched off. {W Post, June 23/84, A-3, June 25/84, A-l, June 26/84, A-l, June 27/84, A-3) During June: ARC Director William F. Ballhaus announced that center aircraft and their operation would be transferred to the Ames Flight Operations Directorate. Martin A. Knutson, director of flight operations and site manager of the Ames Dryden Flight Research Facility, would be responsible for all flight activities at the Ames’s Moffett Field location in northern California and at the Ames Dryden Facility in southern California. The Flight Operations Directorate office would continue to be maintained at the Ames Dryden Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Factors in the management change were continued safety of flight and continuity of aircraft operations to be assured with all flight operations reporting through a single management chain. And the change served to integrate more fully the Ames Dryden Facility into the day-to-day operations of the parent Ames Center. The Ames Research Center and the former Dryden Flight Research Center, now Ames Dryden, were consolidated in 1981, a move that enhanced the capabilities of both organizations. Ames officials said that the latest move was a continuing part of the overall Ames-Dryden consolidation and would centralize all flight operations activities in terms of operations procedures, safety, and management philosophy. There were no plans to move any aircraft or personnel involved from either location. (ARC Release 84-15) Later, NASA announced that it was considering a plan to continue the 12th and 13th Space Shuttle missions as a way to avoid expensive delays that could push at least one mission scheduled for 1984 into 1985. The problem with combining missions was the inability to combine crews. Five crew members from the aborted flight or from the August flight would have to step down and wait for another turn. The possibility of combining missions arose when technicians at NASA’s engine test facility at Bay St. Louis, Miss., were unable to duplicate the failure of Discovery’s starboard engine that had aborted the flight. “No matter what we did, we were unable to duplicate the failure,” a NASA source said. “And until we understand what went wrong, we don’t want to fly.” The failure of a rocket nozzle on a communications satellite during a test in St. Louis then further complicated NASA’s rescheduling decision. A final decision awaited analysis on the test of a Star^f8 solid-fuel rocket nozzle at the Astronautics Division of McDonnell Douglas Corporation in St. Louis. Star-48 rockets were on two communications satellites that would be part of the cargo on a combined mission. On July 12 NASA announced that the next Space Shuttle flight would consist of payloads from flights 41-D and 41-F and would be launched from KSC no earlier than August 24. The mission aboard the orbiter Discovery would retain the designation 41-D. The cargo would remain essentially the same, except that the large format camera and spartan would be replaced with the Satellite Business Systems (SBS) and Telstar payloads then scheduled for launch in the same time frame. The crew for mission 41-D would be the six-member team of Commander Henry Hartsfield; pilot Michael Coats; mission specialists Judith Resnik, Steven Hawley, and Richard Mullane; and payload specialist Charles Walker. The crew of 41-F would be scheduled for a later flight. (NASA Release 84-95; WPost, July 3/84, A-12, July 10/84, A-5, July 11/84, A-6)
The New York Times reported that space industry experts and government intelligence officials had said that U.S. Air Force satellite photographs of launching pads in central Asia showed that the Soviet Union was developing a booster rocket for a Soviet version of the Space Shuttle and a new family of big rockets similar to those used by the United States for the Apollo Moon program. A special feature of the new rockets was that they would use liquid hydrogen, a cryogenic (supercooled) type of fuel technology that had eluded Soviet space experts but had been mastered in the United States nearby 20 years ago. The Pentagon had originally described the Soviet development of new booster rockets and a Space Shuttle in April. The new disclosures gave added detail of the Soviet program, including checkouts on the launching pad and the development of cryogenic fuels. “It’s a major step to go to liquid hydrogen,” said James E. Oberg, an expert on Soviet space technology.” They’ve been using the same boosters for 20 years. Now they appear to be trying to build a new family.” The Pentagon’s “Soviet Military Power 1984” had originally suggested the existence of a new family of Soviet booster rockets. The publication asserted that the biggest of the new Soviet rockets could lift payloads of up to 150 tons into low orbits around the Earth, about seven times more than the largest operational Soviet booster and five times more than the biggest U.S. booster, the Space Shuttle. The publication also said the Soviet Union’s space shuttle differed from the U.S. Shuttle only in the respect that the main engines were not on the orbiter. In addition, the publication published pictures of a small Soviet space plane that had undergone flight tests. (NY Times, Aug 30/84, B-13) —NASA, launched at 8:41 a.m. from KSC the Space Shuttle Discovery (STS 41-D) on its maiden voyage after three earlier postponements, another one-day postponement due to computer problems, and a last-minute delay to avoid possible collision with a private line. Discovery carried for mission 41-D a six-member crew of commander Henry Hartsfield; pilot Michael Coats; mission specialists Judith Resnick, Steven Hawley, and Richard Mullane; and payload specialist Charles Walker, a McDonnell Douglas engineer. It also carried the heaviest cargo flown in orbit aboard a Space Shuttle. About eight hours after liftoff, three of the crew members deployed a U.S. communications satellite, SBS-4, which was owned by Satellite Business Systems, McLean, Va., and was designed to relay data, including telephone and television transmissions. About 45 minutes later its on-board engine ignited flawlessly to send it to a position 22,400 miles above the equator just west of South America. The successful launch helped dispel doubts about the solid-fuel rocket motor technology when two satellites last February did not reach orbit. Also planned for launch from the Space Shuttle were the Leasat-2, owned by Hughes Communications Services, Inc., and leased by the U.S. Navy, and the Telestar 3-C of AT&T. On board would be NASA’s Office of Astronautics and Space Technology OASTOl, a collapsible solar array, and the Continuous Flow Electrophoresis System (CFES) of McDonnell Douglas. On the same day as the liftoff, President Reagan visited GSFC and addressed several hundred of Goddard’s employees. In his remarks, Reagan said that “there is nothing that the United States of America cannot accomplish. If the doubting Thomases would just stand aside and get out of our way.” He went on to speak of the creation of new jobs, technologies, and medical breakthroughs as a result of the rigors of the space program. (NASA Release 84-112; NASA Press Kit June 84, August 84; WPost, Aug 31/84, A-l; W Times, Aug 31/84, 3A)
NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said that engineers had determined the problem with two types of rocket motors that had caused the loss of two $75 million satellites and the near-loss of a third and had led to postponements of two Space Shuttle flights, the Washington Post reported. A report from McDonnell-Douglas said that a team had found a way to determine which rocket nozzle would fail in space and which would work. Such a procedure might have saved the two communications satellites that gone into useless orbits. However, the solution had come too late to put a Canadian communications satellite on the next Space Shuttle flight scheduled for June 19. (W Post, May 4/84, A-2) —In a continuing series of reports on orbiting cosmonauts Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov, who had been in space for 85 days aboard the Salyut-7, Tass said that the crew had completed planned operations with the cargo craft Progess-20, storing supplies and pumping drinking water into the station’s tanks. Kizim and Solovyev then made their fourth walk in open space. The two removed a heat-resistant coating that had been installed during a previous space walk, assembled a second conduit, and checked it for airtightness. The two then reinstalled the heat-resistant coating, put tools into a container, and returned to the station. Their walk lasted 2 hours and 45 minutes, bringing their total time in open space to 14 hours and 45 minutes during 4 walks in 12 days. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 4/84)
An Arianespace Ariane I rocket lifted off at 9:33 a.m. EDT to orbit a U.S. communications satellite 22,300 miles above the equator in the world’s first strictly commercial space venture. Virginia-based GTE Spacenet Corporation built the satellite, which was intended to relay thousands of simultaneous television, telephone, and data transmission channels to U.S. domestic subscribers over the next 10 years. The corporation would launch other satellites later in the year and early in 1985. ESA had contracts for 28 launches worth more than $800 million, plus options for another 19. More than 40% of the orders came from outside Europe. (W Post, May 22/84, A-24) During May: NASA and Deere & Company, Moline, 111., signed a memorandum of understanding to cooperate on the design of metallurgical tests to be conducted aboard a future Space Shuttle flight. In 1981, Deere became the first private company to sign a Technical Exchange Agreement with NASA that permitted the company to perform cast iron solidification experiments on board conventional suborbital NASA aircraft, which simulated microgravity for 30 to 60 seconds. Deere was already working on the design of additional metallurgical tests, where engineers used data from the low-gravity tests conducted earlier. Based on this work, Deere and NASA engineers concluded that further experimentation would be productive. The Space Shuttle tests would permit experiments in space for longer periods, which could yield new information to aid in the search for stronger irons. These tests could also provide new data about the process for forming iron molecules, leading to improved foundry efficiencies. (NASA Release 84-56) —NASA announced that astronaut Terry Hart, who had operated the Space Shuttle’s mechanical arm to retrieve the Solar Maximum Satellite during the April 6-13, 1984, Space Shuttle flight, would leave NASA effective June 15 to work in an engineering management position for the newly formed Military and Government Systems Division of Bell Laboratories in Whippany, N.J. The division would produce large digital communications networks for government applications. Hart was also a member of the astronaut support crews for Shuttle missions 1, 2, 3, and 7, serving as capsule communicators in mission control for those flights. (NASA Release 84-59) —Officials at the U.S. Department of State blocked an offer by the Soviet Union to use its rockets to launch Western satellites, the Christian Science Monitor reported. The Soviets had offered to “sell” their rockets to INMARSAT, the International Maritime Satellite Organization based in London, for launching a new generation of satellites in the 1980s. INMARSAT was running a network of communications satellites that routed telephone calls and data among some 2,300 ships and their shore bases. However, it had not decided on the companies that would supply the new satellites, which could number up to nine and cost up to $500 million. Under the Soviet Union plan, satellites would have to travel to the Soviet rocket site prior to launch into space, and the satellites would undoubtedly contain a large proportion of U.S. parts. Such a transfer would be prohibited under the technology control regulations that sought to stop the channeling to unfriendly countries of hardware that could be used in weaponry. The State Department said that “under no circumstances” would it permit the transfer to the Soviet Union of American-made satellite components. Only two organizations had submitted tenders to INMARSAT to build the satellites: a joint venture of Hughes Aircraft Corporation and British Aerospace and a consortium of Marconi of the United Kingdom, Aerospatiale of France, and Ford Aerospace of the United States. The Soviet Union had said that it would make available its Proton rockets for a fee of about $23 million a launch. That was roughly half the comparable charge for a satellite launch by either the Space Shuttle or the Ariane rocket sold by Arianespace, a semipublic company dominated by French interests. U.S. officials feared shipment to the Soviet Union’s main launch site at Baykonur in Central Asia of hardware containing electronic components that could be useful to the Soviet’s military buildup. (CSM, May 3/84, 1) —NASA announced that Dr. Hans M. Mark, deputy administrator of NASA since July 1981, would become chancellor of the University of Texas System, effective September 1, 1984. In announcing the appointment, Texas Board Chairman Jon Newton said of Mark: “With his Air Force and NASA background, he has demonstrated the management ability to administer effectively a complex organizational enterprise such as the U.T. System, which involves 119,000 students, 50,000 faculty and staff, and an operational budget for FY84-85 of $1.8 billion.” Mark was born in Mannheim, Germany, and in February 1969, after receiving his doctorate in physics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1954, became director of NASA’s ARC. He had also served as a consultant to government, industry, and business, including the Institute for Defense Analyses and the President’s Advisory Group on Science and Technology. (NASA Release 84-65) —Martin A. Knutson was named director of Flight Operations and Ames Dryden Site manager for ARC. In this position, Knutson would be responsible for the operation of more than 40 highly specialized research and support aircraft at ARC and its Ames Dryden Flight Research Center. He also would be responsible for site management of the Mojave Desert facility that conducted NASA’s high-speed flight research and served as one of the prime landing sites for Space Shuttle missions. Knutson joined NASA in 1971 as the ARC’s manager of the Airborne Instrumentation Research Project. He was instrumental in creating the project and in acquiring its U-2 aircraft and was a pilot with over 6,000 hours of flight time. (ARC Release 84-11)
The first Space Shuttle external fuel tank for use at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, arrived there after a 5,000-mile journey, marking a major milestone in activation of the West Coast space launch complex. Plans called for the initial launch from the new complex in October 1985. Most of the major faciliteis at Space Launch Complex-Six were completed, including the facility for storage and preparation of the external tank. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers had been responsible since 1979 for building and facility construction at the launch site, while Martin Marietta Aerospace had responsibility for design, procurement, installation, and checkout of Space Shuttle ground support systems. Space Shuttle missions from Vandenberg would carry both DOD and NASA payloads. At the facility, the tank would undergo a thorough four-week inspection by the Air Force and its Shuttle processing contractors. Early in 1985, it would be mated with two inert solid-fuel rocket boosters and the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise for testing and compatibility between the Space Shuttle and ground facilities. Martin Marietta Aerospace manufactured the tank at MSFC’s Michoud Assembly Facility. (MSFC Release 84-85)
