USA Today reported that its debate for that day would explore the pros and cons of U.S. manned space missions. In its editorial, USA Today said, "Human brains can adapt to change. Machines cannot. Without men and women in space, there would be no one to even try to fix the Navy's stranded satellite" [Navy communications satellite carried on the Discovery 51-D mission], ". . . Space is our last frontier. Without humans aboard to ride rockets to the stars and beyond, man will never embrace what he has envisioned," the editorial concluded. USA Today guest columnist Geoffrey Keller, a professor of astronomy at Ohio State University, wrote that one of the values of the manned space program was that it would help to lengthen the useful life of expensive space telescopes (for example, the Hubble Space Telescope), by permitting astronauts to replace worn-out telescope parts and to make telescopes more powerful as new and more efficient cameras were invented and installed. In an opposing view, James Van Allen, a professor of physics at the University of Iowa, wrote that nearly all of what he considered the really important and durable products of space technology were "achieved by much-less-expensive unmanned spacecraft, operating automatically and under cornmand control from ground stations, often for many years in earth orbit or in the far reaches of the solar system. ". . . The public acclaim for the Apollo program has left a permanent imprint on NASA and has, in effect, committed it to an overriding emphasis on further development of manned space flight," Van Allen continued. "This emphasis is simultaneously NASA's greatest strength and its greatest weakness. Manned space flight, with all its mythological foundations, has assumed the aura of a religion. The space shuttle and the proposed permanently manned space station are primarily embodiments of this religion," he wrote. But, he added, "the relevant results to date are far too meager to justify such hyperbolic expectations and such enormous expenditures. Meanwhile, the proven applications of space technology are languishing for lack of resources." (USA Today, Apr 16/85, 8A)
Astronauts James van Hoften and Dr. William Fisher said at a Johnson Space Center news conference that they would attempt to activate the Syncom satellite deployed in April from the Space Shuttle, the Washington Post reported. Although the satellite was loaded with rocket fuel, the astronauts said they didn't think their mission was any more dangerous than the two other rescue missions by astronauts in the previous two years. Because the satellite was "armed," (in the position in which it was ready to fire its engines), the danger was great if the engines ignited accidentally while the astronauts were working. However, the astronauts indicated the hardest part of their upcoming mission was its awkwardness, not the danger. They said they would attempt the rescue on the seventh day of the August 24 Space Shuttle 51-1 mission with the orbiter Discovery. Van Hoften would stand in foot restraints at the end of the Space Shuttle's 50-foot-long mechanical arm 35 feet below the satellite to affix a capture bar to the side of the satellite, then force the satellite to come to a standstill from its once-a-minute spin. Fisher, standing in temporary foot restraints fixed to the side of Discovery's cargo bay, would put two plugs on either side of the arming switch to prevent the satellite from accidentally turning itself on. Then, standing on opposite sides of the satellite, the astronauts would bypass the satellite's electronics so that flight directors on the ground could begin to command it from earth. NASA gave the operation a 50-50 chance of succeeding. (IV Post, July 23/85, A2)
Society Expeditions, which specialized in offering exotic vacations, announced at an October 29 press conference that on November 15 it would begin taking reservations for regularly scheduled spaceflights, the Washington Times reported. Society Expeditions scheduled its first flight for October 12, 1992, the 500th anniversary of Christopher Columbus's discovery of the new world. A flight would cost $50,000, and there would be a $2000 charge for a three-day orientation. T.C. Swartz, president of Society Expeditions, said more than 3,500	people had already expressed interest in traveling in space and 350 had signed letters of intent and deposited $5,000 to confirm space on the rocket. He explained that his company signed a five-year $280 million contract to charter the first two commercial reusable spaceships built by Pacific American Launch Systems. Pacific American's president Gary Hudson said it would cost more than $200 million to develop and build a 57-foot long rocket and that each launch should cost about $1 million. A flight on Pacific American's PHOENIX E, a rocket powered launch and landing vehicle, would begin somewhere in northern California, circle the earth five to eight times, and return to the launch area. Before certification for commercial use, PHOENIX E would undergo at least 50 test flights and face vigorous examination by the Department of Transportation, Hudson said. Asked if he would be on one of the test flights, Hudson said, "We think it's the ethical responsibility of the designers to go up before the public. But we won't be on the first flight. That's why there's test pilots." (W Times, Oct 30/85, 1B)
Arianespace officials blew up the European Space Agency's (ESA) Ariane V15 rocket, which carried the third in the European Communications Satellites (ECS-3) series and the U.S. communications satellite Spa-cenet F3, less than ten minutes after liftoff when the rocket veered off course and began falling, threatening inhabited areas, the Washington Post reported. The failure was Ariane's third in 15 launches. French President Francois Mitterrand, on a stopover on his way to French Polynesia, watched the failed launching. Liftoff at the Kourou (French Guiana) launch site was on schedule at 8:26 p.m. Reports said Ariane was on course during the first minutes of its ascent, but then it suddenly went off course and lost altitude because of a propulsion problem in the third-stage motor. Ariane's other failures were on May 23, 1980, on its second launch, and on May 9, 1982, on its fifth. (W Post, Sept 13/85, A12; ESA release Sept 2/85)
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) announced that its Wallops Flight Facility had launched at 1:46 p.m. EDT June 24 and 1:46 p.m. EDT June 26 Nike-Orion sounding rockets for the University of Illinois to investigate the daytime mid-latitude ionosphere between 96 and 241 statute miles above earth. Specific mission objectives were to investigate differential absorption of radio waves; determine the electron density profile; and investigate the irregular structure of the electron density profile in terms of neutral turbulence, plasma instabilities in the mid-latitude region, and gravity wave effects. The 120-lb. payloads reached peak altitudes of 110 statute miles, and preliminary results indicated all instrumentation performed satisfactorily and obtained good data. The Nike-Orion was a two-stage, solid-propellant unguided sounding rocket about 30 feet long. Researchers would correlate scientific data from the missions with information from a similar study of the daytime equatorial ionosphere conducted March 1983 in Peru as part of Project CONDOR. Dr. L.G. Smith, University of Illinois project scientist, noted the studies were important "because turbulence is the major unsolved problem of the atmosphere and ionosphere." (GSFC Release 85-19)
NASA announced that the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT) selected the Space Shuttle to launch July 1988 and mid-1989 two communications satellites in INMARSAT'S second generation series. The spacecraft would enhance INMARSAT'S existing maritime satellite network and the communications services the organization provided to 43 member nations including the U.S. British Aerospace Corp. would build the spacecraft; Hughes Aircraft would supply the spacecraft communications payload. A McDonnell Douglas spin-stabilized upper stage, the PAM-D, would boost the spacecraft from low-earth orbit into a geosynchronous transfer orbit. An apogee kick motor, a smaller rocket motor on the spacecraft, would position the spacecraft in a circular 22,300-nautical-mile geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release 85-111)
NASA today released a statement on the proposed action to develop a second source for the Space Shuttle's solid-fuel rocket motor (SRM). Since November 1984, NASA had assessed the desirability of a second source, and four firms—Aerojet Strategic Propulsion Co., Atlantic Research Corp., Hercules, Inc., and Chemical Systems Div. of United Technologies Corp.—had expressed interest in becoming the SRM second source. As a result, NASA believed the development of an SRM second source would serve the national interest. The statement read in part: ". . . Because of the continued strong interest of the four contractors and our belief that a second source would be in the national interest, it is our intent to provide the contractors the opportunity to respond through a formal request for proposal (RFP). "Industry must, however, be willing to respond with the full knowledge that NASA will provide no firm guarantee of recovery of their qualification costs. If industry is so willing, and where competition remains available with the incumbent excluded, NASA intends to proceed with establishing a second source. "Should the winner of a second source competition for SRMs become qualified to produce flight-quality motors in time to support our next production buy, NASA would plan to buy contingent on overall cost considerations, 20 flight sets of motors at the rate of not less than four flight sets a year. In addition, NASA would compete the balance of the buy and subsequent buys to determine the split in production between the incumbent and the qualified second source. A decision to dual source any quantity beyond the planned minimum buy of 20 flight sets would be based on the cost of the dual source in comparison to the cost of contracting the balance with the incumbent (Morton Thiokol, Inc.) only. "Based on the above, NASA intends to notify the four interested firms by letter in early January 1986 of our willingness to proceed with an RFP and the specific conditions that would apply. Their comments and views would be requested. A positive response would provide the basis for NASA to issue an RFP. Should industry not support the RFP under these conditions, NASA would cancel any initiative of establishing a dual source for the SRM." (NASA Release 85-178) Student Involvement Program
before liftoff and delaying STS mission 61-C until early in 1986, the NY Times reported. The shutdown came four seconds before ignition of the three main engines. NASA had called for a delay of 54 minutes earlier in the morning when clouds moved over the Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA aborted the countdown when a computer on the ground sensed that a pump on one of the Space Shuttle's solid-fuel rocket boosters was spinning at 86,000 rpm, exceeding the turbine's "red line" limits by almost 7,000 rpm. The device, described as a hydraulic power unit, provided power so the nozzle of the solid-fuel rocket booster could pivot slightly in flight, helping to control the direction of the orbiter's ascent. NASA officials indicated there was a backup pump on the booster, but that, if a single pump failed before liftoff, safety precautions called for abort of the countdown. That particular hydraulic power unit had flown twice before on the resuable solid-fuel rocket boosters, NASA officials said, and similar devices had flown up to four times before requiring replacement. It was the first failure in the Space Shuttle program of that particular part. NASA would have to repair or replace the failed pump and said it had rescheduled the launching for January 4, 1986, so there would be no interference with the holidays. The delay until January would also allow NASA to avoid paying the Air Force to keep open its Eastern Test Range at Cape Canaveral and paying launch pad workers triple-time pay for working between Christmas and New Year's, the Washington Post reported. "The team is obviously disappointed," said Robert Sieck, director of Space Shuttle operations at KSC. "But we're going to isolate the problem and fix it and get on with the launch process." NASA said the delay would have no impact on the 16 Space Shuttle missions, including 61-C, that it had scheduled for 1986. (NY Times, Dec 20/85, B10; W Post, Dec 20/85, A2) Main Engines
In a letter to the editor in the NY Times, Saunders Kramer, a Fellow of the American Astronautical Society, commented on the NY Time's report of speculation in a London newspaper that debris from a satellite reentering the atmosphere may have struck the Air-lndia jetliner that crashed in July [see Aviation/Civil Aviation, July 29]. "You dismiss that possibility as 'bizarre,'" Kramer wrote, "Not quite." Kramer then related a tale of an incident that occurred in the early 1960s, when passengers on a airline flight from Honolulu to Tokyo saw at 30,000 feet a white flash and heard a thud. "After they landed at Tokyo, inspection revealed a smooth dished-in area (about 18 inches across) on the plane's right wing leading edge between the two starboard engines," Kramer continued. There was no evidence of a bird collision. When the navigator returned home, he related the tale to Kramer, who checked North American Air Defense Command'a (NORAD) space-tracking data bulletins, which showed reentry of satellite debris at the time and location of the Pan Am flight. "We concluded that the debris had indeed struck the plane," Kramer wrote. "The propulsion section of the last stage of a satellite booster is frequently massive enough to survive reentry. Had it struck the tail section severely or struck the cockpit from above, it is certainly conceivable, however remote, that destruction of the aircraft could have been instantaneous," Kramer concluded. (NYT, Aug 2/85, A24)
The expected January 23 flight of the orbiter Discovery would be the first of 15 Space Shuttle flights devoted wholly to military purposes, Science reported, increasing the visibility of the military role in the program. Discovery would carry a reconnaissance satellite designed to intercept a wide variety of electronic communications, radar signals, and telemetry from intercontinental ballistic missile tests. After several orbits, the Space Shuttle would discharge the satellite from its payload bay and a booster rocket would push it to an altitude of about 35,000 km, where it would "park" over the USSR. NASA estimated about 30% of Space Shuttle flights over the next 10 years would be military missions, although NASA's civilian budget had paid almost all basic costs of the Space Shuttle and associated launch and servicing equipment (estimated at more than $15 billion). In addition, military needs had dictated that the Space Shuttle have unusually large wings, rugged thermal protection, an unusually large payload bay, and unusually powerful engines; however, the Pentagon had borne none of these added costs. Although some NASA expenditures were for items serving both military and civilian functions, such as improved engines for both the orbiter and a rocket booster and onboard experiments in flight aerodynamics, plasma physics, astronomy, biology, chemistry, and radiation, NASA paid for all these projects without any Department of Defense assistance. (Science, Jan 18/85, 276)
The first in a series of laser experiments in the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program was only partly successful because laser operators were unable to lock on to a fast, high-flying rocket target, the NY Times reported. A laser station on the island of Maui succeeded in focusing a laser beam on the rocket but failed to bounce the beam off an eight-inch reflective shield attached to it, said unidentified sources. The Pentagon had announced it was preparing a new round of laser tests similar to one conducted in June when a low-power blue-green laser was reflected off the Space Shuttle Discovery. On July 16 the Pentagon issued a statement saying the first of five planned experiments was conducted in the early morning of July 14 and that "it was only partially successful due to technical difficulties not associated with the experiment." Officials in the SDI office refused to elaborate beyond that saying the Navy's Pacific Missile Range Facility launched a Terrier-Malemute rocket that traveled almost 450 miles into space and that the laser had been fired. (NYT, July 16/85, C7)
NASA announced it would transfer on December 6, 1985, the title to the Space Shuttle orbiter Enterprise to the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum. The NASA Shuttle Carrier Aircraft, a modified Boeing 747, on November 16 would deliver Enterprise to Washington Dulles International Airport, where cranes would remove Enterprise from the top of the 747 and lower it to Dulles's tarmac. Rockwell Internatl., NASA's Space Shuttle prime contractor, constructed Enterprise, which was the first orbiter built. NASA used Enterprise, Space Shuttle orbiter vehicle 101 (OV 101), to test airframe loads, flight dynamics characteristics, and other aspects of the orbiter as it flew through earth's atmosphere. NASA also used Enterprise as a test bed for manufacturing techniques, aerodynamics, and flight control tests, and mating and fit checks for the remainder of the Space Shuttle components—the external tank, solid-fuel rocket boosters, and mobile launch platforms at both Kennedy Space Center and Vandenberg Air Force Base. On September 17, 1976, Enterprise rolled out from Rockwell's assembly facility at Palmdale, California, and was first flown on February 15, 1977, aboard the modified 747 in taxi tests at Edwards Air Force Base. There were then five approach and landing tests, commanded and piloted alternately by astronaut teams of Fred Haise, Jr. (commander) and C. Gordon Fullerton (pilot) and Joe Engie (commander) and Richard Truly (pilot). After ground vibration tests, engineers at Kennedy Space Center used Enterprise for fit checks with the other Space Shuttle components and the mobile launch systems. More recently, engineers used Enterprise for fit checks at the Space Shuttle launch complex at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA Release 85-150)
Hughes Communications faced the possibility of a $10,000 per day fine, up to a total of $5 million, if the Leasat communications system was not fully operational by November 30, Aviation Week reported. The potential of a fine resulted from the failure of its Leasat 4 satellite following deployment from the Space Shuttle Discovery during mission 51-1, reducing significantly the likelihood of three Leasat satellites being operational by the November 30 deadline. Hughes could avoid the fee if the repaired Leasat 3 activated in late October; otherwise the firm had the option of launching a ground spare. Telemetry data from Leasat 3, repaired during the Space Shuttle 51-1 mission, continued to confirm the satellite's functioning. The liquid propulsion system was intact, and the solid propellant perigee kick motor temperatures were rising toward acceptable levels. However, the satellite could explode when its main rocket fired late in September, and Hughes officials gave it no more than a 50-50 chance of reaching geosynchronous orbit. Leasat 1 and 2, launched in August and November 1984, respectively, were operating according to specifications, and the Navy was leasing them. Hughes had to provide the U.S. Navy with four operational satellites by March 31, 1986, to meet the second contract deadline and could at that time again face fines for noncompliance. Company officials estimated December as the earliest date for a Leasat 5 launch. Albert Wheelon, Hughes Aircraft Co. senior vice president and president of Hughes's space and communications group, said the Leasat 4 loss and other recent spacecraft losses were having an impact on the industry. "My reading is that generally the whole insurance market for satellites has just gone belly-up," he commented. "I think it's going to have a major impact on startup companies. I think it's going to be a narrowing, both on the operator and the development side." He added that the status of spacecraft underwriters would have less of an impact on companies like Hughes, because it could provide self-insurance. (AvWk, Sept 23/85, 21)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced it had scheduled for September 12 at Kennedy Space Center a 20-second on-the-pad test firing of the Space Shuttle orbiter Atlantis's three main engines to verify the flight readiness of Atlantis—the fourth and newest of the Space Shuttle orbiter fleet. The flight readiness firing in a launch-day environment would exercise the Space Shuttle's main propulsion system and computer programs to demonstrate the proper integration of all elements prior to the first Atlantis launch scheduled for October 3 for mission 51-J. Engineers had previously test fired each engine individually at NASA's National Space Technology Laboratories. On September 9 a firing simulation would kick off preparations for the test. The one-day test would check out critical flight and ground computer systems that controlled the actual engine firing and give the Space Shuttle launch team a chance to re-review test procedures. Countdown for the flight readiness firing would begin at 4:00 a.m. September 10, with the clock at the T-43 hour mark, and culminate with the 20-second static firing. Three days of preparations would precede the firing countdown, including purging the external tank with inert gases, installing special firing instrumentation, and mounting a radiation shield on the deck of the mobile launcher platform to protect the solid-fuel rocket boosters and external tank structures during the test firing. Total flight readiness firing, including pre- and post-test activities, would span six days and require support from personnel and operations from various NASA centers including MSFC and Kennedy and Johnson Space Centers. Events leading to the September 12 engine firing would be nearly identical to those that preceded an actual Space Shuttle launch, with built-in holds distributed throughout the countdown at the same times they occurred in an actual launch countdown. An automated ground launch sequencer would control the final nine minutes of the countdown. The sequencer performed the final series of events in a specific order, monitored various measurements of out-of-tolerance conditions, and detected system malfunctions for which it would automatically stop the countdown. Following the test, technicians would inspect externally and internally the three main engines to verify their readiness for flight. These post-firing activities would take about 11 days. (MSFC Release 85—44)
In reporting on NASA's concerns over the effects of vibrations and noise on the Space Shuttle's passengers and cargo, the Washington Post quoted astronaut Air Force Col. Frederick Gregory saying that after his return from a Space Shuttle mission that "Nothing prepared me for the sensation of those main engines starting and those solids lighting up underneath us. That son-of-a-gun really rattles and rolls when it takes off." Although NASA maintained that the Space Shuttle was no rougher a ride than the Titan launch vehicle, doubts were creeping into the minds of some people planning the Space Shuttle program, the Post said. Troubles arose on Gregory's flight when astronauts discovered the latch that released the airlock holding the Spacelab wide-field camera was badly bent—possibly because of the rough ride. In another Spacelab incident, all pressure was lost after four days in the laser spectrometer at the heart of an experiment to measure molecules of synthetic chemicals that could be attacking the earth's protective ozone layer. Space Shuttle managers were quick to defend the spacecraft, the Post reported. Columbia, Challenger, and Discovery had flown 17 times in four years without a serious incident. At least two of the three satellites that failed in space did so because of onboard rocket engine difficulties, not because the Space Shuttle was too rough. Johnson Space Center Director Gerald Griffin said in an interview with the Post that "occasional" mistakes had led to mishaps, but he insisted that "we are not repeating our mistakes." He used as an example the Syncom (Leasat-3) satellite deployed in April with no power to raise it to a higher orbit. He said that NASA would not have deployed the Syncom without any power if NASA had insisted that Hughes Communications Corp install a device that flashed a warning to the Space Shuttle's cockpit that the satellite had no power. "We've always insisted our customers adhere to our safety standards to protect the crew and the shuttle, but we've never insisted they do anything else," Griffin said. "We don't want to be 'Big Brother' but we're beginning to think that some of the [the customers] design features are not good for us. I'd like to see more data for the crew in the cockpit." (W Post, May 24/85, A1)
Sometime in 1986 or shortly thereafter a Conestoga rocket might launch a capsule carrying the cremated remains of 15,000 human beings into an orbit 1,900 miles above the earth, Malcom Brown wrote in the NY Times, and a few critics had deplored the idea that the U.S.'s first private venture into space should haul so seemingly useless a payload. However, Browne pointed out, the day might come when the space undertakers would orbit human relics of genuine value to future historians, archeologists, scientists, and doctors. As the living world became more crowded, he wrote, cremation seemed increasingly attractive as a space-saving alternative. However, if the trend continued, scientists in the distant future might encounter a troublesome shortage of human remains representing today's society. Space burial of at least a few representatives of our society would serve future science admirably, he wrote. Safe from grave robbers, souvenir hunters, land developers, and other terrestrial menaces, an orbiting body would remain in the most pristine frozen storage imaginable. Short of orbiting whole bodies, he added, even the storing of samples of human tissue in space would give future scientists useful time capsules. A system patented by a U.S. inventor, Philip Backman, reduced a human body to 5% of its natural weight by freezing, pulverizing, and vacuum drying it. "A few grams of the resulting powder, taking up no more space in an orbiting mausoleum than cremated remains, would bequeath to future scientists important clues about the deceased person's identity, genetic makeup, pathology, and even style of life," he wrote. "Space may be the arena of our future wars. It seems fitting that space should also serve as a graveyard, from which our distant descendants could mine the treasure of knowledge," Browne concluded. [NYT, Aug 6/85, C3)
NASA today rolled the Space Shuttle orbiter Challenger to launch complex 39B two miles from where NASA had installed the orbiter Columbia for mission 61-C, the first time a pair of orbiters had been on the launch pads at the same time, the Washington Times reported. Columbia was on Pad 39A until repair of a faulty power unit that aborted a launch attempt December 19 [see Space Transportation System/Launch Schedules, Dec. 19]. NASA had scheduled Challenger on mission 51-L for launch on January 22. (IV Times, Dec 23/85, 4A) Solid-fuel Rocket Boosters
A Titan 34-D booster carrying a classified payload, possibly a reconnaissance satellite, exploded August 28 minutes after launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base, the NY Times reported. Because of the classified payload, the Air Force revealed little information about the launch. Booster rockets typically carried an internal destruct package that ground controllers could activate in the event of a malfunction. The explosion and subsequent crash of the booster started a 20-acre brush fire near the launch pad. An Air Force spokesman said it took firefighters more than five hours to extinguish the blaze. The Air Force was conducting an investigation to determine the cause of the booster failure. (NYT, Aug 31/85, A14)
Langley Research Center (LaRC) announced that NASA would sponsor an exhibition July 22 through July 30 at the 1985 National Scout Jamboree at Fort A.P. Hill, Virginia. The jamboree, celebrating scouting's 75th anniversary, was expected to draw more than 35,000 U.S. and international scouts and leaders and many thousands of general public participants. The NASA exhibit, for which LaRC was serving as lead coordinator, would include information on subjects ranging from current aeronautics research to the Space Shuttle and man's future in space. A 100-seat theater would have video presentations and live programs throughout each day. Astronaut Frederick Gregory, a former scout and long-time scouting enthusiast, would participate in the jamboree's opening program on July 24 and would talk with scouts in the NASA exhibition area on that day. NASA would sponsor July 24 through 28 model rocket launch demonstrations and presentations on earning the Space Exploration merit badge. (LaRC Release 85-38)
Continuing a project begun in 1984, some of the world's most prominent lightning experts gathered during the summer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) to study lightning strikes and their effects, the Spaceport News reported. KSC attracted scientists with a variety of research interests because it was one of the nation's areas of highest frequency of strikes and the presence of French experts who had mastered the technique of triggering lightning. Taking part in the summer's project were representatives of NASA, the U.S. Air Force's Wright Aeronautical Lab, the Federal Aviation Administration, the U.S. Naval Laboratory, France's Center for Nuclear Studies, three U.S. universities, and two industry organizations. Since late May, the 36 lightning investigators had conducted studies at a specially equipped lightning research facility located on the shore of Mosquito Lagoon about nine miles north of the vehicle assembly building. The facility included a launch site for the three-foot rockets used to trigger lightning and two nearby trailers that housed the research teams and their equipment. From their control center, the French experts triggered lightning events by launching a small rocket that trailed a thin copper wire to an altitude of about 2000 feet. The wire acted as a trigger, attracting a stroke, which vaporized the wire while traveling down an electrical pathway to the ground. Special instruments and cameras near the launch site recorded the strike in detail. The triggered lightning events allowed researchers to obtain ground measurements that they could use in atmospheric and lightning research. Researchers might eventually use information from the studies to design advanced lightning protection systems for KSC facilities and for greater protection for aircraft such as the Space Shuttle that contained electronic flight control systems. Other research at the facilities included using a Convair C-580 to obtain measurements on a lightning strike; a study to determine how lightning strokes gained access to power lines; investigation of the Maxwell Current, which developed in a particular pattern before, during, and after thunderstorms; and attempts to obtain three-dimensional photos of lightning strikes. In addition to hosting the project, KSC was contributing funding to some of the university research. Project managers hoped to attract more participants in the future with the promise of research leading to tangible benefits in lightning protection and prediction. (Spaceport News, Aug 16/85, 7)
Japan's first deep-space probe had escaped earth's gravity on its way to a rendezvous with Halley's Comet early in 1986, the Washington Post reported. A domestically developed rocket had launched Sakigake (Pioneer) January 8 from the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science's launch site at Uchinoura in southwestern Japan. Dr. Tamiya Nomura, director of the institute's office of project coordination, said the probe was 580,000 miles from earth the morning of January 12 and was "entering a sphere where the sun's gravity is dominant." (W Post, Jan 12/ 85, A17)
The European launcher Ariane 3 launched two satellites, Brazil's Brasilsat 1 and the Arab Arabsat 1, FBIS AFP in Spanish reported. Frederick D'Allest, French Center for Space Studies director general, noted Ariane had taken off on schedule, down to the exact hour planned a year previously. Ariane's three sections functioned perfectly, and the 3rd one had reached satellite-ejection speed at an altitude of 210 km; three minutes later Arabsat 1 separated from the rocket, followed a half minute later by Brasilsat 1. The satellites would require several weeks to reach their geostationary orbits: Arabsat 1 over Zaire, Brasilsat 1 above central Brazil. (FBIS AFP in Spanish, Feb 9/85)
As a result of White House prodding, the Air Force had signed an agreement to use NASA's Space Shuttle for at least eight flights a year for 10 years starting in 1988, and the Air Force would get a discount when NASA worked out a new pricing policy for the start of FY 89, the Washington Post reported. The Air Force would pay a fixed fee at the start of each fiscal year, then a per-flight charge less than commercial and other government customers would pay. Under the agreement, NASA would drop opposition to an Air Force plan to buy 10 single-use unmanned rockets to orbit two satellites a year for five years starting in 1988, and NASA and the Department of Defense would work together to ensure a fully-operational and cost-effective Space Shuttle. NASA hoped the Space Shuttle would begin to break even in 1987, as the agency anticipated making from that time on 24 Space Shuttle flights yearly for 10 years. The new agreement called for the Air Force to use one third of all Space Shuttle flights for the 10 years starting in 1988. The agreement also permitted the Air Force to pick the single-use rocket it would use to orbit secret satellites too small for economical use of the Space Shuttle. (W Post, Feb 27/85, A22)
measure galactic and extragalactic contributions to the diffuse ultraviolet background radiation, and develop and demonstrate an advanced Get Away Special carrier system capable of providing data and power services to Space Shuttle attached sounding rocket class instruments (GSFC);
Astronauts James van Hoften and William Fisher on Space Shuttle mission 51-1 today completed repair of the Leasat 1 satellite, the Washington Post reported. Steven Dorfman, president of Hughes Communications Corp., satellite owner, referred to the effort as the "most remarkable salvage mission" tried in space. During the second day of the salvage mission [see Satellites, Aug. 31], astronaut John Lounge, using the Space Shuttle's mechanical arm, raised the satellite 35 feet above the cargo bay and placed its center of gravity on a straight line with that of the orbiter Discovery. Outside, van Hoften stepped into foot restraints on the end of the arm, and Lounge lifted him to the satellite. Reaching up, van Hoften placed gloved hands on the bar he had earlier attached to the satellite and pushed down as hard as he could to start the satellite spinning. Three more pushes sent the satellite spinning evenly into space over the equator near the west coast of South America where officials planned to operate it as a Navy radio relay. Although Hughes was still concerned that very cold temperatures might have permanently damaged the satellite, it did beam to earth its first signals since deployment on April 13. The signals indicated that temperatures in the satellite's outer shell were normal, suggesting that the inner drum holding the two onboard rocket engines and more than 7,500 lb. of rocket fuel might have survived the varying temperatures of space and be ready to carry the satellite into permanent position 22,300 miles above earth. (IV Post, Sept 2/ 85, A3)
19 a.m. today a three-stage, Taurus-Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket that left several colored clouds high over the mid-eastern U.S. coastline. The objective of the experiment was to provide baseline data on expected yields, vapor expansion velocities, and other parameters for the chemical release canisters for the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES), scheduled for launch in July 1987 from the Space Shuttle. The 157-lb. payload ejected balls of greenish-white titanium-boron-barium and barium-cupric-oxide at an altitude of 230 statute miles, one as the rocket ascended and one as the payload descended. The barium clouds rapidly expanded, while ejecting barium ions along the earth's magnetic field to form a visible streak more than 62 miles long. Another red titaniumboronlithium cloud released at 325 miles expanded to a diameter of several hundred kilometers in less than a minute. Goddard Space Flight Center's (GSFC) Wallops Range Control Center received reports of cloud sightings from as far north as Waterville, Maine, as far south as Wilmington, North Carolina, and as far west as South Bend, Indiana. (NASA Release 85-148; GSFC Release 85-39) Upper Atmospheric Research
Astronauts aboard the Challenger on Space Shuttle mission 51-F spent an extra day in space gazing at the sun after the instrument pointing system was back in order, the Washington Post reported. The sudden recovery on August 4, as a result of a lucky radio command transmitted on a whim after a jolting rocket firing, of a fourth solar telescope called a solar optical universal polarimeter added to the science data. Most of the August 5 sun observations used that telescope after NASA had considered it a failure. The telescope initially recorded images of sunspots, dark splotches that erupted through the visible surface of the sun when underlying magnetic fields became convoluted, the Washington Times reported. The astronauts turned the telescope on the sunspot again on August 5, and the TV image was so clear scientists on the ground reported that they could see changes in its penumbra, a surrounding halo-like feature made up of jets of gas streaming out from the dark central area. (W Post, Aug 6/85, A5; W Times, Aug 6/ 85, 2A)
NASA launched today from KSC Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-G with a crew of seven, including Saudi Prince Sultan Salman A1-Saud and Patrick Baudry from France, for the 18th Space Shuttle flight, the Washington Post reported. Earlier NASA had announced that mission 51-G would carry the automated directional solidification furnace (ADSF), Spartan 1, and the French echocardiograph (FEE) and posture (FPE) experiments. The objective of the ADSF was to provide a technology demonstration of the capability of the equipment to perform directional solidification of a magnetic composite material and to study the role of gravity-driven phenomena in such processing. The apparatus used for the directional solidification experiments was a specially designed furnace that melted a sample contained in a quartz tube one cm in diameter and 35 cm long. A furnace module (a heater with an integral quench block) moved along the four tubes in the experiment so that the manganese-bismuth alloy samples melted and solidified at a controlled rate. Electric resistance provided the heat; the quench block was liquid cooled. In that first flight, all four samples were the same alloy with only the solidification rate changed to allow a better understanding of that aspect of the process. Spartan 1 was the first of a continuing series of low-cost free flyers designed to extend sounding rocket experiment capabilities. The Spartan 1 objective was to map the X-ray emissions from the Perseus Cluster, the nuclear region of the Milky Way galaxy, and the Scorpius X-2 (SCO-X-2). NASA had flown the Spartan 1 instrument several times on sounding rockets; the resulting information led to the need to obtain greater viewing time of the selected targets, thus permitting more detailed studies with greater resolutions. The crew would deploy the Spartan 1 from the Space Shuttle and retrieve it using the Canadian-built remote manipulator system. After deployment, the Spartan 1 would perform scientific observations for up to 40 hours via an onboard microcomputer controller that commanded all pointing sequences and satellite control. There was no command or telemetry link; when observing sequences were complete, the satellite "safed" all systems and placed itself in a stable attitude for retrieval. The objectives of the FEE and FPE, a part of a cooperative program with France, was to obtain on-orbit data regarding the response of the cardiovascular and sensorimotor systems to weightlessness. French payload specialist Patrick Baudry would perform the experiments with participation from other crew members including the Arabsat payload specialist. The USSR's July 1982 Salyut mission had also flown the FEE system. By 4:30 p.m. June 17, Discovery's crew had successfully deployed a Mexican satellite, Morelos-1, the first of two identical satellites, which headed for a position 22,300 miles above the equator west of the Galapagos Islands. It would beam TV programs to the most remote regions of Mexico. (NASA Flight Operation Report M-980-51-G [prelaunch] June 5/85, NASA MOR E-420-51-G-16 [prelaunch] June 7/85, MOR E-420-51-G-17 [prelaunch] June 5/85, MOR E-420-51-G-18 [prelaunch] June 13/85, MOR-989-51-G [postflight] July 3/85; W Post, June 18/85, A3) During June: NASA announced that the Space Shuttle mission 51-G would carry three communications satellites, a deployable/retrievable Spartan 1 spacecraft, and six Get Away Special canisters. The orbiter Discovery would fly several mid-deck experiments including one for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) organization and a materials processing furnace. The Mexican spacecraft, Morelos-A, was a version of the Hughes HS 376 satellite, a number of which had already been deployed from the Space Shuttle. Morelos-A was the first of two domestic communications satellites that would provide advanced telecommunications to the more remote parts of Mexico. Arabsat-A, owned by the Arab Satellite Communications Organization and built by Aerospatiale, would provide telecommunications links between the member nations. A U.S. domestic communications satellite owned by American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T), Telestar 3-D would provide telecommunications services to the continental U.S., Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. All three spacecraft would first spring-eject from the orbiter's cargo bay, then on each a small attached payload assist module would ignite about 45 minutes after deployment to propel the satellites to transfer orbits out as far as 22,300	miles above earth. A second small rocket motor would then fire on each spacecraft to circularize the orbits, placing the spacecraft in geosynchronous orbits. Three of the six Get Away Special canisters contained West German payloads for study of materials processing in space and behavior of liquid propellants. A fourth canister contained a U.S. Air Force/U.S. Naval Research Laboratory investigation of the ultraviolet radiation environment in space. A fifth canister had a package of nine student experiments in biological and physical sciences. A Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) investigation of a developmental heat transfer system was in the sixth canister. A capillary pumped loop (CPL) experiment, it was the first flight of a CPL two-phase thermal control system. The advanced development and flight experiments section of the thermal engineering branch at GSFC developed the CPL (NASA Release 85-83)
NASA had completed a series of tests to validate parachute systems to be used with advanced lightweight, solid-fuel rocket boosters that would replace the boosters then in use on the Space Shuttle, Ames Research Center (ARC) announced. The new boosters would be first used during a Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg AFB no earlier than January 29, 1986. For the tests, researchers used a vehicle a third the size of a solid-fuel booster with one main parachute and, to simulate a splashdown, drop tested it from the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility's (DFRC) B-52 over the China Lake Naval Weapons Center at Ridgecrest. Most drops were made at an altitude of about 40,000 feet with an airspeed of about 230 knots. ARC and DFRC conducted the drop tests in cooperation with Marshall Space Flight Center, which was responsible for the parachute system. (ARC Release 85-1)
Li Xue, vice minister of the Peoples Republic of China (PRC) astronautics industry, indicated in London recently that the PRC wanted to compete with the U.S. and West European countries for rocket launches of other countries' satellites, FBIS, Shanghai City Service in Mandarin reported. He said the PRC had not decided to launch charges or how to market the service, but it was ready to talk to western countries needing launch services. (FBIS, Shanghai City Service in Mandarin, Feb 17/85)
NASA announced a launch date of no earlier than April 12, 1985, for the 51-D Space Shuttle mission, with two windows for launch on that date: from 8:04 a.m. to 8:18 a.m. EST and from 8:45 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. EST. The orbiter Discovery would land April 17 at approximately 8:14 a.m. EST at KSC. During the mission, crew would deploy the Canadian Telesat (Anik C1) and the Hughes Syncom IV (LEASAT) and operate the McDonnell Douglas continuous flow electrophoresis system. (NASA Release 85—43) During March: NASA announced it had scheduled for no earlier than March 3 from KSC the launch of Space Shuttle mission 51 -E, which was the 15th Space Shuttle mission and the orbiter Challenger's 7th flight. The Challenger was scheduled to land on March 7 at the 15,000-foot Space Shuttle landing facility at KSC. NASA previously announced the flight crew [see Feb. 7]. Challenger would carry the heaviest cargo taken into space by a Space Shuttle; total weight of the payload bay and cabin payloads would be nearly 53,400	lb., almost 15,000 lb. heavier than the previous record set on Space Shuttle mission 51-A. After liftoff and insertion into orbit, the crew would prepare to deploy the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-B)/inertial upper stage (IUS). Following release, the crew would maneuver Challenger to a safe distance and observe the IUS perigee kick motor firing, placing the TDRS in geosynchronous transfer orbit. Following IUS first-stage burn of about 2 minutes 26 seconds, which would then drop off, the TDRS/IUS second stage stack would coast for six hours on the way to geosynchronous orbit altitude of 22,300 miles. Once there, the IUS second stage would fire for 1 minute 49 seconds to stabilize the TDRS in geosynchronous orbit and the IUS would drop off. The IUS was an advanced solid-propellant, two-stage booster designed to carry heavyweight payloads into orbits higher than the Space Shuttle could reach. NASA first used the IUS on the STS-6 mission for launch of TDRS-A. Changes to the IUS since then corrected problems that developed during the STS-6 mission. The IUS first stage developed about 46,500 lb. of thrust, the second stage about 18,500 lb. On the second day, the crew would use the Challenger's orbital maneuvering system (OMS) engines to raise their orbit to above 180 miles for deployment during the 22nd orbit of the 7,347-lb. Telesat-1 (Anik C-1) and its payload assist module (PAM). (NASA Release 85-24)
In his "National Security Launch Strategy" directive, President Reagan told NASA and the U.S. Air Force to begin a study leading to joint development of a bigger and more powerful space shuttle that could begin flying missions just before the year 2000, the Washington Post reported. In a major policy change, the Reagan Administration indicated that the Air Force should share with NASA the cost of designing and acquiring the second-generation space shuttle; NASA had borne the $10 billion cost of developing the current Space Shuttle, although the Air Force used it one third of the time. The directive also covered an agreement by the Air Force to use NASA's Space Shuttle at least eight times a year for the 10 years after 1988 and approved an Air Force decision to buy an improved version of its Titan rocket to supplement the Space Shuttle for military launches starting in 1988 and ending in 1993 [see Feb. 27]. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger said in the directive that the Air Force had decided to buy 10 Titan 34D7 single-use rockets for $2.09 billion between then and September 1993 from Martin Marietta Corp. The directive did not resolve the dispute between NASA and the Air Force over Air Force plans to sell at bargain rates obsolete Titan II intercontinental ballistic missiles to launch three weather satellites for NOAA [see Feb 25]. NASA was disappointed in the Air Force decision to buy the Titans, as it had tried to persuade the Air Force to buy an upgraded version of the solid-fuel rocket booster that helped put the Space Shuttle into orbit. Present rocket power limited Space Shuttle cargo weight, flying height, and its crossrange (limiting landings to Kennedy Space Center, Edwards AFB, and the White Sands Missile Range). The permanently manned space station planned for 1993 would require loads up to 75,000 lb. carried into polar orbit and at least 100,000-lb. loads into near-equatorial orbit at altitudes of at least 500 miles. (W Post, Mar 3/85, A12)
NASA announced that a Scout vehicle launched the Air Force AF-16 satellite [see U.S. Air Force/NASA and U.S. Air Force, Nov. 20] at 9:35 p.m. EST today from the Wallops Flight Facility. The Scout launch vehicle, S-207C, performed satisfactorily and placed the spacecraft into an orbit with the following parameters: 418 km, apogee; 170 km, perigee; and 37.05°, inclination. The U.S. Air Force, in a brief statement released that same day, announced that NASA launched aboard a single booster from Wallops Island two instrument test vehicles, or ITVs, into low orbit, the Chicago Tribune reported. "The satellites will be checked out and maintained in orbit for an unspecified time as part of the U.S. antisatellite program," the Air Force said. An Air Force official commented later that it was "safe to assume there will be another [antisatellite] test during the first quarter of 1986." (NASA MOR M-490-605-85-01 [postlaunch], Jan 10/85; Chi Trib, Dec 14/85, A4) U.S. Science and Technology
The Washington Post reported that W. Germany had agreed to contribute $900 million over the next decade to participate in an American-led program to build an $8 billion permanently manned space station for initial operations in 1992, the 500th anniversary of Columbus's discovery of America. The W. Germans would negotiate detailed contracts over the next two years to ensure a fair return on their investment and access to space-based technology, as U.S. restrictions on technology transfer (ostensibly to prevent USSR acquisition of sensitive information, the W Post said) had increasingly irked European allies. W. German and Italian companies planned a special laboratory module that would plug into the U.S.-built spacecraft's main structure for experiments in zero gravity and vacuum conditions. A W. German ministerial report had said cooperation embodied in the space station program "should be welcomed in W. Germany not just for technical and economic reasons, but for political ones, as a transatlantic connecting link." However, the venture had evoked controversy, as some European scientists contended that robots could conduct the work planned for the space station, and others alleged that a $750 million European investment in 1973 to underwrite Spacelab had attained few research benefits. Heinz Riesenhuber, W. German minister for research and technology, said that Bonn would also contribute nearly $500 million to develop a more powerful and versatile Ariane rocket to achieve some European independence in space travel by the 1990s, although he admitted a major W. German investment in the French space shuttle project "Hermes" was impossible. (W Post, Jan 17/85, A1)
Goddard Space Flight Center announced that a team from its Wallops Flight Facility completed studies of the atmospheric ozone profile at Natal, Brazil. The team acquired data from 9 to 40 miles above the earth at an equatorial site using the improved "A" version ROCket OZonesonde (RO-COZ-A). The team took seven profiles during ozone-measuring satellite overpasses to compare the ROCOZ-A data with other satellite data for the same time and place. Although the primary mission was to support the SAGE II ozone measurements acquired by the ERBS/SAGE II satellite, the team would also compare the data with that from the solar backscatter ultraviolet spectrometer on the Solar Mesopheric Explorer (SME) satellite. Each ROCOZ-A launch included the supporting launch of a super-loki datasonde dart (a small meteorological rocket) to collect temperature data from 9 to 43 miles in the atmosphere and an electrochemical concentration cell (ECC) balloon-launched ozonesonde to collect lower-atmospheric (below 18 miles) ozone, temperature, and pressure data. The team would use the supporting data to define the atmosphere at the site for comparison with the appropriate satellite. The team provided ROCOZ-A coverage during five dual and two single satellite overpasses. There were at least two ROCOZ-A profiles for each satellite with four profiles for the NOAA-9. (GSFC Release 85-17)
By voice vote the U.S. Senate approved a FY 86 NASA authorization of $7.6 billion, an increase of $142 million above the 1985 NASA appropriation and the House-approved authorization, the Washington Post reported. The increase would mainly cover the cost of restoring the Reagan Administration's proposed 5% pay cut for federal employees and provide additional funds for booster rockets. The Senate spending ceiling was $234 million below the Administration's request. The Senate and House authorization bills were substantially different. The Senate approved cuts in specific programs, while the House simply approved an across-the-board freeze for the entire NASA budget. (W Post, July 1/85, A13) Data Tracking and Relay Systems
Scientists from China's Ministry of Astronautics announced the previous week plans to improve the design of their existing rockets so they could launch heavier satellites into geostationary orbits, thus challenging the western nations' domination of commercial exploitation of space, the New Scientist reported. China had a rocket that could put 750-kg communications satellites into geostationary orbit, which they used the previous year to launch their first such satellite. Jean Vandenkerckhove of the European Space Agency (ESA) said the rocket made "Chinese launch capability equivalent to Europe's Ariane 3 rocket." China's rocket, the Long March 3, had two liquid-fuel stages and one cryogenic stage fuelled by liquid hydrogen and oxygen. Chinese engineers said they planned to add extra boosters to allow them to put heavier loads, possibly two satellites, into space. The engineers also spoke of plans to develop a cryogenic upper stage for the rocket that could launch 2.5-ton satellites 35,000 km high into geostationary orbit. That would give China a capability close to that of Ariane 4, Europe's newest rocket. However, Wu Ke Li, in charge of Chinese interest at the Paris Air Show where China for the first time had an exhibit, would not confirm or deny the plans. Western engineers were impressed by China's existing ability because Long March 3 placed their satellite into correct orbit without flight tests, since China could not afford such tests. Instead, the Chinese relied on elaborate space simulators for checking satellites and launch components. Vandenkerckhove said China's launch facilities were at a disadvantage compared with Ariane because the compartment for satellites on Long March 3 was smaller than on Ariane 3, measuring 2.3 m rather than 2.9 m. However, Yi Zluo Hyang, one of the Long March 3 designers, said, "Our launch costs will be lower than any other service, partly because we have lower labor costs, but also because we will be supported by the government." During the past year, China had signed cooperative agreements in space science and technology with the U.S., W. Germany, France, and Britian; and they were pursuing an interest in remote-sensing satellites. (New Scientist, June 6/85, 4)
NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) requested proposals for a 12-month study of an advanced high-thrust, high-performance liquid oxygen/liquid hydrogen rocket engine that could be used for the advanced launch vehicles being examined in NASA/Air Force Space Transportation Architecture Studies (STAS), which included heavy lift launch vehicles, Defense Daily reported. NASA considered the advanced LOX/hydrogen cryogenic engine and a new LOX/hydrocarbon engine to be key elements to advanced transportation systems. MSFC said it planned to award up to three parallel firm-fixed-price contracts for the study of the Space Transportation Main Engine (STME). During the study, the contractors would prepare parametric trade-off data for engine requirements and configurations that might be employed in future launch vehicles. NASA would compare these engine configurations to the Space Shuttle main engine (SSME) for application to new launch vehicles. The contractors would identify candidate engine configurations, compare their features, and then recommend engine configurations that would best satisfy the requirements of future launch vehicles. The three principal contenders for the STME study were Rockwell's Rocket-dyne Div., prime contractor for the SSME; and Aerojet Technologies and United Technologies's Pratt & Whitney Aircraft, who conducted component improvement studies for the SSME. (D/D, Nov 21/85, 105) Military Applications
A fire of unknown cause today destroyed one of the four buildings used to mix rocket solid fuels for the Space Shuttle at Morton Thiokol's rocket motor assembly plant outside Brigham City, Utah, the Washington Post reported. No one was injured in the fire that leveled a 400-sq.-ft. building operated largely by robots at a remote part of the Thiokol plant. Because three of the four fuel mixing plants at Thiokol were needed at all times to maintain solid-fuel rocket motor production schedules, NASA said it was concerned enough to send an accident review board team from Marshall Space flight Center to investigate. (IV Post, June 5/85, A5)
In assessing the status of the Syncom IV-3 (Leasat 3) satellite that was drifting in low-earth orbit after its apogee kick motor failed to push it into proper orbit [see Apr. 18], aerospace engineers said astronauts might be able to salvage the satellite, the Washington Times reported. Payload specialists originally believed it would be too dangerous to return the satellite to earth on the Space Shuttle because of the nearly six tons of highly volatile rocket fuel it carried. Jerome Hammack, a spacecraft safety operations expert, said deactivating the satellite's electronic systems would significantly reduce the chance of stray sparks igniting the fuel, most of which would turn to gas upon descent. To ensure that there was no power going to any of the electrical circuits, a spacewalking astronaut would have to cut power circuits running to the satellite's batteries and solar power cells. However, NASA would mount a rescue attempt only if Hughes Communications Inc., Leasat 3's manufacturer, and Hughes' insurance underwriters agreed to a salvage contract. (W Times, Apr 22/85, 2A)
The USSR today launched a secret rocket from its Tyuratam launch site that may have been an antisatellite weapons test or the first launch of a new Soviet rocket that used liquid hydrogen fuel instead of kerosene, the Washington Post reported. The rocket later broke into three pieces, the largest of which was three feet long, the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) said. One piece fell out of orbit June 24 and burned up in the atmosphere; the two other pieces came down June 28. The objects were in an orbit 121 miles high at the lowest point and 215 miles at the highest. The orbit was inclined at 64.4°, a course only slightly off the one the Soviets use to test new rockets and satellites, because it passed directly over a highly instrumented corridor in the Soviet Union. U.S. intelligence sources said they were baffled by the small size of the three pieces. One source suggested the launch may have been a test of a new Soviet rocket that used liquid hydrogen fuel that resulted in the launch vehicle exploding with most of the debris falling to earth out of radar contact. Another source speculated it might have been a test of a new antisatellite weapon that failed or was deliberately blown up. The June 21 mystery launch followed that same day the launches of Cosmos 1663 and Progress 24. The Soviets launched Cosmos 1664 June 26, resuming their numbered Cosmos series after skipping the June 21 "noname" launch. NORAD gave the secret launch the designation 1985-53-A. (The "53" stood for the 53rd object put into space that year; "A" meant NORAD classified it as a payload, not a rocket launcher. NORAD gave the suffix "B" to launch vehicles that went into orbit.) (IV Post, July 5/85, A2) Space Program
NASA Administrator James Beggs told Congress that the new version of the Centaur rocket designed for Space Shuttle-launched planetary missions would cost about $110 million more ($90 million for NASA; $20 million for the Air Force) than expected [see NASA/Budget, Feb. 28], the Washington Post reported. Wider and shorter than the old-model Centaur to fit in the Space Shuttle's cargo bay, the new rocket would launch in 1986 two spacecraft toward Jupiter. An even shorter version starting in 1987 would launch from the Space Shuttle two classified missions for the Air Force. Beggs told the House Science and Technology subcommittee on space science and applications that "We underestimated the job of integrating the Centaur into the shuttle and General Dynamics underestimated the cost of changing the configuration of the rocket." The new estimates raised Centaur program costs from $755 million to $865 million. (W Post, May 24/85, A16)
Peoples Republic of China astronautics minister Li Xue said China would put their Long March 2 and 3 rockets on the international market to provide satellite launching services for local and foreign clients, FBIS Beijing XINHUA Hong Kong Service in Chinese reported. The decision resulted from the October 21 launch by a Long March 2 rocket of an earth surveying satellite and an April 8, 1984 launch by a Long March 3 rocket of China's first experimental telecommunications satellite. Li Xue said the recent Long March 2 launch was its seventh consecutive success, indicating the two-stage liquid-propellant rocket could reliably put a satellite of about two tons into a near-earth orbit from the Jiuquan launching center, in addition the Long March 3 launch from the Xichang launching center of a satellite into geosynchronous orbit showed China had mastered the technology for placing a satellite in that orbit. He added that in addition to launch services from the two centers, China could provide satellite orbital control and support from the Xian control center, which had an ocean-based survey vessel component. And he pointed out that China could provide preferential prices for foreign customers, would train technicians, and had the capability, through the Chinese People's Insurance Co., to underwrite satellites that were launched. In conclusion, he said that, after the Long March 2 and 3 rockets were on the international market, they would promote international technical and economic cooperation in the astronautics field and contribute to the maintenance of world peace. (FBIS, XINHUA Kong Hong Service in Chinese, Oct 26/85) January 1Ch Four years after cancellation of the National Oceanic Satellite System (NOSS), the U.S. Navy had begun to develop a simple, low-cost system to monitor ocean conditions routinely from space, Aerospace Daily reported. Budgeted at about a third the estimated cost of NOSS, the Navy Remote Ocean Sensing System (NROSS) would have nearly the same capability as NOSS by 1989, lacking particularly the synthetic aperture radar, and would use many of the ocean observation capabilities NASA's Seasat program demonstrated in 1979. The Pentagon had avoided $591.5 million in FY 1981-88 costs by cancelling NOSS (NASA and NOAA contributions would have made the total over $1 billion). NROSS would use a single-satellite system with no backup; the Navy would resolve later the issue of replenishment satellites. NROSS would also use existing or already planned data-processing equipment at the Navy's Fleet Numerical Oceanography Center and the USAF's Defense Meteorological Satellite Program command and control facilities. The Navy expected to spend about $200 million from FY 85 development through a launch in 1989, with a NASA contribution of $115 million ($35 million for the satellite program and $80 million in research). The Office of Management and Budget had vetoed use of NOAA's NOAA-D spacecraft as the NROSS bus, so NROSS would use a Block 5D-2 DMSP spacecraft. The Navy had planned an Atlas E launch, but was considering a refurbished Titan II ICBM. Planners rejected a Space Shuttle launch as too expensive.
NASA was still evaluating data submitted by four companies in response to its request for responses on the possibility of opening a second source for Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket motors (SRM), Aerospace Daily reported. Those responding were Hercules, Aerojet Strategic Propulsion, United Technologies' Chemical Systems Division, and Atlantic Research Corp. NASA also had a proposal from Morton Thiokol, the current sole-source producer, and would not make a final decision until later in the month. In April Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator for spaceflight, told the House appropriations HUD and independent agencies subcommittee that he expected to "have a review of the assessment sometime in the early part of May" and that in the interim NASA would proceed with the next buy of SRMs from Morton Thiokol. Agency officials expected it would take about four years to qualify a second source and "get them up to speed." NASA Administrator James Beggs would make the final decision on whether to open a second source for SRMs. A NASA official said he thought there was "a good possibility" that Beggs would have the needed information to make "a decision by the end of this month." {A/D, June 6/85, 1)
Engineers with Hughes Communications Inc., owner of the Syncom 3 communications satellite, sent at 11:53 a.m. today from the company's Guam ground station a radio command to fire the marooned satellite's rocket booster, causing the satellite's ICBM-type rocket motor to fire for 64 seconds as planned, the Washington Times reported. The undertaking capped the most ambitious space salvage effort ever attempted, the Times said, a two-day effort in August by two astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery (see Satellites Apr 22 and Aug 31). The engineers fired the rocket without knowing whether it would blow up or work properly after months exposed to freezing temperatures. "We really nailed it," said Albert Wheelon, president of the Hughes space communications group. "We'll have it in synchronous orbit round about the first of November and then we still have 30 days of checking out the radio equipment and all the systems." Insurance underwriters stood to recoup 85% of the insured cost of the satellite, a boost for an industry that had lost more than $600 million in the past 20 months because of seven satellite failures including Syncom 3. (W Times, Oct 28/85, 3A)
Robert Cooper, director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), said in testimony delivered in late March before the U.S. House Armed Services Committee research and development subcommittee that a space plane capable of flying to anywhere on the earth within half an hour to intercept enemy bombers or perform space spy missions might be possible within the next 10 years, the Washington Times reported. The U.S. Space Shuttle, which had limited ability to maneuver in space, was put in orbit only after a lengthy and complicated rocket launch. So the U.S. Air Force wanted a "transatmospheric vehicle" that would be able to quickly reach and return from space like an ordinary aircraft. Cooper said a recent breakthrough in so-called ramjet technology might make possible an aircraft capable of taking off from a runway and reaching speeds of Mach 25 (times the speed of sound), the velocity necessary to escape earth's gravity. Cooper noted the plane would weigh about 100,000 lb., take off from and land on a 10,000-foot runway, and probably use hydrogen as a fuel. Only a small amount of rocket power would be required to "deorbit" the plane, he said. DARPA proposed to build two full-scale model ramjet engines for testing on the ground. "There are a number of very interesting technical problems here . . . none of them insurmountable. They're all within our grasp," Cooper said. Cooper explained that the ramjet combustion providing the extra boost took place only when the air flowing through the jet engine chamber was at supersonic speeds. Ordinarily, to get air flowing at this speed through the entire length of the chamber, the aircraft itself had to be moving at Mach 6. However, "a way has been found/' he said, "to use a subsidiary scheme for driving the air through the engine up to supersonic speeds, even though the vehicle on which the engine is attached is sitting on the runway." By slightly varying the geometry of the engine, it might be possible to fly the aircraft from takeoff to Mach 6, and "with slight variations" fly from Mach 6 to 14 and then to Mach 25, Cooper said. The Air Force and Navy were interested in the engine, development of which marked a resurgence in hypersonic speed research that had been "put on a back burner" in the late 1960s, Cooper commented. (W Times, Apr 2/ 85, 3A)
Finnish army divers had recovered the main section of a stray Soviet rocket that had crashed December 28, 1984, through a frozen lake, and military officials said it was not a cruise missile, the Washington Post reported. A helicopter recovered the missile's main frame and engine after divers had brought up the nose cone and other debris. Finnish authorities said the debris showed it was "an old-type missile dating from 1971 or 72 and without military capacity." U.S. officials, contradicting an earlier statement by Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger that it was an "air cruise missile," agreed with the Finnish that the missile was an older-generation drone and unarmed. The Soviet Embassy in Helsinki, which said the missile had gone off course while in use for target practice over the Barents Sea, had requested return of the remnants. The Finnish later announced they would return the fragments, but asked Moscow to pay for the recovery. (W Post, Feb 3/85, A17, Feb 6/85, A15)
The first military mission of the Space Shuttle ended the afternoon of January 27 when Discovery landed, in excellent condition with only minor damage to a dozen heat protection tiles, at KSC surrounded by the same secrecy in which the mission had begun, the Washington Times reported. The five-man crew had blown bosuns' whistles and rung ships' bells in greeting to flight controllers; however, in keeping with the flight's secrecy, the public did not hear the salute. During the flight, a $50 million rocket booster called IUS, which had failed on its only previous Space Shuttle assignment, had successfully propelled a satellite from the Space Shuttle's low-earth orbit to a listening post 22,300 miles high. NASA would use the IUS on its next flight, scheduled for February 20, to boost a communications satellite to a 22,300-mile high orbit. Discovery's return was a surprise, as observers had believed it would stay up another day, possibly two. NASA had ordered the ship home early, apparently because weather conditions for a KSC landing had deteriorated. Sources reported the crew had released a spy satellite during the first 10 hours of the mission. The Air Force said only that the rocket carrying the Space Shuttle's cargo to higher orbit "successfully met its mission objectives" and would not confirm reports that the cargo was an advanced spy satellite, first of a new generation capable of intercepting radio, radio-telephone, and digital communications from ground and space, or the satellite's orbit parameters. Four private planes had violated the security zone around KSC during preparations for Discovery's landing, the Washington Post reported the Air Force as saying, the 8th time in 15 Space Shuttle missions that planes had violated restricted airspace during launch or landing. The Federal Aviation Administration had suspended the flying licenses of some violators for up to 90 days because of dangers posed by intruding pilots. The problem had grown so serious that the Air Force had improved the security zone around KSC. (IV Post, Jan 28/85, A1, A3, A9; IV Times, Jan 28/85, 3A, Jan 29/85,4A) February 5: In a speech today to the Washington chapter of the National Security Industrial Association, NASA Administrator James Beggs addressed the issue of NASA's role in assisting the Department of Defense (DOD) in national defense. After touching on the media attention given the recent secret launch of a military payload, Beggs said the fuss "stemmed, I believe, from a misapprehension that the nation's civilian space program was about to be taken over by the military. As one news organization put it sternly: 'The line is being crossed.' "Well, let me set the record straight," he continued. "Nothing could be further from the truth. On the last mission we did what we always try to do. And that is to satisfy our commercial customers, be they civilian or military." Beggs went on to trace the history of U.S. military aeronautical developments and pointed out that many of the early astronauts were former military pilots and that almost 100 military detailees worked at NASA, mostly at Johnson Space Center CSC). He also referred to other shared assets, including the KSC launch facilities, and to the aerospace technology that the military employed, practically all of which stemmed from a NASA-developed technology base. Beggs concluded by saying NASA and DOD's Space Shuttle program cooperative efforts began in 1969 and that DOD had priority on the Space Shuttle manifest for missions of national security. "Our challenge is to continue to work together to secure our future, on earth and in space." (NASA Release 85-18)
NASA announced the postlaunch status of the NOAA-A, -B, and -C missions carried out for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. In addition, NASA announced it scheduled NOAA-D for launch in 1987.	NASA submitted on January 24, 1984 a postlaunch report for NOAA-E (launched March 18, 1983) and would submit a postlaunch report for NOAA-F (launched December 12, 1984) after a full year of data collection and evaluation. NASA successfully launched NO.AA-A (NOAA-6) June 27, 1979, from the Western Space and Missile Center into a sun-synchronous orbit. The satellite ceased providing usable atmospheric soundings on October 22, 1983, when the filter wheel assembly became inoperable. NASA still used the primary imaging system. NOAA-G would replace NOAA-6 in November 1985. During NOAA-B launch on May 29, 1980, one of the two Atlas booster engines had a thrust reduction. This premature booster engine cutoff caused a deficit in velocity and altitude of the Atlas, making the sustainer engine burn 55 seconds longer than planned. As the sustainer engine was still thrusting when the spacecraft attempted to separate from the launch vehicle, the spacecraft consumed most of its attitude control gas as it fought the booster for its attitude control. The apogee kick motor burn put NOAA-B into a highly elliptical, 269 x 1466 km, 92.5° inclination orbit. As a result of the combination of incorrect orbit and loss of attitude control, NASA terminated the mission. The aborted NOAA-B mission brought about changes in subsequent NOAA launches, and the next three launches were successful. On June 23, 1981, NASA successfully launched NOAA-C (NOAA-7) from the Eastern Space and Missile Center into a sun-synchronous orbit. Failure of the filter wheel assembly on February 7, 1985, terminated the collection of usable atmospheric soundings. On February 25, 1985, NASA placed the primary imaging system on standby when NOAA-9 became the operational spacecraft for afternoon observations. NASA achieved the mission objectives of NOAA-A and -C, and the spacecraft provided useful sounding and imaging data far in excess of their two-year design life. NASA certified these missions successful. Due to launch vehicle malfunction, NASA terminated the NOAA-B mission and reported that mission unsuccessful. (NASA MOR E-615-79-01 [postlaunch], E—615— 80-02 [postlaunch], E-615-81-03 [postlaunch] Apr 16/85) During May: The Canadian government had cut $5 million (Canadian) from the National Research Council of Canada's space sciences budget, eliminating the sounding rocket program and most of the balloon research, Spaceflight reported. The cuts meant the end of nearly a quarter-century of space research with the indigenous Black Brant family of sounding rockets. The council did not cut major satellite and Space Shuttle research projects. (Spaceflight,, May 85, 201)
NASA postponed for 24 hours the first classified Space Shuttle flight, scheduled for launch the afternoon of January 23, as freezing temperatures threatened to cause severe icing on the external fuel tank, the Washington Post reported. Officials said ice chunks could drop off, damaging the Space Shuttle, and also that NASA staff was conducting inspection of fuel and water pipes to determine if they had frozen shut. The Department of Defense (DOD) had classified nearly all aspects of the mission. The crew consisting of Navy Capt. Thomas Mattingly, AF Lt. Col. Loren Shriver, Marine Lt. Col. James Buchli, AF Maj. Ellison Onizuka, and AF Maj. Gary Payton would not conduct the traditional prelaunch news conference nor hold one after landing. The U.S. Air Force would not disclose how long the crew would stay in orbit or what flight path they would take on the premise it might help the USSR determine mission purpose or interfere with the mission. Previously the Washington Post had reported that Challenger would carry into orbit a sigint (signals intelligence) satellite that could intercept telemetry from Soviet missile tests. The Associated Press later had reported that the satellite could pick up radio, ground-to-space communications, and longdistance telephone calls made by microwave relay. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger would not comment on the reports' accuracy. The USAF had not filed a flight-path plan with the United Nations, and the location of two ships that would recover the solid-fuel rocket boosters was also secret. There would be no public air-to-ground communications during the flight. (W Pbst, Jan 23/85, A3)
French President Francois Mitterrand opened today the Paris Air Show, stating that the French-led European high-technology program known as Eureka was "off to a good start" after gaining approval from West Germany and other European partners, FBIS Paris AFP in English reported. France and W. Germany had previously disagreed over a U.S. invitation to participate in the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) defense research project. West Germany had endorsed the project, but France had rejected it, fearing it would render France's independent nuclear deterrent impotent and give the U.S. an unassailable lead in advanced technology. In speaking of Eureka, a space research program primarily for civilian uses and the development of ultramodern technology in such fields as lasers and high-speed computers, Mitterrand repeated his contention that the Eureka and SDI projects were not competing for the same goals, but added that Bonn's participation in both would necessitate choices in its budget and assignment of scientists. Fie also said France was determined to develop a European fighter plane by the 1990s and that the European Flermes space plane project was of major importance and could tie in with the European Ariane-5 rocket program. (FBIS Paris AFP in English, May 31/85) Hermes Program
Hughes Communications Inc., manufacturer and owner of the Syncom 4 satellite launched August 27 from the Space Shuttle Discovery during mission 51-1, today declared it a failure due to a faulty cable between the satellite's UHF radio transmission system and its broadcast antenna, the Washington Post reported. Failure of the $85 million satellite, known as Leasat 4 after its lease to the Navy, pushed satellite insurance losses to $234 million in a single week and to about $570 million for the past 18 months. Satellites insured for $84 million and $65 million were also lost that week when Arianespace blew up a malfunctioning Ariane rocket. (IV Post, Sept 17/85, All)
Arnold Engineering Development Center (AEDC) qualification tests had shown the Star 30C apogee kick motor, designed to place satellites in orbits around the earth and manufactured by Morton-Thiokol Inc., was ready for production, the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Sverdrup Technology Inc., operating contractor of AEDC's propulsion test facilities, had conducted qualification checks in one of AEDC's high-altitude rocket development test cells at a simulated altitude of about 100,000 feet. Test objectives were to demonstrate component structural integrity and to determine ballistic performance. Sverdrup temperature conditioned the motors and then test fired them while they spun about their axial centerline to simulate spin stabilization during firing in space. The Star 30C, designed to be carried by the Space Shuttle, was the propulsion system for the RCA C-STAR satellite. Once in space, it would ignite and carry the satellite to its designated orbit. (AFSC Newsreview,. Mar 29/85, 6)
NASA announced that interdisciplinary teams of teachers, scientists, and engineers selected seven finalists in the fifth national Space Shuttle Student Involvement Program (SSIP), a joint venture of NASA and the National Science Teachers Association, judges based selection of finalists' entries upon individual scientific or engineering merit for possible flight aboard the Space Shuttle. The national winners and their teacher-advisors would attend in August a special Space Shuttle conference at Kennedy Space Center and view the launch of the Discovery Space Shuttle mission 51—L. NASA would present the finalists and their teacher-advisors with orbiter models, and their schools would receive orbiter models for trophy case display. The sixth year of SSIP competition would open in September 1985. (NASA Release 85-79) During August: NASA announced that the newest solid-fuel rocket booster retrieval ship, the U.S. Air Force's Independence, arrived at Kennedy Space Center for outfitting with retrieval gear. The Air Force specifically designed the ship for retrieval of expended boosters after Space Shuttle launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base. Independence would be the mother ship for west coast booster retrievals, towing one of the boosters and providing room for the majority of the crew and the six main parachutes and the bottoms for both boosters. The ship's first booster retrieval would be mission 51-F set for launch no earlier than July 15. The Air Force would lease another smaller ship to tow the other booster and carry the remainder of the 42-member retrieval crew. Independence, at 199 feet long and with a beam of 40 feet, was larger than its sister retrieval ships, the Liberty Star and the Freedom Star. Those two ships were 176 feet long and had beams of 37 feet. The Independence has both fore and aft water jet thrusters, making it highly maneuverable. The other two ships had only stern thrusters. Halter Marine in Moss Point, Mississippi, built Independence. (NASA Activities, Aug 85, 11)
NASA announced that it had completed with the Italian National Research Council's National Space Plan Office (PSN/CNR) selection of U.S. and Italian principal investigators for the cooperative tethered satellite system (TSS), which NASA had scheduled for a first flight in 1988 aboard the Space Shuttle. The system, using the Space Shuttle as a base of operation, would provide a unique reuseable facility remote from the orbiter for space science investigations in the upper atmosphere and in plasma-electrodynamic interactions. 101 The overall objectives of the TSS program were to demonstrate the successful operation of a tethered satellite, perform the initial electrodynamic science and plasma investigations, and develop a reusable facility capable of supporting a broad range of electrodynamic experiments in the ionosphere. On the first TSS mission, a NASA-supplied deployer mechanism would send the Italian-developed and -built satellite upward from the Space Shuttle orbiter to a distance of as much as 12 miles. The motion of the conducting tether across geomagnetic field lines would generate several thousand volts of energy to provide a broad range of electrical operating conditions. Researchers could also use the overall system to artifically generate and study field-aligned currents and associated plasma effects. On the second TSS mission, the satellite would be at the end of a nonconducting tether at 62 miles in the earth's atmosphere, an area previously explored only sporadically, mainly with sounding rocket payloads. The tethered satellite would permit investigation of the region on a global scale over several days. The TSS-3 mission would be a follow-up to the TSS-1 electrodynamics mission, with deployment from either the Space Shuttle or the proposed space station. A memorandum of understanding signed in 1984 by NASA and PSN/CNR established the TSS program. NASA's Marshall Space flight Center had responsibility for project implementation. NASA's office of space science and applications selected Peter Banks, Stanford University (Shuttle Tether Electrodynamic Tether System); Robert Estes, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (Investigation of Electromagnetic Emissions by the Tether); Gordon Gullahorn, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory (Investigation and Measurement of Dynamic Noise in Tethered Observatory Satellite Systems); Konstantinos Papadopoulos, Science Applications, Inc. (Theory and Modeling of the Tether); and Nobie Stone, Marshall Space Flight Center (Research on Orbital Flight Plasma-Electrodynamics). PSN/CNR selected Silvio Bergemaschi, Instituto Meccanica, Padova University (A Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of TSS Dynamics); Marino Dobrowolny, Instituto Fisica Spazio (Research on Electrodynamics Tether Effects); and Franco Mariana, University of Rome (Magnetic Field Experiment for the TSS Missions). (NASA Release 85-115)
Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) prime contractor for Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster motors, Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Division, successfully static fired today a new lightweight version of that motor at its facility in northern Utah, the Marshall Star reported. The firing was the second and final test of the development version of that motor, which contained major sections made from graphite epoxy materials manufactured by Thiokol's subcontractor, Hercules, Inc. Thiokol would perform a final qualification static test of the flight version of the new filament-wound motor in September. NASA had scheduled the first use of the filament-wound motor segments for early 1986 during the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. Lawrence Mulloy, manager of MSFC's solid-fuel rocket booster project, said each of the filament-wound boosters would weigh about 28,000 lb. less than the current steel boosters, making possible an increase in Space Shuttle payload carrying capacity of about 4,600 lbs. (Marshall Star, May 15/85, 2)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force completed for the first time Space Shuttle vehicle stacking at Vandenberg AFB's Space Launch Complex-6, the Marshall Star reported. Begun January 12, the stacking consisted of inert solid-fuel rocket-motor segments, an external tank, and the orbiter Enterprise. Unlike facilities at KSC where NASA stacked the Space Shuttle in the vehicle assembly building and rolled it to the launch pad, at Vandenberg NASA and the Air Force stacked the Space Shuttle vehicle on the launch mount (pad). Workers at Vandenberg rolled a mobile service tower and a shuttle-assembly building to the launch mount, then brought booster segments to the launch complex from the booster facility and lifted them into place by a mobile service-tower crane. This first vehicle stacking at the Vandenberg launch complex was part of facility-verification testing before the first Space Shuttle launch from the complex in early 1986. Col. Walter Yager, commander of the Air Force shuttle assembly task force, said minor problems had occurred, but "that's why we have facility verification. We want to ensure properly working systems before we start handling actual flight hardware." Fit and function checks, payload operations, and launch-processing simulations would complete facility verification. (Marshall Star, Feb 7/85, 1)
NASA announced plans to deploy for the first time two small experimental satellites from Get Away Special (GAS) containers mounted in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle orbiter Challenger during the STS 51-B mission scheduled for launch in late April. Under the GAS program, NASA would deploy for $10,000 each the Global Low Orbiting Message Relay Satellite (GLOMR) and the Northern Utah Satellite (NUSAT) in hopes of establishing an inexpensive way to deploy small satellites during routine Space Shuttle operations. Clarke Prouty, technical liaison officer for the GAS program at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), said the GAS containers had been upgraded with ejection systems for the 51-B mission and that GSFC had developed a motorized door (full diameter motorized door assembly) for the can similar to the one first flown on the seventh Space Shuttle mission, which would allow the GAS payload to be exposed to space. The door assembly permitted GAS container insulation before and after satellite deployment and provided a means for keeping the satellite in the container in case of malfunction. GSFC had also adapted the spacecraft separation system used in the Delta rocket program for the GAS ejection systems. The GLOMR satellite, designed and built by Defense Systems Inc. was a data relay, communications spacecraft that was expected to remain in orbit for about a year. The NUSAT, designed, built, and tested by Weber State College, Ogden, Utah, in coordination with the Federal Aviation Administration, was an air traffic control radar system calibrator that would measure antenna patterns for ground-based radars operating in the U.S. and member countries of the International Civil Aviation Organization. NASA would first launch the NUSAT, then the GLOMR, at the end of Spacelab 3 science activities on the sixth day of the seven-day 51-B mission. Independent user ground stations would operate the satellites following deployment. The GAS program was available to anyone wishing to fly a small (for containment in 2Vi- by 5-ft area) scientific research and development experiment. The Space Shuttle had flown 29 GAS containers, including those for materials processing, life sciences, biology, seed and crystal growth, and cosmic radiation. (NASA Release 85-35)
Department of Defense scientists the previous week sent concentrated laser beams adjusted for atmospheric distortion from an Air Force facility on Maui, Hawaii, to a retroreflector on a Terrier-Malemute sounding rocket launched from the Navy Pacific Missile Range Facility in Hawaii, the Los Angeles Times reported. The test demonstrated for the first time that the U.S. could fire such a beam through the atmosphere and prevent air molecules from distorting and weakening it. The test appeared to be a significant technical achievement because distortion, or “blooming," of a laser as it passed through air could totally block the beam. To correct beam distortion, engineers developed a flexible mirror that, taking orders from computers, distorted the beam at the start of its journey to compensate, or correct, in advance the dispersing effects of the air molecules. The sounding rocket reached an altitude of over 350 nautical miles with a flight time of 10 minutes, Defense Daily reported. Return of telemetry data from the diagnostic array aboard the rocket confirmed test success. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger announced the test during a speech at a Philadelphia World Affairs Council luncheon for what appeared to be the start of a Reagan Administration campaign to justify continuing its $26-billion Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) research effort in the face of intensified USSR protests over the program. (M Times, Oct 4/85, A5; D/D, Oct 18/85, 251)
Japan's highest space policy board, the Space Activities Commission, adopted in a meeting of its four commission members a plan to begin in FY 85 development of a rocket booster capable of putting a two-ton geostationary satellite into orbit, FBIS, KYODO in English reported. The new booster, code named H—II, a two-stage, 240-ton liquid-fueled rocket, 46-m high and 4-m in diameter, would dwarf the country's biggest rocket, N—II, whose capacity was up to 350 kg. Officials expected the project to cost 200 billion yen and take six to seven years to complete. The commission also agreed to start work on a science satellite and geostationary weather satellite, both intended for 1989 launch, and authorized the PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	163 naJUr.. INTENTIQNALU BLAHS design, beginning in FY 85, of a space module that Japan would construct as part of an international space station program planned for early in the 1990s. (KYODO in English, Mar 13/85) MATERIALS PROCESSING
Dr. Raymond Colladay, NASA's associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology, said in an interview that NASA was developing a set of "technology roadmaps'' that would provide the framework for the government, military, and industry to implement programs that would allow the U.S. to meet the national aeronautics research and development goals proposed in a White House report, "National Aeronautical R&D Goals," Aerospace Daily reported. Dr. Colladay said the report, written by the White House Office of Science and Technology, had charged NASA with developing the quantitative performance levels and technology steps that would be required to achieve three major goals in subsonics, supersonics, and transatmospherics. NASA hoped to have the roadmaps, being developed in cooperation with the Defense Department and industry, completed in July for review at the next planned interagency meeting. The roadmaps "will represent a national consensus" on what needs to be done to achieve the aeronautics goals outlined in the report, Colladay said, although they would not spell out specific programs or funding levels. The report had three goals: to advance technology for a new generation of fuel-efficient, affordable U.S. subsonic aircraft; to develop the technology for efficient, long-range supersonic cruise capability for military and civil aircraft; and to develop options in aeronautics and space technology for routine cruising and maneuvering into and out of the atmosphere with takeoff and landing from conventional runways. A fourth major national R&D goal, Colladay noted, was to maintain the basic research and technology that supported those three goals. Colladay singled out the transatmospheric vehicle and hypersonic speeds as developments that would be “the biggest driver" with the "biggest payoff." Observers had identified hydroglen-fueled scramjets as holding greatest promise in producing substantially improved propulsive efficiency over current rocket technology. Colladay added that both NASA and the Defense Department were "very interested" in the hypersonic area. Vehicles of that type depended on further technological developments in propulsion, materials, and intelligent integrated flight controls. Colladay pointed out that NASA had made substantial progress in all those areas over the last decade. When questioned about future funding, Colladay indicated NASA might not face problems such as those created by the Office of Management and Budget when reportedly it had attempted to delete part of the NASA's aeronautics budget. Colladay said, "I think that the content of the program, when we focus on these national goals, will not be subjected to the same policy disagreements that we have had in the past," which centered primarily on the role of NASA in support of "civil aviation oriented research. In the case of supersonic cruise research and transatmospheric vehicles, there is no longterm commercial driver . . . that industry would do on their own . . . it's a clear example of where the government needs to take the lead to make it happen," Colladay concluded. (A/D, June 19/85, 1) During January: NASA announced it was testing a concept, called laminar (air)-flow control, which removed the layer of air molecules nearest an aircraft's wing surface to increase transport-aircraft flight efficiency. Since air/ skin friction during a subsonic flight's cruise phase caused about one-half of the total drag on an aircraft, the laminar-flow control would use suction through porous wing surfaces to remove the turbulent air, reducing drag and fuel consumption. NASA contractors had designed and fitted two laminar flow-control systems on the leading edge of each wing of a JetStar four-engine light transport. Cloves, perforated either by more than a million tiny suction holes or by narrow slots, encased the systems. Lockheed-Georgia Corp. had designed the test article on the JetStar's left wing; Douglas Aircraft Co. the one on the right wing. Lockheed's construction was a sandwich of nomex-honeycomb core and graphite epoxy-face sheets, covered by a thin sheet of titanium bonded to the surface. Slots in the titanium sheets, .004 in., ran the length of the section and were the openings that drew air through the surface, directing it down ducts in the wing into the fuselage. The Douglas test article, instead of slotted, was perforated by an electron beam that drilled 800 precise, nearly microscopic holes per sq. inch of wing surface. Both concepts had built-in systems to keep the wing surface insect and ice free. The Lockheed system pumped a cleansing fluid through the slots to the surface, making it too slippery for insects to adhere. The Douglas concept used a retractable insect shield deployed in front of the leading-edge panel during takeoff, climb, descent, and landing. After tuning the leading-edge systems for best performance, NASA would flight test the airplane at various locations around the country at different times of year to record effects of weather and insect conditions. Langley Research Center (LaRC) researchers managing the project pointed out that one energy-saving transport configuration, already efficient by today's standards, would be 22% more efficient with the addition of laminar-flow control. (NASA announcement, Jan 85, 7) NASA announced that up to 20% of all fatal light-airplane accidents might be preventable with a LaRC- and ARC-developed wing modification, a carefully designed "glove" placed over the outer portion of a wing's leading edge and covering about the first 6 in. of the upper surface and first 18 in. of the lower surface. The glove was lightweight, had no moving parts, and required no maintenance. Wind-tunnel and flight tests of reshaped wings had revealed greatly increased resistance to airplane spins, which could result in aircraft stalls. Before modification, three test airplanes would enter a spin about 18 of every 20 times pilots stalled wings and applied pro-spin controls. With LaRC's wing leading-edge design, the same planes had entered a spin only once in every 20 attempts. The spins that did occur had required improper airplane loading or extremely aggravated pilot inputs. And the pilot usually had three to four times as long (measured in seconds) to make a correction before the plane entered a spin. NASA hoped ultimately to provide airplane designers with the ability to incorporate the modification as an integral part of a wing, rather than as an add-on, and the analytical tools to determine amounts of spin resistance for new planes. NASA was expanding the research beyond the series on unswept, low-wing airplanes to include high-wing planes and those with different airfoil shapes. (NASA anno Jan 85, 12)
NASA and United Technologies's United Space Boosters Inc.'s Booster Production Co. officials would break ground January 30 for Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) solid-fuel rocket booster (SRB) assembly and refurbishment facility at KSC, the Marshall Star reported. The company had designed and would build the 238,000-sq.-ft. facility, scheduled for completion in 1986, that would employ about 700 people to perform most of the Space Shuttle's SRB refurbishment previously done by the company at various locations at the center and adjacent Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Refurbishment, performed under an MSFC contract, would include replacement of insulation on booster components, addition of electronic and guidance systems, and reinstallation of parachutes and ordnance. The refurbished booster components, including forward and aft skirts and frustum, would then undergo computerized checkout in the facility before delivery to NASA for booster stacking. The new facility would process up to 24 flight sets of solid-fuel rocket boosters yearly and would offer maximum efficiency with extensive use of robotics and computer-controlled production techniques developed in MSFC's Productivity Enhancement Center. (Marshall Star, Jan 30/85, 1)
Assured access to space is one of the Defense Department's "bottom lines" in fulfilling its mission, said Col. Victor Whitehead, deputy for the Air Force Space Command's (AFSC) Expendable Launch Vehicles (ELV), "and we're quite proud of our record," AFSC's Newsreview reported. "We've gone three years in a row without a launch failure. In that time we have launched 30 totally successful ELVs. "We've learned over the years what makes a successful launch; we don't go until everything is ready." The Space Command was examining what might be beyond the Space Shuttle and ELVs for space transportation, considering both manned and unmanned systems as a follow-on. "But I don't think you'll see a future scenario in which we will be dependent on a single system," Whitehead said. "There will be alternative ways of flying payloads. Our job is to determine what they are." The colonel pointed out that the Space Shuttle was a very good system, but that the Air Force recognized that if it stopped using ELVs and was dependent on the Space Shuttle alone, "our access to space would be limited if the shuttle, for some reason, is not available. We therefore found we needed a complementary ELV." Whitehead noted the follow-on Titan 34D7 would fulfill this alternative need. "This new booster will give us into the mid-1990s a totally separate way to launch a payload," he said. "We determine it should have the same capabilities as the shuttle in terms of performance, payload, and volume. This way, a payload that could fly on the shuttle can also fly on the Titan 34D7." But it was a true complement to the Space shuttle in that it had "no common modes with shuttle. We have a completely separate set of contractors and separate launch facilities for the shuttle and Titan. If one system is down, the other continues on and flies those payloads," Whitehead concluded. (AFSC Newsreview, Apr 26/85, 3) November 2Ch NASA announced it had scheduled an Air Force AF-16 satellite for launch December 12 aboard a Scout launch vehicle from Wallops Flight Center. NASA and the Department of Defense entered into agreements in June 1962 for joint use of the Scout launch vehicle. NASA and the Air Force Systems Command continued the agreement under a memorandum of understanding dated April 19, 1977, and amended May 17, 1983. Under the agreement, NASA maintained the Scout launch vehicle system, and DOD used the system for appropriate missions. The Air Force had requested NASA to provide Scout launch vehicles for the Instrumented Test Vehicle Program. The Air Force would pay in accordance with the existing interagency agreements the costs associated with this launch of a Scout vehicle. (NASA MOR M-490-605-85-01 [prelaunch], Nov 20/85)
In a study important to the U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) missile defense program, Space Shuttle crew aboard Challenger on mission 51-F briefly fired the orbiter's rocket engines while scientists in Australia attempted to analyze the effect on the ionosphere, the Washington Post reported. Challenger's engines burned 600 lb. of fuel as the spacecraft passed over an observatory in Tasmania where telescopes measured the effect of the rocket exhaust on the charged gas particles, called plasma, that made up the ionosphere. A second shorter rocket firing took place over observatories in Massachusetts. (W Post, Aug 5/85, A4)
Arnold Engineering Development Center completed the fourth and final qualification test firing of the Payload Assist Module-D (PAM-D) II rocket motor, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. The PAM-D II featured increased propellant capacity (7200 lb.) over its predecessor, the PAM-D (4400 lb.), and could boost both military and commercial communications satellites into geosynchronous orbit about 22,300 miles above earth. A Space Shuttle would deliver the motor and its payload into space at an altitude of 160 to 180 miles, where the PAM-D II satellite package, spinning at 30 to 85 rpm, would spring-eject from the orbiter's open bay doors. At a safe distance from the orbiter, the PAM-D II, which served as a perigee kick motor, would ignite and propel its payload more than 22,000 miles higher. PAM-D II would then separate from the payload, which was positioned by its own apogee motors activited by signals from earth. AEDC test-fired the motor in one of its high-altitude rocket development test cells at a simulated pressure altitude of approximately 100,000 feet while spinning it about its thrust axis at 70 rpm. Test objectives were to determine ballistic performance and to take plume (exhaust) radiation measurements, which were important in determining if the exhaust radiation would damage the motor case or satellite. With the fourth test completed, the Air Force considered the motor ready for production and flight. Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Division was the rocket's manufacturer. NASA had tentatively scheduled PAM-D ll's first flight for November 1985 aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger to place the RCA SATCOM satellite into orbit. (AFSC Newsreview, July 12/85, 7)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced that July 1 marked the center's 25th anniversary. MSFC currently managed a budget of about $2 billion annually and employed some 3,300 people, while thousands more worked with numerous aerospace and other high-tech organizations in the Huntsville, Alabama, area to support the center's projects. During the 25 years, MSFC had moved beyond its initial role as NASA's developer of launch vehicles and propulsion systems to that of a scientific and engineering organization also responsible for spacecraft and scientific experiments. The center was currently responsible for a number of NASA programs including the Space Shuttle's engines, propellant tank, and booster rockets; the Hubble Space Telescope; Spacelab orbiting research laboratories; the Space Shuttle upper stage systems; and a significant portion of the proposed space station. (MSFC Release 85-31)
Michael Burch, assistant secretary of defense for public affairs, said beginning in 1987, two years earlier than planned, two Space Shuttle flights a year would carry experiments for President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) research program, with initial experiments testing the ability to detect, track, and aim against targets in space, the Washington Post reported. The tracking and targeting tests, developed in a Pentagon research program that antedated the Reagan Administration, would include a mounting device for attaching the telescope-like sight to the Space Shuttle and sensors that could pick up at a distance equal to the width of the U.S. the "signature of objects" such as the booster plume of a missile. The Department of Defense had canceled a Space Shuttle test of the system's main telescope, though sources said it would continue land-based tests to develop a more capable telescope. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger had said the previous year's congressional SDI program budget cuts would delay by one year an integrated-system demonstration. (W Post, Feb 20/85, A5)
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) announced that its Wallops Flight Facility conducted today a coordinated series of rocketborne experiments to study effects of lightning in the earth's troposphere. Three rocket payloads at different altitudes simultaneously collected lightning measurement data, and a series of ground-based instruments designed to detect the location and characteristics of lightning also made coordinated measurements. Wallops researchers launched at 8:01 EDT a single-stage Orion sounding rocket, 70 seconds later a two-stage Taurus-Orion, and then 57 seconds later a Nike-Orion; all three were solid-propellant sounding rockets. The Taurus-Orion lofted its 297-lb. payload to a peak altitude of 120 statute miles, and the Nike-Orion carried its 303-lb. payload to a peak altitude of 71.5	statute miles. The Taurus-Orion experiment package contained a water recovery system using an eight-foot parachute with flotation bag, flashing strobe light, and recovery beacon. Wallops personnel, following the three rocket series, launched a meteorological data sonde on a small rocket to determine the meteorological characteristics in the upper atmosphere near the time of the other measurements. The Wallops P-3 search aircraft located the Taurus-Orion payload package at 9:45 p.m. that same day about 40 miles offshore, and the next day the Coast Guard cutter "Point Brown" recovered and returned it to the Wallops Flight Facility for refurbishment and future spaceflights. (GSFC Release 8526)
The military crew of the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 51—J deployed today two communications satellites for Department of Defense, the NY Times reported, citing reliable sources. After release from the Space Shuttle, the satellites, known as Defense Satellite Communications System (DSCS III) and weighing a ton each and measuring 38 feet long with solar panels extended, rocket engines boosted them to a point 22,300 miles above the earth. According to General Electric Co., which built the satellites but would not confirm their presence on the Space Shuttle, both satellites were strengthened to withstand radiation from distant nuclear blasts and had a device to send emergency action messages from the President to the nation's nuclear forces. The Department of Defense (DOD) scheduled Atlantis to land at Edwards Air Force Base on a date that was classified; NASA and DOD said they would announce the time of landing 24 hours in advance. (NY Times, Oct 5/85, A46)
The turnaround clock began running when the Space Shuttle Discovery left the KSC launch pad at 8:59 a.m. April 12 and stopped 70 hours and 35 minutes later when NASA declared the orbiter Challenger, configured for launch of the Spacelab 3 mission, “hard down" on the pad, the KSC Spaceport News reported. The tightly coordinated effort began approximately one minute after Discovery's launch. After launch control center's firing room 1 issued the command for automatic washdown of the pad structures, an operational TV scan, ordnance system resistance checks, and statusing fire and leak detectors commenced operation. About 15 minutes after launch, when it was certain the Space Shuttle would not return to the launch site, a convoy of waiting vehicles moved into action. Workers dumped small cryogenic (hydrogen and oxygen) tanks at the 155-foot level of the fixed service structures (FSS). Two Lockheed and EG&G teams inspected in minutes the hydrogen and oxygen farms, high-pressure hydrogen gas battery, and the gaseous battery beneath the pad, clearing the way for another team to safe and secure the oxygen and hydrogen farms. Following dumping of the cryogenic tanks, two other teams began a level-bylevel quick-look inspection of the FSS and rotating service structure, setting the stage for safety and security procedures, including configuring purge line valves and doors, making environmental checks in the mobile launch platform (MLP), and checking operation of elevators. At the same time, others removed ordnance from the external tank vent arm and tail service masts, secured guard rails where necessary, and cleared the pad for entry of general repair crews. Some damage was anticipated during a launch. In this case, pins had melted off some of the solid-fuel rocket booster holddown posts on the MLP; burnaway (or sacrificial) plates needed repairing; FSS light bulbs had blown at various levels; and some SRB waste residue was present. A 40-foot piece of waterpipe at the 95-foot level of the FSS, part of the Firex system, was bent at a 90° angle. The KSC integrated control schedule called for removal of the MLP by 7 p.m. the day after launch and for it to be at the doors of the vehicle assembly building (VAB) by midnight. To accomplish this, workers had to mount service platforms, disconnect waterpipes, and move flame deflectors. They also serviced the hydrogen burn pond and its several igniters. On schedule, the crawler/transporter crew moved into position to begin the return of the MLP to the VAB. At 11:30 p.m. April 13, crawler 1 and MLP 1 reached the entrance of high bay 3; at 12:17 the next day the crew started the journey to the pad with Challenger. The Space Shuttle was "hard down" on the pad at 6:25 a.m. April 15. (KSC Spaceport News, Apr 26/85, 4)
NASA terminated today efforts by the crew of the Discovery 51-D mission to revive the U.S. Navy's Syncom IV-3 (Hughes Corp.'s Leasat 3) satellite, the Washington Post reported. Troubles with the satellite became apparent the morning of April 13 after astronauts M. Rhea Seddon and Jeffrey Hoffman completed commands that deployed the satellite from the Space Shuttle's cargo bay. The satellite's engine, which would lift it into a permanent geostationary orbit 22,300 miles above earth, failed to fire. A fault in the satellite's timing mechanism (which would direct the satellite through a series of steps to put the satellite into permanent orbit) apparently caused the failure. Johnson Space Center flight director John Cox said that NASA's best guess was that the "post-deploy sequencer (timer) never was activated. The reason we think so is that the antenna should have popped out about a minute and 20 seconds after deployment, and the satellite should have been put into a 15-rpm spin to stabilize it. Neither of those things happened." Engineers at Hughes Aircraft Corp., satellite manufacturer, tried to simulate the conditions of the satellite failure in hopes of duplicating what had happened. "One of the astronauts might be able to get close enough to the satellite to move the lever to start the timing mechanism, then get out of there and inside in enough time to be far away from the satellite when the engine fires," said Marvin Mixon, Hughes vice president. Astronauts maneuvered the Space Shuttle about 45 miles ahead of the satellite in order to take pictures of it; however, they could not draw too close because the satellite's main engine contained 7,370 lb. of solid rocket fuel, its second-stage engine had 4,092 lb. of nitrogen tetroxide and dimethyl hydrazine fuel. The satellite also carried 352 lb. of hydrazine for controlling its position in orbit. NASA made the decision to extend the flight from five to seven days, and on April 15 the Discovery crew cannibalized plastic covers from flight manuals, parts of a window screen, nylon straps, and other paraphernalia in the spacecraft to fashion flyswatters to attach to Discovery's robot arm for an attempt to fire the satellite's engine. Seddon sewed the plastic covers together to form cones that the astronauts would attach to the arm in order to flip the arming lever. On April 16 astronauts Jeffrey Hoffman and S. David Griggs went on history's first unrehearsed spacewalk to rig Discovery's mechanical arm with the flyswatter devices. The two spent more than three hours in Discovery's open cargo bay putting the extension "hands" on the 50-foot-long arm. At about 8:00 a.m. April 17, commander Karol Bobko and pilot David Williams manuevered Discovery to within 30 feet of the satellite. Then Seddon swatted at the four-in.-long power switch. Although she hit it at least twice—once so hard that part of the plastic broke—the lever didn't move. Following the unsuccessful attempt, ground controllers order the Space Shuttle to move away and abandon the rescue attempt on the off-chance that the contact somehow might have activated the satellite's internal timer, which would cause its rockets to fire. Underwriters who had insured the satellite said the failure to either recover the satellite or boost it into an operational orbit would be a serious blow to the satellite underwriters business, Defense Daily reported. "If we have another major claim," James Barrett, president of International Technology Underwriters, said, "the market would be very seriously injured by a total loss." Hughes said the satellite was insured for between $80 and $85 million, and the space insurance market had already suffered three losses over the past year. (W Post, Apr 15/85, A1, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 17/85, A7, Apr 18/85, A1; NYT, Apr 16/85, A1, Apr 18/85, BIO; USA Today, Apr 16/85, 3A; W Times,Apr 18/85, 1 A; D/D, Apr 16/85, 257)
The European Space Agency (ESA) launched at 9:15 p.m. EST today from Kourou an Ariane rocket that successfully deployed two telecommunications satellites including a U.S.-built G-Star 1, the Washington Post reported. A breakdown in timing between the rocket and the ESA's various earth-based satellite tracking stations delayed launch 79 minutes. ESA officials described the launch as "another success" in the agency's competition with the U.S. Space Shuttle to capture the world market for satellite launches. The Ariane rocket was the 13th fired, including two aborted launches, since 1979. The previous launch February 9 also put two satellites into orbit. Officials said they had nearly 30 orders to launch commercial satellites, compared with about 60 orders for the Space Shuttle. The Ariane rocket deployed the G-Star 1 satellite, owned by the GTE Spacenet Corp., and the French Telecome-1B 20 minutes after liftoff at about 22,000	miles above the equator. (W Post, May 8/85, A26)
Hermann Oberth, considered by some to be the father of spaceflight, watched on TV at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) the landing of the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 61-A, the Washington Post reported. Oberth is the last scientist survivor of the group that transformed theory into modern space exploration. Konstantin Tsiolkovsky, the Russian who worked out some of the early theory of rocket propulsion, died in 1935; Robert Goddard, the American who experimented with early rockets and for whom GSFC is named, died in 1945. But Oberth, who made the most complete analyses of the problems and prospects of human space travel, lived to "see it happen." In 1932 Oberth wrote a paper in which he not only showed mathematically that it was possible to escape earth's gravity, but also anticipated a host of other aspects of spaceflight not seriously approached for the next 30 years. Oberth described in the book a spaceship's propulsion system and architectural form down to the rocket engine's nozzles; designed spacesuits and methods of eating in weightlessness; conceived of astronauts performing spacewalks; proposed space stations in earth orbit as transfer points for interplanetary travel; considered the problems of weightlessness and motion sickness (which astronauts still faced); proposed that the stations spin slowly to create an artificial gravity; and suggested the use of flying shuttles that could take off like a rocket, visit the space station, and land back on earth like airplanes. Oberth also worked out the physics of joining two spacecraft in orbit (referred to now as rendezvous and docking), anticipated that photos of earth from space would be useful for studying the ground and forecasting weather, foresaw that telescopes in earth orbit could gather far better astronomical data than those that looked through the atmosphere, and claimed that practical uses for space travel would someday make it a profitable enterprise. Working unaware of Tsiolkovsky or Goddard, Oberth wrote the paper as an amateur physicist and mathematician while serving as a soldier in the Austro-Hungarian army during World War I. Oberth's commanding officer sent the paper to the War Ministry, where the generals rejected it as obvious fantasy. After the war, when Oberth was at the University of Heidelberg, he submitted as his dissertation a longer version of the paper, complete with elaborate mathematical formulas proving his ideas. Again it was rejected. Eventually Oberth paid to have the paper published. "The Rocket Into Interplanetary Space" gained a wide following and attracted Wernher von Braun, who worked as Oberth's assistant and then left to join the German military rocket research program at Peenemunde. Von Braun brought Oberth to work on the V2 rocket, the first major device based on Oberth's ideas. During three years in the 1950s, Oberth joined von Braun in the U.S. where he was developing the Redstone rocket. In 1958 Oberth retired to West Germany. Oberth had concluded in his book that "the foregoing demonstrates that it is possible, with present day science and technology, to construct vehicles which could attain cosmic speed and that it is probably possible for men to ride in these vehicles," but that it would take more than a decade to realize these possibilities. At GSFC today, Oberth said it had "proven to be much more complicated that I thought." (W Post, Nov 7/85, C1)
The U.S. Air Force couldn't decide whether the next test of the miniature homing vehicle antisatellite (ASAT) system should be against a target in space, Aerospace Daily reported. The Air Force was evaluating data from its November 13 ASAT test, in which the miniature homing vehicle MHV infrared sensor tracked a star, but had said that its next ASAT test would be flown against an instrumented target vehicle. Congressional limitations barred such a test until March 1 and until President Reagan had certified to Congress that the test was needed and wouldn't undercut the potential for negotiations with the USSR. The previous day the magazine had discussed a House Republican research report recommending raising the limit of three U.S. ASAT tests against objects in space during that fiscal year. (A/D, Jan 16/85, 84; Jan 15/85, 73) May 24: The U.S. Senate voted today, 74 to 9, to approve a proposal by Sen. John Warner (R-Va.) to allow three final-stage antisatellite tests next year as long as President Reagan told Congress the test would not disrupt negotiations aimed at banning antisatellite weapons, the Washington Post reported. The Senate previously rejected, 51 to 35, a testing ban proposed by Sen. John Kerry (D-Mass.). The U.S. antisatellite (ASAT) weapon was a small warhead atop a rocket carried by an F—15 jet to the edge of space, where it was released to pursue its target. Although the U.S. had tested the weapon in stages, the U.S. had not fired the weapon against a target in space. The Pentagon had scheduled that final round of testing to begin within several months. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	m 9UX |[0 INTENTIONALLY BLANK During the Geneva negotiations on weapons reductions, the USSR sought a halt to ASAT tests, while the Reagan Administration said it was open to such a proposal but had refused to halt ASAT testing as a condition to talks. In 1984 Congress banned tests of the U.S. system in hopes the pause might help negotiations, which had not then started. The Washington Post earlier had reported that electronic problems would raise the cost of the antisatellite system and stretched out its testing program. The Air Force planned a test, originally scheduled for fall 1984, for late July in which the target would be two metallic balloons attached to an orbiting satellite. However, the Air Force was cautious about the first test against a target in space, fearing that a well-publicized failure would hurt the space defense program. Sources told the Post that it might be impossible for the Air Force to carry out a second test of the weapon against the balloon target in space during the current fiscal year. Originally the Air Force had planned for three tests in 1985. (WPost, May 25/85, A4; May 16/85, A27)
The Department of Defense announced that a large high-powered chemical laser destroyed at a distance of six-tenths of a mile a large liquid-fuel booster stage from a Titan 2 rocket in an experiment for the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program, the Arizona Republic reported. The experiment, conducted at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, was significant "because this was the first full-scale test against an object this large," said Mary Pshak, a spokeswoman for the SDI organization. "We had done a lot of subscale testing, but this particular experiment verified our earlier tests," she noted. Pshak declined to discuss the amount of power used because the information was classified, but said the laser was a large working model of MIRACL (mid-infrared chemical laser), considered the largest weapon-grade device of its type developed in the U.S. However, the SDI research program also was focusing on other types of lasers, some of which were considered even more promising. (Ariz. Republic, Sept 14/85, A28)
Frederic J.P. d'Allest, chairman of Arianespace, told the U.S. Senate science, technology, and space subcommittee the previous week that his firm offered satellite insurance at lower than market rates to those using the Ariane rocket to launch their satellites, the Washington Times reported. The insurance covered only the booster phase of a satellite launch. Arianespace charged between 11 and 13% of the total value of the launch for insuring an Ariane launch from lift off to geostationary orbit, that portion of the flight under Arianespace's control. Satellite operators had to go to commercial insurance markets to obtain coverage for the rest of a satellite's operation. More than $600 million in losses from the failure of seven satellites in almost two years had resulted in a tightened insurance market that was seriously threatening commercial space projects. Satellite insurance firms had cut back on the amount they would commit to insure launches, while boosting premiums to more than 20% of the total insured value of the launch. The subcommittee before which d'Allest testified was investigating a possible federal role in easing the insurance problem. However, commercial underwriters warned the subcommittee that the federal government should stay out of the insurance business. "In my view," James Barrett, president of International Technology Underwriters, said, "there is no role for government to play in this commercial market. Intervention can only disturb normal market processes." He noted the solution to the problem was improved reliability of satellite manufacturers and launch agencies. "Insurance . . . cannot compensate for unacceptable levels of reliability," he commented. (W Times, Nov 12/85, 70
Crew aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis on mission 61-B celebrated Thanksgiving in space today, saying it was one of the best Thanksgivings they ever had, the Washington Times reported. It was the first U.S. manned spaceflight during that holiday since the third Skylab flight in 1973. The crew's main job for the day was deployment of the 4,144-lb. SATCOM KU-2 satellite owned and operated by RCA American Communications (RCA Americom). The uninsured $50 million satellite was the last of three KU-brand domestic communications satellites that operated in the 12 to 14 gigahertz range. It had 16 operational transponders and six spares, each transmitting 45 watts of power, more than the 12 to 30 watts used for C-Band transponders. The payload assist module (PAM) on the satellite was instrumented with radio frequency telemetry that would downlink data to ARIA (advanced range instrumentation aircraft) during burn of the solid-fuel rocket motor, a mission requirement for this first flight of a PAM-D2, the Kennedy Space Center Spaceport News explained. The uprated upper stage was identical to the PAM-D, except for size and weight. The spinup would be noticeably slower due to the larger mass and inertial components of the payload. NASA designed PAM-D2 to place up to 4,200 lb. in geosynchronous orbit, compared to the 2,800-lb. PAM-D version. The crew's dinner menu—chicken consomme, smoked turkey, cranberry sauce, green beans, corn, pasta, butter cookies, and lemonade—sounded traditional, but the turkey was preserved before launch by irradiation, sealed in foil, and had to be heated in a device similar to a toaster oven. Crew added warm water to the consomme, vegetables, and pasta to make them edible. (IV Times, Nov 29/85, 3A; Spaceport News, Nov 22/85, 4)
A fare war had broken out in space, Fortune reported, and Arianespace, a consortium of European governments and private companies that operated the European-built Ariane rocket, was grabbing communications satellite launches away from the U.S. Space Shuttle by aggressively underpricing it. Although NASA had launched 30 satellites, nine aboard the Space Shuttle, over the previous four years and the Ariane less than 12, the Europeans would become major competitors, Fortune predicted. A Space Shuttle launch cost $25 million; Arianespace charged $24 million. And Arianespace had cut that price by as much as $3 million to lure some U.S. customers. Arianespace officials said its throwaway rockets were more efficient at the single task of launching satellites than was the complex Space Shuttle, which NASA had designed to perform a range of scientific and military missions. "Using the shuttle for launching satellites," Charles Bigot, director of Arianespace, said, "is like flying a supersonic Mirage jet fighter when all you need is a puddle jumper." American entrepreneurs who wanted to get into the satellite-launching business complained that prices charged by both Arianespace and NASA were ridiculously low as a result of government subsidies. Transpace Carriers Inc., for example, held the rights to buy the Delta rocket from its manufacturer McDonnell Douglas Corp., but couldn't launch a satellite for less than $45 million. The U.S. Department of Transportation, which wanted to encourage private companies like Transpace Carriers, was encouraging President Reagan to set Space Shuttle launch rates high enough to make the commercial launches profitable. So the future of the launch business, Fortune said, would rest with President Reagan's decision on Space Shuttle pricing—and on Arianespace's reaction. If Reagan boosted Space Shuttle launch fees, it would please entrepreneurs anxious to get into the space business. But that would also give the Europeans a bigger opening into the space business than they've had so far. (Fortune, May 27/85, 138)
NASA announced it would award James Harford, executive director of the American Institute for Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), its Public Service Medal at a luncheon ceremony April 10 during AlAA's annual meeting in Washington. The award cited Harford "for more than 30 years of staff leadership of the nation's principal professional society for the advancement of aerospace." In 1953 Harford became executive secretary of the American Rocket Society (ARS), than a fledgling organization of about 2,100 missile engineers and scientists. When ARS and the Institute of Aeronautical Sciences merged in 1963 to form the AIAA, Harford became its deputy executive director and a year later its executive director. AIAA, under Harford's leadership, grew to 35,000	members with 66 professional sections and 132 student branches. Harford was a Fellow of AIAA, the British Interplanetary Society, the American Association for the Advancement of Science and an Associate Fellow of the Royal Aeronautical Society. (NASA Release 85-49)
Three quarters of a million gallons of water flooded Space Launch Complex-6 at Vandenberg AFB during a March test to determine whether the system, intended to suppress sound waves from the Space Shuttle during a launch, would operate properly, the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Sound waves, reflected off the launch mount and flame ducts, could seriously damage the orbiter and its payload. To prevent such damage, nozzles on the mount would begin spraying water into the three pad exhaust ducts seven and a half seconds before the Space Shuttle's main engines ignited. By ignition time, the spray system would reach its full flow rate of 985,000 gallons per minute and maintain that rate for nearly 30 seconds before tapering off after the Space Shuttle left the pad. Although Vandenberg officials had tested the spray system six times previously, the March test was the first time the nonflying prototype orbiter Enterprise, inert solid-fuel rocket boosters, and an external tank were in place on the mount during a test. Remotely controlled by the launch control center, the splash pattern of the gravity-fed water system resulted in no water splashing up into the main engines, where ice might form before ignition. The system sprayed water exactly where it would be needed at launch—down into the flame ducts and out over the concrete pad surface. George O'Gorman, site manager for complex-6, said most of the complex's construction work was complete, although some modifications were scheduled before the orbiter Discovery would arrive in September for launch in January 1986. The Air Force expected to make about four Space Shuttle launches a year by the late 1980s from Vandenberg AFB. The facility could handle as many as ten launches a year. (AFCS Newsreview, Apr 12/85, 3)
NASA announced the highlights of its 1985 activities, which included nine Space Shuttle flights and launches of three Atlas Centaurs, two Scouts, and an Aerobee vehicle, its last flight. In 1985 NASA introduced the last and lightest-weight Space Shuttle orbiter—Atlantis. McDonnell Douglas inaugurated its upper stage booster, the Payload Assist Module D-2. Fifty two individuals flew aboard Space Shuttles in 1985. Of this group 19 were scientists performing observations, experiments, or investigations; 27 were U.S. military officers, and six were payload specialists from foreign countries (Mexico, Saudi Arabia, France, the Netherlands, and two from West Germany). The 52 individuals' combined time in space was nearly 55 days or over 880 earth orbits, for a combined travel distance of nearly 22 million miles. Six Space Shuttle astronauts spent a total of more than a day in extravehicular activities during the year. Two Spacelab missions aboard the Space Shuttle and an encounter by the International Cometary Explorer (ICE) with Comet Giacobini-Zinner highlighted the year for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	167 ^^LLLLjWTENTlONAai 8LANK On April 19, 1985, a little more than a year after President Reagan directed NASA to develop within a decade a permanently manned space station, NASA awarded competitive contracts to eight industry teams for definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of elements of the station. NASA signed a memorandum of understanding with Canada, the European Space Agency, and Japan for cooperation during the definition and preliminary design phase of the program. NASA's aeronautical research and technology efforts included continuing work on such programs as the NASA/Department of Defense X-29 X-wing research aircraft, the tilt rotor/JVX aircraft, the advanced X-29 aircraft featuring a forward-swept wing, and the mission adaptive wing that could change its curvature. In the area of space technology, Langley Research Center completed development, assembly, and testing of a 15-meter hoop column deployable structure and antenna system. Other advances in space technology included significant modification to the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia to measure dynamic and thermodynamic characteristics, selection of the reactor thermoelectric power system concept for design and testing for the space station space reactor power program, and completion of space construction experiments outside the Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA's advances in space tracking and data systems included transition from ground network station support for low earth-orbiting spacecraft to use of the first Tracking and Data Relay Satellite in geosynchronous orbit. NASA had scheduled TDRS-2 and 3 for launch in January and July 1986, respectively. In February NASA completed consolidation of the Deep Space Network (DSN) and later an upgrade of the network that would enable the DSN to receive significantly more images from Voyager as it encountered Uranus in January 1986. NASA's Office of Commercial Programs funded and opened the first five of a planned series of centers for commercial development of space, which NASA expected would become self-supporting through research collaboration by industry, academia, and government agencies. (NASA Release 85177)
American University professor Jeffrey Richelson, testifying at the espionage trial of former Navy intelligence analyst Samuel Morison, said publication in 1984 of three secret KH-11 spy satellite photos in Jane's Defense Weekly told the Soviets nothing important that they did not already know, the Washington Post reported. Morison, who worked at the Naval Intelligence Support center in Suitland, Maryland, had official approval for his part-time job as U.S. editor of Jane's Fighting Ships and in 1984 sent the weekly the three photos in hopes of securing a full-time job there. He was also indicted on charges of keeping in his apartment two classified documents about a May 1984 fire at a Soviet naval ammunition depot. In his testimony, Richelson said the Soviets already had the KH-11 manual, which they had bought from a CIA officer, as well as earlier published satellite photos to show them how the system worked. Government witnesses earlier testified that the photos sent to Jane's were potentially valuable to the Soviets in confirming the KH-11's sophisticated workings and in disclosing U.S. targeting interests. Similarly, a Navy intelligence expert testified that the details about the ammunition depot fires, also gleaned from satellite photos, were so precise that it would have been "very damaging" to the U.S. if the documents had been leaked. Richelson, however, said public sources had provided much detail about the KH-11 and other satellite programs, such as their flight paths over the Soviet Union, their altitude (75 to 155 miles), and the fact that a Titan 3D rocket launched them and another so-called Keyhole satellite, the KH-9. He said it was well known that the KH-11 sent its pictures back to Washington in a matter of seconds via another satellite and that it passed over targets quite frequently. Another defense witness, John Pike, associate director for space policy at the Federation of American Scientists, testified on what was publicly available about the KH-11, saying DOD would soon replace it with a longer-lasting KH-12. According to Pike, the KH-11 orbited the Soviet Union 11 times a day, had the capacity to take pictures continuously, and had a peripheral vision that could switch from extreme left to extreme right in an instant. The Washington Post six days later reported that Morison was found guilty of espionage and theft and could be sentenced to up to 10 years in prison and fined $10,000 on each of four counts. (W Post, Oct 12/85, A9, Oct 18/85, A1) Strategic Defense Initiative The UCS had also stated in its report that the neutral particle beam (to destroy Soviet missiles) would require orbiting a 40,000-ton accelerator, an impossible task. However, Jastrow noted the correct weight of the accelerator was 25 tons, quite reasonable for earth orbit, and the UCS had admitted the error. Also on the SDI program, Space World published the Council on Economic Priorities's (CEP) recommendations, in which CEP suggested the Department of Defense reduce emphasis on developing prototype systems until clarification of the technological uncertainties of deploying an effective overall space defense and Congress should significantly slow SDI's growth rate until demonstration of the plan's technical feasibility. (WSJ, Jan 17/85, 2-E; Space World, Jan 85, 3)
NASA launched today at 2:50 p.m. EST the Space Shuttle Discovery mission 51-C with its five-man military crew to carry out secret military objectives, the NY Times reported. NASA, which had delayed launch due to subfreezing temperatures [see STS/Launch Schedules, Jan. 23], did not announce liftoff time until nine minutes before launch. One and a half hours after launch, Houston Mission Control reported the Space Shuttle had reached its intended orbit, the altitude and position of which were secret. How long the astronauts would remain in orbit was unknown; although most Space Shuttle flights lasted five to eight days, the apparent Discovery mission to launch a single satellite might limit it to three or four days. Discovery carried a 32,000-lb. propulsion, inertial upper stage capable of boosting a large satellite to 22,300 miles above the equator south of the USSR. This was the first test of the rocket system since a predecessor had misfired on a Space Shuttle mission in April 1983. Many newspapers had already published reports, based on information in the aerospace trade press and other unclassified documents, that the secret payload was an electronic spy satellite. Both the U.S. and USSR had engaged in electronic eavesdropping from orbit for several years, and the USSR had obtained many of the plans and engineering information for the earlier U.S. electronic reconnaissance satellite Rhyolite. The Carter administration had cancelled an advanced version of Rhyolite, the Argus, but the Reagan administration had revived the project. Most reports described the Discovery's payload as the most advanced and sensitive form of orbital electronic spying. The Air Force began an investigation to find the officials or contractor employees who had provided information about the secret payload aboard Discovery, the Washington Post reported. Inquiries were not aimed at news organizations, Michael Burch, a Department of Defense (DOD) spokesman, had said. When questioned about a photo of an early-warning satellite published on the cover of Aviation Week, Burch said the picture should not have appeared. However, the Pentagon later acknowledged that the Air Force had given the photo to the magazine after determining it was unclassified. Burch refused to say what action the government would take if it could identify those who leaked information on the Space Shuttle mission. Brig. Gen. Richard Abel had previously warned reporters not to speculate about the Space Shuttle's cargo. After the Washington Post had reported it was an intelligence satellite intended to eavesdrop on the USSR, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger had said the story might have given "aid and comfort to the enemy." Abel later had told a Univ. of Georgia journalism class that little or nothing in the Post story was not available from public sources. Aviation Week's January 21 issue had described the Pentagon's next generation of early-warning surveillance satellites, which would monitor missile and spacecraft launches from Soviet territory and be protected against Soviet laser weapons. {NYT, Jan 25/85, A1; W Post, Jan 25/85, A3)
The White House announced that it had sent Congress a new Space Shuttle pricing policy that entailed, starting October 1, 1988, auctioning the Space Shuttle's cargo bay to commercial and foreign customers at a minimum rate of $74 million for a full bay, the Washington Times reported. This meant that owners of three satellites could share a mission and pay NASA a little less than $25 million apiece or about $1 million more than they presently paid for Space Shuttle launches. However, if demand for shuttle space exceeded its availability, the auction system would drive prices upward. Europe's Arianespace SA charged $25 million for a launch. President Reagan, who earlier had suggested that space should be open to private enterprise and that the Space Shuttle might be turned over to industry, directed NASA under the new policy to establish auction procedures "to ensure maximum return to the government and equitable treatment for all potential launch customers." The President also told NASA to review annually Space Shuttle costs and the effectiveness of its pricing policies and report its findings and recommendations to the president's national security adviser and the director of the Office of Management and Budget. The new policy represented a victory for NASA and defeat for the Transportation Department and Secretary Elizabeth Hanford Dole, who had argued for a full-bay price no lower than $129 million in order to encourage private industry to get into the launch vehicle business on its own, the Washington Post reported. Two companies wanted to compete with NASA and Arianespace. General Dynamics signed a letter of intent with NASA to use the Atlas-Centaur rocket, and Transpace Carriers Inc. signed a similar letter to use the Delta rocket to launch satellites. Both companies said they could not compete with a Space Shuttle price of less than $40 million to send up a single satellite. The Transportation Department argued for a higher Space Shuttle launch price to improve private industry's bargaining power. But NASA said a higher charge would send customers to Arianespace, which had booked more than a third of the world's future commercial satellite launch traffic. (W Times, Aug 2/85, 10C; W Post, Aug 7/85, A3)
In a ceremony today in the East Room of the White House, President Reagan presented the Presidential Medal of Freedom to 12 people including former test pilot Chuck Yeager. "More than you'll ever know," Reagan said, "this world would have been much poorer and a dimmer place without each of you." In presenting Yeager's award, Reagan said he was "a hero in war and peace," who on October 14, 1947, in a rocket plane named "Clamorous Glennis" after his wife, "became the first human being to travel faster than the speed of sound, and in doing so, showed to the world the real meaning of 'The Right Stuff'." After the ceremony, Yeager gave Glennis Yeager his medal. In an interview with a Washington Post reporter upon his arrival in Washington for the ceremony, Yeagar said, "I was just a lucky kid who caught the right ride. But then I was as naive as could be, living a cloistered life out at Muroc, where the flying was fun and the living was easy. ". . . We didn't know what the word 'macho' meant. We were jes' a bunch of hell raisers . . . It wasn't a case of the right stuff. Just dumb luck. "When they refer to a pilot 'having the right stuff,' that doesn't mean a rat's ass to me or any other pilot. It's more meaningful to be in the right place at the right time." (W Post, May 23/85, D1; May 24/85, B1)
The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that it launched at 11.23 hours GMT July 2 Giotto, ESA's interplanetary space probe that would after a 700 million km voyage encounter Halley's Comet in March 1986. ESA launched Giotto by an Ariane 1 launcher from the Kourou Space Center in French Guiana, the ninth straight success for the agency's unmanned Ariane 1 rocket. The rocket placed Giotto into a geostationary transfer orbit with parameters of 35,966 km, apogee; 199.2 km, perigee; and 7° inclination. Following separation from the launcher's third stage 22 minutes after liftoff, ESA's Space Operations Centre (ESOC) at Darmstadt, West Germany, took control of the spacecraft. During the following 32 hours, ESOC spacecraft controllers worked around the clock to reconfigure the spacecraft in its geostationary transfer orbit and carry out spin-up and attitude maneuvers. After Giotto made three revolutions in its transfer orbit, ESOC at 19.24 hours GMT July 3 injected the spacecraft into an earth-escape trajectory. Giotto, named for the 14th-century artist Giotto de Bondone, who in 1301 witnessed what probably was Halley's Comet, should come within 310 miles of the comet's five-mile-diameter nucleus. When the spacecraft reached its rendezvous, ESA scientists expected it to be destroyed by billions of highspeed dust particles pouring off the comet's nucleus. Before its destruction, Giotto would perform approximately 10 experiments examining the image, chemistry, magnetism, and other aspects of the comet and its tail. Other spacecraft participating in the Halley's Comet investigation were the USSR's Vega 1 and 2, launched December 15 and December 21, 1984, respectively, to encounter the comet at a distance of 62,000 miles; Japan's Sakigake launched January 8, 1985, and Planet A, scheduled for launch in August 1985 to photograph the comet's tail at a distance of 160,000 miles; and NASA's International Comet Explorer, ICE (formerly ISEE-3), launched December 22, 1983, and diverted from its previous earth orbiting position for the Halley's Comet encounter. (ESA release July 2/85; ESA release July 4/85; W Post, July 3/85, A3)
A prime time TV series for the first time would offer a comprehensive look at the history of manned U.S. and USSR space flight, the Ames Research Center's Astrogram reported. SPACEFLIGHT, a series of four one-hour programs sponsored by the Public Broadcasting System and the Du Pont Co., would chronicle man's achievements in space from the rocket plane that first broke the sound barrier to the touchdown of the Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia. The series' executive producer, Blaine Baggett, said his staff interviewed some 40 key participants in space activities—astronauts, people on the ground, scientists, and historians. In addition, the Soviet science attache in Washington provided about 10 hours of film footage. Among those interviewed for the series were Chuck Yaeger, first man to break the sound barrier; Scott Crossfield, first to travel twice the speed of sound and to pilot the X-15; Werner von Braun, who worked on the U.S. rocket program; Alan Shepard and John Glenn, first American in space and first American to orbit the globe, respectively; and Sally Ride, first American woman in space. From the point of view of the USSR, the series sought answers to such questions as who the chief designer was of the Soviet space program and why the Soviets were first in the early days of space activities. SPACEFLIGHT also examined future space plans such as space colonies, space stations, and the Strategic Defense Initiative. (ARC Astrogram, Apr 11/ 85,4) PRECEDING PAGE SLAJ^K ftQT FILMED PAfilA.{0 INTENTlOHAtlT BUN*
In an administrative realignment reflecting the maturation of the Space Shuttle program, NASA announced the appointment of Arnold Aldrich, a 26-year NASA veteran and head of the Space Shuttle projects office at the Johnson Space Center (JSC), to manager of the National Space Transportation System (NSTS). He would fill the vacancy left when Glynn Lunney retired in April. The Level II NSTS organization at JSC would assimilate the projects office, consolidating all program elements under Aldrich. With this combined responsibility, Aldrich would take charge of integration of all Space Shuttle program elements including flight software, orbiter, external tank, solid-fuel rocket boosters, main engines, payloads, payload carriers, and Space Shuttle facilities. His responsibilities would also include directing the planning for NSTS operations and for management of orbiter and government furnished equipment projects. NASA named Richard Kohrs, who was acting program manager, and Lt. Col. Thomas Redmond, U.S. Air Force, deputy managers. In a related move, Thomas Utsman, head of Space Shuttle management and operations at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), would become deputy director of KSC, with NASA dividing shuttle management and operations into two primary organizations: Shuttle engineering and Shuttle operations. The engineering directorate, headed by Horace Lamberth, would expand to include skills necessary for sustaining engineering of the orbiter. The operations directorate, headed by Robert Sieck, would retain all functions necessary to manage day-to-day Space Shuttle processing and its logistical support. NASA would transfer later in the year from Johnson Space Center to KSC launch support services and orbiter thermal protection system manufacturing contracts, functions closely associated with KSC responsibilities for Space Shuttle maintenance and launch preparation. At the beginning of 1986, KSC would take over logistics responsibility for spare parts refurbishment and procurement and would assume sustaining engineering responsibility for orbiter subsystems. (NASA Release 85-112)
NASA announced it had agreed with the U.S. Air Force to delay the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg AFB, originally scheduled for October 15, 1985, until no earlier than January 29, 1986. NASA and Air Force officials had conducted in December 1984 an extensive review of Vandenberg Space Shuttle launch-facility readiness, the Department of Defense (DOD) payload, and impact of the orbiter Challenger tile problems on the Space Shuttle program schedule. They had decided to delay launch to maintain the current Space Shuttle manifest and to insure adequate margin in development of the DOD payload for the initial Vandenberg launch. NASA and the Air Force agreed that the orbiter Discovery would be delivered to Vandenberg in early September 1985 instead of May; NASA would use Discovery for two flights from KSC in mid-1985 to accommodate the impact of tile problems on the schedule and would deliver other Space Shuttle flight hardware (filament-wound cases and external tank) as soon as possible to Vandenberg to provide maximum schedule flexibility for the earliest launch. The Air Force had corrected problems with pipe welds and cleanliness at the Vandenberg launch site and was conducting ground systems tests with the orbiter Enterprise in preparation for initial checkout. NASA had delivered an external tank and solid-fuel rocket booster skirt ahead of schedule. NASA was completing the remainder of the 1985 Space Shuttle manifest with commercial and DOD payloads and would release a manifest covering August 1985 through 1989 in the near future. In reporting the delay, the Washington Post noted that Vandenberg was the only base from which Space Shuttles could fly into north-south orbits crossing the poles, an orbit ideal for surveillance and other earth-watching spacecraft because they could fly over the entire globe once every 18 days. (NASA Release 85-4; W Post, Jan 9/85, A9)
The Department of Defense's 1985 edition of Soviet Military Power said the USSR was continuing in 1984 deployment of new nuclear and conventional military weapons systems, including test firings of fifth-generation ICBMs, launchings of new classes of submarines, and installing new strategic bombers, the Washington Times reported. The book detailed several significant developments by the Soviet military, the article said, including continued test firings of the SS-24 and SS-25 intercontinental ballistic missiles, launch of two units of new Delta IV-class of strategic ballistic missile submarines to be fitted with the SS-NX-23 submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) then being flight tested, and completion of sea trials of a third 25,000-ton Typhoon-class strategic ballistic missile submarine to join the two Typhoon units already operational and fitted with 20 SS-N-20 SLBMs. The book also said the Soviets had developed a heavy-lift launch vehicle capable of putting 150-ton payloads into orbit as part of an "extremely high priority" military-related space program. The Soviet version of the U.S. Space Shuttle and manned Space Station would benefit from this heavy booster. Major emphasis in their space program was on long-duration manned missions for military research. The USSR continued research on ground- and space-based, antisatellite high-energy lasers. "The Soviets currently have the world's only deployed antisatellite weapons system that can attack satellites in near-earth orbit," the book said. PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	385 L„lfllENTIQNAll.y 8LANK The Soviets also continued upgrading detection and tracking systems for ballistic missile defense and development of new early-warning and air-surveillance radars. Their work on a new, large phased-array radar at Krasnoyarsk violated the ABM treaty, the book stated, and "in addition, the Soviets are actively engaged in extensive research on advanced defenses against ballistic missiles." {W Times, Apr 1/85, 1A)
U.S. Air Force Maj. Gen. Donald Kutyna said today that the Defense Department had decided to proceed with a $500 million program to design a hypersonic plane capable of flying around the globe in less than two hours and of flying in the highest reaches of the atmosphere and to provide a low-cost method for launching satellites and other equipment critical to President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative, the NY Times reported. Speaking at a Colorado Springs symposium on space technology, Kutyna said construction of the plane itself could cost $2 to $3 billion. "It is something we are very serious about, and we think the technology is now within reach," said Kutyna, who coordinated the Air Force's research and development of space systems. "We have been examining the principles for some time, and now we are ready to head into the next phase." However, in Washington an aide to George Keyworth II, the President's science advisor, said, "Funding for the project's next phase is not assured." He noted Congress would have to approve the program. "This is all a little premature," the aide noted. "We have not yet presented the plan to President Reagan." But on November 20 Keyworth and top officials on the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and NASA presented details of the plan to members of Congress interested in aerospace issues. Unlike the Space Shuttle, which was launched vertically with rocket boosters, the aerospace plane would take off like an ordinary airplane, but would not have jet engines with heavy compressors, making the aerospace plane a light-weight vehicle. "Once you reach about Mach 3," or three times the speed of sound, Kutyna said, "the air streaming through the engines begins to compress itself. Some studies indicated that the plane could attain speeds of Mach 20, although there were experts who said half that speed would be more reasonable. If successful, the project could solve a key problem for the military: drastically reducing the cost of placing satellites and defensive space weapons in orbit. (NYT, Nov 22/85)
A new study issued by the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) said competition from other nations and several private companies in launching spacecraft put the U.S. under pressure to protect its economic and technological leadership in space, the NY Times reported. This protection could be accomplished by reassessing the Space Shuttle's pricing policy, promoting greater private investment in space-related goods and services, and forging a long-term space policy to assure a competitive edge, report recommended. The European Space Agency, a consortium of 11 western European governments, broke the U.S. monopoly in launch services for the West with its Ariane rocket program. Arianespace, a corporation owned by the French government and European banks and aerospace companies, was aggressively pursuing customers for Ariane's services and had won several contracts that would otherwise have gone to U.S. conventional rockets or the Space Shuttle. France was planning later in the year to use the Ariane to inaugurate the world's first commercial remote-sensing satellite service, competing with U.S. Landsats that surveyed the world's geologic, water, and agricultural resources. China announced the previous month a new commercial space program using its own satellites, launching rockets, and ground stations. The Chinese had rockets capable of boosting satellites into the high orbit needed for communications satellites. Japan, emphasizing the export potential of space technology, was developing its own rocket launching capability and was planning to launch the next year the first of a series of ocean and land remote-sensing satellites. India also had joined the nations launching satellites, and Brazil was building a rocket base with the intention of becoming the first South American launching power. Although the USSR was apparently tempted to enter the commercial market, western space experts questioned whether the Russians would ever be a major force in commercial space operations. They said the USSR might be reluctant to allow outside scientists and businessmen access to their facilities and other governments would probably not allow advanced communications satellites to be exported to the Soviet Union. In its report, the OTA said that other nations developed their own space launching capabilities out of a desire to be technologically independent, to gain any economic benefits that derived from space technology, and to be regarded as "space powers." Consequently, the report concluded that the U.S.'s "competitive strategy based on price or superior technology alone will not prevent foreign entry into the launch service business." At stake, besides prestige, was a share of what by the end of the century could be a $50 billion annual business, according to estimates by some economists in the aerospace field. The report recommended that the U.S. government investigate new trade and regulatory policies to reduce the risks and uncertainties that hindered private investment in space technology. The study concluded that NASA by itself was "not well-equipped either to promote or to regulate growth in the commercial exploitation of space." The report suggested the regulation of "space industries" should be integrated with the regulation of their counterparts on earth. (NYT, July 26/85, A1)
NASA announced that Lewis Research Center awarded a $32,346,000 follow-on contract to General Dynamics's Convair Division (GD/C) to erect, test, and launch (with accompanying launch facility modifications) Atlas-Centaur launch vehicles and to perform support testing and launching of Centaur upper stages from the Space Shuttle in 1986; GD/C would work at Kennedy Space Center. The cost-plus-award-fee contract, beginning January 1, 1985 and running through December 1986, was a continuation of work GD/C had performed under earlier contracts. The Centaur should increase the Space Shuttle's capability to carry heavier payloads from low-earth orbit to geosynchronous orbit or interplanetary trajectories. (NASA Release 85-5) During March: In a report of 1984 accomplishments, Arnold Engineering Development Center (AEDC) commander, USAF Col. Philip Conran, said that AEDC conducted more than 200 separate test and evaluation programs during FY 84 and demonstrated the importance of the center's full-spectrum test support to development and operational aerospace programs. In that year, propulsion systems testing dominated test and evaluation efforts, turbine engine testing being the busiest in the history of the center. Much of that had resulted from the new start for the F109 next-generation trainer engine and the fly-off competition between the F110 and F100 engines for the USAF's F-16 Fighting Falcon and the subsequent product verification of the F110. In rocket motor testing, AEDC conducted three altitude test firings of the inertial upper stage (IUS) in an effort that helped Space Division and Boeing Aerospace Co. successfully understand and fix the April 1983 upper stage inflight anomaly. After failure of the Palapa B-2 and Westar 6 commercial satellites to reach desired orbits, AEDC supported the conversion of defense and commercial satellite perigee and apogee booster motors from carbon-carbon to carbon phenolic rocket nozzles. AEDC considered completion of construction of the aeropropulsion systems test facility (ASTF) its outstanding achievement for 1984 and was proceeding with activation and acceptance testing to prepare the ASTF for operations in September 1985. In the flight dynamics area, AEDC completed in a specially modified vacuum chamber the initial ground testing phase of the antisatellite pathfinder sensor that required the use of a spin mount rig, which had been three years in development, and an optical alignment system that provided accuracies on an order of magnitude better than any other available system. AEDC also developed and successfully demonstrated a new test technique of spinning a nose cone to evaluate reentry erosion. One of the most productive programs at AEDC in 1984 was for the C-17 advanced cargo aircraft. AEDC provided more data in less time than usual and saved the sponsors about $1 million in wind-tunnel test time. The in-house technology program, which supported testing and evaluation missions, delivered needed test techniques for testing of advanced reentry-vehicle materials, engine icing, and rocket motors. For example, AEDC applied a flash X-ray technique and worked with the University of Tennessee Space Institute to enhance the image of three test firings of the inertial upper stage, resulting in successful completion of the anomaly investigation. (AEDC Test Highlights, Spring/85, 2)
Goddard Space Flight Center announced the Wallops Flight Facility would celebrate its 40th anniversary on June 29. The events planned were in recognition of the scientific and technological achievements at Wallops, which had conducted rocketborne experiments since July 4, 1945, when researchers first launched a 17-foot Tiamat. Since that original flight, Wallops had launched approximately 13,000 rocket-propelled research vehicles and conducted thousands of aeronautical and aircraft tests to obtain information on aircraft and spacecraft flight characteristics and to increase knowledge of the upper atmosphere and the nearspace environment. This research led to major contributions to the U.S.'s aeronautical and space programs. The breakthroughs to supersonic flight by aircraft and to hypersonic flight by rocket systems were largely attributed to fundamental aerodynamic research conducted at Wallops by means of aerodynamic models propelled by multiple-stage rocket systems. Using sounding rockets Wallops personnel developed the technologies for measuring atmospheric structure and the space environment, such as temperature, pressure and density, micrometeorite densities, electric fields, energetic particles, and radiation levels. These measurements formed the basis for developing design criteria for scientific satellites and manned spacecraft. Wallops's researchers also pursued technology development for the manned space program, such as manned capsule-escape techniques and maximum dynamic pressure tests for the Mercury Program. Most recently Wallops was known as a center for the NASA suborbital program. Sounding rockets, balloons, and aircraft conducted space science and aeronautical research missions. The island obtained its name from John Wallops, appointed deputy surveyor of Virginia in the 17th century by Col. Edmund Scarburgh. Wallops received a Crown Patent to the island in 1672. At present, the facility, in addition to the island, included the mainland area in back of the island and the main base (formerly the Chincoteague Naval Air Station) about seven miles northwest. In addition to an open house, the day's anniversary events would include an Air Force F—15 aerial demonstration and demonstrations in crash/fire/ rescue, space sciences, model rocketry, and radio controlled model airplanes. (GSFC Release 85-16) Office of Inspector General
An air-launched antisatellite missile (ASAT) hit its target in the Air Force's first ASAT test against a target in space, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. An F—15 from Edwards Air Force Base launched the two-stage ASAT missile 35,000 to 40,000 feet above the Western Test Range at Vandenberg Air Force Base, then two boosters carried the ASAT into space. When the ASAT's infrared sensors locked on to the target, which was about 350 miles over the Pacific, small rocket motors guided the weapon to its kill. The Air Force in 1979 launched the ASAT's target, an Air Force satellite known as P78-1, which gathered scientific data on the space environment but which had outlived its usefulness. In 1984 F—15s launched two live-fire tests but not at targets. The first was an ASAT launch to a point in space; the second tested the ASAT sensor's ability to home in on a star's infrared emissions. Air Force plans called for nine more target tests against specially instrumented balloons and satellites that had completed their missions. The Washington Post later reported that, according to Robert MacQueen, director of the high-altitude observatory at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Colorado, the Solwind satellite destroyed in the test was providing "very useful data" on solar activity until the moment it was hit. MacQueen said he was surprised and upset at seeing a fruitful experiment being used as a military target and said it was "deplorable" that the Pentagon "had taken a scientifically useful thing and sacrificed it in this way." The satellite carried seven experiments for the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) and other government agencies. One NRL experiment used a corona-graph that sent to earth during each of the satellite's orbits, or roughly 15 times a day, images of activity on the sun's surface. Several months previously, NRL scientists had to draft what one source said "they thought was a routine paper to justify continued operation of their coronagraph." Although the scientists acknowledged problems with the spacecraft system, the source said, they wrote that it should continue. NRL scientists were told in July that "the satellite would be turned off sometime after August 1, but they weren't told how," the source said. The Washington Post reported on September 6 that Solwind was the likely target for the ASAT test because the original target, an instrumented balloon, was plagued with technical problems. A Pentagon spokesman said the satellite was intended to operate for three years at most and that recent data from the satellite had "marginal value." The Washington Post reported that another Defense Department official said the Solwind research satellite was originally scheduled as a target in the weapon's seventh test, which probably would have come in 1987. The satellite's solar research program was expected to be ending by then, scientists associated with the program said. Although Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger described the satellite as "burned out," an Air Force spokesman said the fact that the satellite was still sending signals back to earth played a key role in its selection as a target. "We had to have an active telemetry system to verify it had been hit," the spokesman said. "A dead satellite would not have given us that." (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 27/85, 1; W Post, Sept 20/85, Al, Sept 21/85, A9)
study the solidification of alloys for lead-antimony and an aluminum-copper combination, study the comparative morphology and anatomy of the primary root system of radish seeds, study crystal growth of metallic appearing needle crystals in an aqueous solution of potassium tetracyanoplatinate, and provide information on the "project-explorer-payload-elapsed-time" and the operational status of experiments during flight to all amateur radio stations and short-wave listeners around the world (Alabama Space and Rocket Center);
Tile work on the orbiter Challenger had remained the "pacing item" in meeting NASA's next scheduled Space Shuttle mission, 51-E, set for no earlier than February 20, Aerospace Daily reported. Randy Stone, 51-E lead flight director, said at a press briefing that NASA would make an assessment at KSC and that he didn't know "what the slip will be or if there is one." Stone had indicated work on the orbiter originating from adhesion problems with thermal protection tiles was progressing well; however, workers still needed to attach over 300 tiles before NASA could move the orbiter to the Vehicle Assembly Building for mating with the external tank and solid-fuel rocket boosters. If all went well, NASA would launch Challenger February 20 from KSC and land it there at about 9:21 am EST February 24. (A/D, Jan 30/85, 1)
NASA announced that Goddard Space Flight Center's (GSFC) Wallops Island, VA, facility in cooperation with the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory (AFGL) at Hanscom AFB, Massachusetts, and the Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI), Copenhagen, Denmark, would carry out that winter the 1985 Cooperative Observations of Polar Electrodynamics (COPE) project of sounding rocket research in Greenland to gather knowledge about the solar-earth relationship. The project would include studies of polar-cap turbulence and electrodynamics, auroral-zone electrodynamics, auroral-electrojet turbulence, neutral-atmosphere coupling, and polar-ionospheric irregularities. Researchers selected Greenland for the investigations because of its access to the auroral oval, polar cap, and polar cusp; an existing rocket range; support from the Sondre Stromfjord incoherent-scatter radar, the Hi Lat Spacecraft, and the extensive array of scientific ground-observing stations in Greenland, Scandanavia, and North America; and a broad choice of launch azimuths. GSFCAVallops Flight Facility personnel had spent several weeks during the previous summer at the Greenland Sondre Stromfjord facility installing additional launchers and related ground-support equipment, radar, telemetry, and communications systems and erecting vehicle and payload assembly structures. Project experimenters scheduled nine suborbital rocket launches of which two would release chemicals creating artificial vapor clouds 250 km high. NASA scheduled seven flights: two Black Brant Xs, two Terrier-Malemutes, a Taurus-Orion, a Nike-Tomahawk, and a Taurus-Tomahawk; AFGL scheduled two missions: a Black Brant VIII and a Black Brant IX. (GSFC Release 85-5)
The orbiter Challenger on Space Shuttle mission 51-F landed at 12:46 p.m. PDT today on Edwards Air Force Base's Mojave Desert lake-bed runway, the Washington Post reported. During the flight, Challenger circled the earth 127 times, a distance of a little over three million miles. Technicians stood by at the runway to remove immediately the heat sensors from Challenger's main engines to check a NASA theory that the sensors caused the premature shutdown of the center rocket engine during the July 29 launch. NASA was confident enough that the sensors would be found at fault that it had equipped Discovery's engines with redesigned sensors before moving it August 5 to the launch pad. During the mission, Challenger became an orbiting astronomical observatory with more than $72 million of telescopes and other instruments to study the sun, stars, and distant galaxies. The NY Times reported that Dr. Burton Edelson, NASA associate administrator, said, "We met more than 80 percent of all science objectives of this mission. We're absolutely delighted." Dr. Eugene Urban, chief mission scientist, added, "Everyone has collected tantalizing new data. It's going to take a long time before this data is analyzed and really fully appreciated. We've made some interesting new observations, and some have been very spectacular." Jesse Moore, NASA associate administrator, commented that the orbiter appeared to be in good shape after the landing, the eighth for the Challenger. "It was a beautiful landing," he said. "The tiles looked very good. The brakes look excellent. The orbiters continue to be magnificent flying machines." (W Post, Aug 7/85, A3; NYT, Aug 7/85, A1)
Presidential Science Advisor Dr. George Keyworth said to the U.S. House aviation subcommittee today that the U.S. was in the forefront of an unprecedented revolution in aeronautical technology, Defense Daily reported, and he called for an immediate start by the country on a streamlined, focused, and coordinated program by both government and industry to develop the necessary technology to field—before the end of the century-hypersonic transatmospheric passenger transport and space launch vehicles/military space planes. The latter could provide a two orders of magnitude reduction in the cost of transporting a pound of payload into orbit. Keyworth said he believed it was possible to develop the technology for the follow-ons to current commercial jetliners and the Space Shuttle under one R&D program. Although he was not certain if one vehicle could fill both roles, he predicted that the vehicles would be "very similar." Keyworth did not give specifics about funding requirements or a timetable but said that the government should in the course of the coming fall's discussions of the FY 87 budget focus on the opportunities available in the hypersonic area. Alluding to the British view that they could build the HOTOL (Horizontal Take-Off and Landing) transatmospheric vehicle by 1997, Key-worth said it was possible for the U.S. to exceed that goal. He noted that the Reagan Administration over the next few months would work with the aerospace industry to develop a program focusing on well-defined goals and added that he hoped NASA and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency would appropriately budget funds to make the program stand out. Keyworth said he was not talking about tomorrow's technology in the hypersonic area but technology that "is here" waiting to be assembled. At the same hearing, Rep. Tom Lewis (R-Fla.) said the British claimed that the HOTOL would be able to put payloads in orbit at one-half to one-fifth the cost of the Space Shuttle, and that they would capture 75% of the commercial launch market by the year 2000. Deputy Assistant Commerce Secretary Crawford Brubaker added that Britain had closed to the outside world all information about the engines being developed for HOTOL, so "they think they have made a breakthrough" on those engines. It was reported that a combination of Rolls-Royce conceived, airbreathing engines using atmospheric oxygen and liquid oxygen/liquid hydrogen rocket engines would power HOTOL. (D/D, July 25/85, 129)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center announced the launch at 6:01 a.m. DST today of a single-stage Orion sounding rocket from its Wallops Flight Facility to evaluate electrical fields and charged particles in earth's middle atmosphere. The Orion, about 16 feet long and 14 inches in diameter, carried the 90-lb. payload to a peak altitude of 52 statute miles, after which a Wallops Skyvan aircraft recovered the payload in mid-air. NASA launched the experiment from the Poker Flat Research Range (PFRR) in Alaska on April 12, 1985; however, snow cover hindered payload recovery. On August 26 a sheep hunting party found the payload and its parachute floating on Beaver Creek in the White Mountains, Alaska and returned it to the PFRR. Range officials on September 23 sent the payload to Wallops for refurbishment for today's launch. NASA tentatively scheduled for July 1986 another launch of the experiment in Sweden. (GSFC Release 85-29)
NASA successfully launched today an Aerobee liquid-fueled, sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, marking the end of that rocket series, which was the oldest continuous rocket-firing program. NASA's Sounding Rocket Division had launched 536 Aerobees with a 94% success rate. The Aerobee's reliability made it the workhorse vehicle for high-altitude studies. Commenting on the program, Maury Dubin, Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) physicist, said "virtually everything that's been done in space research can be attributed to sounding-rocket technology. The Aerobee and other sounding-rocket research precipitated the rise of many disciplines, from astronomy to the upper atmosphere." The Aerobee program began in 1946 when Aerojet Engineering Corp. received a U.S. Navy contract to build the rockets, and the Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) had supplied technical direction; Dr. James Van Allen had been project director. The Aerobee name, the Bumblebees, derived from a combination of Aerojet and APL's series of Navy missiles. NASA had used Aerobees extensively during the Internatl. Geophysical Year (July 1957 to December 1958) to gather information on the atmosphere, cosmic radiation, auroras, and geomagnetism. The Aerobee rockets consisted of a series of five with each rocket carrying as many as six experiments that included equipment such as cameras, vacuum bottles, mirrors, grids, sensing devices, lenses, and other mechanical PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED	„ units. Most rockets recorded data and simultaneously transmitted it via telemetry to ground stations. The final Aerobee payload tested a new spectrograph that would be flown on NASA's Astro mission to record extreme ultraviolet Dayglow emissions in earth's upper atmosphere. George Kraft, GSFC flight support section director, said that, although the demise of small liquid-fueled sounding rockets was imminent, "sounding rockets would continue to be an important element in NASA's support of the scientific community. They're virtually the only vehicles that can conduct studies in the 40 km (25 miles) to 200 km (125 miles) high zone of the atmosphere." Balloons could travel only about 50 km (31 miles) high and satellites were ineffective below 200 km (125 miles) high. GSFC's Wallops Flight Facility managed the NASA sounding-rocket program. (GSFC Release 85-6)
The Celestis Group, an organization of Florida undertakers, signed a contract with Space Services, Inc., headed by Donald Slayton, one of the original seven U.S. astronauts and based in Houston, to orbit a payload of cremated human remains at 1,900 miles high, the NY Times reported. The mission, scheduled for late 1986 or early 1987, would cost about $15 million. The Department of Transportation (DOT), which must approve the contract, indicated it had no immediate objections. In 1982 Space Services had become the first private company to launch its own rocket, the 36-foot Conestoga, into suborbital flight. The company's original liquid-fuel rocket had exploded on the launching pad a year before. The space-burial mission would use a second-generation Conestoga capable of putting 1,500 lb. into orbit. John Cherry, who had formed the Celestis Group, said that a Conestoga nose cone could contain as many as 13,000 capsules, each 3/8 inches by 1/4 inches, holding ashes reduced in volume by a Celestis-developed technique. Burial price would be $3,900 a customer. A reflective material would cover the nose cone in the first launch, enabling viewing of the satellite mausoleum as it passed overhead. Later missions would be deep-space burials, in which the nose cone would eject the capsules for dispersion into the cosmos. The Commercial Space Launch Act of 1984 empowered the DOT to license all commercial space launchings. DOT examined proposals for their effect on public safety, national security, and international treaty obligations. (NY'^Jan 25/85, A13)
The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) approved plans of a Florida-based undertakers and engineers' consortium to orbit in 1986 or early 1987 a mausoleum [see U.S. Space Policy/Commercialization, Jan. 25] with the announcement that the plan represented "a creative response to the president's initiative to encourage the commercial use of space," the Washington fast reported. The approval was the first granted by the DOT'S new licensing authority for commercial space activities and followed checks with the Department of Defense, the State Department, and NASA. The mausoleum's 1,900 mile-high orbit would place the spacecraft in the Van Allen radiation belts, a region of space rarely used by other spacecraft. The mausoleum would be in the nose cone of a rocket, Conestoga 2, designed and built by Space Service Inc. (SSI), a Houston firm headed by Donald Slayton, one of the original Project Mercury astronauts. Conestoga 1, a one-stage rocket, had made a successful test flight in 1982. The Celestis Group, Melbourne, Florida, would pay SSI $14 million to put the 300 lb. cargo into orbit and charge $3,900 per cremated body. A Celestis spokesman said that since announcement of its plans, the group had received hundreds of calls from people wanting to sign up. Slayton said seven or eight other companies had approached him about setting up similar businesses. (WPost, Feb 13/85, A2)
The first test of a U.S. antisatellite weapon against a physical target in space was delayed indefinitely because technical difficulties forced postponement of the target launching, the Washington Post reported. The U.S. Air Force cancelled the launching from Wallops Island, Virginia, and sent the targets back to the manufacturer, Avco Systems, for repair. Until the cause of the problem was found, Air Force officials said they could not estimate when the test might be rescheduled. The NY Times reported John Pike, associate director of the Federation of American Scientists, as saying he was told by "usually reliable sources" that the technical problems centered on the radio that would signal the results of the target practice back to earth. The Air Force had conducted two of the test flights planned for the antisatellite weapon, but aimed at a point in space rather than a physical target. The Air Force had already for apparently technical reasons rescheduled several times in 1985 the latest test, in which the weapon would be fired at one of two six-foot-diameter target balloons in orbit. The antisatellite weapon was a two-stage rocket with a 13-inch, heat-sensing homing vehicle in its nose. Launched from beneath an F15 fighter, the rocket would intercept and destroy its target on impact. The U.S. House the previous week approved an amendment to the military programs bill banning tests of antisatellite weapons against targets in space as long as the USSR refrained from similar tests. The Senate voted to permit the testing as long as President Reagan certified that he was trying to negotiate a treaty prohibiting antisatellite weapons. A House-Senate conference committee was scheduled to begin reconciling differences on the military bill the following week. (WPost, July 4/85, A4; NYT, July 4/85, A9)
NASA announced that Inorganic Coatings, Inc. was providing interior corrosion protection to the refurbished Statue of Liberty by means of a primer coating known as K-Zinc 531, an aerospace spinoff product developed at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) to protect gantries and other structures at NASA's primary launch site, Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Because KSC was located on Florida's Atlantic Coast, its launch facilities required greater corrosion protection due to constant exposure to salt spray and fog. GSFC undertook a research program to develop a coating that would not only resist salt corrosion, but also protect KSC launch structures from very hot rocket exhaust and the thermal shock created by rapid temperature changes during a space launch. The GSFC research resulted in an inorganic water-based potassium silicate binder, a compound that provided long-term protection with a single application. NASA granted in 1981 a license for the coating to Shane Associates, which signed an agreement with Inorganic Coatings to allow it to become the sole manufacturer and sales agent under the Shane license. Inorganic Coatings assigned the trade name K-Zinc 531 to the compound, which was nontoxic, nonflammable, and had no organic emissions. The high ratio silicate formulation bonded to steel in 30 minutes and created a hard ceramic finish with superior adhesion and abrasion resistance. It required no straining before application and could be mixed on site. (NASA Release 85-64)
NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) would launch in 1986 Ulysses, previously known as the International Solar Polar Mission, to explore behind and around the sun beginning in July 1987, the JPL Universe reported. JPL managed the U.S. mission phases and was responsible for part of the magnetometer experiment. The Space Shuttle would take Ulysses into orbit; a modified Centaur upper stage rocket would send it on a trajectory toward Jupiter, where it would gain energy from Jupiter's gravity field to pull it out of the ecliptic plane (the plane of the earth's orbit) and back over the sun. Researchers would incorporate into the spacecraft bus instruments shipped to the European Space Research Technology Center near Amsterdam, Holland; after extensive testing scheduled for completion in August, an international board would review the spacecraft's readiness. After a mission operations review, ESA would ship Ulysses to KSC for flight tests and preparations. At a June meeting in Switzerland, a team of scientists would decide whether Ulysses would approach the sun over its north or south pole, yPL Universe, Jan 25/85, 1)
For the first time since the 1975 Apollo-Soyuz project, liquid-hydrogen rocket fuel flowed through the lines at Kennedy Space Center's launch pad 39-B, the Spaceport News reported. Nearing its January 1, 1986, deadline for completion of pad B renovations and improvements, NASA was entering final work stages including functional testing for such installations as the new 100-foot-tall flare stacks that would replace the old burn pond for disposal of vented gaseous hydrogen. NASA planned first use of pad B for the 51 —L Space Shuttle mission scheduled for launch no earlier than January 22, 1986. One of the flare stacks, 26 inches in diameter, would vent off and burn gaseous hydrogen from the Space Shuttle's external tank and the orbiter fuel cells service system; the other, 18 inches in diameter, would handle hydrogen from the Centaur upper stage, the facility storage tank, and the mobile launcher platform. Also new to the complex were two rooms on the rotating service structure, one of which was designed for storage of equipment used in the payload changeout room in order to avoid the necessity for temporary removal of the equipment from the site for each launch. The other was a new clean room/ suit changing room. Another major new item was the rolling beam that would supply liquid hydrogen to the Centaur upper stage. Plans called for use of the Centaur upper stage during the Galileo and Ulysses missions scheduled for May 1986. Work began on pad B renovations about seven years previously; total cost would be approximately $150 million. (Spaceport News, June 21/85, 4) July 2b: Chilean foreign Minister Jaime del Valle announced that Chilean and U.S. delegations reached agreement on extending the Easter Island airfield for Space Shuttle emergency landings, FBIS Santiago Radio Chilena in Spanish reported. Del Valle said Chile received favorable answers from the U.S. government to two major questions raised by Chile and that he would recommend the Chilean president approve the project. Earlier Del Vhlle had said that a possible agreement with NASA on the extension of Mataveri Airport would not imply the surrendering of Chilean sovereignty over the airfield nor would it constitute the establishment of a foreign military base on Chilean territory. Del Valle was quoted as saying, "On the eve of the beginning of formal negotiations, I want to reaffirm to the country that the agreement proposed by the United States refers exclusively to the emergency landings of space shuttles of the type that are currently in operation. It is appropriate to note that the possible emergency landings at Easter Island include only those isolated flights originating in California and those taking off from Cape Canaveral, which take a different orbit." Del Valle concluded the earlier statement by saying the "cultural, archeological, and ecological structure of the island will be preserved." (FBIS Santiago Radio Chilena in Spanish, July 2/85, July 26/85)
During Space Shuttle mission 51-1 astronauts James van Hoften and William Fisher spent seven hours and eight minutes, a new record for a spacewalk, in the first stage of repair of the Leasat 3 satellite, the Washington Post reported. During the walk, they retrieved the 15,000-lb. satellite, fastened Discovery's mechanical arm onto it, disarmed its Minuteman rocket motor, and exposed its electronic connections. Later Fisher said he could see no evidence of what caused the satellite to go dead after astronauts deployed it in April. "There is no evidence of debris on anything that would cause a problem. It's clean as a whistle," He said. Van Hoften and Fisher were outside the Space Shuttle from about 8:00 a.m. to shortly after 3:00 p.m. EDT, breaking by one minute the spacewalk record set April 1984 by van Hoften and George Nelson when they repaired the scientific satellite Solar Max. Although the astronauts accomplished more than half of what was needed in the salvage mission, they were planning a four-hour spacewalk on September 1 to finish the job. They would put a "space blanket" over the engine bell that served as the Minuteman motor's rocket nozzle to trap more of the sun's heat to warm it, because Leasat-3 had been in the cold of space so long that its rocket motor was too cold to fire correctly. Then the astronauts would install a vertical bar along the 20-foot length of the satellite to serve as a handle for van Hoften to spin the satellite and push it away from Discovery into space. It would then be seven days before the satellite acquired enough power to thaw its liquid-fuel tanks and almost two months before the solid-fuel rocket motor was warm enough for ground controllers to command it to ignite. (W Post, Sept 1/85, A5)
