NASA launched its first successful rocket since the Challenger accident, a Delta rocket from the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Carrying two payloads for the Strategic Defense Program, one satellite would attempt to track down and intercept the other. McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, manufacturer of the rocket, viewed the event as a stepping stone that might lead to the company's entry into commercial launches. NASA had two more Delta rockets in its inventory, one committed to a U.S. Government weather satellite identical to the one lost in May and the other to an Indonesian weather satellite. (NASA Release 8632; WSJ, Sep 8/86, P Inq, Sep 6/86; NY Times, Sep 6/86; Sep 8/86; W Post, Sep 6/86; C Trib, Sep 6/86; LA Times, Sep 6/86)
NASA scheduled two scientific experiment rocket launchings for early May, a Black Brant X and a TaurusNikeTomahawk, to create artificial clouds along the East Coast that would be visible from Canada to Florida and as far west as Ohio. The objective of the experiment was to investigate Nobel prize winner Dr. Hannes Alfven's proposed Critical Velocity Effect Theory, which has been used to explain details in the early formation of the solar system. In 1954, Alfven proposed that if an element in a nearly neutral plasma became ionized when it attained a flow velocity that matched its ionization potential, several facets of the structure of the solar system could be explained, including differing chemical compositions of the planets and the regularity of their orbits. Although Alfven's critical velocity effect has been studied in the laboratory, the phenomena required investigation in a space plasma. The experiment was scheduled for dawn, when the Earth's surface would still be dark but when there would be sunlight at the experiment's altitude so ionized cloud chemicals could be visible to the naked eye. The threestage, solidpropellant rockets would release barium and strontium at the apogee altitude of 267 miles. When the releases occurred, ground observers could see, if the experiment was successful, a cloud split into two0*welldelineated jets of gas in the first few minutes. The experiments were part of NASA's sounding rocket program, which included launching approximately 40 to 45 sounding rockets a year from various worldwide locations. (NASA Release 8651)
James E. Kingsbury, director of the Science and Engineering Directorate at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, in Huntsville, Alabama, was named to manage an ad hoc group formed to requalify the motor of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket booster for flight. The booster rockets, said NASA, could be ready in one year. Kingsbury said that all of the current hardware could be modified and reused, a comment that surprised outside engineers. (NASA Release 8636; W Post, Mar 28/86; NY Times, Mar 28/86; NY Times, Mar 30/86)0*April
The third stage of a French Ariane rocket that had been launched nine months earlier blew up on this date. U.S. officials asked Arianespace to look into the matter in order to prevent a recurrence because orbiting debris posed an increased danger to other satellites. (W Times, Dec 2/86; W Post, Dec 2/86)
The U.S. Marine Corps salvage operation for the 51L Space Shuttle accident, which involved the Freedom Star, the Liberty Star, and the Independence vessels, came to an end after a sevenmonth effort. It was the largest ocean recovery operation in history and at its peak involved 22 ships and 6,000 personnel, as well as numerous aircraft. The search yielded 45 percent of the Challenger, 50 percent of the external tank and solid rocket boosters, 95 percent of the SpartanHalley spacecraft, 35 percent of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, and 90 percent of the Inertial Upper Stage. (NASA Release 86121; C Trib, Aug 29/86; B Sun, Aug 29/86; W Times, Aug 29/86; W Post, Aug 31/86)
The Delta 178 rocket accident that occurred on May 3, 1986, was caused by mechanical damage to wiring caused by vibration during flight. The rocket's first failureafter 43 flights since 1977was attributed to a design change, a shift from polyvinylchloride (PVC) insulated wiring to Teflon insulated. Unlike PVC, which is overwrapped for greater abrasion protection, Teflon wiring bundles are overwrapped in only a very limited number of locations; the abrasion resistance of mechanical damping was not adequately considered when making the change. The investigating board recommended a review of the booster electrical control system and possible design changes, verification of the quality of all connectors, and a reemphasis on highly attentive, quality workmanship. Another study released concerned the Titan 34D mishap of April 18; it determined the cause of the accident to be insulation inside one of the two solid rockets being pulled away and allowing "burn through." Neither accident was deemed the result of any major design flaw and, subsequent to minor modifications, the United States planned to resume untended rocket launches. The investigating board also observed potential problems resulting from highhumidity conditions for vehicles stored at the Kennedy Space Center, to instrument limitations, and lack of protection from contamination of the Rocketdyne engine relay box. These problems were not directly connected with the Delta 178 `"rocket accident or the Titan 34D mishap. (NASA Release 8685; W (#Post, Jul 3/86; WSJ, Jul 3/86; NY Times, Jul 3/86; B Sun; Jul
NASA officials announced that James Kingsbury, engineering chief at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, would retire at the end of November. He was one of the high ranking officials who had worked on Challenger's fatal rocket boosters. (USA Today, Nov 5/86)
Debris brought to shore on March 19 was determined to be part of the right booster rocket from the Challenger accident. The white outer skin of the pieces were discolored from excessive heat, and the suspected oring, officials said, may lie inside of one 4footbyfoot piece of wreckage. (W Times, Mar 21/86; USA Today, Mar 21/86)
The Presidential Commission's investigation of the Challenger accident, said the Chicago Tribune, had nearly concluded that cold weather led to reduced elasticity of the rubber seal in the rocket booster and the subsequent leak of gasses. Engineers from Morton Thiokol, the rocket booster manufacturer, objected to the cold weather launch, but officials higher up in that company gave NASA the go ahead. (NY Times, Feb 20/86; C Trib, Feb 20/86; W Post Feb 20/86)
A 3,500pound piece of debris that was determined to be a rocket booster, but not identified as from the left or right side, was recovered 28 miles northeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida, in 400 feet of water. The massive operation was resumed after a twoday halt from storms and rough seas. Other salvage teams also continued their efforts to recover the rest of the crew's compartment and remains. (W Post, Mar 17/86; P Inq, Mar 17/86; NY Times, Mar 18/86)
Further investigation into the Challenger accident opened a number of theories into the booster rocket's failure. One pointed to bad fuel segments, perhaps caused by cold temperatures. "Propellants can crack the way you crack a cookie. When they crack...it allows you new sites where gases can be generated," opined Herman Krier from the University of Illinois. Another theory suggested that improper handling had produced hairline cracks while fuel segments were cast or during launch preparation, or that installation of badly joined seams between the fuel segments caused uneven burning. It was noted that workers ignored standard operating procedures. A third theory looked into the possibility that a solidrocket booster nozzle had burned through, as had nearly happened on a previous flight. Still another theory cited cold weather or vibrations resulting from launch as a possible culprit for a failure in the suspected seam that joined two fuel segments. Other theories speculated that the external tank experienced over heating, leading to expansion of its contents and rupture of the tank, or even direct burnthrough from the 5,900 degrees exhaust leaving the rocket booster or that there might have been a preexisting hole in the tank. However the hydrogen came to leak, it was ignited by the heated air surrounding it or by the thin flame from the solid NASA Engineers thought, in that point in the investigation, that cold weather had no adverse affect on either the solid fuel or the seals, but were concerned with the possibility of leakage between segments of the rocket motors because deterioration of these seals had been noted on previous flights. Back up seals, they added, performed adequately. (P Inq, Feb 5/86; Feb 10/86; W Times, Feb 5/86; Feb 6/86; Feb 7/86; CSM, Feb 5/86; C Trib, Feb 5/86; Feb 6/86; Feb 7/86; NY Times, Feb 5/86; Feb 7/86; Feb 9/86; B Sun, Feb 6/86; Feb 7/86; WSJ, Feb 6/86)
The Congressional Budget Office estimated that it would cost $5 billion to both replace the Challenger Shuttle and build more expendable launch vehicles for carrying payloads into space. NASA had planned to make all of its satellite launches from an orbiter, but changed its position after the Challenger accident. The shift was welcome news to the rocket industry, even though the companies would need two years to get ready for launch inasmuch as the rocket program, with no crew assistance, had been all but replaced in the United States by the Shuttle program. (NY Times, Mar 13/86; W Post, Mar 13/86)0** NASA and Morton Thiokol found new evidence suggesting that the putty used in joints of the solid rockets to protect the orings could have stiffened from the cold and prevented the oring from sealing. They also noted that the putty could have cracked and exposed the oring to hot gases. Adequate data measuring the effect of cold on the putty did not exist. Dr. William Graham notified the Presidential Commission of these findings. (WSJ, Mar
Initial investigation, and tape review of the Challenger accident, pointed to the right solid fuel rocket booster and showed a leak near one of its seams. An apparent rupture between two sections of the rocket emitted flames that soon found their way to the external fuel tank, igniting the volatile contents. Meanwhile, salvage operations recovered two large objects believed to be part of the Shuttle from the ocean floor, but most of the craft was still unaccounted for. NASA planned to bring in a recovery vessel equipped with a remotecontrolled robot and (#cameras. (WSJ, Feb 3/86; NY Times, Feb 3/86; W Post, Feb 3/86)
An advanced reconnaissance satellite, believed to be a KH11 photographic reconnaissance satellite, was lost as the Titan rocket carrying it exploded seconds after liftoff from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. With only one HK11 in orbit, officials were concerned that verification of arms control treaties would be hampered and that it would be more difficult for the Soviet Union and the United States to sign the treaties. Older satellites dropped film after photographing, but the KH11 beamed pictures to ground stations and could maneuver about while in orbit. An HK11 was lost in August 1985 when another Titan rocket failed. Assistant Secretary of Defense Donald Latham, estimated that it would be six or seven months before the Department of Defense could launch another satellite. Outside experts believed that the government might approve an emergency0*Shuttle launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base because the only other reconnaissance satellite remaining on the ground was an HK12, believed too big for an expendable rocket. (NY Times, Apr 20/86; Apr 22/86; CSM, Apr 21/86; USA Today, Apr 21/86; W Post, Apr 22/86)
NASA officials announced that the launch of an AtlasCentaur rocket scheduled to carry a Navy communications satellite into orbit on August 28 was postponed indefinitely. The flight was originally set for May 22, but the Delta rocket accident canceled that liftoff. The Atlas was the only remaining U.S. rocket system that had not been grounded; the delay resulted from the discovery by engineers of problems with some of the rocket's electrical parts. (W Post Jul 24/86)
The sixth FLTSATCOM communications satellite, F7, was launched by an AtlasCentaur rocket fired from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The Department of Defense added this satellite to their communications network among naval aircraft, ships, submarines, ground stations, Strategic Air Command elements, and Presidential command networks. With this addition, the network could provide 23 high frequency communication channels and one super high frequency channel with an experimental Extra High Frequency package. The rocket had been grounded since May because of previous NASA rocket failures, beginning in January with the Challenger explosion, and had experienced eight delays before becoming NASA's third successful major flight of the year. (NASA Release 86165; W Post, Dec 5/86)
For the fourteenth time since August 1985, the launch of a weather satellite that the Air Force had hoped to put into orbit was again postponed, this time because of a leak of liquid oxygen. Past delays were caused by technical problems with the AtlasE booster rocket and its payload and scheduling conflicts. The satellite was next intended to be launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California on August 30. (LA Times, Aug 26/86; NY Times Aug 26/86)
Preliminary investigation into the Titan rocket lost on
The Air Force was forced to destroy an unarmed Minuteman 3 ICBM over the Pacific Ocean after an undisclosed problem developed during its 30minute test flight. Since February 1995, ten successful minuteman test launches had been done when another rocket had to be destroyed. (NY Times, Aug 29/85; P Inq, Aug
Dr. William R. Graham told a congressional committee that the suspected orings in the Challenger accident should be modified or redesigned. The manufacturer of the rocket boosters had submitted 43 possible modifications to NASA since February, and changes to the fleet, said Graham, would cost about $350 million. This was the first time any official from NASA had indicated a need for improving the seals since the January 28 The acting administrator also noted that recovery from the accident could cost the Nation $3.2 billion and replacing the Challenger would run another $2.8 billion. Not replacing the Shuttle, he warned, would restrict the fleet to military use and service flights. (Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Space Science Applications, Mar 11/90; P Inq, Mar 12/86; W Post, Mar 12/86; USA Today, Mar 12/86; W Times, Mar 12/86)
Elizabeth Dole predicted that U.S. rocket companies would begin launching private satellites by 1989 and capture 50 percent of the international market. Her announcement came after President Ronald Reagan's confirmation that NASA would no longer handle the business. Representatives from General Dynamics Corporation and Transpace Carriers, Inc. expressed hope that they would soon announce launch contracts. Some satellite officials, however, were less enthusiastic because NASA had the goahead to launch at least some of the 44 commercial satellites, leaving the agency with limited but palpable competition. In a related matter, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher said that a large portion of future flights would be devoted to scientific missions and that he expected a commercial launching industry to supplement the Shuttle. (W Post, Aug 19/86; W Times, Aug 19/86; NY Times, Aug 19/86; CSM, Aug 26/86)
Senior officials at the White House found it increasingly difficult to go ahead with President Ronald Reagan's call for another Space Shuttle. The President's remarks, they inferred, did not constitute any commitment. Meanwhile, members of the House committee, delving further into the Challenger accident, questioned Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly in regards to the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama, which was in charge of the booster rocket. Representative James H. Scheuer believed that information regarding the faulty booster was known not only at the MSFC but by officials at NASA Headquarters. (W Post, June 13/86; WSJ, June
NASA chose a new design for its solid rocket motors, a major step for returning the Shuttle fleet to flight. Each joint would be sealed by three orings constructed from a more resilient material than that used originally, and would seal at all times, not just from pressure produced by expanding gas inside the rocket. Other changes included a metal clip meant to force the joint to remain sealed, interlocking insulation to prevent hot gases from directly contacting the orings, and a bolt assembly between the rocket nozzle and the engine for providing an additional seal at the nozzle joint. Hundreds of (#tests for the new design were scheduled for the coming fall. (NY Times, Aug 12/86; Aug 13/86; W Times, Aug 12/86; W Post, Aug 13/86; C Trib Aug 13/86)
James R. Thompson, of Princeton University's Plasma Physics Lab, nationally recognized propulsion expert, and former NASA propulsion engineer, was named vice chairman of the NASA task force inquiring into the Challenger accident. His appointment was in support of the Commission assigned by President Ronald Reagan to perform the investigation of the Challenger accident. (NASA Release 8620)' 0*March 3: NASA announced a comprehensive project to evaluate the implications of the Challenger accident on the space program. Because the Ulysses and Galileo missions had been postponed, NASA announced that the Shuttle Discovery would be modified so that it could launch spacecraft with a Centaur upper stage rocket. The Challenger accident left only the Shuttle Atlantis with the capability for carrying Centaur payloads. These decisions were made by the Acting NASA Administrator, Dr. William R. Graham, on the recommendation of the Headquarters Replanning Task Force, headed by Dr. Raymond S. Colladay, set up to study program alternatives in the wake of the accident. Other matters considered by the task force included: (1) the requirements for all aspects for an orbiter to replace the Challenger as well as the lost Inertial Upper Stage (IUS) launch vehicle and its support structure attached to a Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) lost with the Shuttle; (2) new launch schedules for the remaining three Shuttles; (3) an additional launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base; (4) the role of expendable launch vehicles for commercial use; (5) the retention of ground communications because only one TDRS, instead of two, was in orbit to link spacecraft to earth because of the accident; (6) and identification of monetary losses other than those from the destroyed equipment. In the meantime, customers who had hoped to launch their satellites from the Space Shuttle were being forced to examine other alternatives. With launch schedules certain to fall far behind and military and scientific communities getting first priority, commercial interests would have either to put their projects on the back burner or use NASA's rival, the European Space Agency's Arianespace company, for more expensive launches. With NASA's announcement that its Shuttle program would be put on hold for 1218 months, Shuttlelinked businesses were searching for other options as well. (NASA Release 8622; C Trib, Mar 3/86; B Sun, Mar 4/86; USA Today, Mar 4/86)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, responding to negotiations with the White House budget office earlier in the week, warned that the planned $8 billion Space Station and a new'G0*replacement Shuttle were in jeopardy of not meeting scheduled completions. He stated that the 35 percent increased budget for fiscal year 1987 was earmarked only for costs resulting from the Challenger crash and could not be benchmarked for future budgets. The strict budget, he added, could afford no new projects. In a separate statement, Fletcher agreed to remove himself from any future Shuttle booster rocket contracts. Senators called for an investigation of the contract awarded to Morton Thiokol in 1973, a decision in which Fletcher had considerable influence. (W Times, Dec 8/86; NY Times, Dec 8/86)
Speaking to NASA employees, Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly announced that the Shuttle Program would resume in about one year, after an intense safety program to include reassessment of Shuttle management structure, redesign of the solid rocket boosters, reassessment of methods for aborting Shuttle flights, and recertification of all critical Shuttle parts. He noted that "the business of flying in space is a bold business," and added, "We cannot print enough money to make it totally riskfree. But we certainly are going to correct any mistakes we have made...and we're going to get going ahead just as soon as we can." When the Shuttle Program resumes, he continued, the first Shuttle would be launched from Florida, not have a guest astronaut, the payload would be a familiar one, and the Shuttle would land at the better landing strip at Edwards Air Force Base, in California. (USA Today, Mar 26/68; W Post, Mar 26/86; WSJ, Mar 26/86; NY Times, Mar 26/86; W Times, Mar 26/86)
This date marked the 60th anniversary of liquidfueled rocket flight. In 1926 Dr. Robert H. Goddard assembled and launched a gasoline propelled rocket from his aunt's farm in Worcester, Massachusetts. In commemoration of the event, NASA planned to launch a fullscale replica of the rocket from the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release
Another setback for Western launch capability occurred as an Ariane rocket was destroyed by ground controllers 4 minutes and 36 seconds after liftoff in French Guiana, when its third stage failed to ignite. Also lost was an Intelsat V communications satellite; it was the third time failure in the rockets had occurred for that reason. Arianespace, a French company that sold space on the rocket, was in fierce competition with NASA for multimilliondollar commercial contracts, but ceded its monopoly when forced to postpone future flights while the accident was being investigated. With the grounding of the U.S. space program, western nations were left with the Ariane rocket as the only means to place commercial satellites into space. (LA Herald, Jun 1/86; CSM, Jun 16/86)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared before a House Appropriations subcommittee and announced that he had created an independent panel to review NASA's management practices, especially the decisionmaking process on the morning of the January 28 Challenger accident. The review would require about six to eight months to complete. He also said that Shuttle flights would likely resume by July 1987, with an optimum of seven launches in the first year, and that funding for a replacement Shuttle was his "highest priority." Also present was Deputy Administrator William R. Graham, who told members of Congress that NASA Inspector General Bill Colvin would investigate the transfer of two Morton Thiokol engineers, Allan McDonald and Roger Boisjoly. The two men had vehemently' 0*objected to the Challenger launch on the morning prior to its deadly flight and later detailed their scenarios before Congress. He was particularly concerned that NASA engineers might somehow be involved with the reassignments. The subcommittee advised NASA to reevaluate its relationship with the rocket booster manufacturer and threatened to severely reduce NASA's budget for new space programs if the agency did not undergo some drastic changes. (Department of Housing and Urban Development Independent Agencies Appropriations for 1987, May 13/86; W Times, May 14/86; W Post, May 14/86; WSJ, May 14/86; NY Times, May 14/86; P Inq, May 14/86; C Trib, May 14/86; B Sun, May 14/86)
James R. Thompson, vice chairman of the NASA task force investigating the Challenger accident, said that NASA officials could be "walking on the edge of a cliff" if they did not correct flaws in the solid rocket booster. Previous problems, he noted, simply were not taken seriously enough; he then added that NASA could say conclusively that the right solid rocket booster had caused the Shuttle accident. The task force, said Thompson, focused on four factors of the joint in the booster rocket: the tendency of the joints to rotate during liftoff; the impact of subfreezing temperatures on the orings; defects in the putty used to protect them; and slight damage to the orings during assembly. James Kingsbury, director of Science and Engineering Directorate disagreed with Thompson's findings because the rockets had performed well on 24 previous flights. (USA Today, Apr 9/86; W Post, Apr 9/86; P Inq, Apr 9/86)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, selected the RCA Corporation and Orbital Sciences for negotiations leading to the award of contracts to build a spacecraft and upper stage booster for the Mars Observer Mission scheduled for launch in August 1990. The first in a series of proposed planetary observer programs, the Mars Observer would study the climate, atmosphere, and surface, using eight science instruments while in orbit around the planet a full Martian year, 687 Earth days. (NASA Release 8634; WSJ, Mar 26/86)
A Presidential panel report was to be released April 11, but details that aimed at mining the Moon and asteroids and establishing human presence on Mars were disclosed in Aviation Week & Space Technology, a trade magazine. The plan, which assumed that the Space Station would be completed by 1994, called for establishing a lunar base after the year 2000 for mining and production of rocket fuel, expanded searches for potentially0*useful asteroids, and a "network of spaceports between Earth, the Moon, and Mars and a Martian colony by the year 2027." (W Post, Mar 24/86; NY Times, Mar 25/86; CSM May 23/86; P Inq, May 23/86)
NASA and the Nuclear Safety Review Panel differed in their estimates of the reliability of booster rockets before the
NASA's chief engineer said that cutbacks in the safety program over the previous three years had put the Agency "in a dangerous situation." Loss of personnel and transfer of safety responsibility to field offices and contractors contributed to NASA's inability to catch the seal problem. He reasoned that "there are only so many problems [one person] can look at, and in my opinion the solid rocket booster was a relatively easy thing to do. But it really wasn't getting the amount of attention from here it should have." (W Times, Mar 5/86)
A section of debris recovered from the Atlantic Ocean in March was found to be the part of the right booster rocket suspected as the cause of the Challenger accident. Although the piece was a section opposite the flame seen coming from a joint in the rocket, it contained part of the joint. Recovery of the section could both aid investigators and assist engineers in their redesign. (B Sun, Apr 2/86; W Post, Apr 2/86; NY Times, Apr
Shuttle Director Richard H. Truly announced that John W. Thomas, Spacelab Program Officer Manager at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was to assume management responsibility for the Solid Rocket Motor redesign team at the Marshall Space Flight Center on May 12, 1986. The Space Shuttle Challenger accident investigation uncovered several deficiencies in the design of the solid rocket motor joint. An independent group of senior experts would also be involved in all phases of the program; they would report to NASA Administrators and review and integrate the findings and recommendations of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 8658)
Another NASA launch ended in failure as a $30 million0*Delta rocket carrying a $55.7 million weather satellite was destroyed shortly after liftoff from Cape Canaveral, Florida. An order to destruct by remote control came when the rocket's main engine failed and it tumbled off course. This was the first mishap for the Delta rocket, praised as NASA's most dependable launch vehicle, in 9 years and 43 consecutive launches. The four most used vehicles for launching satellites (the Delta, Titan 3D and Atlas Centaur rockets and the Space Shuttle) were all put on hold, grounding the agency for an undetermined amount of time. A short circut was the leading suspect the Delta loss. (W Times, May 5/86; May 6/86; W Post, May 5/86; May 6/86; WSJ, May 5/86; May 6/86; NY Times, May 5/86; May 6/86)
Launching of a Delta rocket carrying a weather satellite was postponed because of a quarter cup of leaking rocket fuel. The delay, said officials, would be from 1 to 10 days, depending on the extent of the problem. This was to be the first NASA launch since the Shuttle accident. (NY Times, May 2/86; W Post, H&May 2/86; P Inq, May 2/86; B Sun, May 2/86)
Shuttle director Richard H. Truly announced NASA's interest in an improved, secondgeneration solid rocket motor design for study by the National Space Transportation System program manager. Among the requested changes were asbestosfree insulation, alternate case and propellant design, and modified burn rate for improved performance. Outside geometry and interfaces with other Space Shuttle elements would not be affected. He added, however, that the tentative schedule for launching a Shuttle in early 1988 would not be contingent upon this newly designed booster rocket. (NASA Release 8694; NY Times, Jul 21/86)
NASA announced that Aaron Cohen would be appointed as Director of the Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, and that Jesse W. Moore, in response to his own request, would be reassigned from that position to be Special Assistant to the General Manager, NASA Headquarters. Since 1962 Cohen had served NASA first in the Apollo Program, then in the Space Shuttle Orbiter project as Director of the Engineering and Development Directorate, and then as overall Director of Research and Engineering at the JSC. Moore came to NASA in 1978 as Deputy Director of the Solar Terrestrial Division, Office of Space Science. From there he was appointed Director of the Space Flight Division; Director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division; and Deputy Associate Administrator and acting Associate Administrator for Space Flight. (NASA Release 86138; NY Times, Oct 3/86)
Senator Albert Gore made public his order for a'I0*congressional investigation into whether NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher had violated conflictofinterest rules when he awarded Morton Thiokol the Shuttle booster contract in 1973. Dr. Fletcher denied the charges, but said he would seriously consider removing himself from future booster rocket contract decisions. NY Times, Dec 19/86)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced that it had signed an agreement to launch a communications satellite for Federal Express from Cape Canaveral, Florida, in 1989. Because the Titan 3 rocket to be used could deliver payloads up to 32,00 pounds, the corporation was searching for another customer to join the launch. Reagan administration officials were quick to point to the agreement as the birth of the private rocket industry. (W Post, Sep 5/86; P Inq, Sep 6/86; LA Times, Sep 5/86)
In a data gathering activity in support of the Challenger accident investigation, destacking of solid rocket motors to gather information and assess the preflight conditions in and around the field joints was scheduled for early April. Inspections would focus on the field joint orings, putty used in the joints, rocket motor case ovality or "roundness," with any assembly damage, clevis gapopening resulting from stacking, and the degree of propellant slumping that occurred as a result of vertical stacking. Any relevant data from the destacking inspections that might be useful to the investigation was to be assembled by the NASA 51L Data and Design Analysis Task Force and provided to the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident. (NASA Release 8637)
Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced four key appointments in the Science and Engineering Directorate, in an effort to meet the goal of getting the Space Shuttle back to full operation. Dr. Judson A. Lovingood was named Associate Director for Propulsion Systems, with responsibility for propulsion projects for the Space Shuttle Main Engine, Solid Rocket Booster, External Tank, Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle and upper stages. E. Ray Tanner was named Associate Director for Space Systems, with responsibility for assuring engineering adequacy of the Space Station, Hubble Space Telescope, Advanced XRay Astrophysics Facility, and Marshall Centerassigned payloads and Spacelab payload integration. John P. McCartney was named Director, Propulsion Laboratory to oversee research and development, engineering, and technical direction of propulsion systems design, and analysis related to launch and space vehicles. Dr. George F. McDonough was named Director,'E0*Structures and Dynamics Laboratory with responsibility for research and development in structural design and analysis of launch and space vehicles, analysis dynamics behavior, specification of dynamicsrelated design criteria, and analysis of atmospheric and environmental processes. (NASA Release 86164)
A NASA Aries sounding rocket was destroyed by a range safety officer at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, 50 seconds after liftoff at an altitude of 77,000 feet, when a problem in the vehicle's guidance system was discovered. The rocket carried a 2,300 pound Xray telescope, designed to study distant stellar objects emitting soft Xrays, jointly developed by Dr. Gordon Garmire of Pennsylvania State University and Drs. R. Novick and William HainMin Ku of Columbia University. (NASA Release 86119; W Post, Aug 28/86)
Salvage crews reported that they might have located a key part of the booster rocket, suspected in the January 28 accident, 32 miles offshore at a depth of 650 feet. Embedded firmly into the ocean's floor, the estimated 400500 pound debris located near other wreckage was positively identified as parts from the right booster rocket. As engineers examined their most recent discovery, other teams recovered still more of the crew's cabin as well as additional remains and personal affects. (W Times, Mar 13/86; NY Times, Mar 13/86; B Sun, Mar 13/86)
NASA announced that it would terminate further development of the $1 billion Centaur Upper Stage for launching other spacecraft on board a Space Shuttle. The Shuttle 51L accident prompted major safety reviews and safety criteria, which the Centaur, even after modifications, could not meet. Under Richard H. Truly's direction, NASA initiated efforts to examine alternatives for those national security missions that had planned to use Centaur. Because the Ulysses and Galileo missions were dependant on such a launch, other options for launching them from the Shuttle with a Titan rocket were being considered. (NASA Release 8680, W Times Jun 20/86; W Post, Jun 20/86; WSJ, Jun 20/86; NY Times, Jun 20/86; CSM, Jun 23/86)
NASA ruled out a recommendation to supplement its Shuttle flights with untended launch vehicles for building the Space Station. The combination would accelerate assembly by up to nine months, said Space Station manager John Dunning, but the time savings would be offset by a 10 to 40 percent increase in potentially dangerous space walks. Using expendable launch vehicles, he went on, would also require an orbital maneuvering rocket to keep the parts in place. (NY Times, Dec 28/86)
NASA engineers settled on a design for the Shuttle's new booster rockets, and beginning in early 1987, four fullscale tests were planned. John Thomas, manager of the booster design project at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, predicted that the tests would run smoothly and that Shuttle flight would resume in February 1988. (C Trib, Oct 28/86)
The Presidential Commission questioned NASA scientists regarding faulty orings as a cause of the Challenger accident. The panel learned that these seals could indeed malfunction in cold weather and also that erosion (not the result of cold0*weather) had occurred in 6 of 171 seals on previous flights. Morton Thiokol, the firm responsible for manufacturing the orings, had raised concerns about launching the Shuttle in cold weather, but NASA engineers concluded that the backup ring would function if the primary seal failed. Released NASA documents also showed concern expressed by engineers, who, three years prior to the accident, concluded that the mechanism for sealing segments of the solid rocket booster could fail and result in "loss of mission, vehicle, and crew." One risk analysis received by NASA from an outside agency estimated the chances for an accident involving the boosters as 1 in 35. NASA's safety advisory board stated in their 1985 annual report that 18 Shuttle flights per year were "very optimistic" because these launches were anything but routine. However, "the requirement to launch has not been a prerequisite," said acting NASA Administrator Dr. William R. Graham, "The prerequisite has been safety." (Official Transcript Proceedings before the Presidential Commission on Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Feb 11/86; P Inq, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; B Sun, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; CSM, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; C Trib, Feb 12/86; Feb 14/86; Feb 13/86; WSJ, Feb 12/86; USA Today, Feb 12/86; Feb 13/86; NY Times, Feb 13/86; W Post, Feb 13/86)
NASA released footage of the Challenger just seconds after ignition, showing a puff of black smoke coming from the right solid rocket booster near a joint between two segments. The tape lent more weight to the theory that the accident had resulted from a faulty seal in the motor. (W Post, Feb 14/86; WSJ, Feb 14/86; W Times, Feb 14/86; NY Times, Feb 14/86; B Sun, Feb 14/86; USA Today, Feb 14/86)
Aerojet Solid Propulsion Company, an unsuccessful bidder on Shuttle boosters, released documents it had sent to NASA some 13 years earlier stating that the multisegment booster that relied on oring seals were "burdened with design features that can detract from safe, efficient, and reliable operation." According to officials involved in the decision to choose the Utah based Thiokol design, the least expensive bid; the fact that Senator Frank Moss, then chairman of the committee that controlled NASA's budget came from Utah; and that then NASA Administrator Dr. James Fletcher was former president of the University of Utah were all salient factors. NASA calculations, however, also pointed out that Thoikol needed minimal up front Government cash and deferred major costs to the latest possible date, and that Aerojet required a good deal more money to get started. All three factors were important to the early days of the program's budget constraints. (B Sun, Mar 5/86)
Two hundred fiftyeight members of Congress signed a letter addressed to NASA urging them to find a second supplier for its Space Shuttle booster rockets. Congress, described as further tightening the rein on NASA, believed that competition for the sole provider, Morton Thiokol, would equate to savings. Aerojet General said it was ready to build a seamless booster, a safer design. Congress also wanted NASA to eliminate some of the rules that favored Thiokol, such as requiring any second manufacturer to purchase nozzles for the rocket from them. (W Times, Jun 6/86; WSJ, Jun 6/86; P Inq, Jun 6/86; B Sun, Jun 6/86)
Only 74 seconds after liftoff, the Space Shuttle Challenger, flight STS 51L, exploded at about 10 miles above the Earth, killing all seven crew members. It was the worst accident in the history of space exploration and the first time American fatalities occurred during space flight. Slow motion film of the launch revealed a thin flame between the left booster rocket and the Shuttle's main fuel tank, causing engineers to speculate that hydrogen from a ruptured tank ignited upon contact with air heated by the rocket motors or directly by the motors themselves. It was hoped that investigation of the debris that fell into the Atlantic Ocean could lend a better understanding of the accident. All crew tended spaceflight was halted until a thorough investigation was completed, stunting the ambitious space program that promised to bring the richest lode of scientific data ever imagined. (W Post, Jan 29/86; W Times, Jan 29/86; NY times, Jan 29/86; B Sun, Jan 29/86; P Inq Jan 29/86; C Trib, Jan 29/86)
by the Presidential Commission were followed. The report called for correction of the Shuttle's braking system, development of an escape system, and review of more than 700 critical components; however, the biggest obstacle lay in the redesigning and testing of the booster rockets. The Commission recommended a costly and time consuming fullscale, vertical test for the new rockets. NASA had relied on a less expensive, scaled down, horizontal test for new designs in the past and made no commitment for following this advice. The added preparation time would most adversely affect the Air Force, who earlier had warned that even a 1year delay would produce a backlog of 40 payloads by 1992; some of their satellites could not fit aboard any untended launch vehicle then in use. Some former commercial customers had negotiated flights with the French Ariane rocket program, but because they were also grounded, China and Japan were being sought for President Ronald Reagan, in the meantime, had called for a replacement orbiter, but had not yet revealed how it would be funded. (NY Times, Jun 12/86)
The European Space Agency announced that it planned to fly four missions relating to the Space Station project. The maiden flight for the Spaceplane Hermes, said Director General Dr. Reimer Lust, would be launched between 1996 and 1998, by a new Ariane 5 rocket. (NY Times, Oct 6/86)
NASA extended a $1.32 billion contract to Lockheed Space Operations Company for processing services at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The contracted price, however, did not reflect the schedule changes brought on by the Challenger accident; the changes would be handled through contract amendments. NASA also awarded contracts at $500,000 million each to five different firms for the study of designs for second generation solid rocket boosters. The companies were required only to submit concepts for a newly designed rocket. (LA Times, Sep 6/86; WSJ Sep 8/86)'80** NASA cleared a site at Wallops Island, Virginia, for use by Space Services, Inc., a new rocket company, to launch its Conestoga rocket. The company planned to put cremated remains of 10,000 people on a satellite that was to orbit the Earth. (P Inq, Sep 9/86)
Rocket debris recovered on April 13, 40 miles northeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida, in 560 feet of water was determined by the President's Commission to be the part of the right booster thought to be responsible for the Challenger accident. In the area where photographs had shown a plume of flame was a onefoot by twofoot hole, lending concrete evidence to the theory that the oring and/or the putty used to protect it had failed to do its job of sealing two of the rocket's four segments. (C Trib, Apr 15/86; W Post, Apr 15/86; W Times, Apr 15/86; NY Times, Apr 15/86; B Sun, Apr 15/86)
NASA officials confirmed that the Agency had considered reproduction of the Delta rocket and was ordering at least one from McDonnell Douglas for launching an Indonesian communications satellite early in 1987. Officials at the corporation assured NASA that the grounded Delta rocket could be ready for launch in a few months because problems were worked out and the production line for the rocket was partially restarted. (W Post, Jun 27/86; WSJ, Jun 27/86)
Forty miles off the Florida coast and at a depth of 1,200 feet, a fourman submarine recovered debris and took photographs of what engineers hoped was Challenger's right booster rocket. As the investigation moved further ahead, the Presidential Commission looking into the accident asked NASA to remove from its own investigation any officials involved in the H&decision to launch the Shuttle. (B Sun, Feb 18/86; NY Times, Feb 18/86; W Post, Feb 18/86; P Inq, Feb 18/86; W Times Feb 17/86) 0** NASA Requested $45 million for fiscal year 1987 to accelerate research for its next generation spacecraft, a hypersonic transatmospheric vehicle, or "space plane", capable of Mach 25 (about 17,000 mph). Able to fly into orbit, reenter the atmosphere and achieve orbit again while being completely reusable, the craft would have both commercial and military applications. (W Times, Feb 17/86)
Air Force Secretary Edward Aldridge restated at a conference of the Aviation Space Writers that the USAF would like to purchase a new rocket that could lift medium weight satellites. The rockets, which the service calls "medium lift vehicles," were needed to launch 12 NAVSTAR navigation satellites scheduled for Shuttle flights. He also informed the conference of an interest in larger rockets, "complementary expendable launch vehicles," (an updated Titan rocket) for putting the Pentagon's heaviest satellites into orbit. (B Sun, May 14/86; NY Times, May 13/86; May 20/86)
NASA had another successful launch; a 25yearold rebuilt AtlasE rocket, a onetime ICBM, carried a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration weather satellite, NOAA10, into orbit from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. NOAA Director Larry Heacock said that the polar orbiting satellite would render "half of our satellite program restored to full working capability." (Public Affairs Plan For NOAAG Launch; ':0*Trib, Sep 18/86; W Post, Sep 18/86; W Times, Sep 18/86; NY Times, Sep 18/86)
Space Shuttle Columbia was scheduled to be ferried atop a modified Boeing 747 and transported to Vandenberg Air Force Base in California where it was expected to remain until early November. Testing would closely parallel that done at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), in Florida, in preparation for the first West Coast Space Shuttle launch. Upon arrival, Columbia would be moved to the launch pad and mated with a set of solid rocket boosters and an external tank for integrated vehicle testing, including the loading of cryogenic propellants in a "wet" countdown demonstration test. Prior to the move, processing at KSC would include installation of the main engine, auxiliary power units, and orbital maneuvering system pods, in parallel with structural inspections, approved modifications, and ferry flight preparation. (NASA Release 8640)
In response to a recent order, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher handed President Ronald Reagan a 50page report that outlined the agency's plans for implementing the Rogers Commission's recommendations. Among the items detailed were booster redesign, changes in NASA's management, review of "critical items" whose failure would lead to vehicle loss, establishment of a safety organization, improved communications, landing safety, launch abort and crew escape, flight rate, and maintenance safeguards. Fletcher also submitted a companion letter urging the President to authorize funds for replacement of the Challenger. Because of the requirements for getting the Shuttle flying again, NASA confirmed the aircraft would be grounded until at least early 1988. (Actions to Implement the Recommendations of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident, Jul 14/86; NY Times, Jul 15/86; W `"Post, Jul 15/86; B Sun, Jul 15/86; W Times, Jul 15/86; P Inq, Jul (#15/86; C Trib, Jul 15/86)
A NASA study found that the part of the booster rocket that was suspect in the Challenger accident had reached a temperature of only about 29 degrees Fahrenheit at the time of liftoff, 9 degrees cooler than the surrounding air. Both NASA and Morton Thiokol engineers, the study noted, had knowledge of0*the ring's susceptibility to damage in 50degree temperatures. A member of the President's Commission pointed out that NASA officials should have been aware of this as earlier temperatures were in the 20s and the orings would not heat up quickly. (W Post, Feb 24/86)
James R. Thompson, vicechairman of the NASA task force investigating the Challenger accident, announced that the cause of the disaster would be pinpointed within a month. Although the right booster rocket, which would be a tremendous help, was still unrecovered, and tapes from the crew compartment shed no light, Thompson noted that photographic evidence and other data already available would eventually yield the answer. He also stated that
NASA officials provided investigators with new evidence challenging the theory that the Challenger accident was triggered by failed rocket seals caused by cold weather. They presented prelaunch photographs showing a flaw in the suspected oring on the right side booster, a possible correlation to the fact that workers assembling the booster were hampered with a misshaped rocket segment. New tests on the orings conducted at Morton Thiokol's plant demonstrated that they sealed properly to temperatures at 10 degrees below zero. Also, the Challenger, according to meteorologist Irving P. Krick, sustained wind shear of 125 to 150 miles per hour just prior to the accident, which would have been similar to "flying into a tornado." (W Post, Mar
Investigation into the Delta rocket crash May 3 indicated that the accident could have been a result of a faulty hardwareassembly program in the engine compartment. A short circuit was most likely the cause, said Lawrence Ross, Chairman of the Delta review board, but sabotage was not ruled out. (B Sun, Jun 6/86)
Western European officials announced that the grounded Ariane rocket would not be ready to fly in February as was earlier hoped, adding to the strains fed by the West's inability to launch. Modifications were recently approved for the rocket's faulty third stage; no new flight date was given. (NY Times, Dec
A $13 million Air Force satellite that had served as a museum piece at the Smithsonian Institution was renamed Polar BEAR and lifted into polar orbit aboard a Scout rocket, NASA's smallest booster. The satellite's mission was to photograph the Northern Lights and sample electrical particles and the magnetic field in order to design better communications. (NY Times, Nov'C0*15/86)
Several engineers at NASA recently questioned the proposal to add 100 bolts to a critical joint between the exhaust nozzle and the solid fuel segments in the Shuttle booster rockets. The purpose of the fasteners was to prevent further leakage of hot gases. Many engineers, however, saw these holes as another way for the gasses to escape because they were to be placed between inner and outer orings. (B Sun, Nov 3/86; 'A0*Times, Nov 3/86)
Space agency officials announced that it would cost $625 million to get the remaining Shuttle fleet off the ground. The money would go to salvage and investigation costs ($43 million), spare parts ($46 million), and corrective actions ($537 million). The corrective actions included redesign of the solidfuel rocket booster, changes in the main engine, and changes in steering, braking and other systems, but not escape options for the crew. The Senate Appropriations Committee trimmed the request to $526 million because, it was reasoned, the agency could not spend all of its money before the fiscal year ended on September 30. Other officials from NASA met with President Ronald Reagan to discuss the Nation's launch capability and requested $2.8 billion to replace the Challenger. The request, which was part of a $5 billion to $8 billion total that included expendable launch vehicles, violated the deficit reduction GrammRudman law. Chief of Staff Donald Reagan questioned the need for a new Shuttle that might be outdated within 10 years. President Reagan queried, "Should we be buying the technology of the '70s for use in the '90s?" In grappling with the NASA budget, the President considered a recommendation to bar all commercial and foreign launches from the Shuttle. (W Times, May 16/86; W Post, May 16/86; WSJ, May 16/86)
outer casing of the solid rocket booster might have peeled, allowing flames to burn through its casing. Although made by United Technologies, the design was identical to that used in the boosters made by Morton Thiokol for the Space Shuttles and raised the question as to whether solidfuel booster rockets in lieu of liquidpropellant rockets were suitable for human space flight. NY Times, June 4/86)
Allan McDonald, in charge of the booster rocket redesign task force, told members of Congress that the new booster joints would fall into the "criticality1R" category, meaning that they'(0*would have a backup. No specific design had yet been chosen, and the engineer stated, "We're looking at some designs with orings and some without. We're looking at various seating concepts." McDonald was taken off Morton Thiokol's solid rocket team after testifying before the Rogers Commission concerning his objection to launching the Challenger in cold weather, but was reassigned to head the task force after complaints from Congress. (USA Today, Jun 19/86; W Times, Jun 19/86; NY Times, Jun 19/86)
A Reuters report said that Arabsat1, the Arab world's first communication satellite, built for the Arab League by a Frenchled consortium and launched in February 1985 by a European Aryan rocket, failed to operate in orbit because of technical errors. The report also noted that Iraqi Director General Ali Mashat, the man in charge of the project, was fired last month by a committee of six Arab League communications ministers. (C Trib, Jan 2/86)
Lawrence B. Mulloy, a manager at the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, in charge of the solid rocket motors that were held responsible for the Challenger accident, announced his retirement after more than 30 years of Government'-0*service. He was among those who opted for liftoff of the illfated Shuttle and was repeatedly faulted for this judgement by William P. Rogers, chairman of the commission investigating the accident. He was the third Marshall manager to retire since the accident, following William R. Lucas and George B. Hardy. (W Post, Jul 17/86; P Inq, Jul 17/86; B Sun, Jul 17/86)
The results of a study conducted by Geologists Dr. Matthew Golombek and Dr. Laurie Brown suggested that the northwest Mojave Desert had shifted about 25 degrees clockwise because of periodic, violent earthquakes some 16 to 20 million years ago. Golombek reported that "results of magnetic studies of volcanic rocks taken from 19 sites suggested that the movement was caused by shear (the Earth's tectonic plates sliding past or over one another) from the Pacific Plate sliding along the fault past the North American Plate." Magnetic minerals had once lined up parallel with the Earth's magnetic field to the North, but the study found minerals now pointing 25 degrees to the east, and it was determined that tectonic movement had rotated the rocks. (NASA Release 86160; LA Times, Nov 30/86) 'D0*November 26: NASA selected the Inertial Upper Stage (IUS), a launch vehicle that fits in the cargo bay of the Space Shuttle, to carry three probes for planetary missions. Despite earlier plans for alternative launch vehicles following cancellation of the Shuttle/Centaur Upper Stage and the Challenger accident, NASA felt an urgent need to reestablish its planetary program. The probes scheduled for launch in 1989 and 1990 included the Galileo, a joint mission with Germany that would circle Jupiter and measure electromagnetic fields and plasma particles; the Magellan, which would orbit and map Venus using radar; and the Ulysses, a joint mission with the European Space Agency designed to orbit and study the poles of the sun. These three were the first missions for orbit around bodies other than Earth that would employ the IUS. The IUS boosters were manufactured by Boeing to launch three scientific missions. They were to have launched the General Dynamics hydrogenfueled Centaur rockets, but the highly volatile boosters, thought possibly unsafe for human space flight, were grounded after the Challenger accident. Because of its less powerful rocket, the Galileo needed to slingshot Venus in order to reach Jupiter, as opposed to flying directly to the planet. The added time for the mission was expected to run $50 million. (NASA Release 86161; NY Times, Nov 27/86)
A panel of scientists and engineers, established at the behest of the Roger's Commission, endorsed NASA's redesign of the Shuttle's solid rocket, but urged the Agency to increase its test schedule and to consider alternative designs. NASA's efforts had been limited by confining any redesign to plans that incorporated the rocket segments already ordered before the Challenger accident. Because the chosen design could prove inadequate and because NASA would begin investigating second generation booster rockets, all alternative design changes, the panel concluded, were in need of study. (P Inq, Oct 14/86; W Post, Oct 14/86; NY Times, Oct 14/86)
NASA officials announced that the redesign of booster rocket seals would render them failsafe. The new design would not use putty to protect the seals from heat; would include an outside cover to protect the seals from rain and ice, with a possible heating element built in; use a clip to prevent rotation; and provide a backup seal for each joint of the booster. (P Inq, Apr 14/86)
NASA announced that it would allow private contracts for McDonnell Douglas, builders of the Delta rocket, and General Dynamics Corporation, builders of the Atlas Centaur, to market their products. The two companies were also granted the use of NASA launch facilities, with the agreement to reimburse for any costs incurred. Talks with Transpace, a competitor who had hoped to market the Delta rocket, were ended. (W Post, Oct 15/86; W Times, Oct 15/86; WSJ Oct 15/86)
A decision was reached by NASA to test the new booster rocket design for the Shuttle fleet by firing the rockets horizontally, and not vertically as the Rogers Commission had suggested. A NASA spokesman called this method of testing "the most demanding" and the one that "best satisfies the Commission's intent." (NY Times, Oct 3/86; W Post, Oct 3/86; P Inq, Oct 3/86)
The Presidential Commission investigating the Challenger accident recommended major changes in the Shuttle Program. Recommended changes included an injection system for astronauts, even though the Commission concluded that such a system would not have saved lives in the January 28 accident; and an independent safety board with power to postpone any flight in which potential hazards were recognized. Other problems pointed out by astronauts and NASA officials who testified were a faulty brake design, a rough and narrow runway at Kennedy Space Center that became more treacherous with Florida's unpredictable weather, a lack of spare parts, and deficiencies in spacecraft simulators. NASA manager Arnold Aldrich also testified before the Commission and said that major flaws existed in the Shuttle Program. He was referring to communication problems that kept him uninformed about numerous matters, the most important of which were issues raised about the safety of seals in the rocket boosters. (W Post, Apr 4/85; NY Times, Apr 4/86; Apr 7/86; USA Today, Apr 4/86; P Inq, Apr 4/86; WSJ, Apr 4/86; W Times, Apr 4/86; C Trib, Apr 4/86)
NASA planned to proceed with construction of a second horizontal test stand for redesign and recertification of the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Motor (SRM) at the Morton Thiokol, Inc., Wasatch facility in Utah. The newer test stand would more'>0*closely simulate the stresses on the SRM during an actual launch and ascent. (NASA Release 86146; W Times, Oct 17/86)
manufacturers for solid rocket boosters. The House also voted to authorize spending whatever money would be needed to begin construction of a new orbiter in fiscal year 1987. (P Inq, Sep 26/86; WSJ, Sep 26/86; W Post, Sep 26/86; W Times, Sep 26/86; NY Times, Sep 26/86)
NASA announced that it had located both the Shuttle's0*crew compartment and the remains of some crew members, in 100 feet of water, about 25 miles northeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida. Sonar first detected the object on the night of March 7 and subsequent dives confirmed it to be the module. About 10 percent of the wreckage had been recovered to this date, but the suspected right solid rocket booster still lay on the ocean's floor. Although little insight into the cause of the accident was expected, recovery of the data tapes, officials speculated, could shed some light. (USA Today, Mar 10/86; P Inq, Mar 10/86; B Sun, Mar 10/86; NY Times, Mar 10/86; W Post, Mar 10/86; W Times, Mar
