NASA announced that a more detailed examination of the results of the December 23 cold weather testfiring of the redesigned booster rocket revealed that an outer ring which anchors the booster's nozzle came apart during the test. The nozzle steers the Space Shuttle during the first two minutes of flight. The setback forced NASA to cancel the June 2, 1987, launch of the Space Shuttle. NASA officials said they were confident the launch would be delayed about three months, since the critical elements of the booster rocket, the redesigned field joints, functioned perfectly during the test. (B Sun, Dec 30/87; NY Times, Dec 30/87; WSJ, Dec 30/87; W Post, Dec 30/87; W Times, Dec 30/87)
A report sent to President Ronald Reagan by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the first postChallenger Space Shuttle would have an escape hatch. But a decision on the rocket assist system necessary to eject the crew safely in emergency had not yet been made. The escape hatch was one of many significant changes made in the Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for launch in June 1988. Twentyone major changes were made in the Shuttle's main engines alone, in order to increase operating life, safety, and reliability. These and other changes listed in the NASA report to the White House reflected recommendations made by the Rogers Commission, following their H&investigation of the Challenger accident. (C Trib, July 2/87; LA Times, July 1/87; NY Times, July 1/87) During June: General Dynamics Corporation said that it would build 18 rockets over the next 5 years to launch communicationsh)0*0*0*satellites. According to a company spokesman, General Dynamics would spend $100 million to start production of the AtlasCentaur rocket. General Dynamics became the third U.S. company, together with McDonnell Douglas Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation, to attempt to move into launch vehicles production after the Challenger accident. (WSJ, June 16/87)
NASA's last AtlasCentaur rocket was extensively damaged in a launch pad accident. A $4million fuel tank was destroyed when it was hit by a work platform. Four General Dynamics Space Division workers were treated for minor injuries. The launch of a military satellite, scheduled for liftoff aboard the AtlasCentaur rocket in the fall of 1987, was grounded indefinitely. (LA Times, July 14/87)
The Air Force placed a military satellite, launched aboard a Titan 34D rocket, into orbit 23,000 miles above the Earth. h)%0*0*0*According to a spokesman from the Federation of American Scientists, the satellite was a DSP5R, one of a series of Defense Support Program satellites providing early warning of a hostile missile attack. (NY Times, Nov 30/87; P Inq, Nov 30/87; W Post, Nov 30/87; W Times, Nov 30/87) During November: Martin Marietta signed an agreement with the British Ministry of Defense to launch a British Skynet 4 satellite aboard its Titan rocket in 1989. The agreement was yet another step in the U.S. effort to shift the launching of communications satellites from NASA to private companies. (W Post, Nov 9/87) A General Accounting Office report found no evidence that NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, or other space agency officials, had violated conflictofinterest regulations in 1973, when they chose Morton Thiokol, Inc. to produce the solidfuel booster rockets for the Space Shuttle. The investigation, carried out by the General Accounting Office, was requested last December by Senator Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee. (NY Times, Nov 5/87; W Post, Nov 5/87) NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Station, Andrew J. Stofan, selected Grumman Space Systems, Bethpage, New York, and Martin Marietta Astronautics Group, Denver, Colorado, as contractors for definition and preliminary designs studies of the Space Station Flight Telerobotic Servicer (FTS). The FTS is a space robot that will assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and serving of the Space Station and visiting spacecraft. (NASA Release 87176; P Inq, Nov 27/87) A team of British and American astronomers discovered two quasars much further away from Earth than any previously known. The discovery of the two celestial objects, one that is 12 billion light years away, suggests the outer limits of the observable universe are still unknown. The new findings were largely a result of improved methods for reading photographic plates exposed by the latest telescopes. (LA Times, Dec 7/87; NY Times, Dec 3/87; W Times, Dec 3/87)
James Elliott, a spokesman for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that a NASA rocket exploded about 20 seconds after launch from Poker Flats, Alaska. The small rocket, carrying an upperatmosphere plasma experiment, detonated when its second stage malfunctioned. (W Post, Mar 8/87)
The National Research Council recommended, in its fifth interim report to NASA, additional testing of NASA's new solid rocket motor before resuming Shuttle launches, raising fears that the scheduled June 1988 launch could be postponed. The Council maintained, however, that the planned June 1988 launch date could still be met by concentrating on the more extensive tests and deferring some less critical ones. (B Sun, Nov 24/87; NY Times, Nov 24/87; W Post, Nov 24/87)
The Soviet Union launched a giant new rocket booster more powerful than the American Space Shuttle. According to the Soviet Tass News Agency, the first two stages of the rocket, launched from the Baikonur test site in Central Asia, fired correctly but a mock satellite failed to enter orbit and landed in the Pacific Ocean. Tass described the untended Energia launch vehicle as a "twostage multipurpose launch vehicle" capable of putting into orbit more than 100 tons of payload, which is 75 tons more than what the U.S. Space Shuttle could carry. (LA Times, May 17/87; C Trib, May 18/87; W Times, May 18/87)
NASA announced that Morton Thiokol, Inc., the builder of the booster rocket that caused the Space Shuttle Challenger explosion, voluntarily accepted a $10 million reduction in fees and agreed to take no profit from $409 million worth of work required to fix future rockets. The company also agreed to replace the rockets lost in the accident. The agreement between Thiokol and NASA negated any lawsuits growing out of the January 28, 1986, accident that destroyed the Shuttle and killed the crew of seven. (C Trib, Feb 25/87; W Post, Feb 25/87; B Sun, Feb 25/87; WSJ, Feb 25/87)
The Air Force announced that it would purchase 20 rockets from the McDonnell Douglas Corporation for launching navigational satellites. Modeled on the existing rockets used by NASA, the Delta 2 medium rocket boosters would also be used commercially for launching communications satellites. (UPI, Jan 21/87; USA Today, Jan 22/87; NY Times, Jan 22/87; W Post, 22/87)
Two firms, General Dynamics, San Diego, California, and Martin Marietta, New Orleans, Louisiana, were chosen by NASA for liquidfueled rocket booster design studies. The liquidfueled rocket boosters could be used on the Space Shuttle and future launch vehicles. (NASA Release 87138; H Chron, Sept 17/87)
Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, formed a new organization, the Martin Marietta Commercial Titan Systems, to sell commercial rockets. The new organization, to be headed by Richard E. Bracken, former head of Space Launch Systems at Martin Marietta in Denver, would sell a modified version of the Air Force Titan 3 rocket to owners of commercial satellites. (W Post, May 4/87) During April: NASA and the Israel Space Agency signed an agreement allowing for the first Israeli space experiment on a future Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 8757; Science, vol. 236, May 1/87) Two top U.S. scientists, serving in advisory positions to NASA, resigned following their criticism of NASA policy and the space station. On April 10, 1987, Thomas Donahue, Chairman of the Space Science Board, National Academy of Sciences, resigned after sending a letter to some members of Congress calling for NASA to place higher priority on expendable launch vehicles for space science missions than on an as yet "poorly defined space station." Donahue was reinstated on April 15, 1987, after resolving hish)0*0*0*disagreement with Frank Press, head of the National Academy of The other scientist to resign was Peter Banks, Chairman of NASA's Task Force on the Scientific Uses of the Space Station. Banks resigned on April 13, 1987, after he criticized the Space Station planning, saying that the schedule for operations should be accelerated and a heavylift launch vehicle should be used. (AvWk, Apr 20/87)
The Air Force, after two consecutive failures in 18 months, successfully launched a Titan 3B rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch placed a classified payload into a polar orbit around the Earth. Air Force Secretary Edward C. Aldridge hailed the launch as "the first major step" in the recovery of the American space program after the Challenger accident in January 1986. (LA Times, Feb 13/87; NY Times, Feb `"13/87; W Post, Feb 13/87)
A solid rocket motor intended for use in NASA's Delta launch vehicle failed during a test at the Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, Alabama. The Castor IVA booster rocket escaped from the test stand five seconds into the test. A review team was established to determine the cause of the failure and to assess the impact on the Delta flight program. (NASA Release 87128)
Two teams of NASA specialists began an inquiry as to why the testfiring of the reconstructed Shuttle booster rocket on
A military satellite was lifted into orbit by a Titan 34D, the Nation's largest untended booster rocket. The launch from California's Vandenberg Air Force Base was the first successful launch of a Titan 34D rocket since February 1985. C Trib, Oct 28/87; LA Times, Oct 27/87; W Times, Oct 28/87)
Former astronaut Donald K. Slayton, President of Space Services, said that his company would be the first private U.S. company to launch satellites into orbit. According to Slayton, the first of five precision navigationlocation Star Find satellites would be launched from NASA's Wallops Island in Virginia in 1988. Space Services would use its Conestoga II rocket system to launch the 300pound satellite into a geostationary orbit 22,000 miles above the Earth. (W Post, May 11/87; W Times, May 11/87) h)0*0*0*May 11: NASA released the findings of the Accident Investigation Board, which had looked into loss of the Atlas/Centaur67 on March 26,1987. In a report to Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Jon R. Busse, Chairman of the Accident Investigation Board, blamed the accident on an electrical transient, caused by a singletriggered lightning flash. Furthermore, the Board found that the launch was made "in violation of the established criteria used to avoid potential electrical hazards." The Board made recommendations concerning weather criteria, the launch decision process, and future launch vehicle. (NASA Release 8772)
NASA announced that its fiscal year 1988 budget request did not include funding for the launching of the Mars Observer mission in 1990. Under pressure from the scientific community, NASA considered spending about $130 million for the launching of the Mars Observer from an Air Force Titan rocket. The Agency said it planned to launch the spacecraft in 1992 from the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8732; LA Times, Mar 14/87; NY Times, Mar 15/87)
NASA announced that Morton Thiokol Space Division, a NASA contractor, would test fire the first redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor on August 27, 1987. The 126footlong, 1.2millionpound development motor (DM8) would be fitted with 250 instruments to measure acceleration, pressure, deflection, thrust, strain, temperature, and electrical properties. (NASA Release 87125)
The motor section of an MX missile containing nearly 100,000 pounds of rocket propellent exploded at a Morton Thiokol, Inc. plant killing five workers. The explosion at the company's Wasatch Operations plant, 25 miles west of Brigham City, Utah, was the fourth major accident at the plant. The cause of the explosion was not immediately known. Morton Thiokol also was the manufacturer of (#the Space Shuttle's booster rocket. (NY Times, Dec 30/87, 31/87; P Inq, Dec 30/87; W Post, Dec 30/87)
Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems, New Orleans, Louisiana; Rockwell International Space Transportation Systems Division, Downey, California; and United Technologies Corporation, USBI Booster Production Company, Inc., Huntsville, Alabama; were selected for contracts to perform definition studies for a proposed untended launch vehicle. The new vehicle, called ShuttleC, would supplement the orbiter with an untended cargo element. (NASA Release 87159)
A number of senators expressed reservations that Morton Thiokol, Inc. remained the sole maker of NASA's Shuttle booster rocket. Members of the Senate Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space complained during the hearing that, despite the fact that Congress had instructed NASA to employ other industries to redesign Shuttle rockets, the Agency appeared locked into using rockets designed by Morton Thiokol, Inc. (NY Times, Jan 23/87; WSJ, Jan 23/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced NASA planned to develop an advanced solid rocket motor for the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8747)
A 15story high Ariane 3 rocket, carrying two communications satellites, was launched into an Earth orbit from Kourou, French Guiana. The successful launch marked the reentry of Western Europe into the commercial utilization of space after a 16month hiatus. LA Times, Sept 16/87; NY Times, Sept 16/87)
NASA successfully test fired a redesigned shuttle booster in Utah's Wasatch Mountains. NASA officials, very pleased with the test firing, cautioned, however, that the complete success of the firing cannot be fully determined until engineers have taken the hardware apart and fully analyzed it. They added that, at any rate, this was just the first step and much work remained if the Shuttle was to make its flight date in June 1988. The 14storyh)0*0*0*test booster, built by Morton Thiokol, Inc. and known as "DM8," was loaded with 1.1 million pounds of propellent. (B Sun, Aug 31/87; NY Times, Aug 31/87; WSJ, Aug 31/87; W Post, Aug 31/87) During August: Data collected by the Giotto spacecraft, which flew by the Halley comet in March 1986, suggested that tiny chains of formaldehyde chemicals, contained in the comet's gassy halo, may be older than the solar system. (LA Times, Aug 9/87) NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded a 2.6 million contract to the city's Wyle Laboratories' Scientific Services & Systems Group to design and develop the multiple experiment processing furnace. The furnace, for processing metals and alloys in space, was to be carried aboard the Space Shuttle where astronauts would carry out their experiments. Def News, Aug 10/87)
NASA launched a GOES7 weather satellite aboard a Delta rocket. The satellite was first placed into an elliptical orbit. Ground command was expected to arrest the satellite in a stationary orbit 22,400 miles above the Atlantic Ocean by firing a booster rocket. GOES7 joined the already orbiting GOES6 weather satellite to provide weather information and patterns in an areah)0*0*0*stretching from the eastern Atlantic to the midPacific Ocean. (B Sun, Feb 27/87; P Inq, Feb 27/87; W Times, Feb 27/87)
NASA announced that the first postChallenger Space Shuttle launch had again been rescheduled, this time for June 1988. The 4month delay was caused by the need to perform further tests on the liquidfuel main engines and because of needed redesigning and testing of the Shuttle's rocket boosters. The postponement caused a decrease in the number of crew tended flights planned for 1988 and 1989. NASA said that three Spaceh)0*0*0*Shuttles, instead of the five originally planned, would be flown in 1988 and seven, instead of the ten planned, would be flown in 1989. The reductions in Space Shuttle launches, NASA believed, would further slow U.S. efforts to regain primacy in space exploration and utilization. (LA Times, May 21/87; NY Times, May 21/87; B Sun, May 21/87; W Post, May 21/87)
NASA announced plans to study the feasibility of building an untended rocket to carry heavy materials for use in Space Station construction. The proposed concept calls for a space freighter capable of carrying more than three times as much cargo as the Space Shuttle. The vehicle would use the same type of solid fuel boosters as the Space Shuttle. NASA surmised that such a vehicle, whose estimated costs were put at $1.5 billion, could be delivered in 1993. (H Chron, Aug 6/87; H Post, Aug 6/87; W Times, Aug 6/87; USA Today, Aug 6/87)
An apparent technical problem forced the cancellation of the test firing of the redesigned 126footlong, 1.2millionpound Space Shuttle solid rocket motor, Development Motor9 (DM9), to be used in the first postChallenger flight. The failed test took place at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Facility near Brigham City, Utah. The test was cancelled one second before ignition. This was the second of at least five fullscale tests planned to check the operation of the booster's redesigned oring joints. The first fullduration test firing of a redesigned motor took place on August 30, 1987. (NASA Release 87183; P Inq, Dec 20/87; W Post, Dec 20/87)
NASA issued a request to the U.S. aerospace industry for system studies and design concepts of liquidfueled rocket boosters. The request for proposals resurrects the original concept for liquidfueled rockets for the Space Shuttle that NASA had rejected. The request for studies was part of NASA's efforts to find an alternative to the hardtocontrol solidfuel boosters. Four NASA CentersMarshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama; Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas; Kennedy Space Center, Cape Canaveral, Florida; and Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginiawould be involved in this project. (NASA Release 8785; H Chron, May 29/87; H Post, May 29/87)
Carver Kennedy, Vice President for Space Services at Morton Thiokol, Inc., said that engineers successfully testfired the company's redesigned Space Shuttle booster rocket, planned for use when NASA resumed Shuttle flights in June 1988. (WSJ, Dec 24/87; W Post, Dec 24/87; W Times, Dec 24/87)
New Mexico urged NASA to find a second company, in addition to Morton Thiokol, Inc., to build the booster rocket. (B Sun, Dec h)31/87; H Post, Dec 31/87; USA Today, Dec 31/87; W Post, Dec 31/87;h))0*0*0*W Times, Dec 31/87)
NASA announced that lightning had destroyed an Orion rocket scheduled for launch. The intense storm at the Wallops Flight Center, Wallops Island, Virginia, also destroyed the scientific experiment payload. (NASA Release 8797; NY Times, June 11/87; W Post, June 11/87; H Chron, June 11/87
Officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland,h)0*0*0*reported that NASA scientific satellites, the International SunEarth Explorers ISEE1 and ISEE2, were expected to reenter Earth's atmosphere two minutes apart on September 26, 1987. They were expected to create fireballs as they burned in the atmosphere over Brazil. The two orbiting spacecraft, launched on a single Delta rocket on October 22, 1977, for nearly 10 years studied fluctuations in plasma waves, the magnetic field, proton and electron density, cosmic rays, gamma ray bursts, and the solar wind in the nearEarth environment. (NASA Release 87137)
A spokesman for Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative Organization (SDIO) stated that research and an experiment conducted by SDIO demonstrated for the first time that lasers and other highpowered electrical devices can be operated in space without heavy insulation to prevent short circuits. The experiment involved the launching of a 60foot rocket from Wallops Island, Virginia, on December 13, 1987. Extending from the nose cone of the rocket were two probes about 39 inches apart. These probes were alternatively charged with high amounts of electrical power,h)'0*0*0*up to 44,000 volts. Although there was no insulation between them, no arcing of the electrical charge between the two probes occurred, as it would commonly occur on Earth. The experiment confirmed that space is a good insulator in and of itself. (NY Times, Dec 17/87)
The first fullscale test of the redesigned Space Shuttle booster since the Challenger accident was labeled a spectacular success by all who watched it. The firing of the 126foot Shuttle booster in Utah's Wasatch Mountains, witnessed by 300 officials from NASA and Morton Thiokol, Inc., the company that designed the booster rocket, was the first of six fullscale tests. Also present at this test were the five astronauts scheduled to fly the Space Shuttle in June 1988. (B Sun, May 28/87; NY Times, May 28/87; W Post, May 28/87)
The Pentagon released a Defense Intelligence Agency study which claimed that the Soviet Union had spent $80 billion on military space programs during the last decade. As a result, the Soviet Union was dramatically expanding its ability to boost payloads into space. The study said the Soviet Union operated about 50 types of space systems for military and civilian uses, had successfully tested a heavylift booster rocket in may 1987, and routinely launched five times as many rockets each year as the United States. (P Inq, Nov 15/87)
Five aerospace firms were awarded contracts by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, to develop preliminary advanced solid rocket motor designs for the Space Shuttle. The five firms receiving the awards were Aerojet Solid Propulsion Company, Sacramento, California; Atlantic Research Corporation of Alexandria, Virginia; Hercules Aerospace Company's Aerospace division of Salt Lake city, Utah; Morton Thiokol Inc., Brigham City, Utah; and United Technologies Chemical System Division, San Jose, California. The results of the preliminary studies would determine whether NASA will pursue the design, development, test and production of an advanced motor for Shuttle flights in fiscal year 1989. (NASA Release 87120)
NASA announced that Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, had invited industry to develop advanced solid rocket motor designs. The preliminary designs called for both a segmented motor design and a monolithic motor design. Requests for these designs, called Phase B studies, followed completion of "Phase A" conceptual studies of alternative solid rocket motor designs. Those designs were done by five aerospace firms. (NASA Release 8790)
A Soviet rocket burned like a huge fireball as it reentered the Earth's atmosphere, lighting up the skies over a broad area of the West and Midwest. The rocket was used in the launching of Soviet communications satellite Raduga 21 on December 10, 1987. (C Trib, Dec 14/87; LA Times, Dec 14/87)
NASA announced that two Shuttle crew escape systems would be tested in November at the Naval Weapons Center in China Lake, California, using dummies and Navy volunteers. NASA is toh)$0*0*0*make a decision early in 1988 on whichif eitherof the two systems would be installed aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery. One of the escape systems involved the installation of twofootlong tractor rockets that would extract the astronauts through an open hatch. The other system consisted of a telescoping slide pole that would extend through the hatch for the crew members to slide down, away from the disabled spacecraft. The crew would be connected to the rocket or the slide pole with a lanyard. Neither system would be of use in a Challengertype explosion that occurred without warning. But either could function in the event of a main engine failure aborting the mission during launch. Both systems require the Shuttle to be equipped with a hatch that can be blown off the spacecraft in an emergency. (NASA Release 87170; H Chron, Nov 13/87; H Post, Nov 13/87; NY Times, Nov 14/87)
An AtlasCentaur rocket, launched during a driving thunderstorm from Cape Canaveral, Florida, veered out of control 52 second after liftoff and was blown up by NASA safety officials. The launch was NASA's third major mission in 1987. Investigators trying to determine the cause of the accident said that data radioed to the ground from the rocket seconds before it careened off course indicated a major electrical disturbance aboard. Investigators speculated that lightning, prevalent in the area at the time, may have caused the failure. (W Post, Mar 27/87; W Post, Mar 31/87; W Times, Mar 31/87)
NASA announced that within hours of its discovery on February 24, 1987, NASA scientists were monitoring the Supernova 1987a with the Earthorbiting International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) and the Solar Max Mission (SMM) spacecraft. Subsequently, as previously announced, NASA began monitoring the supernova with a network of ground antennas. The major supernova science program mounted by NASA and the intense, worldwide scientific interest in the supernova resulted from the fact that the discovery of Supernova 1987a provided scientists the opportunity to study not only the death of the star, but also the resultant rebirth of matter. The explosion, shock waves, and tremendous energies of Supernova 1987a were expected to provide direct evidence of the creation of heavy elements such as silicon and nickel. This marks the first time a supernova has been so close to the Earth and so bright since the 1604 supernova, when the telescope had not yet been discovered. The advantageous circumstances allowed scientists to study the supernova in all radiation wavelengths from nearly the moment of its explosion. Scientists expected that the array of instruments and the variety of NASA'sh)0*0*0*methods of monitoring the supernova would not only yield a new understanding of the chemistry and physics of the comet, but also potentially would provide a better understanding of the creation of The supernova program was expected to extend at least over the next 21/2 years. It would consist of multiple, continuous satellite observations, balloon and sounding rocket missions, aircraft flights, and radio observations. A special computer communications network would allow scientists from NASA, American and foreign universities, and other international scientific organizations to analyze the great amount of data generated by the In addition to the IUE and SMM spacecraft, managed and operated by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, a Japanese Ginga (AstroC) satellite was used to monitor the Supernova 1987a. The IUE satellite provided data from ultraviolet observations and monitored the overall brightness of the supernova. It also was expected to help define exactly which star in the Large Magellanic Cloud exploded creating the supernova. The SMM satellite, a sunobserving instrument, was used to monitor the expected gamma ray emissions from the supernova. The Japanese Ginga (AstroC) satellite was used to monitor the supernova for Xray emissions. NASA's Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO), a C141 jet transport stationed in New Zealand, was also used in supernova observations to measure infrared energy. It was expected to be involved in a number of flights through the spring of 1989, using new and increasingly more sophisticated instruments. (NASA Release
Because of complications encountered in the nozzle fabrication process, NASA moved the test of the flight configuration of the redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM) to middle or late December 1987. (NASA Release 87151)
NASA announced that it had chosen the final design for the Space Shuttle's new rockets. Also, the Agency declared it had resolved the problem of Challenger's leaking seals. Hot gasses escaped during launch and the seals failed to close properly because of cold weather. John Thomas, Manager of the rockets design team at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, stated that henceforth the oring seals would be heated in cold weather rather than constructed of new materials. He also said that the new design would contain three oring seals instead of two. Thomas emphasized that up to eight more test firings of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket motor were planned before flights resume. (NY Times, July 17/87; W Post, July 17/87; W Times, July
China signed a contract with Teresat, Inc. of New York to launch its first satellite for an American firm. The contract called for a Teresat WestarVIS satellite to be launched into orbit aboard a Chinesemade rocket in the first half of 1988. (LA Times, Jan 29/87). During January: The American journal Aviation Week & Space Technology reported two serious Soviet setbacks in space that were not acknowledged by Soviet authorities. The magazine claimed that on January 29 the Soviets deliberately destroyed a Cosmos 1,813 military reconnaissance satellite they had launched on January 15, 1987. When the satellite malfunctioned upon reentry, its selfdestruction system was activated to prevent it from striking a populated area or from falling into western hands. Also according to this source, a Soviet SL12 Proton booster rocket failed during launching on January 30, 1987. Its fourth and uppermost stage failed to ignite and the debris from the rocket and communications satellite it carried fell out of orbit a day later. C Trib, Feb 7/87; NY Times, Feb 7/87)
After a lengthy debate, the European Space Agency decided to fund an independent space program that would give it "full autonomy in space." Only Great Britain, which has been pushing for cuts in the space exploration program, refused to go along. The decision was reached during the meeting in the Hague of ministers from the 13 member states, with France and Germany being the primary proponents of the new policy in space exploration. The longrange plan adapted by the ministers included a $3.7 billion "Columbus" project calling for a crewtended space module to be connected to the proposed U.S.international Space Station; a freeflying humantended Station to orbit near it; and a polar Earthobservation platform. The plan also called for about $4.4 billion for the "Hermes" miniature Space Shuttle, a reusable spacecraft with an ejectable cockpit for a crew of three, and $3.5 billion for the "Ariene" 5 rocket, which would be used to boost the Hermes into space. (LA Times, Nov 10/87; NY Times, Nov 10/87; W H&Post, Nov 13/87)
