The fourth fullduration test firing of NASA's redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor was conducted at Morton Thiokol's Space Operations facility near Brigham City, Utah. The test was part of the Shuttle motor redesign program. The 126footlong, 1.2millionpound motor, designated Qualification Motor7 (QM7), underwent a fullduration, horizontal test firing of two minutes. After a preliminary examination of the fired motor, NASA and Morton Thiokol officials declared the test an apparent success. The exercise involved the first use of a new test stand at Morton Thiokol. One remaining fullduration test, Production Verification Motor1 (PVM1), would be conducted in July, prior to the next Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 887; NY Times, Jun 15/88)
The third fullduration test firing of NASA's redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor was carried out at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Facility near Brigham City, Utah. The 126foot long, 1.2 millionpound motor, designated Qualification Motor6 (QM6), underwent a fullduration horizontal test firing of two minutes. The test, tentatively labeled a success, was the third of five test firings to be carried out prior to the scheduled resumption of Shuttle flights in August 1988. (NASA Release 8851; MSFC Releases 8843, 8844; AP, Apr 20/88; UPI, Apr 20/88; NY Times Apr 21/88; W Post, Apr 21/88; USA Today, Apr 21/88; W Times, Apr0*21/88)
NASA announced August 4, 1988, as the target for launch of the next Space Shuttle mission, STS26. This new launch target was selected following a major program assessment, subsequent to the most recent fullscale firing of the redesigned solid rocket motor (SRM) in December 1987, which revealed a design defect in the outer boot ring of the SRM casetonozzle joint. As a result of the assessment, NASA officials determined that the SRMs that would boost the orbiter Discovery on STS26 would use an alternative outer boot ring configuration tested successfully during the Development Motor8 firing in August 1987. Roll out of Discovery to Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B was scheduled for May 13, and a flight readiness firing of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was to take place on June 13.(NASA Release 8811; NY Times, Jan 28/88; W Post, Jan 28/88; USA Today, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 28/88; P Inq,
The fifth and final shortduration solid rocket motor Nozzle Joint Environment Simulator (NJES) firing test was carried out. The overall objective of the test, part of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor redesign program, was to evaluate the failsafe performance of the redesigned casetonozzle joint with verified defects. (NASA Release 8856)
A United Nations (U.N.) report warned of an alarming increase in the amount of space debris in lowEarth orbit since the first orbital launch in 1957. The report, prepared by Siegfried J. Bauer, Chairman of a U.N. panel on "Potentially Environmentally Detrimental Activities in Space," declared that "action on an international scale is obviously needed to deal with the global issue of space debris." Bauer, a professor at the Institute for Meteorology and Geophysics of the University of Graz, Austria, said most damage in space collisions until now had been caused by debris from "normal" activities in space. However, as a result of the first U.S. antisatellite weapon tests, part of the Strategic Defense Initiative program, "there are already signs of 'willful' fragmentation and production of space debris," he said. Bauer said that in the 30 years of the Space Age, since the first Soviet Sputnik of October 4, 1957, about 18,000 manmade objects had been projected into space. About 7,000 of them, larger than 8 inchesthe visibility limit of radarremain in "near Earth space." Of these, 23 percent are satellite payloads, 10 percent are burnedout rocket stages, and 62 percent are various fragments. Only 5 percent are "active" satellites. Some 50 objects "appear to contain radioactive material." Besides the larger fragments, there are at least 2,000 objects ranging in size from 4 to 8 inches and about 50,000 in the range of 1/2 inch to 4 inches. Below that, there are "millions to billions" of metal and paint chips in the millimeter and submillimeter range" which pose greater danger than would appear from their size. Bauer claimed that a halfmillimeter metal chip moving at 18,500 miles per hour "could easily penetrate a space suit and even kill an astronaut." Most space junk is concentrated between 220 and 800 miles above Earth, "exactly where most of the satellites, the Space Shuttle and space stations Bauer said that at this point "the possibility of a collision with space debris is still very small, but is not completely negligible, particularly compared to the hazard from extraterrestrial material such as micrometeorites." Bauer listed several examples of damage to satellites caused by manmade space debris. (UPI, Jan 27/88)
In response to a civil suit brought under the Freedom of Information Act by the Associated Press and six other news organizations, the Justice Department disclosed documentation showing that the Federal Government and Morton Thiokol paid $7,735,000 in cash and annuities to settle all claims with the families of four of the crew members who died in the explosion of the Shuttle Challenger. Thiokol, maker of the faulty booster rocket blamed for the January 28, 1986, explosion, paid $4,641,000. The Government's share of the settlement was $3,094,000. The settlements were reached on December 29, 1986, with the immediate survivors of the spacecraft crew members, Francis R. Scobee, Ellison Onizuka, Gregory B. Jarvis, and Sharon Christa McAuliffe. Settlements had been reached among Thiokol and two other familiesthose of Judith Resnik and Ronald E. McNair with no Government contribution. A claim by the widow of Michael J. Smith against Thiokol was still pending in Federal court. The Federal Government maintained that it cannot be held liable for the deaths of civilian and military government employees who die on duty. (UPI, Mar 8/88; NY Times, Mar 8/88; W Post, Mar 8/88; WSJ, Mar 8/88; USA Today, Mar 8/88; LA Times, Mar 8/88; W Times, Mar 8/88; C Trib, Mar 8/88; P Inq, Mar 8/88; AP, Mar 13/88)
The European Space Agency (ESA) successfully launched'*0*its first Ariane 4 booster from the Korou launch center in French Guiana. The Ariane 4, the latest and most powerful ESAbuilt booster, carried two European telecommunications satellites. The launch had been delayed by 24 hours because of a faulty sensor on the rocket's third stage. (FBISWeu88238, Dec 11/88; SSR 1988 109CD; NY Times, Dec 12/88)
In a setback for the Space Station program, the Senate approved a $10.1 billion appropriation for fiscal year 1989$1.4 billion less than was requested by NASA and the Reagan administration. The legislation provided only $200 million of the estimated $767.4 million NASA said it needed to continue basic work on the Space Station program. An earlier House appropriations bill approved $902 million of the $967 million requested for the Station. Senior Reagan administration officials warned that the final version of the bill would provoke a Presidential veto if it lacked sufficient funding to continue the Space Station program. UPI, Jul 13/88; WSJ, Jul 14/88; W Times, Jul 14/88; USA Today, Jul 14/88; LA Times, Jul 14/88) 0** An Indianbuilt rocket carrying a weather satellite malfunctioned and plunged into the Indian Ocean shortly after it was launched from India's Sriharikota Island launch facility. The fivestage, 80foot rocket Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV) apparently suffered a malfunction in the solid fueled first stage boosters. This was the second failure of the new rocket, which suffered a catastrophic malfunction during its first launch attempt in March 1987. The launch failure was interpreted by space experts as a major setback for India's civilian space and ballistic missile development programs. (NY Times, Jul 14/88; C Trib, Jul 14/88; P Inq, Jul 14/88; LA Times, Jul 14/88)
A DMSP F9 meteorological observation satellite was successfully launched at 9:53 p.m. aboard an AtlasE rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base Space Launch Complex3 in California. The 1,650pound Department of Defense (DoD) satellite was placed in a nearpolar orbit. (W Times, Feb 4/88; Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1988, 171)
Morton Thiokol, Inc. was fined by Utah state officials for six safety violations in connection with a December 29, 1987, fire that killed five workers and destroyed a missile casting building at Thiokol's Wasatch facility near Salt Lake City. The Utah Occupational and Safety Health Division sought fines of $31,700 against Thiokol, citing violations of safety rules related to protection of workers, deviations from approved procedures, and failure to take precautions against static electricity buildup in a rocketcasting facility. An Air Force investigation into the immediate cause of the fire, which occurred during the casting of solid rocket propellant into the metal casing of an MX missile segment, was pending. (UPI, Mar 16/88; W Post, Mar 17/88; NY Times, Mar 17/88; WSJ, Mar 17/88; W Times, Mar 17/88)
An engineer who, only hours before the Space Shuttle Challenger blew up, warned NASA that it was dangerous to launch the spacecraft in cold weather was named a winner of the Scientific Freedom and Responsibility Award. Roger M. Boisjoly, a former engineer for Morton Thiokol, Inc.the manufacturer of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor blamed for the Challenger accident that0*killed seven crew memberswas honored by the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) for attempting to halt the launch and for his attempts to have the flawed rocket redesigned. The AAAS, in an announcement, cited Boisjoly "for his exemplary and repeated efforts to fulfill his professional responsibilities as an engineer by alerting others to life threatening design problems on the Challenger Space Shuttle and for steadfastly recommending against the tragic launch." Boisjoly was to receive the AAAS award during February 14 ceremonies in Boston. (LA Star News, Jan 27/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that James B. Odom was the new Associate Administrator for Space Station, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. He replaced Andrew J.0*Stofan, who recently announced he was leaving the Agency on April 1. Odom joined the U.S. Army's rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, in 1956, as a systems engineer. He transferred to the Marshall Space Flight Center in 1959, where he held various engineering and technical management positions, including that of Chief of the Engineering and Test Operations Branch for the second stage of the Saturn V launch 3 vehicle. He was appointed Manager of the External Tank Project in the Space Shuttle Projects Office in 1972 and became Deputy Manager for Production and Logistics in the Shuttle Projects Office in 1982. He was appointed Manager of the Space Telescope Office in 1983. Odom is the recipient of numerous service awards. (NASA Release 8832)
Morton Thiokol announced that it would not bid on a $1.5 billion contract to build the proposed Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). Instead, Thiokol officials stated they would concentrate on building the current generation of redesigned solid rocket motors, currently undergoing final testing prior to the resumption of Space Shuttle flights in September. (UPI, Jun 6/88; AP, Jun 6/88; NY Times, Jun 7/88; WSJ, Jun 7/88; LA Times, Jun
Two U.S. Navy navigation satellites were launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, into a 600mile circular polar orbit aboard a NASA Scout rocket. The two Oscar satellites were part of the U.S. Navy's longestablished, continuous allweather global navigation system. Made available to nonNavy users in 1967, the spacecraft had since been adapted for diverse civilian uses such as commercial shipping, charting of offshore oil and mineral deposits, and land survey projects. The system provided position information within onetenth of a nautical mile anywhere in the world. This marked Scout's 100th flight and followed closely on the heels of the Scout San Marco D/L launch, which took place on
An ESA Ariane 3 rocket carrying two communications satellites was successfully launched from the Korou Launch Center in French Guiana. The Ariane 3, launched at 7:12 p.m. EDT, carried two satellites belonging to India, and the European Telecommunications Satellite (Eutelsat), into polar orbit. (UPI, Jul 22/88; W Times, Jul 22/88)
After several delays, the Soviet Union successfully completed an automated orbital flight test of the Space Shuttle Buran. The untended Soviet orbiterwhich is almost identical in aerodynamic design and dimensions to the U.S. orbiterswas launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Central Asia. Buran was powered by a 198foot Energia rocket with two strapon boosters in a configuration similar to that of the U.S. Space Shuttle. Unlike the Shuttle, however, the Soviet orbiter does not carry its own main engines, but relies almost entirely on the Energia's engines for ascent to orbit. According to Soviet sources, the Soviet shuttle can be equipped with jet engines to assist landinga capability the U.S. Shuttles lack. After completing two orbits, Buran landed successfully on a 2.7mile runway at the Baikonur facility, ending the 31/2 hour mission. The Tass News Agency hailed the Buran mission as a "major success" and as a prelude to crewtended Shuttle flights. In Washington, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher congratulated the Soviet Union. (FBISSOV88222,''0*Nov 17/88; SSR 1988 100A; AP, Nov 15/88; UPI, Nov 15/88; NY Times, Nov 16/88; WSJ, Nov 16/88; W Post, Nov 16/88; LA Times, Nov 15/88; W Times, Nov 16/88; B Sun, Nov 16/88; P Inq, Nov 16/88; C Trib, Nov
Engineers at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch facility in Utah concluded that a design flaw had led to the failure of a previously untested Space Shuttle booster part during a fullscale test firing December 23. NASA officials delayed the flight schedule after they discovered that a portion of the booster's nozzle assembly, which guides the vehicle, had fallen apart during testing, a month Engineers finished taking the booster motor apart and recovered all six missing pieces of the failed nozzle part. Known as the outer boot ring, the failed part anchored the booster's nozzle to a flexible rubbery "boot" that allowed the nozzle to swivel. One purpose of the boot ring was to shield the metal and rubber bearing at the core of the swivel mechanism from the intense heat of the rocket gases. During the test firing, the booster's nozzle was deliberately moved to the maximum seven degreessome three degrees beyond what would be required during a normal Shuttle flight. NASA was looking into the possibility that the extreme steering might have caused the boot ring to come apart or A group of officials at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, developers of the original design test requirements for an extreme swiveling of the nozzle, studied whether the maneuver should be repeated in future tests of whatever design is adopted, or whether a less severe maneuver would be an adequate test under the more stringent, postChallenger standards. The test failure would probably force a delay of 6 to 10 weeks in the resumption of Space Shuttle flights, delaying the STS26 flight of Discovery to no earlier than August 1988. (NASA Release 87190; UPI, Jan 4/88; W Post, Jan 5/88; NY Times, Jan 6/88) 0*January 11: Speaking at the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics supported Aerospace Sciences Conference, Ross M. Jones, an engineer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, presented a proposal to launch very small, low cost scientific probes to various destinations in the solar system by using Earthorbiting electromagnetic launchers or railguns. Electromagnetic launchers, which produce strong electromagnetic forces that accelerate projectiles to extremely high velocities, were being developed by the U.S. military for use both on the ground and in space. (NASA Release 884; M News, Jan 11/88; W Times, Jan 11/88; LA Times, Jan 11/88; LA Star News, Jan 12/88)
A NASA Delta 181 launch vehicle carrying a major Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) experimental payload was launched at 5:07 pm EST from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The 6,000 pound payload, the heaviest ever carried by a Delta rocket, consisted of a main orbiting sensor platform and fifteen subsatellites released from the main spacecraft during the first 4 hours of the 12hour experiment. The goal of the $250 million exercise was to test the ability of an orbiting sensor platform to detect and track the various components of Soviet Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs) in flight. Four of the subsatellites were small solidfuel rockets whose exhaust plumes simulated the exhaust from the upper stages of Soviet ICBMs, whereas other test objects simulated real and "dummy" Soviet warhead reentry vehicles. During the mission, the main satellite and subsatellites were monitored by over 100 radar tracking stations, which simulated the groundbased component of an antimissile defense system. In addition, the exercise also included0*the detection, by sensors on the satellite, of a 40foot sounding rocket launched from Kauai, Hawaii. The experiment was declared a success despite the failure of an infrared sensor. The Delta launch, originally scheduled for February 4, was delayed five days because of an apparent valve malfunction on the Delta. Data gathered by the satellite during the 12hour exercise would be transmitted to Earth over a 10day period. (SSR 1988 008AD; UPI, Feb 9/88; NY Times, Feb 9/88; W Post, Feb 9/88; W Times, Feb 9/88; USA Today, Feb 9/88;
NASA and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, St. Louis, Missouri, announced the signing of an agreement providing for use of facilities at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, and technical support from the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, in support of commercial launches. The umbrella agreement would enable McDonnell Douglas to gain access to NASAmanaged launch support facilities when conducting commercial launches of the Delta rocket, expected to begin in 1989. (NASA Release 88124)
The Associated Press and United Press International news agencies reported that U.S. surveillance satellites had detected the explosion of a Soviet solid propellant plant 500 miles southwest of Moscow in the Ukraine. The Soviet Union confirmed that an explosion had occurredkilling three people and seriously injuring five othersbut denied that rocket propellants had been involved in the blast. U.S. intelligence officials claimed that the explosion destroyed several buildings at the plant and put a halt to all solid propellant manufacturing activities at the facility, which was the only source of solid propellant for the SS24 intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM). Two weeks previously, a powerful series of explosions destroyed a solid propellant plant in Nevada, killing two plant employees and injuring hundreds of others. Pentagon officials estimated it would take at least six months for the Soviet facility to resume production of ICBM propellants. (AP, May 18/88; UPI, May 18/88; W Post, May 18/88; WSJ, May 18/88; USA Today, May 18/88; W Times, May 18/88)
The fifth and final test of NASA's redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor, prior to resumption of Shuttle flights, was conducted at Morton Thiokol's Space Operations facility near Brigham City, Utah. The 126footlong, 1.2 millionpound motor, designated Production Verification Motor1 (PVM1), underwent a full duration, horizontal test firing of two minutes. The motor was extensively flawed to demonstrate the failsafe characteristics of the redesign. (NASA Release 88113; AP, Aug 18/88; UPI, Aug 18/88; NY Times, Aug 19/88; W Post, Aug 19/88; WSJ, Aug 19/88; USA Today, Aug 19/88; W Times, Aug 19/88; B Sun, Aug 19/88 )
The Washington Post reported that the Martin Marietta Corporation agreed to launch communications satellites for the General Electric Corporation (G.E.) on untended Titan rockets during the next several years. According to the news account, the agreement to launch 15 satellites would establish Martin Marietta as the dominant company, developed in the two years since the January 28, 1986, explosion of the Challenger, in the domestic rocket business. The ageeement was expected to bring in revenues between $750 million and $1 billion for Martin Marietta through the0*early part of the next decade, one senior company official told the Post. Analysts told the newspaper that the G.E. agreement would make Martin Marietta dominant over two U.S. rivals in the commercial satellite launching businessMcDonnell Douglas Corporation, manufacturer of the Delta rocket, and General Dynamics Corporation, manufacturer of the Atlas Centaur rocket. (UPI, Jan
A classified Department of Defense payload was launched aboard a Titan 34D launch vehicle from launch complex 40 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Sources quoted by the Associated Press said the rocket failed to carry its payload into the correct orbit. The payload was widely believed to be a Vortex reconnaissance satellite. (SSR 1988 077AC; UPI, Sep 2/88; Reuter, Sep 2/88)
NASA and the Air Force, responsible for range safety, mutually determined that the number of persons permitted access to the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, for the launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery, STS26, would be greatly reduced for safety reasons. Studies of the January 1986 Challenger accident, and the loss of an Air Force Titan 34D the following April, showed that the danger to persons on the ground, if an accident occurred, was much greater than previously thought. Under certain conditions, a solid rocket booster released from the vehicle as a result of an accident would follow an unknown ballistic trajectory, rather than tumble on course as previously thought. In addition, upon destruction the'#0*boosters fragmented into thousands of pieces and the explosive properties of unburned solid motor propellant were greater than originally determined in laboratory tests. Because of this new information, NASA and the Air Force determined that the prudent action would be to minimize the population at the closein viewing areas. (NASA Release 88125)
A European Space Agency (ESA) Ariane 2 launch vehicle was successfully launched at 7:58 p.m. EDT from the Kourou Launch Center in French Guiana. The 162foot threestage rocket successfully carried into orbit the 2,619pound Intelsat 5 commercial communications satellite which would eventually propel itself into a 22,300mile geosynchronous orbit. This was the 22nd launch of the Ariane series and the second Ariane 2 launch in 1988. A total of eight Ariane 2 launches were scheduled for 1988. (SSR 1988 040A; AP, May 18/88; UPI, May 18/88)
Aviation Week Space Technology reported that the Soviet Union was assessing a major expansion of its untended Mars balloon/rover mission planned for 1994. Soviet officials were evaluating the possibility of significantly increasing the payload capability of its dual Mars orbiter/lander spacecraft by using aerobraking instead of rocket propulsion to enter Martian orbit. Aerobraking would enable the Soviets to dispense with rockets needed to decelerate the spacecraft sufficiently to enter Martian orbit, thereby making available an additional 3,300 pounds of payload An approved aerobraking maneuver would give the Soviets several new features to the balloon/rover mission, including: a 110pound subsatellite that would be released into Martian orbit to provide Mars gravity data; 10 "meteorbeacons" dropped on the surface that would return data on temperature, pressure, and wind velocity; 2 penetrators that would dive as deep as 16 feet into Mars' surface to return data on chemical composition, soil temperature, and water vapor content; a high resolution orbiter imaging system; and 2 Earthreturn vehicles, which would serve as test vehicles for a future automated soil sample return mission. AvWk, Feb 29/88)
A classified Department of Defense payload was successfully launched aboard a Titan 2 launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. Civilian experts said they believed the rocket was carrying a cluster of Navy recon naissance satellites known as "White Cloud." The Titan 2 launch followed an apparent failure of a Titan 34D rocket to launch a military reconnaissance satellite into proper orbit. (SSR 1988 078AB; NY Times, Sep 6/88; W Times, Sep 6/88; CSM, Sep 6/88)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's NOAA11, meteorological weather satellite was launched aboard a U.S. Air Force AtlasE launch vehicle from Launch Complex 3 at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. NOAA11, and its companion spacecraft, NOAA9 and NOAA10, assist in global and local weather forecasting. In addition, the NOAA satellites are used for hurricane tracking and warning; global sea ice monitoring; various atmospheric studies; and for agricultural, commercial fishing, forestry, maritime, and other industrial uses. NOAA11 was placed in a 540mile Sunsynchronous, near polar orbit, where it would circle the Earth approximately every 102 minutes, observe a different portion of the Earth's surface on each orbit, and view the Earth's entire surface and cloud cover once every 12 hours. `"(NASA Release 88126; Aeronautics and Space Report of the (#President: 1988; SSR 1988 089AC) September 29October 3: U.S. crewassisted space flight resumed after a hiatus of over two years with the successful launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission STS26 from Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39B in Florida. The first Space Shuttle flight since the Challenger accident in January 1986, STS26 followed a'$0*prolonged period of review and reassessment of the entire Shuttle program and redesign of the Shuttle's solid rocket motors (SRMs), which had experienced a catastrophic failure on STS25. STS26 had as its primary payload the Tracking and Data Relay SatelliteC (TDRSC), which would significantly expand communications and data links between Earth and the orbiting Shuttles. In addition, Discovery carried the Orbiter Experiments Program Autonomous Supporting Instrumentation System (OASIS), which would record environmental data in the orbiter payload bay during STS flight phases, as well as 11 secondary payloads. The STS26 mission lasted four days and concluded with a landing at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on October 3. The fiveman crew for STS26 included Navy Captain Frederick H. Hauck (Commander), Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey (Pilot), and Mission Specialists John M. Lounge, Marine Lieutenant Colonel David C. Hilmers, and George D. Nelson. (NASA STS26 Press Kit, SSR 1988 091A; UPI, Sep 29/88; AP, Sep 29/88; Reuter, Sep 29/88; NY Times, Sep 30/88; W Post, Sep 30/88; W Times, Sep 30/88; USA Today, Sep 30/88)
The fifth firing in a series of Transient Pressure Test Articles (TPTA) was conducted in the East Test Area of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. The test, designated TPTA 1.3, was part of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor redesign program. For this test, flaws were intentionally cut into both the test article's field joints, the casetonozzle joint, and other components of the redesigned motor. Instrumentation on the motor recovered data to verify the structural performance, thermal response, and sealing capability of the redesigned field and casetonozzle joints. (MSFC Release on
NASA successfully launched the first of three suborbital rocket experiments to study Supernova 1987A. The rocket, launched from the Woomera, Australia Range, carried an Xray spectrometer that observed Xray emissions in the 0.37 keV band. Two additional rocket experiments were scheduled for launch during a window lasting until March 20. An earlier series of sounding rocket observations of Supernova 1987A were conducted from Woomera during November and December 1987. Both campaigns used Black Brant IX twostage, solidfuel rockets. (LRC Release 887)
NASA announced selection of the Government sites to be used as production and testing facilities for the Agency's planned Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). The Tennessee Valley Authority property known as Yellow Creek, in northeastern Mississippi, was selected as the location of the ASRM production facility, while NASA's Stennis Space Center near Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, was selected for ASRM testing. Maximum utilization also would be made of available manufacturing and computer capability at the Michoud Assembly Facility and the Slidell Computer Complex, both located in southeast Louisiana, to minimize total program costs. The planned ASRM, which would replace the current Redesigned Solid Rocket Motors in the mid1990s, would incorporate substantive design changes to improve reliability and safety margins, as well as provide a significant added performance capability to the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 88104; MSFC Release 88102; UPI, Jul 27/88; W Post, Jul 27/88; USA Today, Jul 27/88) During July: A team of NASA scientists from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, the Lockheed Company, and the University of Alabama in Huntsville, announced the discovery of a new hightemperature superconductor. According to a paper published in Applied Physics Letters, the scientists demonstrated that "samples of yttriumbariumcopper oxide, when mixed with silver oxide, heat treated, and exposed to 320 degrees Fahrenheit, can be suspended below a rare Earth magnet by the magnetic field trapped in the sample." Because superconducting material excludes a magnetic field, by floating a superconductor beneath a magnet, the two materials are firmly attracted to each other, but never touch. According to Palmer N. Peters, of Marshall's Cryogenics Physics Office and a member of the scientific team, the implications of high temperature superconductors for space technology are numerous. "In space, with the elimination of the weight associated with gravity, it should be possible to develop lowvibration, lowfriction couplings and bearings," Peters said. "The importance of the discovery is that this new material not only has stronger suspension forces but exhibits other unusual magnetic properties: it has demonstrated a lower electrical resistance at normal temperatures, is easier to solder, and is less brittle than other high temperature superconducting materials." (MSFC Release 88104)
Israel launched its first orbital satellite aboard an Israelibuilt rocket. The Horizon I experimental satellite was launched from an Israeli launch facility in the Negev desert aboard what U.S. experts believed was either a Jericho II or a Comet launch vehicle. The Horizon I was expected to have an operational lifetime of one month in low Earth orbit. (SSR 1988 087AB; NY Times, Sep 20/88; W Post Sep 20/88; W Times, Sep 20/88; CSM, Sep 20/88; B Sun, Sep 20/88; LA Times, Sep 20/88)
NASA submitted to the Congress its acquisition plan for the Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). The plan contained NASA's strategy for a full and open competition to introduce an ASRM into the Shuttle system. NASA contended that a new booster design would result in substantive improvements in flight safety, reliability, and performance over the current SRMs produced by contractor Morton Thiokol. The ASRM design considered by NASA would be an advanced version of the segmented boosters currently in use in the Shuttle program. The new boosters would have a more reliable field joint design and would be more powerful than the current SRMs, providing for a 12,000pound increase in the Shuttle's payload capacity. Additionally, the ASRMs would preclude the necessity for throttling the Space Shuttle's main engines during the period of maximum dynamic pressure, thereby reducing or eliminating about 175 "criticality 1/1r" failure modes for the Shuttle system. An important aspect of NASA's ASRM acquisition plan was the proposal that the boosters be developed in a new Governmentowned contractor operated (GOCO) facility and that the contract be subjected to competitive bidding. In response to protests by Morton Thiokol and the Utah congressional delegation, led by Senator Jake Garn, NASA altered the proposal to include the possibility of building the ASRM in a currently existing private facility. The overall cost to develop the ASRM was estimated at just under $1 billion, including modern tooling and equipment, plus $200$300 million for construction of facilities. Under the current production schedule, the first ASRMs would be flight certified by 1993. Thiokol announced it would bid aggressively to build the ASRM at its existing facilities in Utah. (NASA Release 8854; UPI, Apr 18/88; AP, Apr 19/88; USA Today, Apr 19/88; W Times, Apr 19/88; NY Times Apr 20/88; W Post Apr 20/88; WSJ, Apr 20/88; )
A segment of a Space Shuttle solid rocket motor was test fired at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch facility in Utah in a test of the solid rocket motor nozzle joint. The overall test objective was to evaluate performance of the redesigned solid rocket motor casetonozzle joint that had an insulation adhesive defect and damaged oring in order to determine the failsafe performance of the redesigned joint. The redesigned casetonozzle joint included 100 added radial bolts, adhesively bonded insulation surfaces, and an added "wiper" oring designed to keep the adhesive on the insulation surfaces during assembly. The test was part of the Shuttle motor redesign program. (NASA Release 8823)
This date marked the tenth anniversary of the launch of0*NASA's Seasat Satellite, which ushered in a new era in space research focusing on unsolved questions of the world's oceans and weather. Launched on June 26, 1978, on an AtlasAgena rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, Seasat carried a payload of five scientific instruments unlike any package carried on previous remotesensing satellites. Among the experimental instruments Seasat pioneered were a synthetic aperture radar, which provided highly detailed images of ocean and land surfaces; a radar scatterometer to measure nearsurface wind speed and direction; a radar altimeter to measure the height of the ocean surface and waves; and a scanning multichannel microwave radiometer to measure surface temperature, wind speeds, and sea ice cover. The satellite also carried a passive visual and infrared radiometer to provide supporting data for the other four Seasat demonstrated how space sensors could be used in oceanography, serving as a protoype for a generation of international missions that could provide answers to some of the world's most baffling and threatening weather phenomena. (NASA Release 8884)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, updated the target for the upcoming Space Shuttle launch to early September and indicated that he was very pleased with the progress of preparations for STS26. The new launch target was selected following a major review covering all aspects of the Shuttle program and Truly's subsequent report to NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Truly said, "Hard work by a lot of people is paying off and the Shuttle program is coming along nicely." Discovery was scheduled to be rolled out to the Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B the first week of July. A flight readiness firing (FRF) of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was targeted for late July. The final fullscale, fullduration test firing of the redesigned Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM) prior to STS26 was also planned for late July. (NASA Release
NASA announced that TRW, Inc. had been selected for final negotiations leading to the award of contracts for extended definition and development of the spacebased Advanced Xray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The facility would be the third in NASA's series of spacebased great observatories, following the Hubble Space Telescope and the Gamma Ray Observatory into orbit in the mid1990s. These observatories, as well as the Space Infrared Telescope Facility, would permit simultaneous, complementary observations of astrophysical phenomena over different wavelengths of the spectrum. The objective of this project would be to develop a highquality, Xray telescope to be used by the international scientific community, in conjunction with NASA, for an operational period of 15 years. The proposed cost of the contract was approximately $508 million. (NASA Release 88118; MSFC Release 88131)' 0*August 25: NASA launched two U.S. Navy navigational satellites aboard a Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The two Oscar satellites, each weighing 141 pounds, were placed into a 600nauticalmile circular polar orbit. The Oscars were part of the Navy's allweather, global navigation system. The Stacked Oscars on Scout4 (SOOS4) mission marked the fourth and final Scout launch for 1988. (SSR 1988 074AG; NASA Release 88116)
Scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland, successfully launched a rocket experiment aimed at simulating the effect of small comets entering the Earth's atmosphere. Following two aborted attempts, the Environmental Reactions Induced by Comets (ERIC) experiment payload was launched from GSFC's Wallops Flight Test Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, by a twostage suborbital TerrierBlack Brant VC rocket. At the 186mile (300 kilometer) apogee of suborbital trajectory, the payload released a combination of water, carbon dioxide, and ice crystals into the upper atmosphere, simulating the release of gases that would result from the impact of a small comet with the Earth's atmosphere. The gas release was synchronized with the passage of NASA's Dynamic Explorer (DE) satellite over Wallops Island. The satellite photographed the atmosphere over Wallops in ultraviolet (UV) light in order to detect ionospheric depletion resulting from the release of the gases. The purpose of the experiment was to test the hypothesis that the phenomenon of ionospheric depletiona sudden appearance of small holes in the Earth's ionosphereis caused by the impact of small, undetected comets. The principal investigator for the project, Dr. Michael Mendillo, declared the experiment a success and noted, based on preliminary data, that the hole in the ionosphere "seemed to last longer than we had anticipated." (GSFC Release 885; UPI, Jan 29/88)0*January 30: This date marked the thirtieth anniversary of the launch of Explorer 1, the first satellite put into orbit by the United States. The launch of the 31pound satellite aboard a modified Army JupiterC booster marked America's entry into a space race with the Soviet Union following their launch of two Sputnik satellites. In addition, Explorer 1 discovered the Van Allen radiation belts that surround the Earth. (UPI, Jan 30/88) 0*
NASA and the Missiles Division of LTV Missiles and Electronic Group, Dallas, Texas, announced the signing of an agreement that would grant the firm exclusive rights to commercially produce and market the Scout launch vehicle. NASA considered the negotiation of the agreement as another important advance in establishing a strong U.S. commercial launch vehicle industry through the privatization of Government expendable rocket programs. (NASA Release 88167)
A series of powerful explosions destroyed the Pacific Engineering & Production Company oxidizer plant near Las Vegas, Nevada, killing two plant employees and injuring over 350 people. The plant was a major supplier of the ammonium perchlorate oxidizer used aboard the Space Shuttle's solid rocket motors and other military and civilian boosters. The explosions produced flames that shot 100 feet into the air and created a 400 footwide crater at the facility site. Seismographs at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 200 miles away in Pasadena, California, detected two of the blasts registered at 3.0 and 3.5 on the Richter scale. The cause of the explosions was investigated. 0*The destruction of the oxidizer plant raised concerns among NASA and contractor Morton Thiokol over the availability of solid fuel oxidizer beyond the next four Space Shuttle flights. A prolonged interruption of Pacific Engineering's production activities would also threaten the military's missile production schedule. (UPI, May 5/88; AP, May 5/88; NY Times, May 5/88; W Post, May 5/88; WSJ, May 5/88; USA Today, May 5/88; W Times, May 5/88; B Sun, May 5/88;
NASA selected a telescoping pole as the egress method for the Space Shuttle's new crew escape system. The escape system, to be carried on all future Shuttle flights, would provide crew escape capability from the orbiter during controlled, gliding flight following failures or difficulties during ascent or entry where landing at a suitable landing field could not be achieved. Tests conducted in February and March, using a fixed pole extending through a hatchlike opening in a C141 aircraft, demonstrated that the pole would provide adequate orbiter clearance in an emergency egress situation. The telescoping pole system had been chosen over an alternative tractor rocket extraction system. (NASA Release 8850; JSC Release 88014; AP Apr 8/88; NY Times, Apr 8/88; W Post, Apr 8/88; USA Today, Apr 8/88; LA Times, C Trib, Apr 9/88; Apr 8/88; P Inq Apr 8/88; H Post, Apr 8/88; H Chron, Apr 8/88)
