NASA's Office of Commercial Programs sponsored plans to develop a system for launching and recovering commercial spaceborne experiments. Assisted by numerous universities, the Commercial Experiment Transporter would be launched on an expendable rocket and contain both a recovery system and a service module. The two would then separate so that the experiments aboard the recovery system could land in the United States while those not requiring recovery could remain in orbit. (NASA Release 9083)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Thomas E. Utsman as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight. He was to assist William Lenoir, Associate Administrator, in daily management of space flight programs. Utsman began at NASA in 1963 as a facilities design engineer in the Apollo program and later was named to head the Design Engineering Directorate's Project Engineering Office. He also served as Deputy Director of Project Management, Associate Director of Design Engineering, Operations Management Director of Technical Support, Director of Shuttle Operations, and Director of Shuttle Management and Operations. Truly also named James A. Thomas as Deputy Director of the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Thomas joined0*NASA in 1962 and served as lead engineer for prelaunch testing and communications for the Apollo program. He worked on the initial Shuttle program and served as lead flight engineer, as chief Shuttle flight project engineer, in the Shuttle Engineering Directorate, and as Director of Shuttle Launch and Landing Operations. (NASA Release 903)
A Government industry board selected the gas generator power cycle engine, similar to the J2 engine used on the Saturn moon rockets, for the rocket engine to be designed and built to power the NASA/USAF Advanced Launch System. Chosen over the closed expander power cycle, the engine would power next century launch vehicles, capable of delivering a wide range of payloads into Earth orbit at a reduced cost. (NASA Release 90113)
A Delta rocket was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, successfully carrying an International Maritime Satellite Organization communications satellite into orbit. The satellite was intended to expand international telephone and facsimile services aboard ships, planes, trains, and other vehicles. (W Post, Oct 31/90) During October: Photographs sent back from the Magellan spacecraft since September 15 were ten times sharper than any seen before. The images "revealed a whole new planet" and "almost everywhere you look on Venus you see volcanic features," said scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California. (CSM, Oct 25/90)
An Ariane rocket carrying two Americanbuilt Japanese satellites exploded over the Atlantic Ocean shortly after liftoff from French Guiana; a fire in the rocket's propulsion system was suspected to be the cause of the explosion. Ariane had a record of 17 successful flights previous to this accident; it held more than 50 percent of the international market for commercial launches. (The European Space Agency later admitted that a cloth inadvertently left in the rocket had caused the failure by blocking water supplies to one of its first stage engines.) (FBIS Paris AFP in English, Apr 13/90; W Times, Feb 23/90; NY Times, Feb 23/90)
A Delta rocket carried two satellites into space from Cape Canaveral, Florida, to test laser technology planned for the Strategic Defense Initiative program. One satellite, the Relay Mirror Experiment, was to reflect a beam fired from a mountain top in Hawaii back to another nearby point on Earth using a mirror. The other satellite, the Low Power Atmospheric Compensation, was to correct laser strike distortions caused by dust, moisture, and gases. The media generally opined that success of the experiment might induce Congress not to slash the $4.5 billion that President George Bush had requested for further research into the project in budget year 1991. (W Times, Feb 15/90; NY Times, Feb 15/90)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly addressed the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee and defended the projected 24 percent budget increase that President George Bush0*had proposed for the agency. Truly warned that any attempt to slash the budget would render the Space Station defunct, a project whose expected cost had risen from the original 1984 estimate of $8 billion to $20 billion, despite reduction in design. Also discussed was the status of the planned ShuttleC, an crewassisted heavylift cargo rocket that representatives claimed could be built by private industry. It was doubtful that the rocket could be ready in time to aid construction of the Space Station. William Lenoir, NASA Associate Administrator, said the new rocket was not necessary for building the Space Station, but would have other uses. In a related matter, Truly released to the White House and Congress his plan to increase NASA's budget by 60 percent over the next three years: $15 billion in 1991, $17.6 billion in 1992, $19.3 billion in 1993. The increases, he said, were needed for the Space Station Freedom, the Earth Observing System, and crewassisted Moon and Mars explorations. (Hearings before the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Feb 6, 8, 21, 27/90; Sp News, Feb 1511/90; H Chron, Feb 7/90; UPI, Feb 6/90)
A White House commission, formed in July as a result of the Hubble Space Telescope problem and temporary grounding of the Shuttle fleet, released its report concerning future space plans. The 12member panel emphasized a new system of crewless launch vehicles for a number of NASA missions in order to reduce reliance on the Space Shuttle. It also recommended a greater pursuance of scientific study and less emphasis on the accomplishment of engineering feats for their own sake, that is, crewassisted space flight. In addition, it recommended a gradual phasing out of the Space Shuttle; redesign of the Space Station to make it cheaper and simpler, with a focus on life in space; and restructuring of Agency management. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, said that a heavylift rocket would take $10 billion to design and take 7 to 10 years to complete. He also said that new Space Station designs were underway, but would be similar to the original ones. WSJ, Dec 7/90; Dec 11/90; NY Times, Dec 11/90; W Post, Dec 11/90; H Post, Dec 14/90; NASA Release 90161)
Government officials said that the mirrors attached to the Nation's next generation of weather satellites used to reflect images from Earth's atmosphere into internal sensors would warp from the Sun's heat, according to recent tests. NASA formed a team of nine experts from Ford and ITT, makers of the spacecraft, to correct the problem, in time to meet the 1992 launch date. A single Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite was in orbit at the time. Officials were worried that, if it failed, the Nation would have to rely on planes, radar units, and other satellites that were not capable of giving the comprehensive overview needed, for example, to follow storms.0*There were normally two satellites of this type in orbit, but one was destroyed in 1986 when a Delta rocket malfunctioned. Solutions for the GOESNEXT flawed mirrors ranged from repairing them, which would cause a sixmonth delay, to remanufacturing, and causing a delay of more than one year. (NY Times, Aug 8/90; W Post, Aug 9/90; W Times, Aug 9/90)
Orbital Sciences Corporation successfully launched its Pegasus rocket from a NASA B52 aircraft to boost a 422pound payload into polar orbit over the Pacific Ocean. The experimental rocket deployed a NASA scientific satellite and a Navy communications satellite, opening a new avenue for launching small payloads. The elimination of a costly ground booster, said company president David Thompson, provided a means by which payloads could be delivered inexpensively. (W Post, Apr 6/90; WSJ, Apr 6/90; NY Times, Apr 6/90; LA Times, Apr 6/90)
NASA scientists reported to the American Astronomical Society preliminary information obtained from the Cosmic Background Explorer spacecraft, launched on November 18, 1989, aboard a Delta rocket. The data gleaned by the Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer, the Differential Microwave Radiometer, and the Diffuse Infrared Background Experiment0*supported the Big Bang theory, but at the same time minimized the belief that other releases of energy had subsequently occurred. Scientists reported that instruments aboard the craft performed with unprecedented precision. This precision was predicted to increase over the spacecraft's estimated two more years of data gathering. (NASA Release 905; P Inq, Jan 15/90)
NASA was scheduled to launch two Multiple Access Communications Satellites (MACSATs) later in May aboard a Navy owned Scout rocket. The MACSATs were designed for a global storeandforward message relay. (NASA Release 9064)
After three delays, NASA and General Dynamics Corporation launched a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, that carried a $189 million satellite to study the Earth's magnetic and electrical fields. The Combined Release and Radiation Effects0*Satellite (CRRES), a joint effort by NASA and the Department of Defense, carried 24 canisters containing chemicals that were to be released in fall 1990 and become ionized by the sun's rays. Visible clouds would then spread along magnetic field lines, allowing scientists to see how electrical fields interact with normally invisible charged particles. The CRRES releases were to be augmented by chemicals released from 10 sounding rockets launched from Puerto Rico and the Marshall Islands. (P Inq, Jul 26/90; NY Times, Jul 26/90; NASA Release 9097; 9098)
NASA announced a recently revised 1990 schedule for Space Shuttle launches that called for 9 flights instead of the previously announced 10. The reason behind the shuffling hinged0*on a threeweek delay to launch the Hubble Telescope, originally planned for deployment March 26, because of an unsatisfactory leak check of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket booster. This delay threatened the highpriority Ulysses mission scheduled for October 5. The mission had to be sent up within an 18day time period in order to slingshot Jupiter and head back toward the Sun, where it would achieve polar orbit around the star. The new agenda for Shuttle launches and their payloads is as follows: Jan 9: Columbia; Navy communications satellite and retrieval of another. Feb 22: Atlantis; classified military satellite. Apr 18: Discovery; the Hubble Telescope.
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS31, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with the $1.5 billion, 25,000pound Hubble Space Telescope in its cargo bay. Seven years of delays, the latest occurring last April 10, when a power failure in the orbiter caused the mission to be scrubbed, preceded the event. The craft ascended to a 381mile orbit, the highest altitude yet obtained by a Shuttle. On April 25 the Hubble telescope, which had an expected 15year duration, was deployed; the telescope was to probe the universe with 10 times the clarity ever before achieved. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, on April 29, with a test of stronger, carbon brakes that would allow future landings at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, reducing both time and money for NASA's Shuttle launches. Scientists, however, could not receive data from the telescope immediately after it had been deployed because of an antenna entangled in a power cable. The entangled antenna could not rotate and relay information to a TDRS satellite. The low, 381mile orbit prevented all data from reaching ground stations. The six to eightweek chore of powering up and calibrating instruments on the telescope could not begin until the problem was resolved. Engineers zeroed in on and only partially resolved the next day. (B Sun, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; W Post, Apr 25/90; H&Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; May 1/90; NY Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; W Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; P Inq, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90)0*During April: NASA began acting on some of the recommendations from its principal independent safety review organization, which had predicted that the approximately 100 flights planned by the agency would probably entail another Shuttle loss. Among the panel's main engineering concerns were the Shuttle main engine, the redesigned solid rocket motor, orbiter structural loads, longterm orbiter maintenance, and human factors. NASA Associate Administrator William Lenoir explained that the safety panel acts as a "devil's advocate" and noted that conclusions drawn by them were intentionally exaggerated. (AvWk, Apr 23/90; CSM May 8/90)
Lockheed Corporation received a $971 million contract from NASA to oversee design and development of a new generation of rocket motors for the Space Shuttle. Twenty more powerful solid rocket motors were to begin lifting the Shuttle in 1995, according to the contract, and sources said that if NASA exercised the option to order 88 more, the contract would be worth $1.39 billion. (WSJ, May 15/90; NASA Release 9068)
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS41, was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida after a 5month dry spell; the fleet was grounded during much of this period because of hydrogen'!0*leaks. Ulysses, the craft's 814pound nuclear powered payload, was released later that afternoon, and a threestage solidfuel rocket began the craft on its long trip to Jupiter. Ulysses was to sling shot Jupiter in order to achieve polar orbit about 120 million miles from the Sun in May 1994. In order to escape an Earth orbit, the $750 million joint mission between NASA and the European Space Agency reached 34,130 mph, the greatest velocity yet required by an interplanetary probe for the task. The scientific mission also included a controlled fire to see how flames behave in weightlessness and release of the craft's 50foot robotic arm, which had a special material attached to estimate effects of deterioration on the Intelsat satellite, launched earlier this year into a low and useless orbit. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on October 10, ending a fourday, practically flawless mission. (W Post, Oct 7/90; Oct 11/90; NY Times, Oct 7/90; Oct 11/90)
NASA announced that Steven A Hawley had been named Associate Director at Ames Research Center, California. He was selected as an astronaut in 1978 and was the veteran of three Shuttle flights. (NASA Release 9077) 0*June 8: The Air Force launched a Titan 4 rocket from Cape Canaveral in Florida and put a classified payload into orbit. The Titan 4, manufactured by Martin Marietta Corporation, was designed to replace the Space Shuttle as the military's principal means of reaching space. This was the second successful launch of the rocket, although the maiden voyage in 1989 almost resulted in a catastrophe because of a malfunctioning engine nozzle. (W Post, Jun 9/90; NY Times, Jun 9/90)
Japan successfully tested its new H2 rocket, which promised to lift large, sophisticated satellites. The rocket using an LE7 engine, similar to the hightechnology propulsion system used by the Space Shuttle, was slated for service in March 1992. (AP, Mar 6/90)
The Air Force launched a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, which successfully carried a NAVSTAR satellite into orbit. The navigation satellite was the eighth in a planned series of 21 that promised to give military units their locations to within 50 feet. (W Post, Aug 3/90)
A Delta 2 rocket carried a $654 million navigation satellite, NAVSTAR, into orbit from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. This was the eighth launch of the Air Force's Delta 2 rocket, designed for heavier payloads than the original Delta. It was number 7 of a planned 21 satellite constellations that were to help ground units, ships, and aircraft locate their precise positions. (UPI, Mar 26/90)
The European Space Agency successfully sent up an Ariane 4 rocket from its launch site in French Guiana and its payload, a SPOT 2 observation satellite and six smaller satellites, that included four tiny U.S. spacecraft for education and science. It was the first 1990 launch for ESA, the thirtyfirst since 1979. All seven satellites were successfully deployed. (UPI, Jan 22/90)
NASA launched a Delta rocket carrying a West German observatory into a 360milehigh orbit from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The observatory consisted of an Xray telescope and a widefield camera for detecting extreme ultraviolet light; scientists hoped the observatory would yield information about forces associated with the center of our galaxy, intergalactic gasses, quasars, black holes, hot stars, and objects on the edge of the universe. The observatory was dubbed Rosat, after the German Scientist Wilhelm Roentgen who discovered Xrays in 1895, and promised to be 100 times more sensitive than even the Einstein Xray Observatory launched in 1978. It was originally scheduled for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in 1987. (LA Times, Jun 2/90; NY Times, Jun 2/90; B Sun, Jun 2/90; P Inq, Jun 2/90)
The official Soviet Tass News Agency reported that their most advanced rocket, a Zenit booster, had blown up seconds after liftoff and destroyed much of the launch pad in the Kazakhstan Republic. The payload, said Western analysts, was likely a recon naissance satellite. The rocket had earlier been promoted for sale in the West and had been used to fly some versions of the Soviet Space Shuttle. (W Post, Oct 12/90)
A German scientific satellite, ROSAT, scheduled for NASA launch on a Delta II rocket, in early summer, arrived at Cape0*Canaveral, Florida, on this date from the Federal Republic of Germany aboard a 747 cargo plane. The spacecraft was to perform "all sky" surveys with two xray imaging telescopes, after which it would focus on detailed xray sources. (NASA Release 9027)
A Delta rocket carried a British television broadcasting satellite, Marcopolo 2, and put it into orbit from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The only problem for the ninth U.S. commercial launch of a payload into orbit was a twohour delay0*caused by thunderstorms in the area. (AP, Aug 18/90)
A Soviet rocket carrying a TM11 space capsule was launched into orbit from Kazakhstan Republic in Central Asia on this date. Accompanying the two cosmonauts on board was a Japanese television reporter, making him the first journalist in space. Japan's biggest private television company, TBS, as well as other Japanese companies, had their slogans emblazoned on the rocket. B Sun, Dec 3/90; LA Times, Dec 3/90)
The Air Force launched a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, that carried a $65 million NAVSTAR Global Positioning System satellite into orbit. The navigation satellite was 10th in a series of 21 that the United States hoped to have `"in orbit by 1992. (W Post, Nov 27/90; USA Today, Nov 27/90)
The Galileo spacecraft, launched from Space Shuttle Atlantis October 18, 1989, fired its thrusters so it could come closer to Earth and use our planet's gravity to slingshot in December toward the Sun for a 1995 rendezvous with Jupiter. The'$0*flyby would mark the first time Earth had been approached by a spacecraft from Venus, or anywhere inside Earth's orbit. The craft was scheduled to study Earth during the maneuver, slingshot the Sun and study our planet again on the return trip in 1992, and then study Jupiter's atmosphere for 2 more years after reaching the planet. The loop around the solar system was necessary because the rocket that launched the craft was too weak to propel Galileo directly on its 2year trip to Jupiter. (Fla Today, Nov 14/90; P Inq, Nov 14/90)
Orbital Communications Corporation requested Federal approval for deploying a global satellite system for data transmission, 20 small satellites that would mostly be used for emergency services. Orbital planned to deploy them, beginning in April with its Pegasus rocket, launched from a B52 aircraft. (W Times, Mar 6/90; NASA Release N9018)
On this date, China put its fifth relay satellite into space on a Long March 3 rocket sent up from the Xichang center in western China and announced that it was ready to launch foreign satellites. China had scheduled launches for Hong Kong and Australian companies who wanted to send up three Americanbuilt satellites beginning in April of 1990. (Beijing Xinhua domestic service in Chinese, Feb 20/90; W Times, Feb 5/90)
A Titan 4 rocket booster exploded at Edwards Air Force Base in California during tests, killing one worker and injuring nine others. The Air Force was further developing the rocket, which experts called problem plagued, hoping to replace the Space Shuttle for launching of heavy payloads. (C Trib, Sep 8/90; LA Times, Sep 9/90)
A satellite launched by Martin Marietta from Cape Canaveral, Florida, failed to reach a useful orbit because of a wiring problem that did not allow separation from the Titan 3 rocket's second stage. Ground engineers successfully took the craft to a higher, but still useless, orbit, so that it would not be as likely to reenter the atmosphere. One plan offered by Orbital Sciences Corporation in Virginia was to attach a rocket' 0*to the satellite via the Space Shuttle so it could obtain the necessary 23,000 mile orbit. Martin Marietta, which had only two remaining contracts, believed it was in jeopardy of not getting any more contracts because of the incident. (WSJ, Mar 15/90; W Post, Mar 17/90; NY Times, Mar 16/90)
Martin Marietta Corporation successfully launched a Titan 3 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, on this date that carried a replacement satellite into orbit for the Intelsat 6 stranded in March. The new communications satellite was to join 14 others in September and would transmit 3 television channels and 120,000 telephone calls simultaneously. (P Inq, Jun 24/90; W Post, Jun 24/90)
NASA and Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science agreed to launch Japan's Geotail spacecraft on a Delta II rocket from Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, in 1992. The craft was to study the stored energy in the geomagnetic tail of the Earth, a magnetic field drawn by the solar winds on the Earth's night side and responsible for the Aurora Borealis. (NASA Release
An Ariane rocket carrying both a French and a German TV satellite was successfully launched from French Guiana. The rocket was identical to the one that exploded shortly after liftoff last February 22. (W Post, Jul 25/90; WSJ, Jul 25/90)
A Titan 4 rocket blasted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with a classified payload outside experts believed was a $180 million advanced missile warning satellite. It was the third launch of the Titan 4 and followed a 2month delay caused by undisclosed technical problems. The satellite, they added, would likely observe Iraq. The Space Shuttle Atlantis, which occupied a nearby launch pad for liftoff on the November 15, also had a (#classified cargo aboard thought to be for the same purpose. (W Post, Nov 13/90; W Times, Nov 13/90)
