A mysterious object was scheduled to fly near Earth in December. Scientists do not know whether it is a new type of asteroid or a 20-year-old Apollo rocket that shot past the moon and was returning home. Subsequently, it was reported to be a tiny asteroid in circular Earth orbit. However, further reporting by another team of observers indicated it was more probably a cartwheeling rocket carcass. (W Times, Nov 20/91; NY Times, Nov 20/91; USA Today, Nov 21/91; P Inq, Dec 1/91; W Post, Dec 9/91)
NASA announced it was scheduled to launch a $3 million U.S. Air Force Radiation Experiment (REX) Scout rocket June 28 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The REX was designed to test sophisticated communications in a high-radiation environment. (NASA Release 91-93)
Maryland Democratic Senator Barbara Mikulski, chair of the Senate Science Space and Technology subcommittee, visited the Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville and NASA's Space Camp for young people. According to the Huntsville Times, Mikulski strongly supported the Space Station and said "The space program excites our young people to become concerned about math and science." (Htsvl Tms, Jun 30/91)
The Washington Times carried an article on Baikonur, the rocket workers' town in the Soviet Union founded by the military in the same year as the Cosmodrome, 1955. No permanent residents were registered in Baikonur, known as Leninsk, but the city had 100,000 inhabitants crammed into a 4.5 square mile area. Tables of Soviet "space firsts" and "space endurance records" were included. Another article in the same issue described Soviet efforts to sell or rent space gear, including parts of the orbiting Mir Space Station, to ease the financial situation of the space program.
Ariane 44L, the most powerful rocket of the Ariane series of Arianespace, the commercial branch of the European Space Agency, blasted into space the night of January 15 from the northeast coast of French Guiana in South America. The rocket carried two European communications satellite: Italsat I, the first experimental communications satellite of the Italian Space Agency, and Eutelsat II-F2, the second communications satellite of the European satellite organization. (W Times, Jan 16/91)
According to UPI, a French Ariane rocket successfully boosted the first in a new series of advanced European environmental remote sensing satellites into orbit from the European Space Agency's jungle complex on South America's northern coast. The satellite, with a three-year life, had a radar system and other equipment to study Earth's oceans, ice packs, and land areas in great detail. (UPI, Jul 16/91; P Inq, Jul 18/91)
Orbital Sciences Corporation in Fairfax, Virginia, made a reputation for fast, frugal flights into space that won it a number of contracts with NASA and the Air Force. It developed the Pegasus rocket, which was launched from under the wing of a B-52 in 1990. Since then it has developed various other rockets designed to boost Shuttle payloads. (W Times, Apr 12/91)
The Pentagon was secretly developing a nuclear-powered rocket for boosting heavy military payloads into space as part of the Strategic Defense Initiative, known as "star wars." The program was disclosed by the Federation of American Scientists and was confirmed by government documents obtained by the New York Times. NASA reportedly was quietly evaluating the program. The Federation opposed the program because of the risk of radiation release. (B Sun, Apr 3/91; W Post, Apr 3/91; UPI, Apr 3/91; WSJ, Apr 3/91; W Times, Apr 4/91)
NASA announced that the next Shuttle launch, scheduled for late February, would be delayed until early March in order to replace three thrusters used to steer the ship in orbit. During the eight-day flight, the 44 thrusters would be used to maneuver the ship into unusual positions. The ship's re-entry engines also would be fired so a satellite temporarily placed in orbit could observe the rocket exhaust plumes. The aim was better identification of the plumes of missiles aimed against the United States in future wars. NASA also displayed the Gamma Ray Observatory scheduled to be carried into orbit in early April. (P Inq, Jan 30/91; B Sun, Jan 30/91; USA Today, Jan 30/91; AP, Jan 30/91; NY Times, Jan 31/91)
The media covered the destruction after launch of Orbital Sciences Corporation's Aries rocket carrying secret Pentagon experiments for Star Wars. The rocket went out of control soon after liftoff and had to be destroyed. (AP, Aug 20/91; UPI, Aug 20/91; NY Times, Aug 21/91; WSJ, Aug 21/91; W Post, Aug 21/91; USA Today, Aug 21/91; P Inq, Aug 21/91; W Times, Aug 21/91; B Sun, Aug 21/91; C Trin, Aug 21/91; LA Times, Aug 21/91)
UPI quoted the publication Aviation Week and Space Technology as saying that a huge Soviet SL-16 Zenit rocket carrying a spy satellite exploded shortly after launch on August 30. (UPI, Sep 7/91)
A Business Week article on attempts to make the commercial space-launch business profitable, quoted NASA Deputy Administrator James R. Thompson Jr. He stressed the need for "real, nongovernmental customers" in order to make the program a success. The article summarized the work of various commercial firms and mentioned a number of instances of unsuccessful rocket launches. (Bus Wk, Aug 12/91)
McDonnell Douglas Space Systems awarded Hercules Aerospace of Magna, Utah, a contract to continue production of graphite epoxy solid rocket motors (GEMS) for the Delta II expendable launch vehicle. (PR newswire, Mar 28/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer, quoting AP, reported that a hydraulic fuel tank in one of Space Shuttle Atlantis's solid rocket boosters burst after a test on October 31. However, according to NASA spokeswoman Lisa Malone, the rupture should not delay the scheduled launch of Atlantis. (P Inq, Nov 1/91)
An experimental rocket motor being tested for the Air Force Titan 4 rocket exploded at Edwards Air Force Base in California. No one was injured in the explosion. The Titan 4, the largest unmanned rocket in the US fleet, was scheduled to replace NASA's manned Shuttle in flying photo reconnaissance spy satellites and other heavy military payloads. (UPI, Apr 1/91; W Post, Apr 2/91; W Times, Apr 2/91; USA Today, Apr 2/91; NY Times, Apr 2/91; C Trin, Apr 3/91)
Media coverage of the launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis on November 24 and the release of a $300 million Air Force early warning satellite on November 25 was extensive. Reports thereafter concentrated on the experiments conducted by the astronauts aboard the Shuttle, including spotting preselected Earth sites from space. On November 28 Atlantis maneuvered out of the way of a chunk of a Soviet rocket. (B Sun, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 25/91; W Post, Nov 25/91; W Times, Nov 25/91; USA Today, Nov 25/91; P Inq, Nov 25/91; WSJ, Nov 25/91; AP, Nov 25/91; UPI, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 26/91; AP, Nov 26/91; B Sun, Nov 27/91; USA Today, Nov 27/91; C Trin, Nov 27/91; AP, Nov 27/91; UPI, Nov 27/91; B Sun, Nov 28/91; NY Times, Nov 28/91; W Times, Nov 28/91; UPI, Nov 28/91; B Sun, Nov 29/91; P Inq, Nov 29/91; W Times, Nov 29/91; USA Today, Nov 29/91; LA Times, Nov 29/91; UPI, Nov 29/91; W Post, Nov 30/91)
UPI reported that General Dynamics concluded from its investigation that a piece of debris sucked into a pump apparently triggered an engine failure April 18 that sent a commercial Atlas-1 rocket tumbling out of control. The rocket was carrying a satellite for the Japan Broadcasting Corporation. (UPI, Jun 27/91)
NASA's launch of the UARS satellite to study the ozone layer was covered extensively by the media. The launch was slightly delayed by communications hitches between ground and the satellite and communications difficulties continued after the launch. Later reports, however, indicated controllers had succeeded in getting the faulty data receiver to work. On September 16 the Discovery temporarily had to move to a lower orbit to avoid possible collision with an old Soviet rocket. (NY Times, Sep 15/91; B Sun, Sep 15/91; P Inq, Sep 15/91; W Post, Sep 15/91; AP, Sep 15/91; UPI, Sep 15/91; NY Times, Sep 16/91; B Sun, Sep 16/91; USA Today, Sep 16/91; W Post, Sep 16/91; W Times, Sep 16/91; B Sun, Sep 17/91; W Times, Sep 17/91; P Inq, Sep 17/91)
A $40 million communications satellite was launched by a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The satellite was owned by GTE Spacenet Corporation of McLean, Virginia. The satellite was scheduled to take over the work of the present Westar spacecraft in June and increase GTE's transponder capacity for relaying information. (AP, Apr 13/91; UPI, Apr 13/91; CSM, Apr 15/91)
According to the Huntsville Times, Boeing donated $300,000 on September 26 toward building a full-size mockup of Space Station Freedom at the U.S. Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. (Htsvl Tms, Sep 27/91)
The Discovery astronauts held a press conference at which they answered questions about their flight. They indicated it was easy to avoid the Soviet rocket chunk but that space debris could be a major threat to future crews. The amount of haze in the atmosphere from Mount Pinatubo or other sources, particularly struck astronauts who participated in earlier flights and aroused concern for the environment. (AP, Sept 27/91; UPI, Sep 27/91; LA Times, Sep 28/91)
NASA announced a contract with Thiokol Corporation of Ogden, Utah, to manufacture 68 additional flight sets (136 motors) of redesigned Solid Rocket Motors and six additional motors for flight support for the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release C91-bb)
ST Systems Corporation, Vienna, Virginia, announced its selection by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center to provide support for the High Energy X-Ray Telescope Sounding Rocket Program. (PR Newswire, Jul 9/91)
According to UPI, an Atlas-2 rocket built by General Dynamics Corporation was seriously damaged during a fueling test at the launch pad on August 25. As a result, the rocket's launch, which was to ferry a Defense Satellite Communications System satellite into orbit for the Pentagon, was postponed till November. (UPI, Sep 4/91)
The press quoted the official Notimex news agency as reporting that the rocket that was to provide data about the sun during the total eclipse on July 11 failed to send back any data. The project was jointly sponsored by the Florida Institute of Technology and the National Autonomous University of Mexico. (AP, Jul 11/91; B Sun, Jul 12/91)
NASA announced November 13 as the launch date for Consort 4, a commercial suborbital rocket carrying nine microgravity experiments. The experiments was to be launched from the Naval Ordnance Missile Test Station at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, with material from the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space. (NASA Release 91-173)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the award of the George M. Low Trophy, recognizing the best contractors on the space program, to Grumman Technical Services Division, Titusville, Florida, and Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations, Brigham City, Utah. Grumman provided hardware and support services to the integrated launch team at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Thiokol provided the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion system that produced 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. (NASA Release 91-185; PR Newswire, Nov 7/91)
Orbital Sciences Corporation in Fairfax County, Virginia was issued its first license for commercial space launches. The Department of Transportation licensed three launches to be used for experiments on the impact of weightlessness on payloads for the Center for the Commercial Development of Space at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. Orbital, which launched an experimental winged Pegasus rocket from a NASA B-52 bomber last year, was to use a different technology for the DOT-licensed flights. It would launch Prospector rockets developed by the company from a Cape Canaveral, Florida, launch pad refurbished by Orbit. The first launch was scheduled for March 1991, followed by launches in December 1991 and December 1992. (W Post, Jan 3/91)
Peenemunde, Germany was the place where the first self-propelled rocket left the Earth's atmosphere. This occurred on October 3, 1942 when the Nazis launched a 5 1/2 ton V-2 rocket to a height of more than 50 miles. A museum was scheduled to open on the site. (LA Times, Apr 9/91)
AP covered the three-day conference attended by more than 500 people, in Cleveland, home of NASA's Lewis Research Center, to discuss advanced Space Exploration Initiative technology. A number of NASA officials participated and cited the need to get the support of the American public to send people back to the moon and on to Mars. Nuclear rocket technology and space mechanics were among topics covered. (AP, Sep 5/91; Cleveland Plain Dealer, Sep 5/91)
The Washington Post carried a lengthy article describing the need for a new cheaper, dependable space launch system and work being done to develop a new family of rockets. The proposed new National Launch System was to be a hybrid of old and new technology to reduce costs. The booster shell would derive from the Shuttle's external fuel tank, topped by a Titan 4 cargo housing. The core would be a newly developed oxygen-hydrogen engine. The rockets would use from one to several engines and for heavy payloads could strap on advanced solid fuel boosters being developed. (W Post, May 13/91)
Royce Mitchell, NASA's Advanced Motor Project Manager at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced that NASA would begin a series of sub-scale test firings to evaluate materials intended for use in the new Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor. The first of five nozzle tests would occur on April 10, conducted by Aerojet Corporation, ASRM Division in Iuka, Mississippi. (NASA Release 91-51)
NASA announced that the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space, a NASA Center for the Commercial Development of Space, had selected EER Systems Corporation, Vienna, Virginia, to provide vehicle, launch, and recovery services for the next series of Consort suborbital rocket missions. (NASA Release 91-194)
According to the media, a small Prospector rocket, launched by Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, was blown up shortly after liftoff when it veered off course. This was Orbital's third attempt to launch the rocket for the University of Alabama in Huntsville, one of 16 NASA commercial space development centers. (AP, Jun 18/91; NYT, Jun 19/91; USA Today, Jun 19/91; W Times, Jun 19/91; WSJ, Jun 19/91; B Sun, Jun 19/91; W Post, Jun 19/91; C Trin, Jun 19/91; LA Times, Jun 19/91; AP, Jun 19/91; UPI, Jun 19/91; H Chron, Jun 20/91)
Michael Griffin, deputy for technology at the Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative Organization, said that the reason the Aries rocket of Orbital Sciences Corporation had to be destroyed when it went off course on August 20 was that a technician loaded the wrong computer program into the rocket's guidance unit. The matter would be investigated. (P Inq, Aug 27/91; W Times, Aug 27/91; W Post, Aug 27/91; NY Times, Aug 27/91; USA Today, Aug 27/91; LA Times, Aug 27/91; AP, Aug 27/91)
The media reported that a British woman, Helen Sharman, went into space in a Soyuz TM-12 rocket with two Soviet astronauts, destined for Space Station Mir. The astronauts were to remain on Mir to do repairs while Sharman was to return with the two Soviet astronauts now on Mir. (AP, May 18/91; UPI, May 18/91; B Sun, May 19/91; P Inq, May 19/91; NY Times, May 19/91; LA Times, May 19/91)
A Soyuz rocket blasted off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome for the Mir Space Station carrying an Austrian electronic engineer and the first cosmonaut from the Republic of Kazakhstan, where Baikonur is located. The joint Soviet-Austrian mission was part of a Soviet effort to help pay for the space program with joint international flights. Tass reported the rocket docked with Mir on October 4. On October 10, two Soviet cosmonauts and the first Austrian in space returned to Earth, according to Tass. (AP, Oct 2/91; UPI, Oct 2/91; P Inq, Oct 3/91; C Trin, Oct 3/91; AP, Oct 4/91; AP, Oct 10/91)
On the night of November 19, NASA delayed the launch of Atlantis for at least five days because of the malfunction of a navigation unit in the satellite rocket that provided liftoff. (P Inq, Nov 20/91; NY Times, Nov 20/91; W Post, Nov 20/91; USA Today, Nov 20/91; LA Times, Nov 20/91; AP, Nov 20/91; UPI, Nov 20/91)
According to UPI, an Orbital Sciences Corporation winged Pegasus rocket, carrying seven Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency "Microsat" research satellites, was launched on July 16 from a B-52 jet. However, controllers lost track of the payload after a possible malfunction. On July 18 Orbital Sciences heard signals from space and learned that the satellites were functioning but had entered a flawed orbit, limiting their lives to less than three years but sufficient to test a new military communications system. (UPI, Jul 17/91; USA Today, Jul 18/91; WSJ, Jul 18/91; W Times, Jul 18/91; LA Times, Jul 18/91; AP, Jul 18/91; W Post, Jul 19/91; USA Today, Jul 19/91; P Inq, Jul 19/91; W Times, Jul 19/91; LA Times, Jul 19/91)
The Washington Post highlighted Japan's rocket industry, which after 30 years of sending the country's own payloads into space, was preparing to win rights to launch foreign satellites. Its H-II was a heavy-lifter rocket, which should be ready for test flight in 1993, according to Hiroshi Imamura, executive vice president of Rocket System Corporation. (W Post, Oct 25/91)
NASA announced that the first flight of a NASA ozone instrument on a Soviet spacecraft would occur in August. NASA's Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) was to be flown on a Soviet Meteor-3 meteorological satellite to be launched August 15 from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome aboard a Soviet Cylone rocket. (NASA Release 91-127; LA Times, Aug 16/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, an Air Force-funded research center in El Segundo, California, was to begin in the fall to study the effect of rocket launches on the Earth's fragile ozone shield. Aerospace Corporation planned to investigate the role of solid rocket fuel combustion in the destruction of the zone. These studies would supplement studies of ozone depletion done by NASA and would likely influence the types of fuels to be used in the National Launch System, a new generation of rockets scheduled for use after the year 2000. (LA Times, Jul 25/91)
The Space Propulsion newsletter commented on the report of the Stanford University professors who, together with Soviet aerospace engineers, projected that at a cost of $60 billion (about one-eighth NASA's estimate) a joint venture using the Soviet Energia heavy-lift rocket could land humans on Mars by 2012. In contrast, the Stafford Synthesis Group estimated 2014 as the earliest date to reach Mars, using lunar bases established in the interim. Some civilian space experts found flaws in the Stanford study. In line with comments on the Stanford report, the New York Times featured a lengthy article on the designer of the Energia rockets, currently visiting New York and seeking a U.S. buyer for the rocket. (SP News, Jul 8-14/91; NY Times, Jul 9/91)
Gregg Easterbrook, contributing editor for Newsweek and Atlantic Monthly, wrote a lengthy article criticizing NASA's slow response to the need for various reforms. He particularly faulted the formation of commissions as being easier than correcting errors and discussed the U.S. lack of a "throwaway space booster." (W Post, Aug 18/91)
The Los Angeles Times described at some length the Yellow Creek Advanced Solid Rocket Motor Facility, to be located on the Tombigbee Waterway of the Tennessee Valley Authority, in the home district of Jamie L. Whitten, chairman of the House Appropriations Committee. The $3 million project was to introduce a solid rocket system that was mandated by Congress but which NASA's advisory panel said was not needed and might not be as reliable as existing systems. The unemployment rate in this district of northern Mississippi was more than 20 percent, and critics maintained this was the reason for the facility being constructed here. (LA Times, Nov 25/91)
NASA announced that Joust 1, a commercial suborbital rocket, would be launched from Cape Canaveral on June 7. (NASA Release, unnumbered)
NASA selected the 49-foot Pegasus rocket made by Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, for seven launches worth about $56 million, with an option for three more. This contract was additional to one for about $43.5 million for ocean observation. (W Post, Mar 5/91)
According to a space publication, NASA's cost estimate for its Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM) program had increased to about $3 billion, and NASA formally announced that the main ASRM goal was to aid the construction of the Space Station. The ASRM was intended to launch an extra 8,000 pounds of Space Station equipment on each Shuttle flight carrying Space Station hardware. (SP News, Jul 8-14/91)
According to the New York Times, Japan was reassessing its decision that preserving good trade relations with the United States was more important than quickly developing a competitive space industry. Because its own heavy-lift rocket program ran into endless problems and delays, Japan turned to foreign companies to launch its satellites. But the two satellite accidents, of which the most recent was the loss of the Atlas Centaur rocket launched from Cape Canaveral by General Dynamics Corporation earlier in 1991, caused considerable Japanese concern. The loss had major impact on Japan's high-definition television projects, which were developing rapidly.(NY Times, May 22/91)
Nippon Television Network asked to borrow from the Smithsonian the Space Shuttle Enterprise, an Apollo capsule, a moon conveyor vehicle, a rocket, and a spacesuit. The Enterprise is stored at Dulles Airport and transporting it--the back of a 747 or by ship would be difficult. The space gear was to be used to celebrate the company's fortieth anniversary in Tokyo in 1993. (W Post, Feb 23/91)
An unmanned $45 million Delta 2 rocket carrying a $110 million NATO communications satellite to replace an older military spacecraft was launched on January 7 from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The rocket was built by McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company and was the 202d launch of a Delta. The satellite, which would enable political and military leaders in the NATO area to communicate with one another, was the first of two advanced NATO 4 satellites built by British Aerospace. (AP, Jan 7/91; NY Times, Jan 9/91)
Orbital Sciences Corporation, Fairfax, Virginia, rescheduled its launch of the Joust 1 rocket at Cape Canaveral for June 5, according to the Washington Times. (W Times, May 21/91)
According to the Press Trust of India, quoting the Indian Space Research Organization, India's second remote-sensing satellite, launched on August 29 by a Soviet rocket from the Baikonur cosmodrome, sent back its first pictures August 30. (AP. Aug 30/91)
The Huntsville Times reported that engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center had successfully tested a 17.5-foot-long solid rocket motor on September 26. (Htsvl Tms, Sep 27/91)
The media reported on the failure of Orbital Science Corporation's Prospector rocket to take off from the NASA launch pad at Cape Canaveral. The rocket, produced by the Fairfax, Virginia firm, contained 500 pounds of scientific experiments. The flight was sponsored by NASA's Commercial Space Development Center at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. (W Post, May 7/91; W Times, May 7/91; LA Times, May 7/91)
Thirteen European countries--Austria, Belgium, Britain, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland--met to discuss European Space Agency plans that were threatened by Germany's lack of funds. The German research budget was short $930 million because of an economic slowdown and the huge costs of German unification. The space agency's German Ariane rocket boosted at least 17 satellites into space and according to Germany's ZDF television network, was assured of funds. The question of funds for other projects, for which Germany and France were major funders, remained unclear. (AP, Nov 18/91; Science and Technology, Nov 25/91)
The Council on Competitiveness in its report found the United States leading the world or holding its own in 61 of 94 technologies considered crucial to future economic progress, including rocket engines, computer software, biotechnology, and advanced welding techniques. However, it deemed the United States trailing in 33 other fields including laser technology and semiconductor chips. International competition and joint efforts to develop a supersonic plane with a new "hypersonic engine" are discussed. Gordon Adams, director of the Defense Budget Project, commented that although most such research would be global, many US firms still did not see themselves as part of a global industry. (W Post, Mar 21/97; P Inq, Mar 21/97)
NASA announced that Joust 1, a commercial suborbital rocket carrying 10 materials and biotechnology experiments, would be launched on March 29 from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The mission was sponsored by the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space (UAH CMDS), a NASA Center for Commercial Development of Space. Space Data Division of Orbital Sciences Corporation would provide rocket and launch services to lift the payload approximately 400 miles into space. In addition to UAH CMDS, four other NASA commercial development centers and two industrial firms were involved. (NASA Release 91-33)
The media reported the launch from Cape Canaveral by Orbital Sciences Corporation of a small Aries rocket carrying Star Wars experiments for the Defense Department. The experiments were intended to help in designing sensors to measure heat-emitting "signatures" of ballistic missiles in flight. (AP, Oct 14/91; W Times, Oct 15/91)
An Atlas-2 rocket boosted an $85 million European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Eutelsat) 2 communications satellite into orbit from Cape Canaveral. The satellite was the third in a series of French-built relay stations designed to route television and radio telephone signals across Europe. (UPI, Dec 7/91)
UPI reported that workers at Baikonur Cosmodrome had rolled a Soyuz TM-12 rocket into place to take two Soviet cosmonauts and a British woman to the Mir Space Station in a commercial mission. (UPI, May 16/91; AP, May 16/91)
Wayne Littles, head of the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center office charged with designing a heavy-lift launch vehicle for military and NASA purposes, commented on work underway. Still in the early stages, the heaviest lift models would carry at least 200,000 to 250,000 pounds. New advanced solid rocket boosters were planned as well as work on developing an unmanned version of the Shuttle, called Shuttle C. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Feb 11/91)
According to Aviation Week and Space Technology, quoting the Earth Observing System (EOS) Engineering Review Panel, NASA's plans for EOS satellites A and B "should be completely reconfigured." The panel also stated that the EOS Data and Information System was incorrectly configured and lacked central control of data archiving and distribution. NASA released the report on September 23. The same issue of the magazine reported that NASA was discussing with Martin Marietta reintroducing the Titan 3 booster to launch the EOS spacecraft into polar orbit from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, in the late 1990s. (AvWk, Sep 16/91; NASA Editor's Note N91-64)
AP reported that after a delay caused by a battery failure in one of the experiments, a three-ton Starfire 1 rocket blasted off from the White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico. After its 15-minute flight peaking at 185 miles above Earth, researchers recovered the rocket's payload in the missile range 50 miles from the launch pad. The rocket spent seven minutes in microgravity, an area of little gravity on the edge of space, where nine experiments were conducted. (AP, Nov 16/91)
Astronauts on Space Shuttle Discovery aimed a research satellite at rocket fuel spewed in space, then captured the satellite and put it back in the Shuttle's cargo bay. (W Post, May 3/91; WSJ, May 3/91; NY Times, May 3/91; LA Times, May 3/91; AP, May 3/91; UPI, May 3/91)
The Soviet Union launched a large new space satellite, Almaz-1, using a giant Proton booster rocket. Tass said Almaz-1 was launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Central Asia. The radar satellite would survey territory of the Soviet Union and other countries "in the interest of geology, cartography, ecology, and agriculture." The Almaz-1 was the first Soviet satellite to provide commercial services for the American market under long-term contracts. One of its principal customers was to be the US Defense Mapping Agency; other enterprises include oil companies that need detailed images of the Earth. (UPI, Apr 1/91; AP, Apr 1/91; LA Times, Apr 2/91)
The upper stage of a commercial Atlas rocket made by General Dynamics Corporation carrying a satellite for the Japan Broadcasting Corporation failed after liftoff from Cape Canaveral. Ron Maehl of General Electric Aerospace Group, which made the satellite, refused to state the cost for the spacecraft and the launch, saying only that the rocket cost slightly more than the satellite. The accident was described as a major setback for General Dynamics whose Atlas program lost $300 million in 1990. Details of the stages of the Atlas-Centaur rocket and its intended use to replace the satellite destroyed in the explosion of a European Ariane rocket in February 1990 were given. (NY Times, Apr 19/91; B Sun, Apr 19/91; WSJ, Apr 19/91; UPI, Apr 19/91; AP, Apr 19/91; NY Times, Apr 20/91; W Post, Apr 20/91; P Inq, Apr 20/91)
The Birmingham Post-Herald, in a series of articles on the space program, expressed concern that quality assurance at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, had declined since the Apollo program, which was at its height in 1970. In contrast to civil service staff, by 1989 contractor employees working on some 20 Marshall projects numbered 13,398, more than four times as many. This meant that contracts sometimes could not be monitored closely, which probably was a factor in the cost overrun of the orbital maneuvering vehicle, leading to NASA's cancelling the program. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Jan 7/91)
Bill Moyers, a member of a national panel of experts involved in Project Censored, a compendium of the most underreported stories of 1990, dealt with NASA and the ozone. Soviet scientists first raised environmental questions about the solid rocket fuel used by the Space Shuttles. They said it left 250 tons of hydrochloric acid eating up the ozone layer after every launch. The Earth Island Journal and the San Francisco Chronicle reported the story. On the program, environmental activist Helen Caldicott spoke of chlorine molecules that chomp up ozone molecules. (P Inq, Feb 25/91)
AP reported that The Save Our Wetlands environmental group had filed suit against NASA to stop the testing of an advanced solid fuel rocket motor for Space Shuttles on the Mississippi Gulf Coast. The group also asked that the Environmental Protection Agency make NASA comply with clean air and water laws. NASA officials maintained that NASA received the needed state and federal permits to test the boosters. (AP, May 29/91)
The Environmental Quality Permit Board for the state of Mississippi in Jackson approved an air emissions and waste water discharge plan of NASA, needed to test-fire rocket motors at the John C. Stennis Space Center near Bay St. Louis. Water quality certification remained to be granted. The Board had one opposing vote from the head of the Department of Wild Life because of NASA's plans to fill in 69 acres of wetlands and clear 150 to 200 acres. The official considered this plan contrary to the president's policy that there be no net loss of wetlands. (Poplarville Democrat, Jan 3/91)
The Washington Times also dealt with space law and the risks involved in such matters as rocket launches. In the latter connection, it cited Orbital Sciences Corporation and its difficulties. Because most commercial space companies had NASA or the U.S. government as a customer, changes in government had an impact on the legal aspects. (W Times, Sep 29/91)
Representative Lamar Smith, Republican, Texas, wrote NASA Administrator Richard Truly expressing concern that NASA's Comet rocket program may keep new firms from entering the commercial space industry. Truly's office was preparing a reply. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)
NASA and the Defense Department were expected to present the National Space Council with a proposal to build a new, heavy unmanned booster for the late 1990s. It would be based on a Space Shuttle external tank equipped with oxygen/hydrogen engines, using strap-on solid rocket motors. Jack Lee, director of the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, told the US Space Foundation Symposium in Colorado Springs that the belief was that the new device could achieve a payload cost to orbit as low as $500-$1,000 per pound. (AvWk, Apr 15/91)
A University of Alabama, Huntsville-managed sounding rocket launch was canceled on November 12 when an electrical problem occurred with one experiment. The launch of the Consort 4 from the White Sands New Mexico Missile Range was reset for November 16. (Htsvl Tms, Nov 13/91; AP, Nov 13/91)
The media reported the Air Force announcement that the second attempted launch of an Aries rocket carrying Star Wars experiments was postponed for at least one month because of a technical problem. (AP, Sep 2/91; NY Times, Sep 3/91; W Post, Sep 3/91; W Times, Sep 3/91; P Inq, Sep 3/91; USA Today, Sep 3/91; C Trin, Sep 3/91; LA Times, Sep 3/91)
An article emphasized the problems of the Soviet space program arising from economic and political causes. The Space Shuttle unveiled two years previously had not yet carried astronauts into space. The 100-foot long Mir Space Station underwent repeated cuts and in 1988 the "permanent" Space Station was left empty for four months; recently, three-man crews were reduced to two. Military rocket launchings continue but space program funds were cut 10 percent two years in a row. As a result, the reusable Shuttle Buran, which was to rendezvous with Salyut 7 and bring it back to earth, was unable to do so. Soviet efforts to fund the space program through foreign sales proved disappointing. (NY Times, Jan 8/91)
NASA announced its Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, would participate in two experiments to study the July 11 solar eclipse from the ground and from space. A new cryogenic instrument attached to NASA' Infrared Telescope Facility atop Mauna Kea, Hawaii, was to test a theory about the sun's atomic processes in its infrared regions. Also, an x-ray telescope in a sounding rocket, to be launched from White Sands, New Mexico, was to study the solar corona. (NASA Release 91-108)
NASA announced that the second mission of the Pegasus air-launched space booster was scheduled for July 17. Pegasus was to be launched from below the wing of a NASA B-52 aircraft based at Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. Pegasus was to carry seven small Defense Department satellites for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and put them into low Earth orbit. (NASA Release N91-49)
The Synthesis Group, an advisory panel headed by former astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, outlined ways to create a lunar base and make the 35-million-mile trip to Mars. The group's report was expected in May, and John E. Pike, space policy expert for the Federation of American Scientists, said it was expected to recommend that the best method for the flight would be a nuclear reactor-powered rocket. Nuclear power would cut the time of the trip in half from the 450-500 days needed using conventional chemical rockets. It would require convincing the public of the safety and desirability of such nuclear power, which to date has been used only to produce electrical power for long, unoccupied trips such as that of Voyager that photographed the outer planets. (Plain Dealer, Apr 2/91)
NASA gave an update about the launching of Joust 1, a commercial suborbital rocket being launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. Because of bad weather, the launch was postponed to June 9. (NASA Joust 1 Update, Jun 7/91)
The media reported that the Air Force had launched an unmanned Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral July 3. The rocket contained a $65 million satellite that joined 10 advanced Global Positioning System spacecraft already circling the globe in order to assist military forces on the ground, at sea, and in the air to determine their location. (UPI, Jul 4/91; W Times, Jul 5/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said that NASA would ask Congress to increase its budget by 13 percent in the next fiscal year, emphasizing projects with short-term ecological benefits and helping schools and teachers to encourage students with an aptitude for mathematics and science. Truly added that manned space flights would be downgraded in importance compared with unmanned programs and pure scientific research, particularly research that would benefit the life sciences and development of a new rocket engine. (SF Chron, Jan 25/91)
AP reported that statistically it was inevitable that astronauts would be obliged to make detours to avoid space junk. It happened twice within the previous three months, most recently with Atlantis a week and a half earlier, when it had to dodge 3,200 pounds of rocket debris. Under mission rules adopted after the Challenger explosion in 1986, astronauts must distance themselves from orbiting objects if they are expected to pass within a security zone that is 3.1 miles long, 1.2 miles wide, and 1.2 miles deep. NASA estimated there was one chance in 100,000 that a detectable object would collide with a spacecraft once inside that zone. (AP, Dec 9/91; NY Times, Dec 10/91)
