As part of the 1993 budget, President Bush approved the cancellation of two major NASA projects--a scientific mission to rendezvous with an asteroid and a program to build more powerful Space Shuttle boosters. Under the budget plan, the White House cancelled the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM), a $3 billion program to develop new and more powerful boosters for the Space Shuttle, as well as the Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby mission, a $700 million spacecraft slated for launch in the late 1990s. The 1993 Bush plan allocated a $700 million increase over the 1992 $14.3 billion NASA budget. (Space News, Jan 28/92)
The House of Representatives approved a $47.3 billion space program for the next three years after voting to limit spending on development of an advanced solid-fuel rocket motor motor. The bill reauthorizing NASA for fiscal years 1993 through 1995 was passed by voice vote and sent to the Senate. The House included $7.5 billion for the proposed manned Space Station, nearly $8 billion for other space science applications, and $12.5 billion for the space shuttle program. Before approving the bill, the House agreed to cut in half, to $260 million, the 1993 budget for the next generation solid-fuel rocket, designed to enable the Space Shuttle to carry heavier payloads, including key components of the Space Station. (AP, May 5/92)
Chinese engineers blamed a faulty ignition circuit for botching the launch of an Australian communications satellite. Investigators checking the Long March-2E rocket that failed to blast off on March 22 found a fault in the ignition system circuits that led to an emergency engine shutdown. According to Chinese officials, the launch will be attempted again later during the year. (P Inq, Mar 30/92)
A pinched piece of rubber filler--not a faulty O-ring seal--caused a leak in a solid rocket booster being readied for the launch of Space Shuttle Discovery, NASA said. The booster's three O-rings seals were in good condition. (AP, Sept 24/92; UPn, Sept 24/92; W Times, Sept 25/92)
NASA managers decided to replace all three main engines aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour because of problems with powerful oxygen pumps that came to light after an engine test firing. Rocket engineers initially believed that Endeavour had sailed through its flight readiness firing in good condition, with no signs of any major problems in the ship's propulsion system. But detailed analysis of data from the 22-second test indicated the liquid oxygen high pressure turbopump bolted to main engine No. 2 had experienced high vibration levels during engine operation, apparently because of abnormal bearing wear. NASA decided to replace all three of the engines to minimize the impact on the Shuttle's launch processing. (UPI, Apr 8/92; AP, Apr 8/92)
Lockheed Corporation formed a joint venture with Russian aerospace firm Krunichev Enterprise to market the Russian-built Proton rocket for commercial satellite launches, a move that could help make Russia one of the dominant forces in the world-wide commercial launch business. Lockheed was to be responsible for marketing the Russian rocket to Western customers and would provide payload integration. Rockets were to be launched from the Baikonur site in Kazakhstan. (WSJ, Dec 29/92; LA Times, Dec 29/92; NY Times, Dec 29/92)
It was reported that for the first time in a generation, NASA and the Air Force were developing a new rocket engine and launch system. The National Launch System (NLS), which was to consist of three new vehicles, would become operational in 2002, and will, among other missions, carry supplies to Space Station Freedom. (W Times, Apr 2/92)
The Air Force test-fired a new booster for the Titan IV rocket and said it was the second successful test since an explosion ruined a firing last year. The new booster would allow Titan IVs, which launch U. S. spy satellites, to carry heavier payloads. (AP Oct 16/92)
An Atlas 1 rocket tumbled out of control after one of two Centaur second-stage engines failed to ignite, destroying a cable television satellite in a $150 million failure for General Dynamics' commercial-launch business. It was the second catastrophic failure in seven flights for General Dynamics Space Systems Division of San Diego, California, which was trying to overtake the European consortium Arianespace for control of the world's commercial launch market. Lost with the Atlas 1 was a  Galaxy 1R cable television relay station, a satellite built by Hughes Aircraft Company. (UPI, Aug 22/92; WSJ, Aug 24/92; LA Times, Aug 23/92)
Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, suffered another failure of one of its rockets. Ground controllers blew up the rocket about seven minutes into its flight at Wake Island in the Pacific Ocean, conducted as part of the Pentagon's "Brillinat Pebbles" program. (W Post, Nov 4/92)
Air Force officials employed a revised and more accurate computer model of wind direction and speed in the launch of the Mars Observer. The officials insisted on ideal weather conditions before allowing the launch because of concerns that a plume of harmful nitrogen tetroxide could drift over nearby populated areas should the Titan 3 rocket explode within the first 20 to 30 seconds of flight. The new computer model allows the Martin Marietta-built Titan family of rockets to continue as launch vehicles, although the modelling may make it more difficult to launch on time. (Fla Today, Oct 4/92)
The launch of Consort 5, a commercial suborbital rocket carrying nine microgravity experiments, was scheduled for September 10 by the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space. A two-stage Starfire solid fuel rocket would carry the payload to an altitude of 200 miles and provide the experiments with seven to eight minutes of microgravity exposure or weightlessness. The rocket and launch services were funded by a grant from NASA's Office of Commercial Programs.(NASA Release 92-133)
NASA launched a small satellite on a $19 million mission to help the Pentagon develop its strategic missile detection system. A Scout rocket lifted the Miniature Seeker Technology Integration-1 satellite into orbit. The satellite carried miniaturized cameras and sensors designed to detect an attack by medium-and short-range missiles. (W Times, Nov 23/92; W Post, Nov 23/92; AP, Nov 21/92; P Inq, Nov 22/92)
Reacting to a wave of international protest and some severe domestic criticism, Germany canceled a celebration of the 50th anniversary of the first successful V-2 rocket launch at the Peenemunde range on the north German coast. The first V-2 rocket was fired on October 3, 1942, under the direction of Werner von Braun, then a young scientist. The date is generally recognized as the birth of the space age. (LA Times, Sept 29/92; W Post, Sept 29/92)
Technicians searching for a leak in a Space Shuttle solid-fuel booster rocket found a 1-inch hair pressed into a secondary seal, a NASA spokesman said. The leak was detected yesterday in a segment of a booster for the Shuttle Columbia, which was being prepared for a February launch date. It was a leak in an O-ring seal that was blamed for the 1986 Shuttle Challenger explosion in which seven astronauts were killed. (W Times, Dec 27/92; W Post, Dec 17/92; The Sun, Dec 27/92)
NASA announced that on January 6, 1992 administrator Richard H. Truly will officially present the NASA 1991 George M. Low Trophy, would be presented to Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations employees, Bringham City, Utah. The trophy recognizes NASA prime contractors, subcontractors, and suppliers for outstanding achievements in quality and productivity improvement and Total Quality Management (TGQM). Thiokol's Space Operations provides the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion that produces 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. In addition, Thiokol provides engineering services for sounding rocket design for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. (NASA Note N92-1)
White House administration officials reported that President Bush had called for an 11 percent increase in the Space Station project for 1993, as well as additional money to put robots on the moon and build a new space launch system and a hypersonic transport plane. The Space Station project, which aims to launch a permanent orbiting platform by 1996, was slated for $2.25 billion. Bush also requested $8 million to develop a NASA plane that could make direct flights from Earth to orbit without using the traditional rocket booster launch system. If successful, it would revolutionize air travel by flying around the world in a fraction of time compared to conventional aircraft. (NY Tines, Jan 25/92; P Inq, Jan 25/92; WSJ, Jan 27/92)
Yuri P. Semenov, general director of NPO Energia, the Russians' civilian manned space program, invited U.S. officials to lease room aboard the Mir Space Station, orbiting 240 miles above Earth, to conduct experiments. In addition, Semenov also proposed selling Russians' most powerful rocket, the Energia, which exceeds the lifting capacity of any U.S. launch vehicle. (W Post, Feb 23/92; NY Times, Feb 23/92)
*NASA's Mars Observer space probe, the first American mission to Mars in 17 years, blasted off from Cape Canaveral. The probe was to search for future landing sites and map the planet's geology and climate. Despite a radio blackout before a critical rocket firing that left flight controllers in the dark for nearly two hours, the spacecraft was successfully boosted out of Earth orbit on an 11-month, 450-million-mile journey to Mars after a flawless launch atop a Titan 3 rocket. It was also the first mission for the Transfer Orbit Stage, a 13-foot thrusting unit designed to fire for two and a half minutes to provide the final shove to put the probe on its 11-month coast to Mars. The launch heralded an era of unprecedented United States-Russian cooperation in space. Eleven Russians were part of the spacecraft's science team, and the orbiter was designed to help relay pictures and data from Russian probes scheduled to land on Mars in 1995 and 1997. (UPI, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; AP, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; W Post, Sept 25/92, Sept 29/92; The Sun, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; P Inq, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; NY Times, Sept 26/92; W Times, Sept 26/92)
NASA inspectors announced that they had discovered a pinhole-size leak in an O-ring seal of a solid rocket booster intended for Space Shuttle Discovery's November 15 launch. Technicians replaced the seal, which was similar to the one that caused the 1986 Challenger explosion. (USA Today, Sept 23/92; W Times, Sept 23/92; AP, Sept 23; UPI, Sept 23/92)
NASA launched the first of its new, low-cost spacecraft, the Solar, Anomalous, and Magnetospheric Particle Explorer satellite (SAMPEX) aboard a four-stage Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The spacecraft was designed to study anomalous cosmic rays in an effort to improve understanding of the evolution of the sun, the solar system, and the Milky Way Galaxy. (NASA Release 29-102; The Sun, Jul 4/92; P Inq, Jul 4/92; W Times, Jul 4/92; W Post, Jul 4/92; LA Times, Jul 5/92; NY Times, Jul 5/92)
L. Eugene Root, a pioneer U.S. aircraft builder who led Lockheed Missile and Space Company to maturity and was a member of the RAND think tank died in Menlo Park, California, at the age of 87. As president of the Institute of Aeronautical Sciences in 1962, Root combined his organization with the American Rocket Society, co-founding the major U.S. aerospace society, the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (LA Times, Jan 25/92)
A spokesman for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization said a 23,000--pound rocket motor clamped to the marrooned Intelsat 6 satellite by the crew of Space Shuttle Endeavour fired fllawlwssly at 1:25 p.m. EDT while both were orbiting about 230 miles over Africa. The 122-nation consortium, based in Washington, owns and operates the $150-million satellite. (LA Times, May 15/92)
It was reported that in the upcoming flight of the Shuttle Endeavour, NASA would try for the first time to revitalize a crippled satellite while in orbit. During a four-day procedure, Endeavour's crew were to rendezvous with Intelsat 6, pull the satellite into the spaceship's cargo bay and mate it to a new solid rocket motor. Intelsat 6 then would be released and its rocket motor fired to send it into a 22,300 mile-hight orbit. The hope was that then, for the next 14 years, Intelsat 6 would relay trans-Atlantic telephone calls and television shows from Europe to North America and South America. (W Times, Apr 18/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that the end of the Cold War had created a new era of space cooperation with Russia and Western Europe. Goldin spoke to a public meeting at the University of Washington in Seattle. NASA intended to study the possibility of using the Soyuz capsule as a "life raft" for Space Station Freedom and might begin using some Russian booster rockets in the future, he added. At the same time, NASA would have to balance these advantages against the risks associated with such cooperation. (Seattle Post-Intelligencer, Dec 17/92)
NASA launched a rocket carrying a Japanese scientific satellite called "Geotail" that will swing by the moon and be flung by lunar gravity nearly a million miles into space. The satellite was intended to explore the effect of the solar wind on the tail of the magnetosphere, a comet- shaped region surrounding Earth and containing radiation belts. The $160 million, four-year mission was a joint project between NASA and the Japanese Institute for Space and Astronautical Science. (W Post, Jul 25/92; APn, Jul 24/92)
It was reported that a Delta 2 rocket carrying a $65 million military navigation satellite was launched into space. The Global Positioning System "Navstar" satellite is the 12th in a globe-spanning network of such spacecraft that allow military forces on the ground, at sea and in the air to determine their location and altitude to within 53 feet anywhere in the world. After a flawless boost into space, the satellite was released into a preliminary orbit about 25 minutes after liftoff. On-board rockets were scheduled to fire later to put the satellite in a circular 12-hour orbit 12,5000 miles up. (UPI, Feb 23/92; B Sun, Feb 24/92; W Times, Feb 24/92; USA Today, Feb 24/92)
President George Bush signed an appropriations bill providing $2.1 billion for NASA's Space Station in fiscal year 1993. Other projects to be funded include the Consortium for International Earth Science Information Network, which was to provide social scientists with Earth science data beamed from NASA environmental monitoring satellites to understand issues such as land use and population growth. A program for developing a new NASA-Pentagon rocket to put satellites into space, ensuring continued use of Martin Marietta's Titan IV booster for satellite launchings, was terminated. (P Inq, Oct 7/92; AP Oct, 7/92; W Post, Oct 7/92; Space News, Oct 12-18)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin appeared ready to abandon the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane program with its goal of constructing and flying a single-stage-to-orbit air-breathing vehicle in favor of a hypersonic research effort. The latter, the NASA Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility effort, centers on a manned, Mach 10-class reusable test aircraft launched from the back of a NASA/Lockheed SR-71A, and on an unmanned platform launched atop a rocket to explore physical phenomena at speeds approaching Mach 25. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
David H. Suddeth, 63, a NASA engineer who was honored by the agency for his work on propulsion systems for spacecraft, died Jan 25 at Bowie, Maryland. His research included work on hydrazine-fueled rocket engines used to guide satellites and the Viking spacecraft, which landed on Mars in 1976. He was with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center from its inception in the late 1950s until he retired in 1990. (W Post, Jan 30/92)
A German and two Russian astronauts were launched into space in the first space mission of the post-Soviet era. The 160 foot Soyuz TM-14 rocket was scheduled to rendezvous on March 19 with the Mir Space Station orbiting 200 miles above Earth. Russian officials hoped the launching would attract more foreign investment for future joint missions to help finance future space explorations. (NY Times, Mar 18/92; W Post, Mar 18/92; LA Times, Mar 18/92)
Germany announced that it would go ahead with a celebration to mark the 50th anniversary of the first launch of the V-2 rocket despite British protests. The organizers said the event would celebrate the "first step into space" and did not represent a glorification of a Nazi weapon. (W Post, Sept 28/92;  The Sun, Sept 26/92)
In a letter sent to the chairwoman of the subcommittee that funds NASA, Senator Howell T. Heflin said killing the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor would cost almost twice as much as building it. NASA and the White House had moved to cancel the $3 billion program, saying the cost of keeping it going wouldn't fit in NASA's tight budget request of $15 billion for fiscal year 1993. Using figures obtained from NASA and from the ASRM's contractors, Heflin calculated that killing the program would cost NASA $2.65 billion through the year 2000. By contrast, he said it would cost $1.29 billion to finish building the rocket, not including $510 million to buy the first six sets of motors. (Htsvl Times, Apr 7/92; Birmingham News, Apr 12/92)
NASA headquarters reported that eight finalists had been chosen for the 1992 George M. Low Trophy--NASA's Quality and Excellence Award. The finalists were: Cray Research Inc., Honeywell Inc., IBM Federal Sector Division, McDonnell Douglas Space Systems, Paramax Systems Corp., Rocket Research Co., Stanford Telecommunications Inc., and Technical Analysis Inc. (NASA Release 92-57)
Advanced techniques used to place criminals are now being employed in NASA's continuing investigation of microbial activity in the weightless environment of orbiting spacecraft. Since the Apollo program, medical researchers have investigated the possibility of microbial cross-contamination between astronauts confined to a spacecraft. The advent of recent methods such as DNA fingerprinting, which studies organisms at the molecular level, has allowed scientists to track the transfer of a specific microbe within the environment of the Space Shuttle orbiter, according to a joint study by NASA's Johnson Space Center and the University of Texas Medical School. (NASA Release 92-79)
A Starfire I rocket manufactured by EER Systems Corporation of Vienna, Virginia, failed to achieve suborbital flight after launch from the White Sands Missile Range. The flight carried nine microgravity experiments. At a cost of $3 million, the Starfire rocket was thought to be an inexpensive way to carry out experiments without the costs associated with programs such as the Space Shuttle. (Las Cruces, NM, Sun News, Sept 11/92; El Paso Times, Sept 11/92)
Dr. David M. Rust, chief scientist for the Flare Genesis project, a powerful solar telescope project developed by a team at Johns Hopkins University, said the telescope could be launched as early as December 1993. Rather than be launched on a NASA rocket or from a Space Shuttle, which might take a decade of planning and cost hundreds of millions of dollars, the telescope was to be dragged 19 miles above Antarctica by a balloon. The project would be another in a series of long-duration research flights using large balloons. Project scientists hoped to use the telescope to explore the precise cause of solar flares. (The Sun, Sept 15/92)
The Air Force reported that a Titan 2 rocket was launched into space carrying a secret military payload into a polar, low-earth orbit. The two-stage rocket, a modified Titan intercontinental ballistic missile, was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, about 250 miles northwest of Los Angeles. (W Times, Apr 26/92)
India launched a research satellite into orbit using local technology in what officials called an important milestone in the country's ambitious space program. The 750-foot rocket blasted off from an island off the southern state of Andhra Pradesh. Nine minutes into the flight, the $7 million rocket propelled a research satellite into orbit 280 miles above earth. The flight was pronounced a total success. (W Times, May 21/92)
It was announced that NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite had achieved two of the three goals of its $400 million mission to study the "big bang." In 1991 COBE had shown that the wavelength or "color" of the cosmic background radiation was consistent with what the big-bang theory predicted, said John Mather, project scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists also said that COBE had met its second goal: detecting the oldest structures in the universe, thereby explaining how matter first started clumping together in the young universe to produce galaxies and stars. COBE was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on November 18, 1989. It was carried into a 559-mile-high, near polar orbit by a two-stage Delta rocket with nine strap-on boosters. (AP, Apr 23/92; LA Times, Apr 24/92; B Sun, Apr 24/92; NY Times, Apr 24/92; USA Today, Apr 24/92; NASA Release 92-51)
Directors of the U. S. and Russian space agencies announced plans in Moscow to put a Russian cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle in November 1993 and to fly an American astronaut on a Soyuz rocket to the Mir Space Station in 1995. In addition to the projects involving cosmonauts and astronauts working together in space, plans were announced to put American instruments on board an unmanned Russian scientific flight to Mars in 1994. (NASA Release 92-165; UPI (Oct 5/92; NY Times, Oct 6/95; W Times, Oct 6/92; W Post, Oct 6/92; The Sun; Oct 6/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; SCM, Oct 14/92)
Associated Press reported that a military satellite capable of guiding warplanes, ships and tanks with an accuracy of 50 feet or better circled Earth Monday after a ride on a Delta rocket. (AP, Feb 24/92)
A U.S.-French satellite roared into orbit aboard a European Ariane 4 rocket from Kourou, French Guiana. The $706 million Topex-Poseidon satellite carried a $30 million altimeter designed for NASA by Johns Hopkins University scientists to measure ocean topography to within 1.2 inches or less from 830 miles in space. During the next three to five years, scientists hoped to use the altimeter to make a comprehensive map of ocean currents, aiding the study of how they pump heat from the tropics to the poles. NASA said the research could eventually improve long-range climate forecasts and predict large-scale weather patterns, such as the El Nino warming trend in the eastern Pacific Ocean, and help in understanding the impact of green-house gases on climate. Also in the payload were a small South Korean communications satellite and a French technological satellite. (The Sun, Aug 10/92; USA Today, Aug 11/92; AP, Aug 10/92; LA Times, Aug 13/92)
The first student managed and built payload flown on a NASA sounding rocket was launched successfully from the NASA flight facility on Wallops Island, Virginia. (NASA Release 92-156)
The "Brilliant Pebbles" missile-defense system suffered a new setback when the test of an experimental rocket was aborted 55 seconds after launch. It was the second failure in three experimental launches. (W Post, Oct 25/92)
NASA and Thiokol Corporation officials were working on a modification to prevent a field joint lining from creating leaks in the cases of solid rocket boosters for the Space Shuttle. This effort came after engineers discovered a leak in a segment of the booster rocket assembled for the Space Shuttle Discovery's scheduled November launch. (AvWk, Sept 28/92)
It was reported that NASA's decision to kill off a multibillion-dollar program to develop a new, more powerful solid rocket booster for the Space Shuttle fleet was a carefully planned move actually intended to help save the project. The advanced solid-rocket motor program, which would have cost nearly $500 million in 1993, was eliminated with the expectation that funds for the project would be restored by Representative Jamie L. Whitten (D-Miss.), chairman of the House Apppropriations Committee. (LA Times, Feb 3/92)
NASA launched a rocket from Puerto Rico's north coast at 7:55 p.m. EDT to study radio waves in the ionosphere. The launch, originally set for May 18 but delayed due to bad weather, was the first time NASA had launched from the Caribbean island since 1967. (USA Today, May 26/92; AP, May 26/92)
A 15-story unmanned Atlas rocket was launched into space with a military communications satellite intended to link the White House with U.S. forces around the world during nuclear attacks or other crisis. In peacetime, the $130 million satellite was to serve as a switchboard for the Defense Department personnel. (B Sun, Feb 11/92; AP, Feb 11/92)
Technicians at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida placed the Mars Observer spacecraft atop its upper-stage rocket in preparation for launch sometime during the September 16 to October 13 launch window. The craft was expected to take 11 months to cover the 450 million miles (740 million kilometers) to Mars. Once there, Mars Observer was expected to compile the first comprehensive database of Martian geophysics and climate. (CSM, Aug 26/92; H Chron, Aug 20/92)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena was added to the federal Superfund list of the nation's most dangerous dump sites because toxic solvents used 40 years ago during research on liquid rocket propellants had leaked into ground water. (LA Times, Oct 14/92; AP, Oct 14/92)
