The experimental DC-XA flight vehicle completed a successful test flight, flying nearly 2,000 feet (610 meters) above the desert of the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico and landing safely. NASA researchers and administrators hoped that the rocket would one day replace the Space Shuttle as the primary means of space exploration. The reusable, unpiloted rocket, taking off and landing from a vertical position, would cut significantly the costs of delivering payloads into orbit. NASA announced that the vehicle had been renamed Clipper Graham, in honor of Lieutenant General Daniel O. Graham. Graham, who died on 31 December 1995, had served as an advisor to President Ronald Reagan and had been an early proponent for the development of reusable rockets. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin expressed optimism that NASA would be able to replace the Shuttle with the DC-XA flight vehicle: “We are going to fly the [S]huttle safely until we can replace it. But, by God, we are going to replace the [S]huttle.”(NASA, “Revolutionary New Launch Vehicle Renamed for Space Pioneer,” news release 96-114, 7 June 1996; Associated Press, “Reusable Rocket Ends Flight,” 7 June 1996.)
NASA spacecraft managers reported the failure of two scientific satellites. NASA had designed the Scientific Applications Satellite-B (SAC-B), launched three days earlier from NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility, to survey solar flares and gamma-ray bursts. The project was a cooperative effort between NASA and Argentina. NASA scientists had intended the second satellite, HETE (High Energy Transient Experiment), to remain dormant until it detected sunlight, at which time it would deploy, transmitting signals. Scientists doubted this would ever occur, because the satellite had fallen into a tumbling pattern. Officials hypothesized that the satellites had not deployed properly and, therefore, had orbited uselessly, lacking electrical power. NASA valued both satellites at more than US$20 million. The launch failure was the third miscue in two years for the Pegasus rocket program. The Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Virginia, developed and ran the program.(John Mintz, “Orbital Sciences Fails in Another Launch,” Washington Post, 5 November 1996; Associated Press, “NASA Reports Failure of Scientific Satellites,” 7 November 1996; NASA, “SAC-B/HETE Spacecraft No Longer Operational,” news release 96-231, 7 November 1996.)
NASA convened a five-member investigation board to determine the cause of the postlanding explosion of the Clipper Graham (DC-XA) rocket on 31 July 1996. The Clipper Graham had successfully flown a 2-minute, 20-second flight profile, but had tipped over and caught fire after landing when one of its four landing gears failed to deploy. The DC-XA had tested successfully three times before the explosion destroyed it. Former astronaut Vance Brand chaired the panel, bringing together representatives from NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, and Kennedy Space Center. Researchers hoped the investigation would illuminate any flaws in the Clipper Graham’s design, allowing engineers to make necessary adjustments in future prototypes.(NASA, “Clipper Graham Incident Investigation Board Convenes,” news release 96-158, 5 August 1996.)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) experienced a setback when one of its prototypes for a small, robotic spacecraft landed in the ocean and sank. The Japanese officials had anticipated the ocean landing immediately after the launch of the Hyflex shuttle, the Hope-X, from an island in southern Japan. In spite of the loss of its shuttle, NASDA did not consider the exercise an entire failure. The Hope-X had launched successfully, separated from its rocket at a height of 70 miles (113 kilometers), and then returned to Earth 19 minutes later, as planned. The problem occurred when the craft splashed into the ocean, and a rope connecting the 1-ton (900- kilogram or 0.9-tonne) shuttle to its flotation device broke, causing it to sink. NASDA reported that it had intended to collect data during the flight to test the shuttle’s fitness for reentry, but had been unable to procure much of the information needed. Japan had manufactured the US$37 million shuttle domestically, planning the exercise as a part of its effort to bolster its fledgling space program.(Associated Press, “Japanese Shuttle Sinks,” 12 February 1996.)
NASA discovered the second of two misplaced hand tools left inside the propulsion system of the recently landed Shuttle Atlantis. Although the Shuttle had experienced no problems during its 10-day flight, NASA formed an investigative panel to determine who had left the tools inside the Shuttle’s engine compartment after completing work. Inspectors had discovered the first missing tool inside the electronic control compartment of the Shuttle’s reusable rocket booster when they retrieved the booster from the Atlantic Ocean shortly after the launch. Workers discovered the second tool during a routine postflight inspection of Atlantis’s rocket engine compartment. Although the tools likely posed no threat to the safety of the Shuttle crew, a NASA representative said that, for safety reasons, NASA intended to find out how workers had made the error and, if possible, to identify the Shuttle contractor responsible.(Mark Carreau, “Another Wrenching Experience for Shuttle,” Houston Chronicle, 3 October 1996.)
Shuttle Columbia landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, ending the longest Space Shuttle mission ever. The mission, lasting nearly 17 days, set a new space endurance record for the crew. The astronauts had bested their previous record by nearly 7 hours. Columbia had carried into space a torch for the 1996 Olympic relay, and upon landing, two members of the crew joined the Olympic torch relay team in a special ceremony. The astronauts had overcome several small malfunctions to conduct the successful mission and land the Shuttle on time. Less than 2 hours before the Shuttle’s scheduled arrival, the crew had discovered a clogged cooling line, but the astronauts were able to flush ice from the system to clear the line. In addition, the mission brought to light a potential ongoing problem for Columbia. In studying the launch, NASA officials had observed gas and flames issuing from the rocket boosters, probably through the O- ring joints used to connect the booster’s fuel segments. Although Columbia’s crew was not in danger, NASA officials decided that the Shuttle would not launch again until scientists had determined how well the new water-based adhesive would function under extreme heat. NASA had discontinued the adhesive used previously on the rocket boosters, because the adhesive was an ozone-depleting agent.(William Harwood, “Record Shuttle Flight Ends; Problem May Delay Next Launch,” Washington Post, 8 July 1996; Associated Press, “Columbia Ends 17-Day Mission,” 8 July 1996.)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2:55 p.m. (EST). In addition to a five-day delay because of the weather, NASA had delayed the mission for a week so that its engineers could conduct a careful check of possible problems with the rocket nozzles. News agencies reported that the fifteen-year-old Columbia, the nation’s oldest Space Shuttle, was carrying into space sixty-one-year-old F. Story Musgrave, the oldest astronaut. With his sixth spaceflight, Musgrave became the first astronaut to fly on all five of NASA’s Shuttles. In Mission STS-80, NASA’s final Shuttle flight of 1996, the crew planned to deploy and retrieve two free-flying spacecraft, conduct spacewalks, and carry out a number of microgravity research experiments. Additionally, NASA and the National Institutes of Health planned to collaborate on tests further exploring how the human body reacts to the space environment. Only hours after Columbia’s launch, Shuttle crew released the U.S.-German Orbiting Retrievable Far and Extreme Ultraviolet Spectrometer, designed to make as many as 300 observations of stars and interstellar gas during the Shuttle’s mission.(Reuters, “Shuttle Crew with Oldest Astronaut Is Set To Fly,” 19 November 1996; John Noble Wilford, “Shuttle Blasts Off on Mission with 2 Scientific Satellites,” New York Times, 20 November 1996; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-80—Press Kit,” news release 96-206, November 1996; Associated Press, “Astronauts Release Ultraviolet Telescope,” 20 November 1996.)
Russia successfully launched the 21-ton (19,000-kilogram or 19-tonne) Priroda module, the last major component of the aging Mir space station, aboard a robotic rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Russian scientists designed the Priroda module primarily as a laboratory for observing Earth. The module also contained equipment for NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid’s stay aboard the station. NASA officials at JSC monitored the launch. Priroda carried a magnetically levitated experiment platform, a spectrometer, and a “glove box,” allowing astronauts to handle potentially hazardous material. The module was the sixth major portion of the Mir complex launched by Russia since the Soviet Union began the project in 1986. Budget shortfalls in the Russian space program had caused some concern that the final module might not reach Mir as planned.(Mark Carreau, “Russia Launches Final, Major Mir Component,” Houston Chronicle, 24 April 1996.)
Russian officials announced that the necessity of cutting costs at the Russian Space Agency had caused a 40-day delay in returning cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev from the Mir space station to Earth. Russian budget cuts had slowed the production of the Soyuz booster rockets needed to fuel a return trip for the cosmonauts. Because Mir was deteriorating, Russia could not leave it without a crew. This was the second time that financial and technical difficulties had led Russia to delay the return of the two men. The episode signaled a deepening crisis for the Russian space program, the United States’ key partner in building the International Space Station (ISS).(USA Today, “Russian Cosmonauts,” 24 June 1996; Associated Press, “Moscow,” 21 June 1996.)
Arianespace, the commercial arm of the European Space Agency, suffered a major setback in its bid to maintain control of the satellite-launching market in the face of competition from U.S. companies. Only seconds after the launch of Ariane 5, a huge rocket intended to launch satellites, Arianespace had to blow up the rocket when it veered severely off course. Arianespace had spent 10 years and more than US$7 billion to develop the 674-foot (205-meter), 821-ton (750,000- kilogram or 750-tonne) vehicle. Also lost in the explosion were satellites valued at more than US$500 million. Arianespace had projected a launch reliability of 98.5 percent for the rocket, considering failure so unlikely that the company had guaranteed a free launch to customers if the launch failed. A spokesperson for Arianespace acknowledged the disappointment of the failed test, but promised that the company would continue as the world’s leader in launching satellites. Aerospace industry analysts predicted that U.S. companies such as Lockheed Martin would likely gain an increased foothold in the market because of the European company’s misfortune.(Kathleen Day, “Losing a Rocket and a Satellite Edge?” Washington Post, 5 June 1996; Craig Whitney, “Costly Failure: Space Launch Is Aborted,” New York Times, 5 June 1996.)
Because of delays in launching Shuttle Atlantis, astronaut Shannon W. Lucid broke Elena V. Kondakova’s record for longest single flight in space by a woman. NASA engineers had delayed the launch because they suspected that the O-rings on the solid rocket boosters were faulty and wanted to replace them. During Lucid’s stay in space aboard Mir, she and the two Russian cosmonauts had conducted a variety of scientific experiments.(NASA, “Lucid To Break Record; Latest Images of Hurricane Fran,” video advisory V96-111, 6 September 1996.)
Russia postponed the scheduled launch of Progress M-33, a cargo vehicle loaded with supplies for the two Russian cosmonauts and the one American astronaut aboard the Mir space station. The delay highlighted once again the severe budget crisis of the Russian Space Agency. A lack of funding held up the production of the rocket booster needed to send the craft into space. The crew on Mir had sufficient supplies aboard the space station, but missed the visit from Earth. Besides supplying food, regular planned visits provided needed contact for the space dwellers. The postponement was the fourth time in 1996 that Russia had delayed the scheduled launch to Mir because of problems paying for the production of Soyuz-U boosters. Reuters announced that because of the delay, a group of laboratory monkeys, already wired to monitor the effects of space travel, would die without ever leaving Earth.
NASA agreed to restructure and extend its contract with USBI Company, which had previously assembled and refurbished the Shuttle’s solid rocket boosters. The new contract extended the partnership for 45 months, paying US$500 million to USBI to support the Shuttle program. Based on the terms of the agreement and on USBI’s production schedule, NASA estimated that the partnership would cover approximately seven Shuttle missions annually for the duration of the contract.(NASA, “NASA Restructures/Extends USBI Contract for Solid Rocket Booster Elements,” news release C96-c, 8 March 1996.)
The Boeing Company, Honeywell Space Systems, and the S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), based in Kaliningrad, Russia, announced a new venture to reduce significantly the cost and time involved in transporting payloads to the Mir space station. Boeing estimated that the service would save one year and would cut the cost of transporting a standard payload to space by at least US$7 million. The three companies split duties to maximize efficiency. Boeing assumed control of the overall management and payload-system integration; Honeywell accepted responsibility for providing payload-interface units and payload-integration support; and RSC Energia signed on to provide launch services and to oversee installation on Mir. Decreasing the expenses involved in sustaining Mir had become urgent in the 1990s, when both Russian and American space agencies had to respond to their governments’ respective budget cuts.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing, Honeywell, and Energia Join in Offering New Commercial Payload Service to Russian Space Station,” news release, 21 May 1996.)
NASA launched its second unpiloted craft, Mars Pathfinder, less than a month after the first, continuing its concentrated program of Mars exploration. The US$196 million Pathfinder lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta II rocket, on a mission planned to cover more than 300 million miles (480 million kilometers). NASA researchers expected the six-wheeled craft to land on Mars, on 4 July 1997, and to journey across the planet’s surface, gathering images of rocks and soil. Depending on how useful the images were, scientists planned for Pathfinder to roam Mars for at least one week and perhaps for months, straying no farther than approximately 60 feet (18 meters) away from its landing site.(John Noble Wilford, “U.S. Launches Second Craft on a Mission To Study Mars,” New York Times, 5 December 1996.)
The European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Eutelsat) launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas 2A rocket, a satellite aimed at serving the burgeoning European television market. The satellite Hot Bird 2 cost US$100 million to develop and was powerful enough to beam television images throughout Europe and the Middle East. Eutelsat led a consortium of co-owner companies from the 45 different countries that co-own the satellite. Eutelsat assumed responsibility for operating Hot Bird 2, calling it “the most powerful commercial satellite launched to date.”(Todd Halverson, “Atlas Sends $100 Million Satellite into Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 November 1996.)
NASA and Orbital Sciences Corporation signed a contract, which was not a cooperative agreement, whereby Orbital Sciences would build a new X-34 reusable launch vehicle, smaller than that originally planned. NASA had first made public the original X-34 program in 1994. NASA had intended the program, also known as the Reusable Small Booster Program, to stimulate the development of a reusable commercial launch vehicle to place smaller payloads in low orbit. In addition, NASA planned for the X-34 program to demonstrate that an industry-led partnership between NASA and the aerospace industry could accomplish this objective within 30 to 36 months and within a fixed government budget. On 12 January 1995, NASA released a final cooperative agreement notice for the X-34 program, and in March 1995, NASA selected Orbital Sciences Corporation as its industry partner. Over the next eight months, as design of the X-34 progressed, problems arose over the selection of an appropriate rocket engine, resulting in NASA’s temporarily shutting down the program on 2 November 1995. In January 1996, Orbital Sciences Corporation suggested that NASA explore the potential of a smaller vehicle. Orbital Sciences then issued stop-work orders to all its X-34 subcontractors, effectively ending the program. Because NASA wanted to use remaining federal dollars to develop a smaller vehicle, capable of demonstrating various reusable launch technologies, it rebid the contract in March 1996. On 10 June 1996, NASA selected Orbital Sciences to build the new X-34.(NASA History Division, “X-33 History Project, Fact Sheet #7: The Policy Origins of the X-33, Part VII: The X- 34,” March 25, 2000, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/pao/History/x-33/facts_7.htm.)
The U.S. Space Foundation inducted into its Space Technology Hall of Fame three technologies that NASA had originally developed for its astronauts: antishock trousers, flame-retardant seat materials, and the radiation barrier. The Space Foundation recognized the technologies as pathbreaking discoveries that had enhanced the quality of life on Earth. Scientists and engineers at Ames Research Center had developed the first two technologies, and members of the Apollo program at Johnson Space Center (JSC) had discovered the radiation barrier. NASA employees had often referred to the dual use of its technologies as spin-offs, recognizing that such inventions served to validate the expenditure of taxpayers’ funds on NASA’s research projects. According to a NASA spokesperson, the technologies “are not merely secondary applications. They provide direct, quantifiable, and invaluable benefits to the American taxpayer and the domestic economy.” The U.S. Space Foundation made the inductions at the National Space Symposium, in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The Foundation had inducted 25 technologies into the Hall of Fame since the establishment of the awards in 1988.(NASA, “NASA Life-Saving Technologies Enter Space Hall of Fame,” news release 96-69, 10 April 1996.)
The Communist Party of China acknowledged for the first time that a failed satellite launch occurring on 15 February 1996 had killed six people and injured 57 others. The Long March 3B rocket had exploded, destroying the 15 Intelsat satellite and damaging 80 homes. The secretive government of the People’s Republic of China had denied the major accident, announcing simply that a setback had occurred. However, foreign news sources had captured video footage of the launch rocket as it careened out of control and exploded in a highly populated area. The Chinese government ended the news blackout, which had prevented its own citizens from learning of the disaster, stating China’s intention to delay future launch plans.(Reuters, “China: Fiery Launch Killed 6, Injured 57,” 4 March 1996.)
NASA announced the six-week delay of astronaut Shannon W. Lucid’s return from her outpost aboard the Mir space station. NASA made the schedule change because of concerns about the reliability of the joint sealant used on the Shuttle’s reusable rocket boosters during the June launch of Columbia. NASA planned to replace the booster before launching Atlantis, scheduled to retrieve Lucid. The reusable rocket boosters, packed with fuel, launch the Shuttle. After pushing the Shuttle into space, the boosters fall off and descend, attached to parachutes, into the ocean. Upon retrieving the rocket boosters, engineers disassemble them into smaller pieces, repack them with fuel, and rebuild them for a new Shuttle launch, sealing each of the rocket’s three field joints with an O-ring. NASA sought to fortify these joints further, and the adhesive used to secure them, before launching another Shuttle mission. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway stated that NASA remained confident in the overall design of the rocket booster and in the joint, but wanted to take no avoidable risks.(William J. Broad, “Astronaut’s Ride Home Is Delayed for 6 Weeks,” New York Times, 13 July 1996.)
NASA successfully launched its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer Earth Probe (TOMS-EP) aboard the Japanese Advanced Earth Observing Satellite, via an Orbital Sciences Pegasus XL launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base. A jet flying roughly 7 miles above the California coast released the rocket that was carrying the satellite, placing the TOMS-EP in a successful orbit. The McMurdo Sound Tracking Station in Antarctica acquired the satellite almost immediately and determined that the spacecraft was functioning properly. After it reached a circular orbit, the TOMS-EP was ready to conduct its scientific mission.(NASA, “Pegasus/TOMS Launch Successful from Vandenberg AFB,” news release, 2 July 1996; Associated Press, “BRF—Satellite Launch,” 2 July 1996.)
