The Russian Space Agency paid cosmonauts Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin belated bonuses for their six-month Mir mission, payments that Russia had withheld until investigators had determined the two men’s roles during the troubled mission, which included the crash of a robotic cargo craft into Mir. S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), the company that built Mir, had blamed Tsibliyev and Lazutkin, suggesting that Russia deny the two cosmonauts their salaries. However, once the Russian government had determined that human error had been only one among many causes of the crash, RSC Energia’s President Yuri P. Semyonov had retracted the company’s demand that Russia punish the cosmonauts and had supported their right to receive payment. Tsibliyev received about US$100,000 and Lazutkin about US$80,000. Both men had expressed dismay at the negative reception they had received upon returning to Earth after the difficult mission.(Associated Press, “Mir’s Pay Day,” 25 December 1997.)
A Russian Zenit-2 rocket carrying a military satellite exploded moments after taking off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. According to Russian space officials, the failure occurred 38 seconds after liftoff, when an engine inexplicably shut off. The Russian Space Agency suspended all further launches until an investigation could determine what had caused the explosion. NASA believed that the destroyed satellite was a spy satellite intended to replace in orbit one of Russia’s many outdated satellites. Russia had not insured the satellite, valued at US$17 million.(Richard C. Paddock, “Russian Rocket Bearing Military Satellite Fails,” Los Angeles Times, 21 May; Associated Press, “Russian Booster Fails, Explodes During Satellite Launch,” 20 May 1997.)
The Cassini spacecraft lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, beginning a seven-year, 2.2 billion-mile (3.5 billion-kilometer) journey to and around Saturn. After several delays, including a two-day delay immediately before the launch because of high winds, the takeoff was flawless. Before the launch, activists had protested Cassini’s fuel source, 72 pounds (33 kilograms) of radioactive plutonium; to calm public anxiety, NASA planned to sample air quality at 25 stations surrounding the launchpad, including several samples taken as far as 10 miles (16 kilometers) away. Additionally, a U.S. Department of Energy aircraft flew through the trailing gases of the rocket booster to make sure that no radioactive material had leaked. The US$3.4 billion mission set out to survey the planet Saturn, its rings, and its moon Titan. Engineers had programmed the Cassini spacecraft to conduct a number of “gravity-assist swingbys,” flying twice past Venus and once past Earth and Jupiter, to build up the speed necessary to make the long journey to Saturn. About seven years into the mission, NASA planned for Cassini to release a disc-shaped Huygens probe toward Titan. Throughout the mission, Cassini was to make more than 40 close flybys of Titan, gathering far more vivid images of the moon than ever before. NASA intended Cassini’s camera to take more than 300,000 colored pictures of Saturn and its moons. Scientists hoped that the mission would expand considerably the knowledge of the planet gained through the earlier Voyager missions.(NASA, “Cassini Launch,” news release, October 1997; Earl Lane, “Plutonium-Bearing Craft Set for Saturn Trip,” Birmingham News (AL), 5 October 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Nuclear Powered Craft Fuels Fury Before Launch,” USA Today, 13 October 1997; Karl Grossman, “The Risk of Cassini Probe Plutonium,” Christian Science Monitor, 10 October 1997; Associated Press, “Cassini Spacecraft Lifts Off for Saturn,” 16 October 1997.)
NASA launched an unpiloted Delta rocket carrying the Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE), a US$100 million solar-observatory satellite bound on a 1 million-mile (1.6 million-kilometer) journey. The launch took place one day later than expected because, on the original launch date, a commercial fishing boat had come within range of the launch danger zone. Scientists launched ACE toward an imaginary point 1 million miles (1.6 million kilometers) from Earth and 92 million miles (148 million kilometers) from the Sun, a point at which scientists believe that the gravity of the Earth and Sun balance each other. NASA planned for ACE to orbit for as long as five years, analyzing particles streaming from the Sun. In keeping with NASA’s focus on improved efficiency, NASA engineers collaborated with the Boeing Company to build ACE and launch the mission, at a cost of US$200 million⎯more than US$30 million under budget.(Associated Press, “After 1-Day Delay, NASA Launches Bargain-Priced Solar Observatory,” 25 August 1997; Associated Press, “Launch Delayed by Errant Shrimpers,” 25 August 1997.)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) unveiled its key contribution to the ISS, two satellites named after stars⎯Orihime and Hikoboshi, which Japan planned to launch aboard an H-2 rocket. The satellites would make it easier to perform unpiloted docking experiments on the ISS. Japan’s interest in robotic space research fueled the proposal, which complemented NASDA’s plan to build an unpiloted space shuttle to ferry Japan’s experiments to the ISS.
Mars Global Surveyor passed a critical test on its journey toward the Red Planet, when it successfully opened valves allowing high-pressure rocket propellant to enter its fuel lines. The same task had thwarted the 1993 Mars Observer at a similar juncture during its trip to Mars. Mars Global Surveyor had traveled for 10 months and for more than 435 million miles (700 million kilometers) to reach Mars. According to Glenn E. Cunningham of NASA’s JPL, the process of transforming Global Surveyor from a high-speed-travel spacecraft into a slow-moving craft subject to Mars’s gravitational pull was “a nail-biter.” Without the powerful propellant, the transition could not occur, which would have ended any hope of the mission’s gathering data. With the opening of the valves complete, NASA scientists were optimistic that the US$250 million probe would descend slowly into a tight orbit of Mars, yielding new information about the planet.
The White House Office of Science and Technology Policy formally approved the mid-October launch plan of the controversial plutonium-powered Cassini Mission. Critics had subjected to intense scrutiny the exploratory mission to Saturn and its moon Titan, because it used nuclear power. The Florida Coalition for Peace and Justice, among other organizations, had protested the mission and attempted to derail it, but had failed to spark widespread public outrage. Activists worried that the rocket might release plutonium if the launch failed, despite NASA’s more than a dozen safe launches using the hazardous fuel. The mission required nuclear power because Saturn has extremely dim sunlight⎯not enough to provide adequate solar power to prevent the Cassini spacecraft’s instruments from freezing. NASA’s policy required that the White House give final approval of the launch, because the mission used nuclear fuel. NASA had begun work on the Cassini Mission in 1989, with cooperation from the European Space Agency and the Italian Space Agency. Many regarded the mission⎯the first time a space probe had attempted to land on the moon of another planet⎯as NASA’s boldest and most ambitious endeavor. This aspect of the mission especially interested scientists, who theorized that Titan has an Earth-like atmosphere. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said of the mission: “I fully expect that it will return spectacular images and scientific data about Saturn.”(NASA, “Cassini To Survey Worlds of Saturn and Titan; Sends First Probe to Moon of Another Planet,” news release 97-190, 3 September 1997; NASA, “NASA Receives Approval To Launch Cassini Mission,” news release 97-225, 3 October 1997; Maurice Tamman, “Protestors Set Stage,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 September 1997.)
Flight International published a story claiming that, more than 10 years after the explosion of Challenger, aerospace engineer Ali Abu Taha had discovered new evidence in Time-Life photographs demonstrating that a breach and a fire in Challenger’s right solid rocket booster (SRB) had caused the explosion. One photograph, taken about 20 seconds after liftoff, revealed a 3-meter-long (10-foot-long) flame issuing from an SRB joint, and another clearly showed a white object separating from the same SRB seconds later. The discovery seemed to support Taha’s controversial theory that the booster had caught fire at liftoff and burned continuously until the explosion occurred. In contrast to Taha's findings, which focused on dynamic liftoff loads, the congressionally mandated Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission) had reported that faulty O-rings caused the tragedy. Automatic cameras set up around the Cape Canaveral, Florida, launch site had taken the photographs that Taha used as evidence for his theory, images never released to the public. Taha’s photographic analysis also revealed that the explosion had propelled Challenger’s crew compartment thousands of meters away from the explosion, partially explaining why investigators had taken 40 days to locate the shell. Taha suggested that a shock wave had killed the crew instantly, although NASA had never found evidence of a shock wave. News of the photographs and of Taha’s research kept alive the debate surrounding the decade-old accident.(Tim Furness, “New Evidence Reveals Fire on Doomed Challenger’s Booster,” Flight International, 5−11 February 1997.)
During the terminal countdown of a demonstration test of the Titan IV-B rocket designed for the Cassini mission to Saturn, engineers noticed liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen leaking from the Centaur stage of the rocket. NASA had scheduled Cassini’s launch for early October 1997. NASA officials delayed the launch until they could complete further tests, offering no immediate estimate of how long that might take. Interested scientists and engineers, however, predicted that the problem could postpone the mission by months or even years. Under the mission’s original timetable, NASA had expected Cassini to launch in October 1997, reaching Saturn in July 2004. Because of the length of the journey from Earth to Saturn, the scientific community expected that NASA would find it difficult to reschedule the flight. Moreover, experts warned that the alignment of planets providing an ideal launch date, such as that in October 1997, would not occur again for 12 to 14 years. At US$3.2 billion, Cassini was one of the last of NASA’s high- stake, multibillion-dollar missions, drawing considerable attention during the climate of steady cost reductions that characterized the 1990s.(NASA, “Countdown Test Reveals Fuel Leaks on Cassini Mission Centaur Upper Stage,” 7 August 1997; Associated Press, “Rocket Leak Could Postpone Landing on Saturn by Years,” 8 August 1997.)
