Rocket scientist Albert E. Schuler died of natural causes at the age of 83, the third original member of Wernher von Braun’s rocket team to die in the same week. Schuler had retired from NASA in 1969, after a career overseeing measurement of instrumentation on test stands and rockets during static firings and overseeing flight instrumentation, guidance, and control on rocket flights.(Associated Press, “3 Rocket Scientists Die.”)
An Athena II rocket carrying Lunar Prospector launched from the renovated U.S. Navy test- launch site, Launch Complex 46, marking the first time that the government-based space transportation agency, Spaceport Florida Authority, had managed a launch from the complex. The rocket carried aboard some of the ashes of geologist Eugene M. Shoemaker, who had died in a car crash in July 1997. Among his many professional accomplishments, the sixty-nine-year-old Shoemaker had selected lunar landing sites and trained Apollo astronauts. On 5 January, NASA had cancelled Athena II’s first scheduled launch for safety reasons, after U.S. Air Force radar necessary to track the rocket failed. The unpiloted rocket launched at 9:28 p.m. (EST) and, after 1 hour, propelled the 4-foot (1.2-meter), 650-pound (291-kilogram) Lunar Prospector out of low- Earth orbit toward the Moon.(Lynne Bumpus-Hooper, “Prospector Off on Historic Trip to Moon,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 1998; Jim Erickson, “Late Flagstaff Astronomer’s Ashes Are Headed for Moon in Fitting Tribute,” Arizona Daily Star (Tucson, AZ), 7 January 1998; Washington Times, “NASA Launches Mission to Moon Seeking Water for Future Settlers,” 7 January 1998.)
The Chinese Long March 2C rocket launched two U.S. satellites into orbit, from the Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center in Shanxi province in northern China. The satellites were part of a mobile telecommunications system that Motorola Corporation had developed for the Iridium World Communications network scheduled to begin commercial service on 23 September 1998. The Iridium contract had “boosted China’s launching industry,” which had been “struggling to recover from a string of launch disasters in 1995 and 1996.”(Associated Press, “China Puts 2 Satellites into Orbit,” 3 May 1998.)
NASA announced its selection of Litton/PRC of Mclean, Virginia, to perform work under NASA’s sounding rocket operations contract, consolidating several previous contracts. The four- year contract, an indefinite delivery–indefinite quantity contract worth between US$11.9 million and US$211.8 million, included two three-year options worth up to an additional US$572.5 million. Goddard Space Flight Center’s (GSFC’s) Wallops Flight Facility, at Wallops Island, Virginia, was to provide services, including design, fabrication, integration, testing, and performance of mission operations for sounding rocket missions. NASA considered the contract an integral part of the Wallops 2000 strategic plan, initiated in 1997 to ensure the facility’s future “stability and vitality.”(NASA, “NASA Selects Litton/PRC for NASA Sounding Rocket Program,” contract announcement C98-t, 1 December 1998.)
An Atlas rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 1:37 p.m. (EST), after NASA had scrubbed the flight three days in a row. The Lockheed Martin rocket, which carried a classified spacecraft for the Pentagon’s National Reconnaissance Office, separated from its passenger 11⁄2 hours after launching, with the satellite successfully placed in orbit. The satellite, viewing two-thirds of the globe, was to circle the Earth in an egg-shaped orbit, taking it from 24,000 miles (39,000 kilometers) above the northern latitudes to just 200 miles (322 kilometers) above Antarctica.
A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a spy satellite. Civilian observers speculated that the spacecraft's name was Orion, and that it would “play an important role in listening in on foes of the United States.” With a wire mesh antenna the size of a football field, the satellite was so sensitive that it could “detect transmissions from a radio the size of a wristwatch or a very small cell phone.” The satellite could also monitor electronic transmissions between military bases. At the time of the launch, the Titan was the most powerful American booster in use.(Robyn Suriano, “Titan Rocket Sends Spy Satellite into Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 May 1998. 476 Associated Press, “U.S. Satellite Launched from Russian Rocket,” 9 May 1998.)
After two delays, one because of mechanical problems, the other because of strong winds, a Japanese H-2 rocket blasted off from Tanegashima Space Center, carrying a US$370 million communications satellite intended to conduct a three-year series of communications and broadcast tests. However, an engine breakdown prevented the satellite from entering a geostationary orbit; instead, the launch left the satellite floating in space, useless for its intended mission. Engineers were looking for ways to rescue the mission.(Mari Yamaguchi for Associated Press, “Japan-Satellite,” 21 February 1998.)
After experiencing two disastrous launch failures in 1996 and 1997, the European Space Agency (ESA) successfully launched its French-made Ariane 5 rocket and recoverable space capsule from Korou, French Guiana. The 1.6 million-pound (800-ton, 726,000-kilogram, or 726-tonne) rocket carried a 2.6-tonne (2.9-ton, 5,700-pound, or 2,600-kilogram) mock-up of a telecommunications satellite and a 2.8-tonne (3.1-ton, 6,200-pound, or 2,800-kilogram) recoverable capsule. With the successful recovery of the capsule from the Pacific Ocean, France became the fourth country to develop such technology, following the United States, Russia, and China. French scientists had designed the Ariane 5 rocket to carry payloads of 5.9−6.8 tonnes (6.5−7.5 tons, 13,000−15,000 pounds, or 5,900−6,800 kilograms) into geostationary orbit, using twice the power of the Ariane 4; to provide launches for low-altitude orbits and interplanetary space probes; and to lift the cargo vehicle that would be the ESA’s contribution to the ISS.(John-Thor Dahlburg, “Third Try’s the Charm for European Rocket,” Los Angeles Times, 22 October 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Ariane Capsule Test Called a Success,” 21 October 1998.)
Fritz Haber, a German engineer recruited after World War II to work on the American space program, died at the age of 86 in Connecticut. An aeronautical engineer, Haber developed a way to simulate a gravity-free environment by flying a plane in a roller-coaster pattern. NASA first used this simulation to train the astronauts in the Apollo program. Before coming to the United States, Haber had developed a way to transport missiles by piggybacking them on another aircraft. Engineers had never used his piggyback design during World War II, but NASA had implemented his idea, carrying the Space Shuttle on a modified Boeing 747 from its landing site in California back to its launch site in Florida.(Ford Burkhart, “Fritz Haber, 86, Dies; Simulated Weightlessness of Space,” New York Times, 29 August 1998. 572 Reuters, “Three Russian Cosmonauts Return Safely to Earth,” 25 August 1998; Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Russia’s Orbiting Bureaucrat Returns to Earth,” 25 August 1998.)
The newly developed Delta III rocket exploded during liftoff, destroying the Galaxy X communications satellite it was carrying into orbit. The launch was the maiden flight of Boeing’s newest version of the Delta rocket, designed to carry 8,400 pounds (3,800 kilograms), twice the payload of the previous version.(Seth Schiesel, “New Type of Rocket To Carry Satellites Explodes in Liftoff,” New York Times, 27 August 1998. 574 NASA, “International Candidates Join 1998 Astronaut Class,” news release 98-155, 27 August 1998.)
Heinrich K. Paetz, an original member of Wernher von Braun’s German rocket team, died of natural causes at the age of 88, the second team member to die within the week. Before retiring from NASA in 1970, Paetz had participated in the Redstone, Jupiter, Saturn I, and Saturn V programs as a member of the test branch.(Associated Press, “3 Rocket Scientists Die.”)
KSC officials broke ground on a complex for testing a NASA experimental rocket, the X-34. Engineers had designed the vehicle⎯a small, winged rocket⎯to launch into orbit from an airplane and to return to Earth, landing like an airplane. Planning flight tests to begin in 2000, KSC hoped the new facility would attract commercial space enterprises, such as Lockheed’s VentureStarTM, still under development. Facilities anywhere in the country would be able to launch the VentureStarTM, once completed, because it would not use boosters or fuel tanks and, therefore, would not require a coastal launch site.(Robyn Suriano, “NASA Breaks Ground for $8 Million Complex To Serve New Rocket, Attract VentureStar,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 December 1998.)
A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket, carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office of the Pentagon, exploded 1 minute after liftoff from Cape Canaveral, Florida. More than 20 stories high and weighing nearly 2 million pounds (907,000 kilograms), the Lockheed Martin–built Titan IV was the largest crewless rocket used in the United States. The rocket used solid-fuel boosters similar to those used to launch NASA’s Space Shuttle. The explosion destroyed about US$1.3 billion worth of hardware, making it one of the worst American rocket- launch failures to date. The rocket was about 20,000 feet (6,100 meters) above the Atlantic when it exploded, and the ocean carried the debris and toxic substances away from land. This was the second time a Titan IV had exploded during launch; the first explosion occurred in 1993.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Rocket Explosion,” 12 August 1998; Kathy Sawyer and William Harwood, “Rocket Explodes, Destroying Spy Satellite,” Washington Post, 13 August 1998.)
A West European Ariane 4LP rocket blasted off from French Guiana, carrying two communications satellites, Brasilsat-3 and Inmarsat-3. Twenty-one minutes after takeoff, the first satellite, belonging to Brazil, separated from the rocket. Five minutes later, the second satellite, a 2-ton (1,800-kilogram or 1.8-tonne) worldwide mobile communications satellite, separated from the rocket. The launch successfully placed both satellites in orbit.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), “European Ariane Rocket Puts 2 Satellites into Orbit,” 5 February 1998.)
The U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Museum in Cape Canaveral, Florida, celebrated the 40th anniversary of the successful launch of the modified Redstone rocket, which had carried into orbit Explorer I, the United States’ first satellite. The launch occurred four months after the Soviet Union had placed Sputnik I in orbit. In addition to achieving orbit, the 31-pound (14- kilogram) Explorer I had discovered the Van Allen Radiation Belt. The museum at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station held an open house and a space fair and launched a model rocket to celebrate the anniversary of this milestone and to educate the public about the United States’ 40 years in space.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Explorer 1 Anniversary Event Will Bring History to Life,” 31 January 1998.)
NASA announced that JSC had modified its contract with United Space Alliance, awarding the contractor more Shuttle work. Three other NASA contractors had previously performed the more than US$900 million of work on the Space Shuttle’s solid rocket booster and other elements. USBI Company at Kennedy Space Center had worked on the boosters; Lockheed Martin Corporation in Houston, Texas, had designed and produced the primary Shuttle avionics software; and Boeing Aerospace Operations in Houston had processed flight equipment.(NASA, “NASA Awards More Shuttle Work to USA,” news release c98-h, 7 July 1998.)
Rocket engineer Max E. Nowak died of natural causes at the age of 89. An original member of Wernher von Braun’s German rocket team, which developed the V-1 and V-2 rockets during World War II, Nowak had been among the first of the team members to move to the United States after the war. He had been the assistant to the director of the manufacturing engineering lab during the Apollo program and had directed the assembly of systems for the Saturn I nose cones and Saturn V launch systems.(Associated Press, “3 Rocket Scientists Die,” 12 July 1998.)
NASA regained control over SOHO and, after successfully thawing the craft’s fuel, determined that its rocket thrusters were useable. NASA spokesperson William A. Steigerwald of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) explained that flight controllers would check each individual system and instrument next, and would then reestablish full automatic gyroscopic control.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Solar Probe Back Under Control,” 17 September 1998.)
During a meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin directed MSFC officials to draw up a new plan for meeting the goals of the Bantam Program. The program’s original goal had been to develop, by 2001, a rocket capable of launching 150-kilogram or 0.15-tonne (331-pound or 0.2-ton) payloads, at a cost of no more than US$1.5 million. None of the rockets developed with NASA funding would have met that cost target. Bantam Program Manager Sherry Buschmann reiterated NASA’s commitment to “achieving a capability to launch small payloads frequently at an affordable cost,” saying that the plan would meet a “legitimate need within the science community.”(Warren Ferster, “NASA Shifts Gears on Low-Cost Launcher: Goldin Renews Commitment to Bantam Goals,” Space News, 8–14 June 1998.)
One thousand Puerto Ricans protested against NASA’s plans to launch, from a nature preserve in Puerto Rico, suborbital rockets filled with chemicals. The Coqui Dos program planned the launch to measure high-level winds and turbulence in the upper atmosphere. Coqui Dos continued the El Coqui program of 1992, part of NASA’s Suborbital Sounding Rocket program, which launched 25 sounding rockets annually from locations worldwide. Because the rockets would disperse aluminum trimethol before crashing into the sea, the protesters demanded that NASA produce studies proving that the launch would not damage the environment. The mayor of Vega Baja led the protest outside the entrance to the Tortuguero Recreation Area, the section of the nature preserve where the rocket launches would take place, threatening to sue NASA to force it to release environmental impact studies from the 1992 launch.(NASA, “NASA Studying Space Weather from Puerto Rico,” news release 98-23, 6 February 1998; Mario Maldonado for Associated Press, “Puerto Rico-NASA,” 1 February 1998; Lance Oliver, “11 Launches Will Attract Protesters: Many in Puerto Rico Fear Damage by Research Rockets,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 2 February 1998.)
NASA successfully tested a fuel tank made of a new metal mixture, aluminum lithium, never before used in major U.S. manufacturing. The tank made of the new alloy was 30 percent stronger and 5 percent lighter than the aluminum magnesium tanks in use since the days of the Apollo program. The tank showed no leaks, pressure bulges, or other problems, when loaded with 537,000 gallons (2,033,000 liters) of liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel. Lockheed Martin had developed the new fuel tank to help ensure that NASA would be able to haul large sections of the ISS into orbit.(Seth Borenstein, “Shuttle’s New Fuel Tank Test a Success,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 19 May 1998.)
Russia’s first privately owned satellite, a Bonum-1 communications satellite, launched successfully from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta rocket. NASA had canceled the first three attempts to launch the satellite because of numerous technical problems. The launch was also the first time a U.S. rocket had placed a Russian commercial satellite in orbit and the first time an American company had built a satellite for a Russian company. Hughes Space and Communications had built the Bonum-1 for Moscow-based Media Most, owner of Russia’s largest television network. The chairperson of the board of Media Most, Vladimir A. Goussinsky, described the event as a “revolution,” because the satellite would provide up to 50 television channels for 200 million viewers in Russia, western Siberia, and Eastern Europe.(Robyn Suriano, “Delta Lifts Russian Satellite,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 November 1998; Orlando Sentinel (FL), “U.S. Broadcast Satellite Was Launched for Russia,” 23 November 1998.)
The Boeing Company appointed Michael T. Kennedy to a newly created position, Vice President for the Boeing Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle and Delta IV Programs. Since 1996, Kennedy had been Vice President of Delta III and had shown “his ability to manage launch vehicle development effectively by bringing Delta III on line for its first launch this summer.” As Kennedy moved into his new position, Boeing promoted Daniel J. Collins to Program Director for Delta III, and Jay L. Witzling became Vice President of Delta II and Titan Programs. Kennedy had joined Boeing in 1970, working on the Skylab, Saturn SIVB, Titan, Delta, SPACEHAB, and ISS programs.(PR Newswire, “Boeing Selects Vice President for EELV/Delta IV Program,” 26 March 1998.)
Launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, a Proton-K Russian booster carried into orbit an American EchoStar IV communications satellite, to relay broadcast signals to the central and western United States. Lockheed Martin Corporation had built the satellite and, under a partnership agreement between Lockheed and the Russian Khrunichev company, International Launch Services launched the spacecraft.
Eberhard R. M. Rees, deputy and later successor to Wernher von Braun as “chief of American rocketry efforts,” died at age 89, after suffering from Alzheimer’s disease. Rees, born in Germany, had graduated from the Dresden Institute of Technology in 1934 with an advanced degree in mechanical engineering. He had worked as a technical plant manager with the German Guided Missile Center beginning in 1940, but after Germany’s defeat in World War II, Rees became one of 118 scientists who surrendered to the West under the so-called Project Paperclip, becoming a U.S. citizen in 1954. In the United States, he had first worked at White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico, “where he shared his expertise on the V-2, a German rocket- propelled bomb, and on guided missile projects.” In 1950 Rees had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to serve as Deputy Chief of the Guided Missile Development Division at Redstone Arsenal. Among the projects Rees had managed were the Hermes II Project, the Redstone and Jupiter missile programs, the Explorer satellite project, and the Saturn program. Between 1956 and 1960, Rees had been Deputy Director of the U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency’s Development Operations Division. He had received a Distinguished Service Medal from NASA for his role in the Apollo 11 Mission. Rees had succeeded Wernher von Braun as Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in 1970, retiring in 1973.(Ford Burkhart, “Eberhard Rees, Rocketry Pioneer, Dies at 89,” New York Times, 4 April 1998. 128)
Progress M-38 launched on a Soyuz-V rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying a 900-kilogram (2,000-pound) propulsion unit. Mir’s crew planned to attach the unit to the Quantum module of the space station. The cargo craft also carried 1,500 kilograms (3,300 pounds) of repair tools, replacement parts, food, and water.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 533, 1 April 1998, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx533.html (accessed 20 October 2008).)
The Iridium World Communications system global, digital wireless communications network completed a series of deployment missions, with the launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California of five Iridium satellites aboard a Boeing Delta II launch vehicle. The successful launch had completed the entire Iridium constellation “in just twelve months.” The world’s first global, wireless telephone company scheduled its commercial service to begin four months following this last launch, once it had completed integrating and testing the Iridium system.(PR Newswire, “Boeing Delta II Rocket Places Iridium Satellites into Orbit,” 17 May 1998.)
The Huntsville Alabama L5 Society (HAL5), a chapter of the National Space Society, failed in its second attempt to become the first group of amateurs to launch a rocket into space. The society attempted to use a hot-air balloon from a NASA barge in the Gulf of Mexico to launch its rocket, a launch concept known as a rockoon. According to the rockoon concept, a small rocket may “obtain very high altitude because there is little air to slow it down during launch.” James A. Van Allen had been the first to fly rockoons in the 1950s, as part of a joint U.S. Navy- University of Iowa project. The U.S. Navy had abandoned the technique after large, ground- based, sounding rockets became available. NASA’s MSFC signed a cooperative agreement with HAL5 in 1996, continuing the relationship for the High Altitude Lift-Off mission. MSFC had supplied HAL5 with the barge, helium for the balloon, nitrous oxide for the rocket, and some funds for materials. HAL5 sought to “make space more affordable for students, amateurs, experimenters, and researchers.” NASA was examining alternate launch sites and methods in an effort to find ways of reducing the cost of rocket launches.(HAL5 Project, “Space Group Hopes To Launch First Amateur Rocket into Space,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 June 1998; Orlando Sentinel (FL), “Space Buffs in Alabama Can’t Get Rocket Launched,” 21 June 1998; William R. Corliss, “Chapter 4: Development of the First Sounding Rockets,” in NASA Sounding Rockets, 1958– 1968: A Historical Summary (Washington, DC: NASA Scientific and Technical Information Office, 1971), http://history.nasa.gov/SP-4401/contents.htm (accessed 30 January 2008).)
Boeing successfully launched, from a California launch site, five satellites for the Iridium World Communications network, aboard a Delta II rocket. The Delta II launched two weeks after the “disastrous maiden flight” of the new Delta III rocket, which had exploded during liftoff. Officials announced on 5 September that a problem with the rocket’s control system had caused the explosion, but that they had not yet determined the exact chain of events. The five satellites launched aboard the Delta II rocket replaced satellites that had malfunctioned and could not be included in the Iridium telecommunications constellation.(Justin Ray, “Delta 2 Lifts Five Satellites into Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 September 1998.)
A Zenit rocket, launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, failed when a computer error caused a premature engine shutdown during the second-stage burn. The rocket fell, crashing in Siberia. The rocket’s failure destroyed 12 of Globalstar Inc.’s communications satellites.(Pavel Polityuk for Reuters, “Ukraine Appeals for Rocket Launch amid Kazakh Row,” 13 July 1999; Globalstar Chronology, 13 July 1999, http://www.astronautix.com/craft/glolstar.htm (accessed 6 August 2008).)
U.S. Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott (R-MS) announced that Alliant Techsystems would build composite materials, such as booster nose cones, for the Boeing Delta IV rocket at Iuka, Mississippi, a former site of the Tennessee Valley Authority and NASA. The rocket would “compete for Air Force and commercial contracts for satellite launches,” while Senator Lott and U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Chairperson Richard Shelby (R-AL) would continue to investigate whether launching U.S.-made satellites on Chinese rockets was compromising U.S. security. Rod Bitz, the director of corporate communications for Alliant, said, “Iuka was chosen in part because the large structures can be easily shipped by barge to Decatur.” Engineers at the new Boeing plant in Decatur, Alabama, would assemble the rocket.(James W. Brosnan, “Iuka Revving Up for Rockets Again Will Be Part of Delta IV Project,” Commercial Appeal (Memphis, TN), 7 July 1998.)
After a delay of more than a year, a Russian Proton booster rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit the first module of the International Space Station (ISS), the 41.2-foot (12.6-meter) Zarya. The role of Zarya, translated as Sunrise, would be to act as a “space tugboat” in the early stages of construction, providing propulsion, power, and communications.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russia Puts First Segment of International Space Station in Orbit,” 20 November 1998.)
An Orbital Sciences Corporation Pegasus XL rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, carrying a NASA satellite to study solar events that could endanger astronauts and spacecraft. The Small Explorer (SMEX) satellite program, under the management of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, had developed the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) satellite.(Associated Press, “BRF—Satellite Launch,” 2 April 1998; PR Newswire, “Orbital’s Pegasus Rocket Successfully Launches TRACE Spacecraft for NASA; Advanced SMEX Satellite Will Study the Sun; Spacecraft’s First Signals Indicate Early Success,” 2 April 1998.)
After a one-day delay to correct a software problem, Mars Climate Orbiter launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, atop a Delta II rocket. NASA had scheduled the 1,400-pound (635-kilogram) robotic craft, paired with Mars Polar Lander, to launch on 3 January 1999. Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, the second pair headed to study Mars following Mars Pathfinder and Mars Global Surveyor, were part of NASA’s “long-term strategy for Mars exploration,” calling for small robotic craft “to leave Earth two at a time,” about every two years. According to NASA’s plan, Climate Orbiter’s first task would be to provide a two-way communications relay between ground controllers and Polar Lander after Lander’s arrival and during its planned 60–90 day mission. Thereafter, Orbiter would generate weather maps and profile the Martian atmosphere for a full Martian year, or 687 days.(Kathy Sawyer, “Mars Probe To Examine Climate; NASA Launch Is First of Two Designed To Shed Light on Potential for Life,” Washington Post, 12 December 1998.)
A modified L-1011 jetliner flying at 40,000 feet (12,000 meters) dropped a Pegasus XL rocket carrying the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS), designed to study the formation of stars and planets. The launch marked the beginning of a two-year, US$64 million mission to learn more about the “composition of interstellar clouds and monitor how they cool as they collapse to form stars and planets.” The 397-pound (179-kilogram) SWAS would study water, molecular oxygen, atomic carbon, and isotopic carbon monoxide, by means of submillimeter wave radiation, which scientists cannot observe from the ground. NASA’s GSFC managed the mission.(Associated Press, “NASA Launches Probe To Study Stars,” 5 December 1998; CNN.com, “NASA Launches Satellite To Study Star Formation,” http://www.cnn.com/TECH/space/9812/05/swas.launch/ (accessed 27 October 2008).)
Aerojet announced it had won a US$485,000 contract to build a rocket injector for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) that would help JPL scientists develop propulsion technologies for NASA’s Mars Sample Return Vehicle.(Sacramento Bee (CA), “Aerojet Lands Contract,” 11 June 1998.)
Pentagon officials announced that, on 12 August, a split-second power outage had caused a Titan IV rocket to explode while launching a secret spy satellite into space. A battery powering the guidance system had failed, interrupting the flow of electricity for a fraction of a second. After the restoration of battery power, the guidance control system had sent a command causing the rocket to pitch down and to the right, while traveling at 675 miles (1,100 kilometers) per hour at 17,000 feet (5,200 meters). The rocket had begun to break up, and the malfunction had triggered the automatic destruct system. In addition, when it had begun to explode, range safety officers had sent the rocket destruct commands, to ensure it would not threaten the coastal population.(Todd Halversen, “Titan 4 Blast Blamed on Brief Battery Power Outage,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 September 1998.)
