Oleksandr Serdiuk, head of the International Relations Department of Ukraine’s Space Agency, announced that Ukraine and Brazil had signed an agreement the previous week, allowing Ukraine to use Brazil’s Alcântara space complex to launch a new generation of Cyclone-4 booster rockets, medium-weight rockets capable of putting 4 tons (3,600 kilograms or 3.6 tonnes) of payload into a geostationary orbit. In 1992, when the USSR dissolved, Ukraine had retained part of the former Soviet Union’s space program, using several former Soviet factories to build rockets and selling rocket space to commercial satellite companies. Before the agreement with Brazil, Ukraine had only used launchpads in other former Soviet countries. However, Ukraine wanted to take advantage of the location of the Alcântara space complex near the equator, where spacecraft reach orbit more easily and commercial launches a
A Russian rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, carrying a scientific satellite into orbit. It was the second launch from the facility since Kazakhstan partially lifted the launch ban imposed following the crash of a Proton-K rocket on 5 July.(Washington Times, “Russian Satellite Launched in Kazakhstan,” 18 July 1999. 210)
The main engine of Japan’s H-2 rocket malfunctioned 4 minutes after launching from Tanegashima Space Center, failing to put the Mtsat satellite into orbit. Fearing they could lose control of its trajectory, officials ordered the rocket’s destruction 8 minutes into its flight, marking the first time the National Space Development Agency of Japan had destroyed a rocket in flight. It was the second launch failure for the H-2 rocket during 1999; another H-2 had failed to place its payload in orbit in February. However, before the February malfunction, Japan had launched five H-2 rockets successfully. The Mtsat satellite, intended to replace the Himawari 5 satellite, would have observed weather patterns and monitored aircraft.(Associated Press, “Japan Destroys Rocket in Midair as It Lifted $95 Million Satellite,” New York Times, 16 November 1999; Dow Jones Newswire, “Japan Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit, Rocket Destroyed,” 15 November 1999.)
NASA announced that Administrator Daniel S. Goldin would present Simon Ramo and Bernard A. Schriever with NASA’s Distinguished Public Service Medal on 5 November at the start of a daylong conference. NASA, the U.S. Air Force Space Command, the National Air and Space Museum, the Space Policy Institute at George Washington University, and the National Space Society were cosponsoring the conference, “Developing U.S. Launch Capability: The Role of Civil-Military Cooperation.” The award recognized the leadership of Ramo and Schriever during the early years of the U.S. space program. Ramo had been the chief scientist and leading civilian in the Air Force program to build the first U.S. intercontinental ballistic missile system. His work had fostered cooperation between the U.S. Air Force and aeronautics industry, the necessary foundation of the space program. Schriever had pioneered the development of the first ballistic missile for the United States; the resulting rocket technology had led to NASA’s successes in its early human spaceflight programs.(NASA, “NASA Honors Missile Pioneers at Launch Vehicle Conference,” news release N99-56, 2 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/note2edt/1999/n99-056.txt (accessed 12 March 2008).)
A Russian Soyuz rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome carrying four Globalstar satellites into orbit. The launch was Russia’s first from the space center in Kazakhstan, since a Proton rocket exploded after launch on 27 October, prompting the Kazakhstan government to reimpose its launch ban. Kazakhstan had lifted the ban partially after Russia agreed to pay US$400,000 in compensation. Media reports indicated that Russia had earned US$70 million from commercial launches such as that conducted for Globalstar Inc., an important income source for the Russian space program.(Associated Press, “Russia Launches First Rocket Since October Explosion,” 22 November 1999.)
NASA launched Mars Polar Lander from Cape Canaveral, Florida, atop a Boeing Delta II rocket, three weeks after the launch of its companion craft, Mars Climate Orbiter. The craft’s main purpose was to search Mars for signs of water. Lander carried machinery and two microprobes, as well as a microphone to record the sounds of Martian wind. Mars Polar Lander and Mars Climate Orbiter formed a pair, the second launched in a 12-year series of dual missions to explore Mars, with the ultimate goal of collecting a sample of Martian soil to bring to Earth by 2008.(Reuters, “U.S. Mars Probe Launched from Florida,” 3 January 1999; Beth Dickey, “Craft Joins Mars Quest for Water,” New York Times, 4 January 1999.)
Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center in China’s Shanxi Province launched two Iridium World Communications satellites into orbit aboard a Chinese Long March 2C rocket, replenishing the 66-satellite Iridium constellation, which provides telephone, paging, and fax communication services worldwide. The satellite was the 57th launched from Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center and the 15th consecutive successful launch since October 1996 for the Long March rocket series.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Iridium Launches Two More Satellites,” 11 June 1999.)
Keith R. Hall, Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Air Force for Space and Director of the National Reconnaissance Office, and Edward C. “Pete” Aldridge Jr., Chief Executive Officer of the Aerospace Corporation, which provides technical analysis for the United States and international space programs, testified before the U.S. House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence’s Subcommittee on Technical and Tactical Intelligence, regarding three rocket-launch failures. All of the launch failures⎯an explosion after launch in August 1998, a missile-warning satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 9 April 1999, and a military communications satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 30 April 1999⎯had involved Lockheed Martin Titan IV rockets. The three mission failures had cost taxpayers “at least [US]$3 billion.” Hall explained that the U.S. Air Force had traced the three launch failures to human error. The investigators had traced the most recent failure specifically to a misplaced decimal point. Aldridge, whose company had been responsible for checking U.S. Air Force rockets for defects prior to launch, explained that the mistake “got through,” despite the system in place to prevent such occurrences. Aldridge remarked that his company’s workforce of engineers, scientists, and support personnel had decreased by 30 percent since 1993, and that the recent launch failures had caused further delays, resulting in increased costs for the Titan program. Both Aldridge and Hall requested federal funding. House Subcommittee Chairperson Michael N. Castle (R-DE) asked whether the military rocket program, which receives less supervision than NASA, needed greater congressional oversight. Castle announced that the subcommittee would hold further public hearings on the failures.(Stephen Sobek for Gannett News Service, “Human Error Called Culprit in 3 Rocket Launch Failures,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 16 June 1999.)
A Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a NAVSTAR Block 2R GPS satellite, the third in a new series of GPS spacecraft; Lockheed Martin was under contract with the U.S. Air Force to launch 21 GPS craft. The NAVSTAR Block 2R military navigational satellite became the 28th operational spacecraft in the GPS constellation, to replace an older satellite in the network after completing a one-month test period. The U.S. Air Force had originally planned to launch the replacement craft in May 1999, but after a rainstorm had damaged the satellite while it was sitting on the launchpad, the Air Force had returned it to Lockheed Martin Missile and Space for repairs. Two hurricanes, a tropical storm, and other rainstorms had caused additional weather delays, preventing the launch of an alternate replacement satellite.(Irene Brown, “Delta Rocket Soars into Space,” Space.com, 7 October 1999.)
Lockheed Martin Corporation named former Martin Marietta President and Chief Operating Officer A. Thomas Young to lead an independent review of the management, engineering, manufacturing, and quality control processes of its space and missile business, specifically Astronautics, Missiles and Space, and Michoud Space Systems. The company had experienced a “series of expensive and well-publicized failures of its rockets and satellites,” including two in the previous week, when a Titan IV placed one military satellite in the wrong orbit and when another satellite, the remote-sensing Ikonos, lost contact with the ground. The company instructed the panel to submit a report to senior Lockheed management by 1 September.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Announces Comprehensive Space Sector Review, Former Martin Marietta President Will Chair Independent Panel,” news release, 4 May 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_ releases/1999/LockheedMartinAnnouncesComprehensiv.html (accessed 7 February 2008); Tim Smart, “Panel To Review Lockheed Failures: Former Company President To Head Probe of Aerospace Foul-Ups,” Washington Post, 5 May 1999.)
A Russian Proton rocket carrying a communications satellite manufactured by Lockheed Martin exploded 6 minutes after launching from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, the second failure of a Proton rocket in three months. The Russian Space Agency formed a commission to investigate the crash. Kazakhstan had temporarily banned Proton launches from Baikonur following a launch failure on 5 July, but Proton rockets had launched from the facility successfully on 6 and 26 September.(Miles O’Brien, “Russian Rocket Explodes After Liftoff: Incident Likely To Delay International Space Station,” CNN.com, 27 October 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/space/9910/27/proton.explodes/ (accessed 10 April 2008). 817 United Press International, “Kazakhstan Bans Russian Space Launches,” 28 October 1999.)
A Lockheed Martin Titan II rocket launched successfully, carrying JPL’s QuikSCAT satellite. Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation had built QuikSCAT in 11 months, setting an industry record. JPL stated that the satellite had “opened its solar arrays as planned an hour after launch, and a tracking station in Norway acquired the first signal from the spacecraft 18 minutes later.” NASA had originally scheduled the satellite’s launch for November 1998, but delayed it when a Titan IVA exploded after launch, carrying a payload for the National Reconnaissance Office. NASA had postponed the QuikSCAT launch until engineers could determine whether Titan II used any of the hardware that had caused the explosion on the Titan IVA. Following the launch of a Titan IVB rocket that placed a Milstar satellite in a faulty orbit, NASA had again delayed the QuikSCAT’s launch, pending investigation of the failure. The successfully launched QuikSCAT satellite was on a two-year mission with the option of a third year, to “gather about 400,000 detailed measurements of the speed and direction of winds over the ocean’s surface.” NASA intended the US$98 million mission to “improve weather forecasting and detect the onset of conditions like El Niño.” Engineers had designed the QuikSCAT to radiate microwave pulses over wide areas and to listen for the pulses’ echo. Those return signals would “allow scientists to determine wind speeds and directions at the surface of the oceans. Understanding the interaction [of wind and ocean circulation] is important for weather prediction.” Under the terms of NASA’s first contract using the Rapid Spacecraft Acquisition process, Ball Aerospace had provided the QuikSCAT spacecraft bus, launch interface, system integration, test, launch support, and two years of mission operations.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Lockheed Martin’s Titan Launches with QuikScat Satellite,” 20 June 1999; “Satellite Launched on Weather Mission,” New York Times, 20 June 1999; Aerospace Daily, “QuikSCAT Makes It to Space After Six-Month Delay,” 22 June 1999; Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corp., “BATC Launches Its First Commercial Spacecraft,” news release, 19 June 1999, http://www.ballaerospace.com/page.jsp?page=30&id=30 (accessed 25 February 2008).)
The U.S. Air Force officially declared the US$1.2 billion launch of a communications satellite on 30 April a “mission failure.” A malfunction in the upper stage booster of the Titan IVB rocket had stranded the Milstar satellite in the wrong orbit. The Air Force established an investigation into the failure, which was its “third costly space failure in nine months.”(Reuters, “U.S. Air Force Investigates Costly Satellite Loss,” 4 May 1999.)
Pending the outcome of an investigation into the crash of a Russian Proton rocket the previous day, the Kazakhstan government banned Russian launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, causing a potentially significant disruption to Russia’s commercial satellite launch program. Kazakhstan’s foreign ministry informed the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs that launches from the facility would cease until investigators had identified the causes of the crash and evaluated the damage sustained. The ministry did not indicate how long the ban would remain in effect. Kazakhstan investigators collected soil and water samples to test for possible hazardous material dispersed in the crash.
Two satellites, the China-Brazil Earth Resources Satellite (CBERS-1), sometimes called ZY-1 in Chinese reports, and the Brazilian Saci-1 satellite, launched atop a Chinese Long March 3B rocket from Taiyuan Launch Center in central China. Brazil and China had jointly financed the 1,500-kilogram (3,307-pound) CBERS-1, which carried three high-resolution cameras for monitoring environmental and vegetation conditions in Brazil and China, as well as in other, unspecified locations. Brazil had designed the 60-kilogram (132-pound) Saci-1 microsatellite to monitor cosmic rays, the magnetic field, and plasma. Shortly after launch, communications with the craft failed.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 552, 1 November 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx552.html (accessed 6 August 2008).)
U.S. Air Force officials announced that, despite initial media reports of a successful launch, the previous day’s launch of the USA 142 aboard a Titan IVB rocket had failed. The USA 142, also called the DSP 19, an American geosynchronous military satellite, had launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The failed launch had placed the Defense Support Program satellite in a useless orbit after an attached rocket engine failed. This was the first launch attempt since the explosion of a Titan IVA in August 1998. Engineers had designed the Titan IVB, an improved version of the Titan IV, to survive the electrical malfunction that had led to its predecessor’s demise. Because of a policy of secrecy concerning military spy satellites, the U.S. Air Force had delayed informing its public affairs office about the launch failure. Although senior Air Force officials knew of the loss of the satellite, they were unable to make the event public until they were certain that the failure had not entailed the release of classified information. The Air Force had designed the satellite, a highly sensitive, 2-ton (1,800-kilogram or 1.8-tonne), infrared telescope, to detect missile launches and nuclear detonations.(Robyn Suriano, “Air Force Says Security Questions Delayed Announcement,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 13 April 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 546, 1 May 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx546.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
After a one-day delay, a Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the US$128 million Stardust spacecraft. Stardust launched on a mission described as NASA’s first attempt to “return to Earth solid extraterrestrial material from beyond our [M]oon’s orbit.” Astronomers expected that, after traveling for about five years, the craft would rendezvous with a medium-sized comet. A device aboard the Stardust would collect tiny particles from the comet before returning to Earth on 15 January 2006.(Michael Cabbage, “Stardust Is Launched To Sweep Comet Debris,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, 8 February 1999.)
Kazakhstan lifted its ban on launches of Russian Proton rockets after Moscow paid US$270,000 in compensation for the 5 July crash of one of the booster rockets and completed an agreed-upon joint investigation. The lifting of the ban cleared the way for two Russian Yamal-100 communications satellites to launch aboard a Proton rocket on 6 September. Although initially the country had banned all launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, which Russia had rented since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Kazakhstan had modified the ban to bar only Proton rocket launches, pending a joint investigation of the accident.(Russia Today, “Kazakhstan Ends Russia Proton Rocket Ban,” 1 September 1999.)
Lockheed Martin and its Russian business partners announced the appointment of Wilbur C. Trafton as President of International Launch Services (ILS); Trafton had been Acting President since the previous December. Lockheed Martin, Russia’s Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center, and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia had established ILS in 1995, as a joint venture to market commercial launch services on Russian Proton rockets and Lockheed Martin Atlas rockets. Before joining ILS, Trafton had been Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Space Flight. In that position, he had headed NASA’s Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise. Ray Colloday, President of Lockheed Martin Astronautics, remarked that Trafton had brought to ILS “years of experience working on joint space programs with Russia.” Colladay said that Trafton’s background, together with his knowledge of the Atlas product line, made him “particularly well suited to lead ILS.”(Lockheed Martin, “Wilbur Trafton Named President, International Launch Services,” news release, 26 March 1999,” http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/WilburTraftonNamedPresident Internat.html (accessed 21 December 2007).)
Kazakhstan’s Finance Minister, Uraz Dzhandosov, announced that Russia had paid US$12.5 million as a first installment of its debt to Kazakhstan, fulfilling a condition of the agreement between the two countries. Kazakhstan had demanded the payment as part of the terms of lifting the launch ban it had imposed on Russia when a Russian Proton rocket exploded after liftoff from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan.(Russia Today, “Russia Pays First Part of Baikonur Debt, 12 August 1999. 214)
Lockheed Martin cleared its Atlas II rocket to resume the 1999 launch schedule, after having placed its schedule on hold when a Delta III launch failed in early May. Delta’s RL10B-2, upper- stage engine was similar to the RL10A-4 used on Atlas’s Centaur upper stage. The Boeing Company and Pratt & Whitney had led the investigation of the Delta III launch failure, with the support of Lockheed Martin. Meanwhile, Lockheed Martin Astronautics had formed two panels “to ensure that no aspects of commonality between the RL10 engine versions were overlooked.” The Senior Engineering Review Panel and the Senior Management Review Team had addressed potential causes of launch failure identified in the Delta III investigation, ruling out those factors that did not apply to Atlas flights. When the investigators had determined that “an engine- brazing process that left voids in combustion chamber structural jacket splice joints” was common to all RL10 engines, Lockheed Martin had instituted a new set of inspection and analysis measures for accepting or rejecting each engine. Lockheed Martin intended to use the inspection techniques on new production chambers; Pratt & Whitney planned to continue using its standard procedure, with its Flight Certification Board certifying each set of RL10 engines for all Atlas missions.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin’s Centaur RL10 Engines Cleared for Flight,” news release, 30 August 1999,)
Landsat-7 launched successfully from Vandenberg Air Force Base. Although Lockheed Martin, Missiles and Space, had built Landsat-7, the newest land-surface observation satellite, with a design life of five years, the company’s spokesperson remarked that 15 years after its 1984 launch, Landsat-5 continued in operation. The upper stage of the rocket that launched the commercially built Landsat-6 in October 1993 had failed to fire the satellite into orbit, destroying the craft and prompting NASA and the U.S. Geological Survey to resume control of the Landsat program in 1994. The latest model in the satellite series carried “a new generation of remote-sensing devices far more sophisticated than the equipment on satellites mapping Earth over the past decade.” Raytheon Remote Sensing of Santa Barbara, California, had built the craft’s enhanced thematic mapper to measure solar radiation reflected off the Earth’s surface. The device was capable of capturing images of Earth’s surface in 114-mile-wide (183-kilometer- wide) swaths and could resolve images as small as 50 feet (15 meters) across.(Frank Sweeney, “New Earth Camera Launched into Orbit,” San Jose Mercury News (CA), 20 April 1999.)
A large section of the outer wall of one of the Lockheed Martin X-33 rocket plane’s two liquid hydrogen fuel tanks separated 2 hours after completing pressure and structural tests at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center. Lockheed intended the X-33 prototype to lead to the development of its VentureStar TM Reusable Launch Vehicle (RLV), and NASA planned to replace its fleet of Space Shuttles with a fleet of Lockheed’s VentureStarTM RLVs after 2012. The latest problem potentially delayed the X-33’s first test flight at least an additional six months, essentially guaranteeing that Lockheed Martin would be unable to produce an operational VentureStarTM vehicle by 2004. NASA had “placed a huge wager” on the VentureStar TM, committing US$941 million to the X-33 program, which had been threatened by technical problems and cost overruns for more than a year. U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) examiners had criticized the project for its rising costs, warning that “delays in the prototype would harm NASA’s plans for a full-scale reusable vehicle.”(Jeff Leeds, “Test Mishap Delays Development of Lockheed’s X-33 Rocket Plane,” Los Angeles Times, 6 November 1999.)
The National Research Council Committee on Space Shuttle Upgrades released a report cautioning NASA “not to wait too long to choose between keeping the Shuttle until 2020 or scrapping it after 2012 in favor of a new vehicle like Lockheed Martin’s proposed VentureStar.” The committee, led by former astronaut and former head of the Space Shuttle Program Bryan D. O’Connor, advised NASA to make a timely decision to either phase out the Shuttle upgrade program or make the major investments necessary for the Shuttle to carry out reliably its long- term mission. The panel specifically addressed the Liquid Fly Back Booster (LFBB), the most expensive Shuttle upgrade under consideration, with development costs estimated at between US$2 billion and US$7 billion. The panel’s report revealed that NASA had not investigated enough alternatives to the LFBB to ensure that it was “the most appropriate way to meet the needs of the Shuttle and other programs.”(Aerospace Daily, “NRC Panel Worried NASA Hasn’t Studied Alternatives to LFBB,” 13 January 1999.)
A Boeing Delta III rocket, carrying an Orion satellite for Loral Space and Communications, malfunctioned shortly after launch, leaving the satellite in the wrong orbit. In the inaugural launch in August 1998 of a Boeing Delta III, a rocket designed to carry twice the payload of the Delta II, the rocket had exploded in midair. In this second attempt at flight, the rocket had survived the initial launch, but malfunctioned when the second stage failed to ignite properly, leaving Orion in an orbit lower than planned. Engineers were uncertain whether it would be possible to boost the satellite using on-board fuel and thrusters.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “New Boeing Rocket Malfunctions, Satellite Enters Wrong Orbit,” 5 May 1999.)
http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINSCENTAURRL10ENGINESCL. html (25 February 2008). The Independent Assessment Team on Mission Success, which Lockheed Martin had commissioned in May 1999 after a series of Titan IV launch failures, met its 1 September deadline, reporting its findings and recommendations to Lockheed’s senior management. Lockheed Martin had tasked the investigating team with assessing program management, engineering and manufacturing processes, and quality-control procedures within the company’s Space and Strategic Missiles Sector. Having discovered problems in accountability, quality, subcontract and supplier management, and cost emphasis, the Team recommended that the company develop a “fly-out plan” for Titan IV’s remaining missions, improve its quality control, and improve its management of suppliers and subcontractors. Chairperson of the review panel A. Thomas Young remarked that regardless of the problems the team had uncovered, the panel had also found “enormous fundamental technical strengths” throughout the sector, as well as “highly capable and dedicated” staff. Young also commented that the new leadership team was “off to a positive start.” Vance D. Coffman, Chairperson and Chief Executive Officer for Lockheed Martin, “endorsed the panel’s findings and pledged Lockheed Martin to implementing its recommendations.”(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Implements Space Panel Recommendations,” news release, 8 September 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINIMPLEMENTSSPACE PANELR.html (accessed 27 February 2008).)
NASA successfully launched its Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) telescope aboard a Delta II rocket. FUSE’s three-year mission was to measure the abundance of deuterium, or heavy hydrogen, which stars consume every day and convert to helium. Astronomers hoped that the study of deuterium would help them understand better “what the universe was like moments after creation.” The FUSE scientists sought to determine how much deuterium still exists and how much of it stars consume regularly, thereby calculating “the original makeup of the universe.” NASA had nearly cancelled the FUSE project in the early 1990s, because of cost overruns and missed deadlines, but in 1994 NASA had asked Johns Hopkins University to manage the project. Project managers at Johns Hopkins had scaled down the scientific instrument and used existing equipment instead of developing new technologies. The Canadian Space Agency had provided the camera, the French Space Agency had provided the spectrograph, and other U.S. universities had provided various parts for the telescope. Orbital Sciences Corporation had built the spacecraft using an existing design to reduce costs further. NASA considered the spacecraft and its launch a success; NASA’s Science Director Edward J. Weiler remarked, “We have never had a satellite as sensitive as FUSE.”(Washington Times, “Special Telescope To Look for First Signs of Creation,” 25 June 1999; Steven Young for Reuters, “NASA Launches Telescope To Seek Universe’s Origin,” 24 June 1999.)
Europe’s new 746-ton (677,000-kilogram or 677-tonne) Ariane 5 rocket launched smoothly on its first mission, carrying the European Space Agency’s 3.7-ton (3,400-kilogram or 3.4-tonne) X- ray Multi-Mirror (XMM) scientific satellite into orbit. In what France called an industry milestone and “hailed as proof of Europe’s superiority in the commercial launch market,” the powerful rocket lifted off at the opening of its launch window from Europe’s facility in Kourou, French Guiana, depositing the satellite in orbit exactly on schedule, 29 minutes later. Jean-Marie Luton, chairperson of Arianespace, the France-based commercial space company that dominated the world’s commercial satellite-launching market, remarked that, although the United States remained its most serious competitor and China was catching up quickly, “Europeans were still one step ahead.” Arianespace intended the Ariane 5, twice as heavy and twice as powerful as the Ariane 4, to carry 10- to 12-ton (9,100- to 10,900-kilogram or 9.1- to 10.9-tonne) payloads by 2005, transporting space-exploration modules and serving the ISS. The XMM satellite was the largest scientific satellite ever built in Europe, equipped with three powerful telescopes, with 58 mirrors each, and “capable of observing everything from supernovas to the remains of exploded stars.”(Jean-Marie Godard for Associated Press, “Mission Accomplished for Powerful New European Launcher,” 10 December 1998.)
In its third consecutive failure, the second loss within one month, the U.S. Air Force launch of a Titan IV rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, placed a geosynchronous military communications satellite, the USA 143, also known as Milstar 2, in a useless low-Earth orbit. (Associated Press, “Air Force Declares Military Satellite Dead,” 12 May 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 546, 1 May 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx546.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
Interfax news agency reported that Russia had agreed to pay Kazakhstan US$400,000 in damages following the 27 October crash of a Proton rocket during its launch from Baikonur Cosmodrome. After reaching an agreement on compensation, Kazakhstan had lifted its launch ban for all Russian launches except the Proton rocket.(Associated Press, “Russia-Kazakstan-Rockets,” 19 November 1999.)
Kazakhstan imposed a new ban on Russian launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome following the previous day’s crash of a Proton booster rocket, which had malfunctioned shortly after launch. Without naming a figure, Kazakhstan announced that it would require Russia to pay compensation in an amount significantly higher than the fee that Kazakhstan had charged Russia after the 5 July Proton crash. In addition, the Kazakhstan government formed a special commission headed by Deputy Prime Minister Alexander Pavlov to investigate the accident.
NASA announced the appointment of N. Jan Davis, Director of the Human Exploration and Development of Space Independent Assurance Office, as Deputy Director of the new Flight Projects Directorate at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, effective July 1999. NASA had tasked the Directorate with overseeing “development of crucial parts of the ISS,” such as connecting Nodes 2 and 3, the Multi-purpose Logistics Modules, commercial EXPRESS (EXpedite the PRocessing of Experiments to the Space Station) racks, the environmental and life support systems, and the Payload Operations Integration Center. Davis had begun her NASA career at MSFC in 1979, leading a team “responsible for structural analysis of the Hubble Space Telescope, the telescope-servicing mission, and the Chandra X-ray Observatory.” She had also served as “lead engineer for the redesign of the Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster External Tank attach ring” before becoming an astronaut in 1987. Davis had flown on three Shuttle missions, logging more than 670 hours in space.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, “Astronaut Jan Davis Returns to Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 99-102, 21 June 1999, http://www.msfc.nasa.gov/news/news/releases/1999/99-102.html (accessed 11 February 2008); James McWilliams, “Ex-Astronaut Named Marshall Executive,” Huntsville Times (AL), 22 June 1999.)
At the 14th Annual NASA Continual Improvement and Reinvention Conference on Quality Management, Administrator Daniel S. Goldin presented the George M. Low Award, NASA’s highest honor for quality and technical performance, to four U.S. companies: 1) Barrios Technology Inc. of Houston, Texas, for its small-business product; 2) Kay and Associates of Edwards, California, for small-business service; 3) Raytheon Support Services Company of Annapolis Junction, Maryland, for the large-business service category; and, 4) Thiokol Space Operations of Brigham City, Utah, for the large-business product category. NASA had evaluated the recipients for performance, delivery according to agreed cost and schedule, innovation, management leadership, alignment of organizational goals with NASA’s strategic plans, customer orientation, and adherence to the Total Quality Management philosophy. Thiokol Corporation, which had won the Low Award in 1991 and Marshall Space Flight Center’s Contractor Excellence Award in March 1999, had manufactured the reusable solid rocket motor for the Space Shuttle, as well as providing launch support and refurbishment services for the motor. Over the past seven years, Thiokol had never delayed its delivery of hardware. Its cost reduction efforts had saved NASA US$152 million.(NASA, “Four Aerospace Firms Win NASA’s Highest Honor for Quality,” news release 99-53, 22 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-053.txt (accessed 7 February 2008); Cordant Technologies Inc., “Thiokol Propulsion Wins NASA’s Highest Honor for Quality,” news release, 3 May 1999.)
Lockheed Martin announced a “sweeping reorganization” of key leadership positions, in response to recommendations of the review panel chaired by A. Thomas Young. The Young Panel had urged the company to make structural changes to correct quality-control problems at Astronautics, the unit responsible for Atlas, Titan, and Athena rocket development. In response to the panel’s recommendation to divide the two tasks of product assurance and mission success, Astronautics President G. Thomas Marsh appointed John P. Mari as Vice President of Product Assurance and Roman Matherne as Vice President for Mission Success. Marsh named John Parker, President of the former Mission Success and Product Assurance Section, to head the operations post in Lockheed Martin’s VentureStarTM Program, which the company hoped to develop into a future reusable launch vehicle with the potential to replace the Space Shuttle. Marsh appointed Joel S. Porter as Vice President for Business Development and Advanced Programs for Astronautics, succeeding Matthew B. Foster, who resigned. Other changes at Astronautics included the appointment of Claude McAnally as Vice President of Operations; the appointment of Grover W. Hall Jr. as Vice President of Technical Operations; and the separation of Technical Operations from Manufacturing Operations to better delineate responsibility and accountability, according to the recommendations of the Young Panel. Lockheed tasked Gareth D. Flora, under Marsh’s supervision, with developing, managing, and improving subcontract management. In addition, Flora became responsible for ensuring that the company properly implemented the recommendations of the investigating team, as well as those of a separate U.S. Air Force review of the aerospace industry.(Jeffrey Leib, “Lockheed Replaces Key Staff in Astronautics Unit,” Denver Post (CO), 21 September 1999.)
At a Boeing Company awards ceremony, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and U. S. Representative Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) recognized “members of the Delta launch team who were instrumental in sending NASA spacecraft to Mars,” awarding Jay L. Witzling, Vice President of Delta Programs, with NASA’s Public Service Medal. Other critical leaders in the program also received awards for their dedication and participation. In his remarks, Goldin commented on the characteristics that made Boeing’s Delta rocket “more and more the launch vehicle of choice.” Goldin explained that the Delta rocket was the least expensive launch vehicle, had the fastest turnaround, and had demonstrated the highest degree of reliability. Goldin also commented that the four launches to Mars aboard Delta rockets had “changed the face of the space program.”(PR Newswire, “Mars Missions Earn Honors for Boeing Delta Employees, NASA’s Goldin and Congressman Rohrabacher Present Awards,” 27 January 1999.)
A Russian Progress M42 cargo spacecraft launched with a Soyuz-U rocket to deliver supplies to the Mir space station. Supplies included equipment necessary to keep an uninhabited station operational and equipment for conducting a controlled reentry, in the event that Russia could not obtain the resources necessary to continue operation. The launch was the first since Kazakhstan’s partial relaxation of a launch ban at Baikonur Cosmodrome.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 549, 1 August 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx549.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
The U.S. Air Force successfully launched a Titan II rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base carrying the first of a new generation of military weather satellites, a Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) Block 5D-3 spacecraft. Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space had built the DMSP Block 5D-3 craft under contract with the U.S. Air Force, and Lockheed Martin Astronautics had supplied the launch vehicle. U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Systems Center at Los Angeles Air Force Base managed the DMSP and Titan programs. The first launch of a Titan II since 19 June 1999, it was the ninth consecutive successful launch of the space launch vehicle. The Titan II, a type of booster previously used as an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) and a fundamental element of the United States’ strategic deterrent for two decades, was one of 14 two-stage, liquid-fueled former ICBMs that Lockheed Martin Astronautics had refurbished for Air Force space launches. NASA had also used Titan II rockets during its Gemini program in the 1960s, launching 10 piloted and 2 unpiloted missions. The DMSP Block 5D-3 series accommodated larger sensor payloads than previous models, featuring a larger power supply; a more powerful on-board computer with increased memory, giving the craft greater autonomy; and increased battery power, intended to extend the mission’s duration. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration operated DMSP, a program for strategic and tactical weather prediction to aid the U.S. military in planning sea, land, and air operations.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Companies Launch Military Weather Satellite,” news release, 12 December 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINCOMPANIESLAUNCH MILITA.html (accessed 13 March 2008).)
The Russian Defense Ministry launched Raduga-1, an early-warning-system satellite for detecting missile launches, aboard a Proton-K booster rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Ground controllers lost communication with the satellite minutes after its launch, and just as it reached its preliminary orbit, both the satellite and the second stage of the rocket crashed in a remote region of Kazakhstan. Russian space officials initially stated that the satellite had crashed in an uninhabited area, but a Russian television network reported that a large piece of the Proton rocket had fallen onto farmland in the Karaganda region of Kazakhstan, nearly hitting a house. Nobody was injured in the crash.(United Press International, “Russian Satellite Crashes into Kazakhstan,” 6 July 1999. 737 Sujata Rao for Reuters, “Kazakhstan Halts Russian Space Launches,” 6 July 1999.)
Ukraine’s Prime Minister Valery Pustovoitenko appealed to Kazakhstan’s Premier Nurlan Balgimbayev to permit the launch of the Okean-O research satellite aboard a Ukrainian Zenit rocket, despite the launch ban following the 5 July crash of a Russian rocket. Ukrainian officials expressed concern that a delay beyond 15 July, with the rocket’s lengthy stay on the launchpad, would endanger the prospect of a successful launch. The Ukrainian space program, seeking to compete in the lucrative commercial space market, was under pressure to make a successful launch after the crash in September 1998 of a Zenit rocket, destroying 12 of Globalstar Inc.’s communications satellites.(Pavel Polityuk for Reuters, “Ukraine Appeals for Rocket Launch amid Kazakh Row.”)
The U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) successfully conducted the first of a series of tests of a proposed missile defense system. An unarmed Minuteman missile, carrying a dummy warhead and decoy balloon, launched over the Pacific Ocean from Vandenberg Air Force Base; 20 minutes later an Exoatmospheric Kill Vehicle, a 55-inch-long (1.4-meter-long), 120-pound (54.4-kilogram) device built by Raytheon Corporation, launched aboard a booster rocket from the Marshall Islands. The two missiles collided 10 minutes later, 3,000 miles (4,800 kilometers) from California and 140 miles (225 kilometers) above the ocean. According to the CIA, when DOD conducted the test, North Korea, Iran, and Syria were developing long-range missiles that could hit the United States.(Associated Press, “Missile Test Sparks Russian Gripes,” 4 October 1999.)
A Russian Soyuz booster launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome 450 miles (724 kilometers) north of Moscow, carrying German, French, and Swedish research devices. In selecting the launch location, Russia was attempting to increase its use of the Plesetsk launch facility because of its problems continuing to launch from Baikonur Cosmodrome. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia had rented the Baikonur launch facility from Kazakhstan.(Reuters, “Russian Rocket Blasts Off from Plesetsk Cosmodrome,” 9 September 1999. 220)
A Taurus rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying satellites for NASA and the Korean Aerospace Institute, as well as 36 capsules holding 7 ounces of cremated remains for Celestis Inc., a Houston-based company that arranged to send human remains to space. NASA’s 253-pound (114.8-kilogram) Active Cavity Radiometer Irradiance Monitor (EOS ACRIM III), expected to return data for a minimum of five years, was deployed to measure sunlight reaching Earth’s atmosphere, oceans, and land, data needed for scientists to study whether slight changes in solar output affected global warming and cooling. ACRIM III was the third in a series of long- term, solar-monitoring tolls that NASA’s JPL had built. ACRIM III’s data would expand the database begun with the ACRIM I mission in 1980, aboard the Solar Maximum Mission spacecraft, and continued with the ACRIM II mission in 1991, aboard the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. ACRIM I was the first instrument to demonstrate clearly that the total radiant energy from the Sun is not a constant. The Korean satellite, built by TRW Inc. for a three-year mission, carried three instruments for creating digital elevation maps of Korea, studying the biology of the ocean, and performing physics experiments on the effects of radiation on electronics. The Celestis mission carried 36 capsules of human remains, which would orbit for 45 years before burning up in Earth’s atmosphere.(NASA, “Item 1⎯ACRIMSAT Launch⎯HQ,” NASA Daily News Summary, 21 December 1999, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/media/1999/m99-262.txt (accessed 13 March 2008); Associated Press, “NASA Satellite, Korea Probe Rocket into Space,” 21 December 1999.)
NASA launched its Wide-Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE) aboard the three-stage Pegasus-XL rocket. Orbital Sciences Corporation’s L-1011 jet carried the rocket to an altitude of 40,000 feet (12,200 meters) before releasing it. Shortly after WIRE’s release into orbit, it encountered difficulties maintaining its stability, and NASA immediately began to investigate the malfunction. The satellite’s scientific instrument was a “cryogenically cooled telescope designed to shed light on the history of star formation in the universe,” as part of NASA’s Origins program. The 12.5-inch-aperture (31.8-centimeter-aperture) telescope aboard WIRE had no moving parts and was enclosed in a cooling system to keep its mirrors below -436°F (-260°C), to prevent its own heat emission from overwhelming the light it would detect from space.(Associated Press, “NASA’s Star-Gazing Wire Satellite Successfully Launched,” 4 March 1999; Associated Press, “Satellite Launch,” 5 March 1999.)
The People’s Republic of China announced it had launched into orbit its first piloted spacecraft, a non-reusable capsule named Shenzhou, which carried a mannequin for test purposes but was capable of carrying a crew of four. Xinhua news agency reported that the capsule, launched from Jiuquan satellite launch center aboard the new model Long March 2F, had spent 21 hours in space, orbiting Earth 14 times. China had built a new land- and sea-based, space-monitoring-and- control network for the launch. China heralded the launch as a breakthrough in the Chinese government’s effort to “join the United States and Russia in the elite club of manned space flight.” The Chinese had abandoned the pursuit of human spaceflight in the late 1960s, because Premier Zhou Enlai thought it was too costly, but in 1992, President Jiang Zemin had decided to renew Chinese efforts, with the goal of putting a human in space by the end of the century. The head of China’s Manned Spaceflight Program told Xinhua news agency that the successful test flight of the Shenzhou capsule demonstrated that the Chinese spacecraft and the new Long March rocket performed superbly. During the mission, the Chinese had conducted experiments in remote sensing, environmental monitoring, space materials, astronomy, and physics. Shenzhou had landed in Inner Mongolia using a parachute.(Michael Laris, “Chinese Test Craft for Manned Orbits: Space Launch Boosts National Pride,” Washington Post, 22 November 1999; Washington Times, “Chinese Successfully Launch First Spacecraft,” 22 November 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 553, 1 December 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx553.html (accessed 6 August 2008).)
NASA announced that it had completed negotiations for a contract worth up to US$1.73 billion, to purchase 73 Space Shuttle reusable solid rocket motors from the Thiokol Propulsion company. Each Shuttle flight used two of these motors as the primary component of the Shuttle solid rocket boosters, providing 6.6 million pounds (2.9 million kilograms) of thrust, 71.4 percent of the thrust needed for liftoff. The contract covered the manufacture and delivery of the new motor components through September 2004, as well as postflight review of the last motors flown through 2005.(NASA, “NASA, Thiokol Complete $1.7 Billion Shuttle Motor Agreement,” news release c99-c, 24 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/1999/c99-c.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) detached the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite-L (GOES-L) from an Atlas IIA rocket, returning the satellite to the integration facility Astrotech, where engineers planned to recondition its batteries and purge it of gaseous nitrogen, to prevent degradation. NOAA had planned to store the satellite in orbit, ready to replace one of the weather satellites, GOES-8 or GOES-10, but GOES-L had been on the launchpad since 6 May. On 15 May, NASA and NOAA had decided to delay the launch of GOES-L until they had received the results of the investigations into the recent Titan and Delta launch failures.(NOAA, “Weather Satellite De-mated from Launch Vehicle, NOAA and NASA Announce,” news release, 15 June 1999, http://www.publicaffairs.noaa.gov/releases99/june99/noaa99GOESDemate.html (accessed 12 February 2008).)
A Boeing Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar cellular telephone satellites. Counting this launch, Globalstar Inc. had placed in orbit 24 of the 32 satellites the company needed to begin regional cellular phone service. The company had planned to begin offering global cellular service in the latter part of 1998, but in September 1998, a failed launch destroyed a dozen satellites aboard a Ukrainian Zenit II rocket. Globalstar had launched its first eight satellites on Delta II rockets, during February and April 1998, and 12 more satellites, early in 1999, on three Russian Soyuz rockets. Globalstar was competing with its industry rival Iridium World Communications Inc., which had placed a complete constellation of 66 satellites in orbit and had begun offering global cellular service before the end of 1998. To meet Globalstar’s launch demands over the summer of 1999, Boeing had increased the pace of manufacturing at its Pueblo, Colorado, rocket factory. In addition, Boeing brought 50 to 70 workers from its Delta launch team at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California to join its Cape Canaveral workforce in Florida.(Todd Halvorson, “Boeing and Globalstar Begin Flurry of Launches,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 June 1999.)
NASA’s GRC announced that, for the first time, researchers had suspended particles of frozen hydrogen in liquid helium, the first step toward creating new rocket fuels that could revolutionize rocket-propulsion technology. Researchers had poured small amounts of liquid hydrogen at a temperature of 14 K (-435°F or -259°C), just above freezing point, onto the surface of liquid helium of a temperature just above absolute zero, at 4 K (-452°F or -269°C). The liquid hydrogen had formed small, solid hydrogen particles, which floated on the surface of the helium. Scientists planned to use the suspension to create “futuristic atomic fuels,” making it possible to develop rockets with “liftoff weights one-fifth that of today’s [rockets] or with payloads three to four times more massive.” In addition, the suspension could “reduce or eliminate on-orbit assembly of large space vehicles,” thereby contributing to the exploration of the entire solar system.(NASA Glenn Research Center, “Rocket Fuels Researchers Suspend Frozen Hydrogen Particles in Helium,” news release 99-65, 12 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/glenn/news/pressrel/1999/99_65.html (accessed 25 February 2008).)
Lockheed Martin launched a Navy communications satellite aboard an Atlas 2A rocket, a badly needed success in a year of launch failures, delays, investigations, and diminishing business. The company had failed to put three satellites in orbit in April, sustaining a total loss of US$1.5 billion. Investigations into the launch failure of a rocket using similar parts had delayed Lockheed International Launch Services’ maiden flight of the Atlas IIIA, causing its first customer, Space Systems/Loral, to launch its Telstar 7 satellite on a European Ariane booster, instead. NASA had lost contact with its US$125 million Lockheed Martin–built Mars Climate Orbiter in September and, in the subsequent investigation, had discovered that Lockheed had used English units of measurement instead of metric, resulting in miscalculations in navigational data. Although for many years Lockheed Martin had supplied satellites to the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), the U.S. government agency responsible for spy satellites, in September the NRO had awarded a major contract to the Boeing Company to develop the next generation of imaging-reconnaissance satellites. Lockheed Martin also faced increased competition from Russia’s new Dnepr rocket, Europe’s Eurockot, and the U.S.-based Orbital Sciences Corporation’s Pegasus.(United Press International, “Lockheed Martin Struggles Through Year,” 23 November 1999.)
Boeing launched a Delta II rocket from California’s Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying the first science satellites from Denmark and South Africa and the U.S. Air Force’s Advanced Research and Global Observation Satellite (ARGOS). The Air Force intended the Boeing-built ARGOS to spend three years in space, “collecting data on the Earth’s global environment and performing technology demonstrations for top-priority military space programs,” as well as testing advanced space technologies for use on the ISS. The launches of Denmark’s Orsted and South Africa’s SUNSAT (Stellenbosch University, South Africa, satellite) were critical milestones for both countries’ space programs. SUNSAT carried remote-sensing experiments to produce images from space at lower cost than larger systems, and Denmark deployed Orsted to study Earth’s magnetic fields and electrical properties.(CNN.com, “Rocket Carries Trio of Science Satellites into Orbit,” 23 February 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/ space/9902/23/argos.launch/index.html (accessed 10 April 2008).)
NASA launched its Terra satellite, carrying instruments made in the United States, Japan, and Canada, from Vandenberg Air Force Base atop a Lockheed Martin Atlas IIAS rocket. NASA had originally scheduled the mission to launch on 14 December, but a computer had aborted the launch moments before ignition. Terra carried five sophisticated instruments for observing the interactions among Earth’s landmasses, atmosphere, ocean, and biosphere. NASA considered the craft the flagship of its Earth Observing System because of its instruments’ measurement capabilities and accuracy. The five instruments were 1) the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER), designed to capture high-resolution images of Earth in visible, near-infrared, shortwave-infrared, and thermal-infrared areas of the spectrum; 2) the Clouds and the Earth’s Radiant Energy System (CERES), a set of two broadband scanning radiometers for measuring Earth’s radiation; 3) the Multi-Angle Imaging Spectroradiometer (MISR), an instrument using nine cameras to measure the amount of sunlight scattered in different directions; 4) the Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), designed to view the entire surface of the Earth every one to two days and to make observations in 36 spectral bands; and 5) the Measurement of Pollution in the Troposphere (MOPITT), designed to observe the interaction of the lower atmosphere with the land and oceans.(Associated Press, “NASA Launched Earth Observing Satellite on $1.3 Billion Mission,” 20 December 1999. 849 NASA, “Mission Archives STS-103, Third Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-103.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
Lockheed Martin launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base an Athena II rocket, carrying the Ikonos I satellite, a civilian satellite capable of capturing the detailed images that only spy satellites could produce in the past. Launch officials had planned to cease communications with the craft 8 minutes after liftoff and to reestablish contact later in the flight, but had not been able to reestablish contact once initial communications ended. Officials were unable to determine whether the craft had remained in orbit. Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems had built the satellite; Raytheon had built the communications, image processing, and other elements of the system; and Eastman Kodak had built the digital camera system. The camera on board Ikonos I was capable of resolving objects as small as 1 square meter (11 square feet), enabling the satellite to distinguish between a car and a truck. Before the manufacture of Ikonos, only military satellites had possessed the ability to photograph Earth in such detail.(John Antczak for Associated Press, “Contact Fails During Flight: Civilian Satellite Lost After Launch,” 29 April 1999.)
China confirmed that it had fired its new Dong Feng-31 (DF-31) missile during a test launch on 2 August, publicizing details of the successful launch of the long-range, ground-to-ground, intercontinental, strategic ballistic missile. The Chinese Guangzhou Daily reported that the “three-stage, solid-fuel rocket was launched from northern Shanxi province and crashed down in the western territory of Xinjiang.” Jane’s Defence Weekly estimated that the DF-31 had an 8,000-kilometer (5,000-mile) range and was capable of carrying a 700-kilogram (1,500-pound) nuclear warhead. Robert Karniol, a foreign correspondent covering Asia for the defense industry publication Jane’s, remarked that “the DF-31 should be operationally deployed by China in 2000,” and that the country expected to build 10 to 20 of the missiles, some replacing 1960s-era missiles with half the range of the DF-31. The Guangzhou Daily also reported that China had developed the technology for piloted spaceflight. Wang Xinqing, head of the China Carrier- Rocket Research Institute, which designs military- and civilian-use rockets, stated that the core of the program was the development of a new series of carrier rockets, Long March 5. Wang Xinqing also refuted a report by the U.S. Congress alleging that China had stolen the United States’ missile and nuclear warhead technology, insisting that China had perfected the rocketry before the United States had achieved it.(Matt Pottinger for Reuters, “China Details Missile Test, Planned Space Flight,” 12 August 1999.)
A dummy satellite reached its orbit, 23,000 miles (37,000 kilometers) above Earth, signaling an important success for the Sea Launch Company. The international consortium, which had invested US$500 million to develop the first commercial, marine-based launch system, launched the dummy satellite from the Odyssey, a converted oil rig located 1,400 miles (2,300 kilometers) south of Hawaii. A Zenit-3SL rocket, built jointly by Ukraine and Russia, carried the satellite aloft. One hour after launch, the satellite separated from the third stage of the rocket at an altitude of 1,200 miles (1,900 kilometers), to continue to its ultimate position.(Associated Press, “Satellite Reaches Orbit After First Commercial Launch from Ocean,” 30 March 1999. 689 European Space Agency, “Mission to Mars Set To Revolutionize ESA’s Working Methods,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 March 1999.)
A European Ariane 4 rocket launched, carrying two communication satellites from French Guiana. The rocket placed into orbit an Arabsat 3A satellite, providing television broadcasting and telephone communications to the Middle East, North Africa, and Southern Europe, as well as the Skynet 4E satellite, a British armed forces strategic and tactical communications satellite. Both craft would move into geostationary orbits.(BBC News, “Ariane Blasts Off Successfully,” 27 February 1999.)
President Nursultan Nazarbayev set Kazakhstan’s conditions for permitting Russia to launch a Progress cargo craft carrying supplies to the Mir space station, scheduled to lift off from Baikonur Cosmodrome on 14 July. Kazakhstan had suspended all Russian launches from the facility, following the crash of a Russian Proton-K rocket on 5 July. Nazarbayev’s terms for permitting the launch of the Progress craft included Russia’s payment of its US$300 million debt for the lease of Baikonur Cosmodrome and a visit of high-level Russian officials to the Proton-K rocket’s crash site.(Sujata Rao for Reuters, “Kazakhstan Sets Terms for Russian Space Launch,” 13 July 1999.)
Following a series of recent launch failures, Boeing Company announced the convening of an independent panel of experts to examine its rocket programs, specifically Boeing’s Delta, Sea Launch, and Inertial Upper Stage programs. To head the panel, Boeing had selected Sheila E. Widnall, former Secretary of the U.S. Air Force and a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The panel was tasked with examining organizational roles and responsibilities within Boeing; recent launch failure investigation findings; processes used for government, civil, and commercial launches; acceptance processes for major subsystems and complex assemblies from suppliers; and manufacturing, assembly, transportation, and storage activities of Boeing launch programs.(Associated Press, “Boeing Forms Independent Panel To Review Space Failures,” 9 June 1999.)
After a two-day delay because of high-altitude winds, the Boeing Company successfully launched a Delta II rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar communications satellites. An hour after launch, the rocket deployed the 988-pound (448-kilogram) satellites in pairs, bringing the total number of satellites in Globalstar Inc.’s constellation to 28, 4 less than the 32 needed to begin network service.(Justin Ray, “Third Try Was the Charm for Delta 2 Rocket,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 July 1999. 741 Washington Times, “Air and Space Director Killed in Glider Crash,” 14 July 1999.)
Robert S. Ruggeri, a retired NASA engineer and pioneer in de-icing research, died at the age of 75. Ruggeri had begun working for NASA’s predecessor agency in 1944, retiring from NASA in 1980. NASA had applied his findings from studying ice buildup on airplane wings in the 1940s and 1950s, to the development of rockets and Space Shuttles. When the United States sought to speed up its space program following the Soviet Union’s launch of Sputnik, Ruggeri had also researched the effects of cavitation⎯partial vacuums in flowing liquids⎯on cryogenic rocket pumps, looking for ways to make the pumps more efficient for rockets. Later in his career at NASA, Ruggeri’s work had focused on the design of compressors for advanced aircraft engines, as he sought ways to increase fuel efficiency, reduce air pollution, and minimize the noise of jet engines.(“Robert Ruggeri, NASA Engineer Was a Pioneer in Aircraft De-Icing,” Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 26 December 1999.)
