NASA launched the most advanced communications satellite it had ever developed, the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite-H (TDRS-H) created to provide communication between the Space Shuttles, ISS, HST, and NASA control centers. Intended to replace a communications satellite that had been in place since 1983 and had surpassed its mission-designed lifetime, the new TDRS-H was the first of three communications satellites planned to link NASA’s space-bound vehicles. NASA had designated nearly US$500 million for the design, building, and launch of the three new satellites. The TDRS-H launched aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas IIA rocket, separating from it after about 30 minutes of flight. Once the satellite reached 171° longitude, it became operational.(Lockheed Martin Inc., “International Launch Services and Lockheed Martin Provide Mission Success for NASA Satellite Launch,” news release, 30 June 2000; NASA, “Advanced Communications Satellite Ready To Serve New Millennium Space Projects,” news release 00-98, 21 June 2000.)
Nature published a letter from physicist Leonard Reiffel revealing that, during the Cold War in the 1950s, the United States had funded a research program focused on detonating a nuclear bomb on the Moon, part of a plan to demonstrate the strength of the U.S. military. The Armour Research Foundation⎯now a part of Illinois Institute of Technology⎯had directed the project, known as A Study of Lunar Research Flights. Astronomer Carl Sagan, then a young graduate student, had worked on the project. As Reiffel explained, Cold War politics had dramatically affected science agendas during the period: “There was lots of talk on the part of the Air Force about the [M]oon being ‘military high ground’.” The scenario had called for the U.S. Air Force to launch a small nuclear device from an undisclosed location and detonate it on the Moon. Those planning the detonation had selected an atomic bomb, because a hydrogen explosive would have been too heavy for a rocket to carry 238,000 miles (383,000 kilometers) to the lunar landing spot. Military leaders eventually called off the plan because of concern that, during the building and launch of the bomb, a nuclear accident could occur on Earth.(Leonard Reiffel, “Sagan Breached Security by Revealing U.S. Work on a Lunar Bomb Project,” Nature 405, no. 6782 (4 May 2000): 13−14; Associated Press, “Physicist Says U.S. Contemplated Detonating an Atom Bomb on the Moon,” 18 May 2000.)
After two earlier unsuccessful trials, Russia launched, without incident, a modified Proton rocket carrying a large Gorizont communications satellite. Propulsion-system flaws had triggered explosions of the Proton rocket in previous trials. The United States viewed the successful test launch as a positive sign of Russia’s commitment to the ISS project, a boost for the strained relationship between the two countries. After the failed tests, a joint NASA-Russian Space Agency research crew had determined that production flaws in the turbomachinery of the rocket’s second and third stages, including the presence of contaminants such as asbestos cloth and metal fragments, had caused the problems. Russia planned to test the Proton rocket again before scheduling the much-delayed delivery of its crew module to the ISS.
The Zvezda service module successfully docked at the ISS, immediately increasing the size of the space station by 50 percent. Through a series of rocket firings, Zvezda had drawn steadily closer to the ISS during its two-week journey to its new home 220 miles (354 kilometers) from Earth. Experts had deemed the successful launch and docking of the Russian component of the ISS vital to the long-term success of the collaborative venture. The Russian-built Zvezda, nearly identical to a core section of the Russian Mir space station, was to provide living quarters for researchers on the station, as well as vital electronic, computer, and communications systems. Anticipating significant interest in the historic linkup, NASA provided information on its Web site explaining how to view the space station as it traveled over Earth.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Is Connected to Module from Russia,” New York Times, 26 July 2000; NASA, “No Telescopes Needed: NASA Web Sites Let Stargazers Track Impending Space Station ‘Nuptuals’,” news release)
After nearly two years of delays and many questions regarding the Russian Space Agency’s commitment to the ISS, Russia successfully launched the Zvezda module aboard a Proton rocket. Building the 22-ton (20,000-kilogram or 20-tonne), US$320 million module, to provide living quarters for researchers aboard the ISS, had severely taxed the Russian space program. To bring the project to fruition, Russia had relied on the resourcefulness of its scientists and engineers, as well as resorting to creative financing arrangements, such as selling the U.S.-based Pizza Hut Company an advertisement for display on the side of the Proton launch rocket. Russia had insured Zvezda’s launch for more than US$1 billion. Hundreds of spectators, representing aerospace companies from Russia and Western countries, witnessed the launch from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Watching the launch with Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin praised the successful completion of the long-awaited module: “The Russians have gone through all sorts of difficulty with their economy, the political changes, and a whole variety of other problems, and they came through and did what they said they were going to do.” Koptev made clear the high stakes for future Russian space projects, based on the successful launch and linkup of Zvezda: “This is 10 years of work and the success of this launch will determine to a large extent whether the Russian space programme continues or not.” The international space community greeted news of the launch as a sign that the much-postponed ISS was nearing completion. Although Russia had plans to contribute further portals to the ISS, none of its subsequent contributions had as much potential to delay the international effort.(Associated Press, “Russian Launching Clears Way for Space Station,” 13 July 2000; USA Today, “Russia Sends Module of Space Station into Orbit,” 12 July 2000; Newsday (Long Island, NY), “Launch of Key Module for Space Station Is Set,” 11 July 2000; Reuters, “Russia Space Station Launch Insured for over $1 Bln,” 12 July 2000; Reuters, “Kazakhstan: Update 2-Russia Launches Key Module for ISS,” 12 July 2000.)
Russia launched a new defense and spy satellite aboard a Proton-K rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome. More concerned with the launch vehicle than with the military satellite, U.S. space officials praised the successful operation of the Proton-K rocket, a rocket similar in type to those that had been involved in several launch accidents during 1999. The United States had a particular interest in the launch, because Russia planned to carry a module built for the International Space Station (ISS) aboard a Proton rocket. Russia had built the Zvezda module to provide living space for the ISS crew. A spokesperson for the Russian Space Agency stated that the rocket’s successful launch confirmed Russia’s ability to transport its Zvezda module: “This launch is important in estimating the readiness of the Proton-K booster rocket for a more important mission July 12 when the same kind of booster will carry the Russian-built Zvezda service module to the ISS.” The Russian Space Agency had overcome significant financial shortfalls to complete production on both the Proton-K rocket and the Zvezda module.(Reuters, “Russia: Russia Launches Proton Rocket Ahead of Space Lab,” 5 July 2000.)
EarthWatch Inc., a Colorado-based company developing a network of satellites to capture images of various regions of the Earth for commercial applications, launched its QuickBird 1 craft from Plesetsk Cosmodrome, aboard a Russian Cosmos-3M rocket. However, ground stations did not pick up its signals as planned. U.S. tracking data listed the craft’s orbit as “decayed,” and a Russian Aerospace Agency spokesperson described the craft as “effectively lost.” EarthWatch had lost its first satellite, Early Bird 1, four days after its 24 December 1997 launch because of a power-system problem.(Stephen Clark, “Commercial Eye-in-the-Sky Appears Lost in Launch Failure,” Spaceflight Now, 21 November 2000.)
Russia successfully launched a Soyuz test rocket equipped with a Fregat accelerator unit able to carry payloads into high orbit, but lost the Fregat unit upon its reentry to Earth. The rocket took off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying only a dummy payload into space, in a test that was part of Russia’s ongoing research into developing vehicles and technologies that would eventually serve the orbiting ISS.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Russia Tests, Then Loses Rocket with Union for Higher Orbit,” 9 February 2000. 878 Orlando Sentinel (FL), “Thousands Walk Out on Boeing in Seattle,” 10 February 2000.)
In a much-anticipated launch, the Astro-E satellite lifted off aboard an M-5 rocket from the Kagoshima Space Center on the Japanese island of Kyushu. However, soon after launch, Astro-E was lost when the rocket suffered a “control system breakdown,” propelling the satellite into a lower orbit than planned. U.S. officials monitoring the launch determined that the satellite had most likely burned up in Earth’s atmosphere. Astro-E, the product of a joint venture between the United States and Japan, carried new x-ray–sensing equipment, which scientists had hoped would further illuminate the material surrounding black holes. Scientists had designed the new equipment to sense minute changes in the heat of single protons. The specialists overseeing the launch and mission had hoped that Astro-E would orbit and gather data for five years. The satellite had cost more than US$100 million to develop.(NASA, “Japanese-U.S. Satellite Ushers in Golden Era of X-ray Astronomy,” news release 00-18, 2 February 2000; Associated Press, “Japan Suffers Another Setback When Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit,” 10 February 2000; Justin Ray, “Astro-E Believed Lost Following Botched Launch,” Space Flight Now, 10 February 2000.)
The Russian Space Agency announced another delay in the launch of the crew compartment for the International Space Station (ISS), after two Proton rockets exploded when metal and mineral particles contaminated their engines. The Russian Space Agency had planned to use a Proton rocket to launch the ISS module. The S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia, which built the boosters, promised to replace the Proton rocket’s faulty parts. Funding problems had previously slowed construction of the crew compartment, disrupting the timeline for the international project.(Associated Press, “Russia Again Delays Launch of Space Station Unit,” 12 January 2000; Associated Press, “Space Station Launch Delayed,” 12 January 2000.)
International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin, Khrunichev State Research, and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia, launched a Russian Proton rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The Proton launch, the fourth in the year for ILS, successfully placed into orbit a United States–built GE-1A communications satellite serving customers in parts of Asia, including China, the Philippines, and India.(Jim Banke, “Proton Rocket Lifts American Satellite into Earth Orbit,” Space.com, 2 October 2000, http://www. space.com/missionlaunches/launches/proton_launch_001001.html (accessed 14 April 2008).)
Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-101 bound for the ISS. The seven-astronaut crew comprised Americans⎯James D. Halsell Jr., Scott J. Horowitz, Susan J. Helms, James S. Voss, Mary Ellen Weber, and Jeffrey N. Williams⎯and Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev. The crew planned to make repairs to the space station, focusing primarily on replacing four malfunctioning solar-powered batteries. The crew also planned to use the thrusters of the Shuttle to realign the ISS’s orbit. Having been unoccupied and underpowered for nearly a year, the station had fallen below the optimal orbiting altitude. The station had gradually descended at a rate of about 1.5 miles (2.4 kilometers) per week. The Shuttle mission plan also called for Atlantis’s crew to repair a damaged radio antenna and stabilize a shaky construction crane mounted on the outside of the ISS. Because of volatile weather in April 2000 and a full docket of rocket launches, NASA had delayed Atlantis’s launch three times, pushing the Shuttle’s liftoff into mid-May. Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, a veteran of two tenures aboard Mir, had spent more time in space than the rest of Atlantis’s crew combined.(Tom Breen, “NASA Goes for 4th Launch Try in a Month,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 May 2000; Reuters, “USA: Update 1⎯Shuttle Atlantis Lifts Off from Florida,” 19 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Off on Fourth Try,” 18 May 2000; Associated Press, “Six Americans, One Russian Bound for Space Station,” 19 May 2000.)
A GE-7 satellite, built by Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems for GE American Communications (GE Americom), launched from Korou, French Guiana, aboard an Ariane 5 rocket. The C-band satellite supplemented GE Americom’s fleet of 12 satellites servicing the Americas, replacing the GE SATCOM C1 craft. A member of the A2100 family of satellites, the GE-7 joined four others⎯the GE-1, GE-2, GE-3, and GE-4⎯to provide distribution of cable, broadcast television and radio, business television, and broadband data distribution across the contiguous United States, Mexico, the Caribbean, and South America. The GE-7 would provide “service to regional and national customers, in-orbit protection for many current cable and radio customers, plus critical telecommunications services delivered by AT&T Alascom.”(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin-Built GE-7 Satellite Successfully Launched from Kourou, French Guiana Launch Site,” news release, 14 September 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/Lock heedMartinBuiltGE7SatelliteSucc.html (accessed 25 April 2008).)
Two Earth-monitoring satellites launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base aboard a Boeing Delta II rocket, successfully reaching orbit. NASA launched its Earth Observing I (EO-I) satellite, part of its New Millenium Program, to test several advanced technologies for possible use in future missions. NASA planned to fly the US$193 million craft within 2 miles (3 kilometers) of the Landsat 7 satellite to collect the same images, with the Landsat 7 images serving as the benchmark for the new imager aboard the EO-I. The second satellite⎯the multinational SAC-C satellite, a joint venture of NASA, Argentina, Brazil, Denmark, France, and Italy⎯carried 11 instruments for studying the Earth’s surface, atmosphere, and magnetic field, including an instrument to observe the migration of the Franca whale.(Associated Press, “Two Earth-Monitoring Satellites,” 21 November 2000.)
News reached the United States that space debris had crashed to the ground near Johannesburg, South Africa, prompting NASA to respond. Several metal balls had fallen from the sky, leaving 8-inch (20-centimeter) dents in the ground. NASA scientists clarified that the debris probably came from a Delta rocket launched in 1996. Chief Scientist for Orbital Debris Nicholas L. Johnson explained that manufactured objects sent into space plummet back to Earth nearly every day, landing mostly in the ocean. Johnson also stated that NASA would compensate anyone hurt by the falling debris, remarking that no such injuries had occurred in more than 40 years.(Associated Press, “Hail of Metal Balls Puzzles Farmers, Until NASA Steps In,” 3 May 2000.)
Scientists at the American Astronomical Society convention also unveiled the first detailed map of the region of the universe inhabited by Earth. Using an Australian robotic telescope, which measured distances between more than 100,000 galaxies, researchers had charted the locations of galaxies, dark regions, and cosmic clusters. Perhaps most significantly, the new map supported a long-standing theory regarding the size limits of cosmic structures. Because of the relatively small scope of previous mapping surveys, scientists had questioned whether the known standards of cosmic size were representative. The newest map, however, did not reveal any cosmic structure outside of previous standards. Therefore, scientists could support with greater conviction the idea that size limits existed as the universe evolved. The researchers termed the limits the “end of greatness.”(James Glanz, “Robotic Telescope Affirms Assumption on Universe’s Birth,” New York Times, 7 June 2000. 933 Mark Carreau, “Rocket Gives Space Station a Life,” Houston Chronicle, 7 June 2000.)
As Russia’s Zvezda module, its major contribution to the ISS, continued its journey toward the ISS, NASA celebrated the 25th anniversary of one of the first international, collaborative missions. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project had launched on 15 July 1975, when American astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton lifted off aboard an Apollo spacecraft atop a Saturn 1B rocket. During the course of their nine-day mission, the NASA crew had docked the United States’ Apollo with Russia’s Soyuz 19 spacecraft, successfully and without incident. The Cold War–era mission, testing the ability of NASA spacecraft to link with Russian ones, had represented a significant step toward the development of international collaboration in future space exploration(NASA, “Anniversary of Apollo Soyuz Test Project Observed,” news release, N00-30, 11 July 2000; Reuters, “US, Russia Mark Space Jubilee as New Era Beckons,” 11 July 2000.)
A Sirius-2 communications satellite launched aboard a Russian Proton-K rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The launch marked the second success for the Sirius Company, which planned to broadcast digital radio to the United States. Sirius had placed its first satellite in orbit on 1 July 2000, scheduling a third launch for November 2000.(Reuters, “Kazakhstan: Russia Launches U.S. Satellite from Kazakhstan,” 5 September 2000.)
Mitsuyuki Ueda of the Aeronautics and Space Development Division of Japan’s Science and Technology Agency announced that Japan had decided to freeze the development of an unpiloted space shuttle, which was four years behind schedule, because of problems in Japan’s shuttle program, as well as in its H-2 rocket program. Japan had originally conceived its planned 20-ton (18,000-kilogram or 18.1-tonne) shuttle in the 1980s, modeling it after the U.S. Space Shuttle, and designing it to conduct scientific experiments and to carry into space payloads of up to 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes). Technical and financial setbacks within Japan’s shuttle program contributed to the freeze. In addition, because the original plan had called for Japan to launch the space shuttle aboard a Japanese-designed H-2 rocket, a launch failure of an H-2 rocket had influenced the decision to halt Japan’s shuttle program. In the failed launch of November 1999, officials had to destroy the rocket in midair, leading an advisory panel to suggest that Japan’s planned shuttle should launch from a reusable high-speed jet plane, rather than atop a rocket.(Associated Press, “Japan Freezes Plans To Make Unmanned Space Shuttle,” 2 August 2000.)
NASA successfully launched the GOES-L satellite aboard an Atlas 2A rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The new weather satellite would provide the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration with detailed readings on severe weather systems affecting the United States. NASA deemed the GOES-L satellite a top priority because of the declining returns of the aging GOES-8 satellite. NASA had delayed the US$220 million satellite project because of engine problems, causing anxiety to weather forecasters who depended on the satellites to track the powerful hurricanes that affected the United States in 1999. As Director of the National Weather Service’s Southern Region, William Proenza explained, “It is vitally important that we have continuity of data or we may be finding ourselves impaired in our ability of forecasting.” NASA had kept the May 2000 launch of the GOES-L on track, despite some calls to postpone it so that NASA could launch Shuttle Atlantis on an urgent repair mission to the International Space Station (ISS). However, NASA officials had determined that the risk of inadequate weather forecasting was too great to take a chance on delaying the launch.(Associated Press, “NASA Launches Hurricane-Tracking Satellite,” 3 May 2000; Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Weather Satellite Has Successful Launch, Heads for Orbit,” 3 May 2000.)
Following a 24-hour delay caused by a computer anomaly, NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) successfully launched the Lockheed Martin–built, NOAAL spacecraft from Vandenberg Air Force Base, aboard a Titan II rocket. Ground controllers confirmed that the craft had deployed its solar array and verified a power-positive condition. NASA and NOAA had designed the satellite, the second in a series of five polar-orbiting spacecraft, to collect meteorological data and to transmit the information to users worldwide. NOAA’s National Weather Service planned to use the craft’s data for long-range weather and climate forecasts. Although NASA had managed the project of building and launching the satellite, it intended to transfer operational control to NOAA 10 days following the launch.(NOAA, “NOAA-L Weather Satellite Successfully Launched,” news release 2000-069, 21 September 2000, http://www.publicaffairs.noaa.gov/releases2000/sep00/noaa00069.html (accessed 29 April 2008); Associated Press, “Weather Satellite Launched After Delay,” 21 September 2000.)
A Starsem Soyuz-Fregat rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit for the European Space Agency (ESA) the final pair of Cluster II scientific satellites, Rumba and Tango. The launch was the 10th consecutive success for the French-Russian Starsem consortium. The first pair of Cluster II satellites, named Salsa and Samba, had launched on 16 July 2000. Designed to determine the physical process of the interaction between the solar wind and Earth’s magnetosphere, the mission’s main objective was to increase understanding of space weather, viewed as “an increasingly significant obstacle to satellite activity,” thereby improving scientists’ forecasting abilities. Each of the four spacecraft contained a collection of instruments for detecting plasma fields, waves, and particles. The Cluster II mission, designed to last for two years following an initial three-month period of instrument and system commissioning, was an international effort of more than 200 scientists from Canada, China, the Czech Republic, ESA member states, Hungary, India, Israel, Japan, Russia, and the United States. The original Cluster mission had ended during its inaugural launch in 1996, when a malfunction had caused the explosion of Arianespace Inc.’s Ariane 5 rocket.(European Space Agency, “Lift Off for Second Pair of Cluster II Spacecraft,” news release 52-2000, http://www. esa.int/esaCP/Pr_52_2000_p_EN.html (accessed 8 May 2008); Space Business News, “Soyuz Launches Second Pair of Cluster Probes Igniting Science Mission; Tenth Successful Launch in 18 Months,” 16 August 2000.)
A Russian Proton-K rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit the Russian Ministry of Defense’s Raduga-1-5 spacecraft, a military communications satellite with the alternate names Globus-1 and Cosmos 2372. Although the Globus-1 was a classified program, news sources reported that the craft would use a geostationary orbit to serve as a relay link for Russian military forces. At the time of the launch, many Raduga craft remained in orbit, but only five were operational.(Justin Ray, “Proton Rocket Lofts Russian Military Satellite,” Spaceflight Now, 28 August 2000; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 562, 1 September 2000, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx562.html (accessed 6 August 2008). 975 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Duxbury Named Project Manager of Stardust Mission,” news release 2000- 084, 30 August 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/duxbury.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Space Media Inc. and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), prime contractor of the Russian service module of the International Space Station (ISS), announced a new multimedia partnership called Enermedia LLC. Under the new partnership, Space Media Inc. would use the Russian Space Program archives to develop and provide multimedia, which the Russian service module would broadcast on television and the Internet.(SPACEHAB, “Space Media Inc and RSC Energia Join Forces Forming New Multimedia Partnership,” news release, 2 August 2000, http://www.spacehab.com/news/2000/00_08_02.htm (accessed 8 May 2008).)
