The Russian Space Agency launched the Soyuz TM-33 to the ISS on a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 4 a.m. (CDT). The mission’s crew members consisted of Russian cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyez and Konstantin M. Kozeev and French astronaut Claudie André-Deshays Haigneré; Afanasyez was also Mission Commander. The spacecraft carried supplies and equipment for the ISS. The crew members planned to conduct joint operations and scientific research with the crew of Expedition 3. In addition, one of the main purposes of the mission, designated Soyuz 3 Taxi Flight, was to deliver the Soyuz spacecraft to the ISS, so that the ISS crew could use it as an emergency escape vehicle. The new Soyuz would remain at the ISS, and the spacecraft’s crew would return to Earth in the older Soyuz TM-32, which was already docked at the station.(NASA, “Soyuz 3 Taxi Flight Crew,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/station/crew/exp3/taxi3/index.html (accessed 26 November 2008); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 576, 1 November 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx576.html (accessed 26 November 2008).)
The Microwave Anisotropy Probe (MAP) launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. MAP carried two Gregorian telescopes, designed to record temperatures in selected locations throughout the sky. MAP’s broad mission was to provide further insight into how the universe formed. The spacecraft cost US$95 million to build.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Delta II Helps Unlock Secrets of the Universe,” news release, 30 June 2001, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2001/q2/news_release_010630h.html (accessed 28 January 2010); Peter N. Spotts, “Latest NASA Launch Aims To Take Cosmic Baby Picture,” Christian Science Monitor, 29 June 2001;)
Russia launched the Coronas-F solar observatory satellite aboard a Tsiklon 3 rocket. The launch took place from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in northern Russia. Engineers had designed the satellite to monitor light intensity, solar bursts, and several solar radii. The satellite carried 13 separate instruments, to gather data as the spacecraft orbited while pointing toward the Sun. The Coronas-F satellite was Russia’s second attempt to place in orbit such a complicated research craft. The Coronas-I, launched in 1994, had operated for only a couple of months before a control failure had caused it to lose its functionality.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573.)
The Russian Space Agency launched an automatic cargo carrier to the ISS from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:24 p.m. (UT). A Soyuz-FG booster lifted the Progress M1-7 cargo carrier. Progress M1-7 was to deliver 2.5 tonnes (2.8 tons or 5,511 pounds) of equipment, food, and fuel to the space station, as well as a microsatellite called Klibri, which the crew would release after the carrier had docked with the ISS.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 577, 1 December 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx577.html (accessed 12 December 2001).)
NASA announced that it had canceled the X-33 rocket development project, an endeavor that many in the space industry had hoped would produce a vehicle to replace the Space Shuttle. NASA ended the five-year program after having invested nearly US$1 billion in developing a reusable launching vehicle. The X-33 program, contracted to Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company, had sought to build the world’s most technologically advanced space vehicleshaped like an arrowhead and protected by a heat-resistant metallic covering. Because of its capability to ascend to space without having to drop weight by discarding boosters after launch, the new vehicle would have significantly improved on the Shuttle. NASA officials had hoped that the X- 33 would lead to development of the VentureStar vehicle, for transporting people and cargo into space. Operating at considerably less expense to NASA than the Space Shuttles, the VentureStar would permit more space missions per year. NASA’s decision to cut funding for the X-33 was part of its general effort to reduce its budget. NASA officials in charge of the Space Launch Initiative (SLI) had determined that, although the X-33 program had yielded significant new knowledge, it had not advanced to a point at which NASA engineers could readily implement the new technology. Arthur G. Stephenson, the Director of NASA’s MSFC, which had managed the program, called the decision to deny further funding “a very tough decision.”(NASA, “NASA Reaches Milestone in Space Launch Initiative Program; Also Announces No SLI Funding for X- 33 or X-34,” news release 01-31, 1 March 2001; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Ends Project on Rocket Meant To Replace Space Shuttle,” New York Times, 2 March 2001; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Kills $1.3 Billion Space Plane Project,” Washington Post, 2 March 2001; Los Angeles Times, “NASA Ends X-33 Project that Sought To Cut Spaceflight Costs,” 2 March 2001.)
The Mars Odyssey spacecraft launched successfully aboard a Delta 2 rocket. The craft, built by Lockheed Martin Space Systems and controlled by scientists at NASA’s JPL, had headed to orbit Mars in search of evidence of water on the Red Planet. NASA officials expected the trip to Mars to take more than six months and the data collection to continue for more than two years. NASA had designed Mars Odysseyequipping it with a thermal-emissions imaging system, a gamma- ray spectrometer, and a radiation monitorto investigate further the question of whether Mars might have once supported life. By collecting data about the climate and geology of Mars’s surface, scientists hoped to explore theories regarding the planet’s seemingly harsh climate change. NASA and members of the scientific community watched the US$300 million craft closely, hoping for success. In 1999 Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander had both failed to accomplish their missions. Upon the successful launch, NASA’s chief Mars program scientist celebrated: “We’ve got a program! This is the next step . . . It’s kind of like setting off on the Lewis and Clark voyage across North America. We’re bound for a new frontier.”(Lockheed Martin Space Systems, “Lockheed Martin-Built 2001 Mars Odyssey Successfully Launched, Begins Journey to Mars,” news release, 7 April 2001, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2001/ LockheedMartinBuilt2001MarsOdysseyS.html (accessed 28 January 2010); William Harwood, “Mars Odyssey Takes Off for Red Planet; NASA’s Stalled Exploration Program Resumes with $297 Million Mission,” Washington Post, 8 April 2001; Mark Carreau, “Flawless Odyssey Launch Fuels Hoe: Three-Year Mission to Mars Follows Pair of NASA Failures,” Houston Chronicle, 8 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Succeeds in Launching Craft To Survey Mars Anxious Time Ahead for Scientists,” 8 April 2001.)
NASA launched the Thermosphere Ionosphere Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics (TIMED) spacecraft on a Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The purpose of the mission was to study a region called the Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere/Ionosphere (MLTI), located 40 to 110 miles (60 to 180 kilometers) above Earth. The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory had designed the spacecraft to produce the first set of comprehensive, global measurements of the MLTI, a region that scientists had not yet thoroughly analyzed, in which electrical currents surge and auroras create a glow over the northern and southern hemispheres of Earth. TIMED, which launched on the same rocket as the Jason-1 oceanography satellite, was the first in a series of six spacecraft that NASA intended to send to observe the MLTI from a 388-mile (625-kilometer) orbit of Earth. NASA’s GSFC would manage the TIMED spacecraft for the Office of Space Science in Washington, DC; the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory would operate the spacecraft for NASA during the mission.
Russian President Vladimir Putin appointed a new director of Russia’s largest manufacturer of spacecraft and rockets, the Khrunichev State Research and Production Company. Putin selected Alexander I. Medvedev to succeed Anatoly Kiselyov, who had headed the company for 26 years. At the time of the change in leadership, Kiselyov had reported failing health. Companies with interests in Russian space exploration continued to adjust to postcommunist operations. The Khrunichev State Research and Production Company, providing much of the revenue to keep Russia’s space projects alive, manufactured Proton booster rockets used to launch commercial and communication satellites.(Associated Press, “New Chief for Russia Space Company,” 7 February 2001.)
The People’s Republic of China launched a robotic spacecraft from the Gobi desert, a significant step in the country’s long-term plan to join the United States and Russia as one of the only nations capable of sending humans into space. The Shenzhou 2 craft reached orbit about 10 minutes after launch. China had shrouded its 31-year-old space program in secrecy, releasing few details about funding or about China’s future goals. People’s Daily, however, called the launch “an important step in realizing manned spaceflight.” President Jiang Zemin urged Chinese space officials to further accomplishments, saying, “I hope you will work persistently and unremittingly to achieve even greater victory.” Space experts speculated that a successful Shenzhou 2 mission could mean that China would be ready to send a man or woman to space in the next two to five years. Chinese officials remained circumspect regarding their exact plans.(Associated Press, “Rocket Launch Aids New Space Program,” 11 January 2001; Associated Press, “Second Unmanned Chinese Spacecraft Returns to Earth,” 16 January 2001.)
India successfully launched its first experimental geosynchronous satellite (GSAT-1) aboard the Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV). The successful test suggested that India was poised to launch its own communication satellites. In a previous trial, India had halted a GSLV launch only moments before liftoff, when sensors indicated that the booster had insufficient power. Subsequent tests remedied the problem, enabling the successful 18 April launch. The Indian government praised the mission as the culmination of a decade of research and development aimed at achieving Indian launch capability.(Indian Embassy, “GSLV Launched Successfully,” news release, 18 April 2001, http://www.indianembassy.org/press_release/2001/april/apr_18.htm (accessed 1 July 2008); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 570, 1 May 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx570.html (accessed 24 July 2008).)
The American geosynchronous relay satellite XM 1, often referred to as Roll, launched into space aboard a Russian Zenit rocket, from a floating launchpad in the Pacific Ocean. The launch of Roll followed on the heels of the March 2001 delivery to space of XM 2, known as Rock. With both Rock and Roll in orbit, XM Satellite Radio became available to subscribing listeners in the United States. The president of the company XM Satellite Radio, based in Washington, DC, called Rock and Roll the “newest power couple” in Washington, DC, declaring that his firm was ready to compete with Sirius Radio for subscribers. Boeing Satellite Systems had designed and built the satellites.(The Boeing Company, “Sea Launch on a Mission To Launch XM’s ‘Roll’ Satellite,” 1 May 2001, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2001/q2/news_release_010501s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 571, 1 June 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx571.html (accessed 28 July 2008); Jim Banke, “Sea Launch Sends ‘Roll’ Spacecraft into Orbit for XM Satellite Radio,” Space.com, 8 May 2001, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/launches/zenit_launch_010508.html (accessed 28 July 2008).)
NASA’s Helios aircraft set a world record for the highest altitude ever attained by an aircraft without rocket power. The solar-powered, propeller-driven aircraft reached an altitude of 96,500 feet (30,000 meters), eclipsing the previous record by more than 10,000 feet (3,000 meters). The remotely piloted aircraft took off from the U.S. Navy’s Pacific Missile Range Facility (PMRF) in Hawaii at 8:48 a.m. local time on 13 August, staying aloft for nearly 17 hours before landing at 1:43 a.m. on 14 August. Fuel cells on the aircraft’s wings provided electrical power during the daylight hours, when the aircraft achieved the record altitude; at night, the plane’s propellers acted as generators, providing electrical power to control the aircraft. According to NASA, an aircraft operating at such an altitude would be able to monitor the environment, improve communications on Earth, and simulate the conditions of flight within the atmosphere of Mars.(NASA, “NASA Solar Aircraft Sets Altitude Record; Communications, Environmental Breakthroughs Expected,” news release 01-165, 14 August 2001.)
Maxwell W. Hunter II, one of the world’s leading rocket designers and space engineers, died at the age of 79. Hunter had graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1944 and had worked for Douglas Aircraft. While at Douglas, he had designed several of the company’s missiles, including the Nike and the Thor, as well as many of its space projects, including the Delta rocket and the Saturn S-IV stage of the Apollo Moon rocket program. Hunter had later worked for Lockheed Missiles and Space Company. Among his achievements with Lockheed was the design of the Space Shuttle. Hunter had also advised Presidents John F. Kennedy and President Lyndon B. Johnson on space programs and space policy and had been a noted proponent of nuclear-powered spacecraft and a space-based laser defense program. In addition, Hunter had authored nearly 60 technical papers and had received the National Space Society’s Wernher von Braun Memorial Award in recognition of his contributions to the development of missiles, rockets, and spaceflight.(Dennis McLellan, “Maxwell Hunter II, 79; Pioneer Rocket Scientist,” Los Angeles Times, 17 November 2001. 146 Mark Carreau, “International Crew Completes Cable Task on Final Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 13 November 2001.)
NASA, conducting a test over the Pacific Ocean, aborted a planned attempt at the speed record for aircraft when the Pegasus rocket carrying a prototype X-43A jet veered out of control. NASA had employed a B-52 to carry the X-43A and the Pegasus rocket to 45,000 feet, where the test was to begin. According to the plan, the plane would release the Pegasus, which would then carry the X-43A to 100,000 feet (30,500 meters) before releasing the jet. Instead, however, the Pegasus rocket had gone out of control almost immediately after its release. NASA spokesperson Alan Brown explained: “The Pegasus went out of control. It appeared parts were breaking off of it.” NASA ordered the Pegasus destroyed after only a few seconds, and the ensuing explosion resulted in the loss of the scramjet as well. NASA officials and flight enthusiasts had hoped that the US$185 million experimental plane would top speeds of Mach 7. Instead, engineers scrambled to determine the cause of the accident.(Peter Pae, “Hypersonic Aircraft Test Fails; Plane Is Destroyed,” Los Angeles Times, 3 June 2001; New York Times, “NASA Halts Scramjet Test,” 3 June 2001; Washington Post, “NASA Aborts Bid for Speed Mark, Blows Up Rocket,” 3 June 2001.)
The Russian spacecraft Soyuz lifted off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan propelled by a Soyuz-U rocket. The spacecraft carried one of the most controversial space travelers in historyAmerican businessman Dennis A. Tito. Tito had paid the Russian Space Agency for the opportunity to accompany cosmonauts Talgat A. Musabayev and Yuri M. Baturin on the mission to the ISS. Many space officials, regarding the endeavor as unsafe and capricious, had opposed Tito’s presence on the flight. Only days before the launch, Tito had gained the final approval of the consortium of nations building the ISS, becoming the highest profile space tourist to fly into orbit.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 570, 1 May 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx570.html (accessed 24 July 2008); Warren E. Leary, “Russia Wins Fight To Be First Space Travel Agent,” New York Times, 25 April 2001.)
Roy Estess, Acting Director of NASA’s JSC, appointed Randy Stone as Deputy Director of JSC. As Deputy Director, Stone would be responsible for planning, organizing, and controlling activities necessary to meet the Center’s goals and objectives. Stone had worked for Mission Control in Houston and for JSC for 34 years and, before his appointment as Deputy Director, had served as JSC’s Acting Associate Director of Management. He had begun his career with NASA in 1967, developing equipment for the lunar landings of the Apollo program. During his tenure with NASA, he had worked on numerous programs, including Skylab, the Space Shuttle, and the ISS.(NASA JSC, “Mission Control Veteran Randy Stone Named Johnson Space Center Deputy Director,” news release J01-111, 15 November 2001.)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) launched the first of its HII-A vehicles at 4:00 p.m., Japan Standard Time (JST), from Tanegashima Space Center. The HII-A carried two payloads, the Doppler Ranging Equipment and the Laser Ranging Equipment, both instruments designed to monitor the rocket during and after launch. Observers regarded the launch as a major success for the Japanese space program, which had designed the rocket as the country’s primary large-scale launch vehicle.(Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2001”; Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), “H-IIA Launch Vehicle,” http://www.jaxa.jp/projects/rockets/h2a/index_e.html (accessed 10 November 2008); JAXA, “LRE (Laser Ranging Equipment),” http://god.tksc.jaxa.jp/lr/lre.html (accessed 10 November 2008).)
The Russian Space Agency launched a module of the ISS designed to expand the space station’s size and provide other capabilities. The module, called Docking Compartment One (DC-1) or Pirs (Russian for pier), launched at 11:44 p.m. (UT), on a Soyuz-U rocket, from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. A cargo craft called Progress M-SO1 would transport the module to the ISS. The Russian Space Agency intended the DC-1 to provide additional stowage space for the ISS, an airlock for spacewalks, and an additional docking port for future Soyuz and Progress vehicles. The 8,000-pound (3,600-kilogram), 16-foot-long (4.9-meter-long) module would increase the total mass of the space station to 303,500 pounds (138,000 kilograms).(Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2001”; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 575, 1 October 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx575.html (accessed 14 November 2008).)
The Russian Space Agency launched a crewless logistics and resupply mission to the ISS. The Progress automatic cargo spacecraft launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 9:32 a.m., Universal Time (UT),108 on a Soyuz-U rocket. The mission, officially designated as M-45, carried to the ISS 2.5 tonnes (2,500 kilograms, 2.8 tons, or 5,512 pounds) of fuel, oxygen, equipment, and other supplies.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 574; Jesco von Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2001: The Year in Review,” http://spaceoperations.nasa.gov/2001/yearinrev/01YearReview.html (accessed 10 November 2008).)
A rocket carrying a NASA satellite and other payloads failed to reach orbit. The 91-foot (27.7- meter) Taurus rocket launched at 11:49 a.m. Pacific Daylight Time (PDT) from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, and within minutes, NASA observed indications of problems with the rocket, including a skewed trajectory near the time of the first-stage separation. The rocket’s manufacturer Orbital Sciences Corporation was uncertain about the exact details of the launch problem but presumed that the rocket had not reached orbit. The rocket was carrying NASA’s ozone-analyzing Quick Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (QuikTOMS) satellite, a private imaging satellite called OrbView-4, and a private payload with the cremated remains of individuals who had paid to have their remains launched into orbit.(Associated Press, “Rocket Launch with NASA, Orbital Sciences Payload Goes Awry, Satellites Probably Lost,” 21 September 2001.)
NASA launched the Jason-1 oceanography satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellite launched on the same rocket as the TIMED spacecraft, but the two spacecraft were part of separate missions. Jason-1 belonged to a joint U.S.-French mission to monitor global climate interactions between Earth’s atmosphere and seas, continuing the mission that the TOPEX/Poseidon spacecraft had begun in 1992. The 500-kilogram (1,100-pound) Jason- 1 weighed about 1/5th of the TOPEX/Poseidon and carried its predecessor’s main instrument―the Poseidon 2 altimeter―as well as other, more advanced instruments that would provide Jason-1 with improved operational utility.(NASA, “NASA/French Ocean-Observing Satellite Set To Soar,” news release 01-225, 19 November 2001; NASA JPL, “Ocean Surface Topography from Space: Missions―Jason-1 Launch,”29 July 2008, http://topex- www.jpl.nasa.gov/mission/jason-1-launch.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
NASA commemorated the 75th anniversary of the first successful launch of a liquid-fueled rocket. On 26 March 1926, Robert H. Goddard had launched a 10-foot-long (3-meter-long) rocket fueled by gasoline and liquid oxygen. The rocket flew just over 40 feet (12 meters) high using the same technology that would one day launch massive rockets carrying Space Shuttles and other research craft into space. NASA had named Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) after Robert H. Goddard. At the anniversary celebration, NASA’s Chief Historian Roger D. Launius called Goddard the forefather of American space exploration: “Dr. Goddard was a true visionary, having already visualized flight in outer space by the time he was 21.” Goddard had turned 21 in 1903, some 50 years before space exploration began in earnest. Even 75 years after Goddard’s successful test, NASA continued to use liquid-propulsion systems to launch most of its spacecraft and satellites.(NASA, “March 16 Marks 75th Anniversary of First Liquid-Fueled Rocket Launch,” news release 01-35, 12 March 2001.)
Abe Silverstein, the former Director of NASA’s Lewis Research Center (LeRC), died at age 92. Silverstein’s work in the aerospace industry predated NASA itself; he had begun his research career in 1929, working for NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. After serving in World War II, Silverstein had played a leading role in constructing the United States’ first supersonic propulsion wind tunnel. He had contributed to the Mercury and Apollo missions before 1969, when he assumed the head position at LeRC, today known as Glenn Research Center (GRC). During his career, Silverstein had received the Guggenheim Medal for “technical contributions and visionary leadership in advancing technology of aircraft and propulsion performance.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called Silverstein one of NASA’s “true founding members,” who had made possible NASA’s robotic and human space programs. NASA also remembered Silverstein for his naming of the Mercury and Apollo missions. In addition, Silverstein had successfully promoted the liquid propulsion techniques pioneered at LeRC for use in the Apollo missions. Two sons and five grandchildren survived him.(NASA, “Dr. Abe Silverstein, Early Architect of the Apollo Moon Landing, Dies,” news release 01-109, 1 June 2001; Wolfgang Saxon, “Abe Silverstein, 92, Engineer Who Named Apollo Program,” New York Times, 5 June 2001; Associated Press, “Abe Silverstein, 92, Pioneer in Space Research at NASA,” 4 June 2001.)
The Russian cargo craft Progress M1-6 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, carrying 2.5 tons (2.3 tonnes or 2,300 kilograms) of supplies for the ISS crew. Along with food, research materials, and a new computer system to replace the damaged control machines, the cargo carrier also hauled 1 ton (0.9 tonnes or 907 kilograms) of extra fuel to the space station, so that Progress M1-6 could push the ISS into a higher orbit. Russian Space Agency officials planned for the spacecraft to dock with the ISS two days after launch. The launch was the first using the newly improved Soyuz-FG rocket, a booster designed to use 5 percent less fuel than previous models.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 571; Mark Wade, “Progress M1,” Encyclopaedia Astronautica, http://www.astronautix.com/craft/proessm1.htm (accessed 29 July 2008).)
