NASA’s KSC launched the Reuven Ramaty High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (HESSI) on a Pegasus XL rocket from a Lockheed L-1011 aircraft. The purpose of HESSI’s two-year mission was to analyze particle acceleration and explosive energy released in solar flares, using imaging and spectroscopic instruments. Solar flares can release in a few minutes, or even just a few seconds, an amount of energy nearly equal to that released by the explosion of 1 billion megatons (907 trillion tonnes or 907 quintillion kilograms) of TNT, disrupting communications satellites and power grids. Scientists at the University of California at Berkeley, which would manage the US$85 million mission, had designed the 645-pound (290-kilogram) probe.(Houston Chronicle, “New NASA Probe To Analyze High-Energy Flares from Sun,” 5 February 2002; Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
A Russian Kosmos-3M rocket launched the first Algerian spacecraft, AlSAT-1, from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in Russia. The Algerian Space Agency (Agence Spatiale Algérienne) had designed the 92-kilogram (202-pound), imaging microsatellite to provide multispectral, medium- resolution images for remote-sensing purposes, particularly the monitoring of natural disasters. The Algerian Space Agency intended AlSAT-1 as the first of five microsatellites for a program called the Disaster Monitoring Constellation.(Agence Spatiale Algérienne [Algerian Space Agency], “Lancement AlSAT-1,” http://www.asal-dz.org/ lancement.php (accessed 29 October 2008); Agence Spatiale Algérienne [Algerian Space Agency], “Mission AlSAT-1,” http://www.asal-dz.org/mission.php (accessed 29 October 2008).)
NASA officials stated that NASA had used Web sites such as Yahoo! and eBay to find discontinued electronic equipment. NASA had continued to use electronic components such as 8-inch-floppy-disc drives, circuit boards, and computer chips, not in the Space Shuttles themselves, but in equipment used to service and support the Shuttles. For example, NASA had purchased outdated medical equipment to acquire the increasingly scarce Intel 8086 computer chip, a variant of the chip used in IBM’s first personal computers in 1981. NASA had continued to use the Intel 8086 chip in diagnostic equipment for the Space Shuttle booster rockets, also developed in the early 1980s. Although NASA planned to develop various systems with new hardware, some crucial systems remained dependent on antiquated electronic parts.(William J. Broad, “For Parts, NASA Boldly Goes . . . on Ebay,” New York Times, 12 May 2002.)
NASA launched Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) on a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. NASA scientists had created CONTOURscheduled to make close
Thomas J. Kelly, designated by NASA as father of the lunar module, died at the age of 72 in Cutchogue, New York. Kelly had led a team of engineers at Grumman Aircraft Corporation in designing and building the Lunar Excursion Module known as the Eagle. Apollo 11 astronauts had used the Eagle to land on the Moon and to return to the orbiting command module for the trip back to Earth. In 1972 NASA had awarded Kelly with its Distinguished Public Service Medal for his work on the Apollo program. Kelly’s wife, six children, and 10 grandchildren survived him.(Warren E. Leary, “T. J. Kelly, 72, Dies; Father of Lunar Module,” New York Times, 27 March 2002.)
The China National Space Administration’s (CNSA’s) Kaituozhe 1 rocket failed during launch, for reasons that remained unclear. Kaituozhe 1 was the first of the CNSA’s new all-solid-fuel, four-stage launch vehicles. CNSA and other Chinese government agencies apparently provided no information to the public about the event or about the reason the launch had failed.(Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
The Earth observation satellite Aqua launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellite Aqua was a component of the Earth Observing System (EOS), which also included the Terra satellite launched in December 1999. Aqua’s primary purpose was to acquire information about the effects of climate change on the water cycle. The satellite would also collect data to help scientists examine biological systems dependent upon water and improve long-term forecasts of weather and climate. Brazil, Japan, and the United States planned for their joint project Aqua to continue for six years.(NASA JPL, “Aqua Launched To Study Earth’s Water Cycle,” news release, 4 May 2002; Warren E. Leary, “NASA To View Interaction of Earth’s Water and Climate,” New York Times, 30 April 2002.)
NOAA’s Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES), NOAA-M, launched on a Titan 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. NOAA intended the satellite, which was renamed NOAA-17 upon reaching orbit, to collect meteorological data to improve weather forecasting. The satellite was the third in a series of five satellites collectively referred to as the POES system. NOAA planned to transmit the satellite’s data to its National Weather Service, as well as to organizations in other countries. Lockheed Martin Space Systems had built and launched the satellite for NOAA, with NASA’s GSFC managing the project and providing technical guidance.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2002, p. 46; NOAA, “NOAA-M Environmental Satellite Successfully Launched,” 24 June 2002, http://www.noaanews.noaa.gov/stories/s929.htm (accessed 18 August 2008); NOAA, “Polar Operation Environmental Satellite: Polar Orbiting Satellites,” http://www.oso.noaa.gov/poes/ (accessed 18 August 2008).)
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) announced its first successful launch of a satellite into a geosynchronous transfer orbit. ISRO launched METSAT, a meteorological satellite, from Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India, using it own rocket, the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV). The new version of the PSLV reflected a significant enhancement of the rocket’s capabilities and a substantial improvement in ISRO’s overall launch capabilities. Previous versions of the PSLV had been capable of placing 900- kilogram (2,000-pound) satellites in a 900-kilometer (560-mile), polar Sun–synchronous orbit, whereas the PSLV-C4 had placed the 1,055-kilogram (2,325-pound) METSAT in a highly elliptical orbit with an apogee (the farthest point from Earth) of 34,700 kilometers (21,600 miles).(ISRO, “PSLV-C4 Launch Successful―Places METSAT in Orbit,” news release, 12 September 2002, http://www.isro.org/pressrelease/Sep13_2002.htm (accessed 3 October 2008); Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
A Russian Space Agency launch failed, when an uncrewed Soyuz-U rocket exploded after the rocket’s engine automatically shut down, 29 seconds after liftoff from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in Russia. The rocket was carrying a Foton-M1 spacecraft with 44 microgravity experiments that ESA, Japan, Russia, and the United States had intended for the ISS. ESA stated that it planned to rebuild the Foton-M1 spacecraft for a later launch.(ESA, “Foton,” http://www.spaceflight.esa.int/users/index.cfm?act=default.page&level=11&page=facfoton (accessed 6 January 2009); Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2002.”)
ESA launched the environmental satellite Envisat on an Ariane-5 rocket. The primary mission of Envisat, designed to provide continuous monitoring of Earth’s atmosphere, ice caps, and land, was to measure sea color in coastal areas and in oceans. To perform this monitoring, Envisat was equipped with 10 optical and radar instruments, including the Advanced Synthetic Aperture Radar and the Medium Resolution Imaging Spectrometer. ESA planned for the satellite to orbit Earth every 100 minutes, examining each region of Earth once every 35 days.
NASA successfully launched the third replenishment spacecraft for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) fleet. The TDRS-J satellite launched aboard an Atlas 2A rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 9:42 p.m. (EST). TDRS satellites comprised a communication-signal relay system providing tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. The TDRS satellite system served numerous NASA programs, including the HST, the ISS, and the Space Shuttle. NASA had launched the first TDRS satellite in 1983.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing-Built NASA Tracking and Data Relay Satellite Successfully Launched,” news release, 4 December 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021204s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); National Space Science Data Center, “NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS),” http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/multi/tdrs.html (accessed 31 October 2008).)
NASA appointed Michael U. Rudolphi as Deputy Director for NASA’s SSC. NASA administrators stated that the selection was part of the “One NASA” initiative of enhancing partnerships among NASA’s various centers. Rudolphi would assume the post after the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour on STS-113, scheduled for liftoff in November 2002. Since January 2000, Rudolphi had managed the Reusable Solid Rocket Motor Project at NASA’s MSFC. He had begun his career with NASA in 1998 as Facility Manager for MSFC’s Advanced Solid Rocket Motor Project. Before joining NASA, Rudolphi had been a manager of the contractor plant for the Solid Rocket Booster Project at NASA’s KSC.(NASA, “NASA Announces New Stennis Space Center Deputy Director,” news release 02-201, 17 October 2002. 312 NASA, “STS-112: Extending the Space Station’s Backbone,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/ shuttle/archives/sts- 112/ (accessed 17 October 2008).)
NASA announced that it had lost contact with the US$159 million comet-exploring spacecraft Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR), launched on 3 July 2002. Ground controllers had lost contact with CONTOUR after a scheduled ignition of its solid-propellant rocket engine, designed to propel the spacecraft out of Earth-orbiting space and into a heliocentric trajectory where it would eventually encounter comets Encke, Schwassmann-Wachmann, and d’Arrest. At the time of its scheduled ignition, the spacecraft was orbiting Earth approximately 140 miles (225 kilometers) above the Indian Ocean.(Warren E. Leary, “Comet-Exploring Spacecraft Has Disappeared, NASA Says,” New York Times, 16 August 2002; NASA National Space Science Data Center, “CONTOUR,” http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ nmc/masterCatalog.do?sc=2002-034A (accessed 26 September 2008).)
The first Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV), the product of a long-term program designed to provide military and other satellites with enduring, reliable access to space, launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Lockheed Martin had developed the rocket, called the Atlas 5. The EELV placed the European television satellite Hot Bird 6 in its preliminary orbit 31 minutes after its launch, and the satellite’s thrusters later maneuvered it into its final orbit. The EELV program had resulted from the U.S. government’s research into the 1986 Challenger disaster. The U.S. Air Force had reportedly paid Lockheed Martin and the Boeing Company more than US$500 million each to design an EELV. The U.S. Air Force had requested an EELV that was an advanced version of existing rockets, rather than an entirely new system, estimating that, through 2020, the EELV could reduce the cost of placing military satellites into orbit by approximately US$10 billion. France-based Eutelsat (European Telecommunications Satellite Organization) owned the Hot Bird 6 broadcast satellite, which Alcatel Space had built.(William Harwood, “Into Space, A New Kind of Rocket,” Washington Post, 22 August 2002; Lockheed Martin, “Inaugural Atlas V Scores Success for ILS, Lockheed Martin,” news release, 21 August 2002, http://www. lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2002/InauguralAtlasVScoresSucceslForILSL.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
Two spacecraft comprising the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) launched on a single rocket vehicle from Russia’s Plesetsk Cosmodrome. The five-year mission’s main purpose was to map variations in Earth’s gravity field, using the GPS and a microwave ranging system to measure the distance between the mission’s two identical satellites―nicknamed Tom and Jerry. The two craft were to monitor each other while flying in a polar orbit 500 kilometers (311 miles) above Earth. This mission, to study measurements of gravity variations, could help scientists understand better the changes in the transport of mass around the planet. Changes in mass, such as ocean currents, ground-water storage, and mass within Earth, can affect climate and other aspects of the planet’s environment. The GRACE mission was a partnership between NASA and the Deutsche Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt (the German Aerospace Center).(University of Texas Center for Space Research, “GRACE: Mission Overview,” http://www.csr.utexas.edu/grace/overview.html (accessed 11 August 2002); Warren E. Leary, “New Satellites To Map Gravity More Precisely,” New York Times, 19 March 2002.)
NASA announced the extension of its existing contract with ATK Thiokol Propulsion for the production and refurbishment of reusable solid rocket motors (RSRM) for the Space Shuttle program. Shuttle launches required two RSRMs and three main engines to provide sufficient thrust for the Shuttle to attain orbit. Under the modified agreement, ATK Thiokol would produce and refurbish 70 RSRMs and three flight-support motors. The US$429 million modification extended to May 2007 the original US$2.4 billion contract, which NASA and ATK Thiokol had agreed on in October 1998. The original contract had been the sixth agreement between ATK Thiokol Propulsion and NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama.(NASA, “NASA Extends Reusable Solid Rocket Motor Contract with ATK Thiokol Through May 2007,” news release c02-q, 1 July 2002.)
Boeing successfully launched its first Delta 4 rocket, which the U.S. Air Force would use in 2003 in the EELV program. The purpose of the EELV program was to develop reliable and cost- efficient launch capabilities for commercial and government payloads. The launch occurred at 5:39 p.m. (EST) at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The Delta 4, a “Medium+” configuration of Boeing’s five-member Delta 4 family of rockets, deployed Eutelsat’s (European Telecommunications Satellite Organization’s) commercial telecommunications satellite W5 into geosynchronous transfer orbit. During the next scheduled Delta 4 launch―the first mission for the EELV program―the Air Force planned to use a Delta 4 Medium rocket to deploy the DSCS III A3 satellite for the Defense Satellite Communication System.(The Boeing Company, “Successful First Launch for Boeing Delta IV,” news release, 20 November 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021120s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); U. S. Air Force, “U.S. Air Force Fact Sheet: Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle,” http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/space/factsheets/eelv.htm (accessed 28 October 2008).)
