The NASA probe known as Deep Impact launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral in Florida, on its mission to Comet Tempel One. The craft carried an impactor, intended to collide with the comet to create a crater about 100 meters (328 feet) wide and 28 meters (92 feet) deep, as well as two instruments designed to observe the impact and its aftermath in visible and infrared wavelengths. NASA planned for the craft to launch the impactor into the comet on 4 July 2005. Mission scientists hoped the data collected from the impact would reveal information about the birth of the solar system.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 615, 1 February 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx615.html (accessed 13 August 2009).)
ESA launched the satellite Giove A on a Soyuz-Fregat rocket at 5:19 a.m. (UT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The satellite was the first component of a satellite navigation system called Galileo. According to ESA’s plan, the Galileo system would consist of 30 satellites and would commence operations by 2008. ESA had created Galileo to reduce European dependence on the United States for satellite navigation services and to provide more accurate civilian services than the GPS, a system that the U.S. military had created. According to ESA, users who had mobile phones with integrated chips would be able to use Galileo to find directions to particular destinations, such as parks and restaurants. Galileo would be capable of providing civilian users with real-time positioning accuracy to within 1 meter (3.28 feet). Civilian services from the GPS were accurate to nearly 5 meters (16 feet).(Molly Moore, “With Satellite Launch, E.U. Positions Itself to Compete,” Washington Post, 29 December 2005; ESA, “First Galileo Satellite on Orbit to Demonstrate Key Technologies,” ESA news release 61-2005, 28 December 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_61_2005_p_EN.html (accessed 31 July 2009).)
The Demonstration of Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) spacecraft, a NASA technology demonstrator, launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, aboard a Pegasus-XL HAPS rocket released from an L-1011 cargo aircraft. NASA intended the launch to test the 360-kilogram (793.76-pound or 0.4-ton or 0.36-tonne) satellite’s video-guidance-system technology, which would enable DART to rendezvous with an experimental military communications satellite and maneuver around it. The technology would allow future spacecraft to approach and dock with another craft automatically.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Chris Kridler, “Failed DART Spacecraft Bumped Its Satellite Target,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 April 2005.)
The U.S. Air Force launched the most technologically advanced GPS satellite ever developed, the GPS IIR-14, on a Delta-2 rocket at 11:37 p.m. (EDT) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The GPS IIR-14 was the first of eight satellites planned for the new GPS, which the Air Force had created to provide improved encryption and GPS antijamming capabilities for the U.S. military, as well as an improved GPS signal for civilian users. At the time of the launch, the GPS constellation consisted of 28 satellites, which the Air Force was operating for both civilian and military users.(Lockheed Martin, “First Modernized GPS Satellite Built by Lockheed Martin Launched Successfully by the U.S. Air Force,” news release, 26 September 2005, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2005/ FIRSTMODERNIZEDGPSSATELLITEBUILTBYL.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
The U.S. Air Force announced the findings of its investigation into the December 2004 inaugural launch of Boeing’s Delta 4 Heavy Rocket, which had failed when engines shut down prematurely. The Air Force and Boeing had intended the launch of the rocket, which was transporting a dummy payload, as a full dress rehearsal. The plan had been to test the newest and largest member of Boeing’s next-generation rocket series before critical national security satellites began using it. Boeing had designed the rocket with three Common Booster Cores, each with a cryogenic main engine. The three cores, secured together, formed a craft capable of launching large cargo into space. The investigation had determined that each booster’s engines had undergone premature shutdown during the launch, after internal sensors incorrectly determined that the engines had exhausted their liquid-oxygen fuel supply. Investigators had concluded that cavitationbubbles in the liquid oxygen plumbinghad caused the glitch. Major Rodney Houser, the lead investigator for the Air Force, stated that the investigating team would focus on determining the cause of the cavitation within the liquid-oxygen feed system and on implementing corrective measures to prevent the problem’s repetition.(Justin Ray, “Delta 4-Heavy Investigation Identifies Rocket’s Problem,” Spaceflight Now, 17 March 2005. 235)
ESA successfully launched from its base in Kourou, French Guiana, an Ariane 5 ECA rocket, the world’s most powerful commercial launcher, more than two years after its inaugural flight in December 2002 had ended in disaster. Capable of carrying up to 10 tons (9,071 kilograms or 9.07 tonnes) into space, the rocket lifted a 7.3-ton (6,623-kilogram or 6.62-tonne) payload consisting of two satellitesthe U.S.-Spanish XTAR-EUR satellite and the Dutch experimental SLOSHSAT-FLEVO microsatellite. Fitted with 12 wideband, X-band transponders, the XTAREUR geostationary satellite would provide military communications for the United States and Spain. For 10 days, the Netherlands’ microsatellite SLOSHSAT-FLEVO, weighing just 127 kilograms (0.127 tonnes or 0.139 tons), would test the dynamics of de-ionized water in orbit. FLEVO was the acronym for Facility for Liquid Experimentation and Verification in Orbit, as well as the name of the latest Dutch province that the Netherlands had reclaimed from the sea. ESA also sent aloft a monitor, MAQSAT, which remained attached to the rocket to gather data about the rocket’s dynamic behavior, from launch through the release of the two satellites. In its inaugural launch, the rocket had veered off course, prompting Mission Control to destroy it. An inquiry board had determined that the cooling system of the rocket’s Vulcain engine had malfunctioned.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 616, 1 March 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx616.html (accessed 26 August 2009); Associated Press, “European Rocket Delivers Payload,” 14 February 2005; Laurent Marot for Reuters, “Upgraded Ariane-5 Rocket Orbits Satellites,” 13 February 2005.)
ESA successfully launched the Venus Express on a Soyuz-Fregat rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 4:33 a.m. (CET). ESA had created the spacecraft to analyze Venus’s atmosphere, chemistry, and structure, while the craft was orbiting the planet. ESA planned to use the analysis of Venus’s surface and its hot, stormy atmosphere to study climate change on Earth, as well as to help determine why Venus had evolved so differently from Earth, despite numerous structural similarities between the two planets. The spacecraft was ESA’s second probe designed to orbit a specific planet, the first being Mars Express, which ESA had launched in 2003.(ESA, “Venus Express En Route To Probe the Planet’s Hidden Mysteries,” ESA news release 50-2005, 9 November 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEM56Q638FE_index_0.html (accessed 19 July 2009); Melissa Eddy for Associated Press, “European Space Agency Launches Venus Probe,” 9 November 2005.)
The U.S. Air Force successfully launched two military satellites aboard an Atlas 3B, the last of Lockheed Martin’s Atlas 3 rockets. The launch marked the 145th and final launch from Complex 36 at Cape Canaveral, Florida, after 43 years of operation. NASA had built the complex in the early 1960s, specifically for its Atlas-Centaur program, which included the launches of NASA’s historic Surveyor, Mariner, and Pioneer missions. Launches from the site had proved highly successful; the launch of the last Atlas 3B marked the 75th consecutive successful Atlas rocket launch, including all six Atlas 3 flights. Launch Complex 36 was one of the United States’ oldest continuously operating launch sites and the last of the U.S. launch sites to use a traditional blockhouse to control the launch. The final Atlas 3B carried a pair of formation-flying, classified satellites, which analysts believed were part of the Naval Ocean Surveillance System (NOSS) of the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO). Satellites in the NOSS, a network for monitoring ships around the globe, were reportedly capable of detecting radio transmissions from ships to pinpoint their locations precisely.(Justin Ray, “Last Atlas 3 Rocket Launches a Pair of Spy Satellites” and “Atlas Rocket Workers Say Goodbye to Complex 36,” Spaceflight Now, 4 February 2005; Todd Halvorson, “Atlas 3 Climbs Through Fog to Final Successful Mission,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 February 2005.)
USA 182, a National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) classified military satellite, launched atop a Titan 4B rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. The rocket was the last Titan to launch from the Florida coast, signaling the end of the historic program after five decades and 168 launches. Only one Titan remained, scheduled for a July launch from Edwards Air Force Base in California. The United States was retiring the Titan, which had begun as a two-stage intercontinental ballistic missile in the 1950s and had made its first launch from Cape Canaveral in 1959, in favor of the less-expensive and more modular Atlas 5 and Delta 4 rocket series, which could fulfill the need for heavy-lifting to space. Titan 2 missiles had served as the boosters for NASA’s Gemini missions, and various Titan 3 and Titan 34D rockets had launched satellites, as had Titan 4, the largest and most powerful version in the program. Titan rockets had also launched space probes―Viking to Mars, Voyager to the outer planets, and Cassini to Saturn.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Justin Ray, “Reality Realized: Titan Has Left Cape Canaveral,” Spaceflight Now, 30 April 2005.)
The GAO published a report warning that the lack of a detailed, long-term strategy regarding NASA’s workforce could threaten the safety of Space Shuttle operations and delay implementation of the Bush administration’s 2004 directive to return astronauts to the Moon. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation had tasked GAO with tracking NASA’s efforts to develop a strategy for sustaining the Space Shuttle workforce until the Shuttle’s retirement and identifying factors that impeded those efforts. GAO reported that NASA had made limited progress toward this goal. GAO found that NASA had taken preliminary steps: identifying lessons learned from the retirement of programs comparable to the Space Shuttle, such as the Air Force Titan 4 Rocket Program; enlisting the assistance of human capital experts; and revising its acquisition strategy for updating specific prime contracts. However, GAO concluded that NASA’s failure to make decisions regarding contractor requirements during the remainder of the Shuttle program would hinder its progress. Moreover, GAO stated that NASA must develop a detailed strategy for retiring the Shuttle program, to enable it to protect agency-wide goals from the potential impact of workforce problems. GAO cited several factors hampering NASA’s ability to accomplish this, such as NASA’s near-term focus on returning the Shuttle to flight, a focus that had caused a delay in assessing hardware and facility needs. Furthermore, program officials remained uncertain about how to implement future aspects of the President’s Vision for Space Exploration.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Space Shuttle: Actions Needed To Better Position NASA To Sustain Its Workforce Through Retirement” (report no. GAO-05-230, Washington, DC, March 2005), 1–19, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d05230.pdf (accessed 3 September 2009).)
The Apstar 6 satellite launched aboard a Chinese Long March 3B rocket from Xichang Satellite Launch Center in China’s Sichuan Province. The 4.8-tonne (4,800-kilogram or 5.3-ton) satellite carried 38 C-band and 12 Ku-band transponders. Replacing the ageing Apstar 1A, the craft would provide digital, multimedia transmissions to Australia, India, and countries in eastern Asia. The satellite was the first Western-built, commercial telecommunications spacecraft to carry almost no U.S.-made components, as well as the first commercial Chinese satellite with an antijamming payload. Hong Kong–based APT Satellite Company had requested that Alcatel Space include the antijamming technology in response to the threat of satellite-signal piracy, which had occurred several times over the previous two years. The new Alcatel Spacebus 4000 C1 satellite platform selected for Apstar 6 included no U.S. parts subject to the export controls of the U.S. Department of State. Because the U.S. government had refused to grant export licenses for U.S. satellite parts destined for launch in China, Alcatel Space had substituted European, Russian, and other non-U.S. components.
Japan successfully launched a geostationary weather satellite MTSAT-1R aboard an H-2A rocket from Tanegashima Space Center in Kagoshima prefecture, after a glitch in communications between the rocket and ground systems had caused a 76-minute delay. The launch was Japan’s first launch of a heavy-lift vehicle since November 2003, when one of the H-2A’s solid boosters had failed to jettison as expected after completing its burn, causing the launch to fail. In the failed launch, Japan had lost the second pair of the four spy satellites that it had built after North Korea had fired a missile into Japanese territory in 1998. The other pair of the four satellitesone optical and one radar-sounding satellitewere all Japan had left to monitor its threatening neighbor. Furthermore, the launch failure had dashed Japan’s plans to enter the commercial satellite-launch business and had caused Japan to lose its international credibility. The successful launch of the MTSAT-1R restored morale to Japan’s rocketry program. A second mission of the MTSAT-1R was to replace a satellite lost in November 1999 when the final H-2 rocket, the predecessor of H-2A, had failed to reach orbit. Japan had designed the MTSAT-1R to service the Japan Civil Aviation Bureau and the Japan Meteorological Agency, fulfilling the two missions of facilitating air-traffic management and obtaining satellite imagery for meteorologists.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 616; James Brooke, “After Failures, Space Effort in Japan Gets a Lift,” New York Times, 28 February 2005; Justin Ray, “Beleaguered H-2A Rocket Roars Into Orbit,” Spaceflight Now, 26 February 2005.)
Russian space officials and officials from the French rocket company Arianespace signed an agreement in Moscow allowing Russia to launch medium-weight satellite payloads from ESA’s spaceport in Kourou, French Guiana. Under the agreement, Europe would provide 344 million euros to build a launchpad for Russian Soyuz rockets, and Russia would erect a tower for the launchpad, ship the rockets from Russia, and make any changes to the rockets necessary for them to operate in the equatorial climate. Locating launches at the equator would allow Russia to increase the weight of its payloads from 1.6 tonnes (1,600 kilograms or 1.7 tons) to about 3 tonnes (3,000 kilograms or 3.3 tons). The arrangement also filled a niche that Arianespace’s two rocket fleets did not. Arianespace Vega rockets launched small scientific satellites weighing no more than 1.5 tonnes (1,500 kilograms or 1.65 tons) into a low orbit. The two models of Ariane 5 rockets could launch payloads weighing 6.6 tonnes (6,600 kilograms or 7.3 tons) or 10 tonnes (10,000 kilograms or 11 tons), respectively, into geostationary transfer orbit. Expecting to launch three or four Soyuz rockets per year, beginning in 2008, Arianespace had already booked three launches from Kourou using the Russian Soyuz rocket―launches of one Australian telecommunications satellite and two French scientific satellites.(Maggie McKee, “Russian Rockets To Launch from South American Base,” New Scientist, 13 April 2005. 772 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618, 1 May 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx618.html (accessed 8 September 2009); Peter B. de Selding, “Apstar 6 Launched from China,” Space News, 13 April 2005.)
Khrunichev Center announced that it had signed a contract with Russia’s defense ministry, valid through 2010, to research, develop, and flight-test the Angara launch vehicle. The Angara project included a series of liquid oxygen/kerosene expendable launch vehicles. The Khrunichev Center intended for Angara 5 to have greater capabilities than the company’s existing Proton rocket and to be far more environmentally friendly. In addition, the Angara 5 would launch exclusively from Plesetsk, rather than from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. According to the contract, near the end of 2006, the Khrunichev Center would launch the first vehicle carrying a Russian government payload.(Dmitry Pieson, “Khrunichev, Defense Ministry To Build Angara Jointly,” Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, 27 May 2005.)
The Russian Space Agency announced that the launch of Cosmos 1 had failed. According to the agency, the rocket that had launched the spacecraft had experienced failure 83 seconds after ignition. Consequently, the experimental solar-powered spacecraft had crashed soon after its launch.(David Holley and Alex Raksin, “Solar Craft Falls Short of Cosmos,” Los Angeles Times, 23 June 2005. 808 ESA, “German Chair for ESA Council,” ESA news release 35-2005, 22 June 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_35_2005_p_EN.html (accessed 11 August 2009); ESA, “What is ESA?” http://www.esa.int/SPECIALS/About_ESA/ SEMW16ARR1F_0.html (accessed 11 August 2009).)
JAXA successfully tested an experimental aircraft capable of flying at Mach 2, which is twice the speed of sound. JAXA launched the aircraft, formally known as the Scaled Experimental Supersonic Transport (SST), on a rocket from Australia’s Woomera Test Range at 7:06 a.m. (local time). After its release from the rocket, the SST flew for nearly 15 minutes at speeds of Mach 1.9 to 2 (1,446 to 1,522 miles per hour or 2,327 to 2,449 kilometers per hour) and at altitudes ranging from 12 to 19 kilometers (7.5 to 11.8 miles). Mitsubishi Heavy Industries had developed the SST as part of a US$10 million program to create an aircraft capable of transporting 300 passengers between Los Angeles and Tokyo in approximately 4 hours.(Meraiah Foley, “Flying High: Speedy Japanese Jet Passes Test,” Houston Chronicle, 11 October 2005; JAXA, “Flight Trial Result of Scaled Experimental Supersonic Transport,” news release, 10 October 2005, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2005/10/20051010_sst_e.html (accessed 15 July 2009).)
A California Launch Vehicle Education Initiative (CALVEIN) research team successfully launched and recovered the Prospector 6 (P6) test vehicle at the Mojave Test Area owned and operated by the Reaction Research Society. The test was part of a joint industry/academic effort to develop a low-cost Nanosat Launch Vehicle, a booster capable of delivering 22-pound (10- kilogram) payloads to low Earth orbit. Researchers at Garvey Spacecraft Corporation of Long Beach, California, and California State University at Long Beach had designed and built the partially reusable 27-foot (8-meter) P6 test vehicle, which had flown to just under 3,000 feet (914 meters), a milestone toward the team’s goal. P6 had also carried student payloads from across the country: a mini-DV camera to capture on-board video of the entire flight sequence; a real-time telemetry system that adapted off-the-shelf Wi-Fi technology to relay key propulsion- system parameters; and a measurement-logging package to record acceleration, pressure, and temperature data that the research team would use to assess the vehicle’s performance.(Leonard David, “High Hopes for Low-Cost Rocket After Successful Launch Test,” Space.com, 27 May 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/050526_prospector6_test.html (accessed 16 September 2009).)
Soyuz TMA-6 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying the Expedition 11 crew of three to the ISS. Russian Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American Flight Engineer John L. Phillips would replace Leroy Chiao and Salizhan S. Sharipov. Italy’s Roberto Vittori, also aboard, would conduct scientific experiments at the ISS before returning to Earth with Chiao and Sharipov.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Chris Kridler, “Soyuz Rocket Blasts Off to Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 April 2005.)
The Boeing Company announced that it had reached an agreement to sell its Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power business to Pratt & Whitney, a United Technologies Corporation unit, for about US$700 million in cash. Rocketdyne, primarily a rocket engine developer and builder that provided booster engines for the Space Shuttle and the Delta series of expendable launch vehicles, had helped pioneer space exploration in the 1950s and1960s. The sale reflected Boeing’s struggle to make a profit in the space-launch business and marked the company’s latest move toward focusing on large-scale weapons and aerospace systems. United Technologies intended the acquisition to broaden the product line at Pratt & Whitney, which, in recent years, had lost market share in its core business of providing jet engines.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing To Sell Rocketdyne Propulsion Unit to Pratt & Whitney; news release, 22 February 2005, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2005/q1/nr_050222o.html (accessed 19 August 2009); Los Angeles Times, “Maker of Rocket Engines Is Sold,” 23 February 2005.)
JAXA launched its Suzaku astronomy satellite at 3:30 a.m. (GMT) from Uchinoura Space Center (formerly called the Kagoshima Space Center) on an M-5 rocket. Suzaku, known as Astro-E2 before the launch, was JAXA’s replacement for its first Astro-E satellite, which had been lost during launch in 2000. JAXA and the Japanese Institute of Space and Astronautical Science had built the satellite to monitor space in conjunction with NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and ESA’s XMM-Newton. The Suzaku satellite was equipped with three telescopes: a Hard X-ray Detector, an X-ray Spectrometer, and an X-ray Imaging Spectrometer.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 621, 1 August 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx621.html (accessed 12 June 2009); NASA, “Suzaku: Mission Overview,” 3 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ mission_pages/astro-e2/ main/index.html (accessed 12 June 2009).)
President of Canadian Arrow Geoff Sheerin and Indian-American entrepreneur Chirinjeev Kathuria joined forces to create a new corporation called PlanetSpace. The company’s goal was to make spaceflight available to the public within two years. Canadian Arrow was creating a rocket based on the German World War II V-2 rocket. Although the company had not completed its rocket in time to compete for the US$10 million X Prize in 2004, it had successfully completed a drop test of the vehicle in August 2005 and expected to complete the rocket within one year. PlanetSpace planned to charge US$250,000 per person for a suborbital flight that would include 14 days of training and 15 minutes of flight time. The rocket would launch from a Canadian site with a pilot and two passengers and would reach a maximum velocity of four times the speed of sound. The rocket would coast to a maximum height of 70 miles (112 kilometers), providing a few minutes of weightlessness and a view of the curving Earth with a black sky above. Finally, a crew capsule would separate from the rocket during its descent and would parachute down to a water landing.(PlanetSpace, “Canadian Arrow Partners with Leading American Entrepreneur To Launch First Commercial Passengers to Space,” news release, 17 May 2005, http://www.planetspace.org/pdf/ps-press-rel-001.pdf (accessed 17 September 2009); Alan Boyle, “Space Partners Plan Flights in 2007,” MSNBC.com, 18 May 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7879142/ (accessed 17 September 2009).)
The Planetary Society and Cosmos Studios launched Cosmos 1, the first solar-powered spacecraft, at 3:46 p.m. (EDT), on a Volna rocket from a Russian submarine in the Barents Sea. Russian Space Agency officials, however, were not certain that the spacecraft had attained orbit. The spacecraft’s sponsors, the Planetary Society and Cosmos Studios, are U.S. nonprofit organizations that seek to increase the public’s knowledge of and involvement in space exploration. The late American scientist Carl Sagan had helped found the Planetary Society, and Ann Druyan―Sagan’s widow―had founded Cosmos Studios. The two organizations had designed the craft and launched the mission to demonstrate the feasibility of solar power technology as an effective means of space travel. The pressure of solar light particles―photons―on the spacecraft’s large, triangular, mirror-like “solar sails” were to propel the engineless, fuel-free Cosmos 1.(John Antczak for Associated Press, “Solar Sail Spacecraft Launched from Russian Submarine,” 21 June 2005; The Planetary Society, “Projects: Solar Sailing,” http://planetary.org/programs/projects/ solar_sailing/ (accessed 10 August 2009).)
Spaceway 1, a DirecTV satellite, launched from Sea Launch’s Odyssey floating platform at the equator aboard a Zenit-3SL rocket. Sea Launch used a self-propelled launch platform and a command ship that had sailed from Long Beach, California, to the equator. At the equator, the physics of Earth’s rotation make it possible to launch heavier payloads than elsewhere. Sea Launch announced that the 13,376-pound (6,067.3-kilogram or 6.1-tonne) satellite was the heaviest commercial satellite ever launched.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Associated Press, “DirecTV Satellite Launched from Sea Launch Ocean Platform,” 27 April 2005.)
NASA returned Discovery to the Vehicle Assembly Building from its launchpad, to attach a newer fuel tank and booster set to the Space Shuttle. While Discovery was sitting on the launchpad, NASA had determined that ice could break off the outside of its external fuel tank and could prove as lethal as the falling foam insulation that had led to the demise of Columbia. To minimize the risk of such debris striking the orbiter’s fragile heat shield, NASA had decided to install an additional heater on the fuel tank. Ice forms on the external tank when the fuel is extremely cold, and a heater would reduce the amount of ice build-up on the tank.(Irene Mona Klotz, “Shuttle Heads Back to Workshop,” BBC News, 27 May 2005; “Shuttle Rolls Back to Hangar,” Washington Post, 27 May 2005.)
International Launch Services (ILS) successfully launched the European satellite Inmarsat 4-F1 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a stretched version of the Atlas 5 rocket. Weighing 13,138 pounds (5,959 kilograms or 5.96 tonnes), the EADS Astrium-built Inmarsat 4 was the largest commercial satellite ever to launch. As part of a three-satellite constellation comprising the new Broadband Global Area Network, the spacecraft would provide wireless, broadband connections to ships, planes, and remote areas that had not previously had reliable access to ground-based, high-speed networks.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 617, 1 April 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx617.html (accessed 31 August 2009); Associated Press, “Atlas 5 Rocket Hauls Satellite into Space,” 12 March 2005.)
The China National Space Administration (CNSA) launched its second piloted spacecraft, the Shenzhou 6, on a Long March 2F rocket from Jiuquan, China, at 1:00 a.m. (GMT). The Shenzhou 6 carried taikonauts Fei Junlong and Nie Haisheng. The CNSA planned for them to remain in low Earth orbit for five days. The CNSA provided few details about the mission and declined to publicize information, such as the taikonauts’ names and the spacecraft’s scheduled return date, until hours before the launch. According to a CNSA spokesperson, Junlong and Haisheng would conduct scientific experiments while in orbit.(Howard W. French, “On Live Television, 2 Chinese Astronauts Begin 5 Days in Low Orbit of Earth,” New York Times, 12 October 2005; China National Space Administration, “Shenzhou-6 To Take Off Wednesday Morning,” news release, 11 October 2005.)
