Russian space scientist Vladimir Sergevich Syromyatnikov died of leukemia in Moscow, Russia, at the age of 73. Syromyatnikov had begun working for Russia’s S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia) in 1956. He had later developed several important space technologies, including the first piloted spacecraft, Vostok, which Yuri Gagarin had flown in 1961. Syromyatnikov had also worked on the Voskhod spacecraft, the Venera probe to Venus, and the docking system that had linked the Soviet Soyuz and the U.S. Apollo space vehicles in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project of July 1975. Syromyatnikov had later developed the Androgynous Peripheral Assembly System—the docking system that connected NASA’s Space Shuttles with Russia’s orbital facility Mir and with the ISS.(Patricia Sullivan, “Vladimir Syromyatnikov; Designing Docking System for Space Capsules,” Washington Post, 1 October 2006.)
NASA launched the first three microsatellites in the Space Technology 5 (ST 5) mission, aboard a Pegasus XL rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, at 9:04 a.m. (EST). The ST 5 mission was part of NASA’s New Millennium Program, created to identify, develop, build, and test innovative technologies and concepts for use in future missions. NASA launched the three satellites to a near-Earth polar elliptical orbit that would enable them to travel from approximately 300 kilometers (190 miles) to approximately 4,500 kilometers (2,800 miles) above Earth. Once in orbit, the satellites would form a row, with each satellite approximately 40 to 200 kilometers (25 to 125 miles) away from the others. Miniature boom-mounted magnetometers on each satellite would collect data enabling coordinated multi-point measurements of Earth’s magnetic field. This type of measurement would be useful in future missions studying the effect of solar activity on Earth’s magnetosphere, the bubble that protects Earth from harmful space radiation. The satellites would remain operational for approximately 90 days.(NASA, “NASA’s Space Technology 5 Satellites Soar into Space,” news release 06-104, 22 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_06104_ST5_Successful_Launch.html (accessed 14 September 2009); NASA, “Space Technology 5: Mission Overview,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/st-5/main/index. html (accessed 4 January 2010).)
James A. Van Allen, a major figure in physics and space exploration, died at the age of 91. Born in 1914, Van Allen had played a prominent role in early American rocket research, including the development of the radiation detectors contained in the United States’ first successful satellite, Explorer 1. Launched January 1958, Explorer 1 had captured data revealing two belts of charged particles above Earth’s magnetic field—phenomena later known as the Van Allen radiation belts. The finding was among the first major scientific discoveries of the early space age. In 1958 Van Allen had chaired a group of scientists who recommended that the United States create an independent national space agency by 1960 and launch a human mission to the Moon by 1968. Van Allen later became involved in several NASA projects, including the development of Galileo, Pioneers 10 and 11, and several Mariner spacecraft. During his lifetime, Van Allen had received numerous awards, including the National Medal of Science and NASA’s Medal of Exceptional Achievement.(Walter Sullivan, “James A. Van Allen, Discoverer of Earth-Circling Radiation Belts, Is Dead at 91,” New York Times, 10 August 2006; NASA, “James A. Van Allen (1914–2006),” http://history.nasa.gov/sputnik/vanallen.html (accessed 5 March 2010).)
An Orbital Sciences Corporation Minotaur rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 9:40 p.m. (EDT), carrying six Taiwanese-American weather microsatellites. The launch of the weather satellites was part of a US$100 million mission known in the United States as COSMIC (Constellation Observing System for Meteorology, and Climate) and as FORMOSAT 3 in Taiwan. Taiwan’s National Science Council and National Space Organization had provided primary funding for the project, with contributions from the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) and its partners, including NASA. After an initial orbit approximately 300 miles (500 kilometers) above Earth, the satellites would achieve their final circular orbits 13 months later, orbiting between 435 and 500 miles (700 and 800 kilometers) above Earth. The principal instrument on each of the 155-pound (62-kilogram) satellites would be a GPS receiver, originally developed by NASA’s JPL. Working together with other on-board instruments, GPS antennas would track the extent to which the GPS signals bend when they pass through (are occulted by) the Earth’s atmosphere. Measuring the degree to which the signals bend would enable scientists to evaluate atmospheric conditions, such as air density, temperature, moisture, and electron density. According to Jay S. Fein, Program Director in the NSF’s Division of Atmospheric Sciences, the satellites would obtain new information that would “have a tremendous impact on geosciences research and weather prediction, and would be an important contribution to global Earth observations.”(Leonard David, “COSMIC Constellation To Study Atmosphere,” MSNBC.com, 14 April 2006; Tariq Malik, “Minotaur Rocket Orbits COSMIC Constellation To Scan Earth’s Atmosphere,” Space.com, 14 April 2006, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/060414_ cosmic_mino_ launch.html (accessed 24 June 2010); Justin Ray, “Mission Status Center,” Spaceflight Now, 15 April 2006.)
CNSA launched the Sino Satellite Communications Company’s (SinoSat’s) satellite on a Long March 3B rocket from Xichang Satellite Launch Center at 16:20 (UT). The communications satellite, SinoSat-2, represented a major technological advance for the Chinese space program. The domestically developed satellite, capable of providing both analog and digital television broadcasts, was China’s first satellite based on the Direct-From-Home-4 system, or DFH-4 bus. The DFU-4 bus enables individual households to receive television signals using their own satellite-dish antennas. SinoSat hoped that the satellite would improve the capacity and reliability of Chinese television broadcasting and help China serve the international spaceflight market. In addition, CNSA officials stated that the satellite’s technology could prompt the Chinese government to eliminate regulations prohibiting Chinese citizens from installing their own satellite-dish antennas.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 636; Xinhua News Agency, “5th Ld-Writethru-China Exclusive: China Launches High- Power Communications, Broadcast Satellite,” 29 October 2006.)
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) and Rocket System Corporation (RSC) launched the Multi-Functional Transport Satellite 2 (MTSAT-2) from the Tanegashima Space Center at 06:55 (UT) aboard an H2-A rocket. The Civil Aviation Bureau and the Japan Meteorological Agency jointly owned the 1,250-kilogram (2,756-pound) geostationary weather satellite, which carried an imaging telescope with detectors for five wavelength channels: visible band, micron infrared (IR1), micron (IR2), micron water vapor (IR3), and micron near infrared. After coming to rest over 145o east longitude, the satellite would commence its mission to capture data and images that scientists could use to determine weather patterns, and to relay that information to the Japanese Meteorological Agency.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 628, 1 March 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx628.html (accessed 17 August 2010); JAXA, “Launch Result of the Multi-functional Transport Satellite 2 (MTSAT-2) by the H-IIA Launch Vehicle No. 9 (H-IIA F9),” press release, 18 February 2006, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2006/02/20060218_ h2a-f9_e.html (accessed 17 August 2010).)
NASA’s KSC selected Lockheed Martin Commercial Launch Services to build the Atlas V rocket that would launch the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) mission. The mission, scheduled for launch in fall 2009 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, would carry to Mars a six-wheeled rover, equipped with cameras mounted on a mast. Twice as long and three times as heavy as the Mars Exploration rovers Spirit and Opportunity, MSL would explore Mars for two years, collecting Martian soil samples and rock cores and analyzing them for organic compounds and for environmental conditions capable of supporting microbial life, now or in the past. Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO), which had entered Mars’s orbit in March 2006, had transmitted to Earth images that NASA scientists would use to select a landing site for MSL. MRO would serve as a communications relay for MSL after the rover landed on the Martian surface.(Chris Bergin, “Another Mars Rover—Atlas V Chosen,” NASASpaceflight.com, 2 June 2006, http://www. nasaspaceflight.com/2006/06/another-mars-rover-atlas-v-chosen (accessed 9 August 2010); Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin’s Atlas V Selected To Launch Mars Science Laboratory in 2009,” news release, 6 June 2006, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2006/LOCKHEEDMARTINSATLASVSELECTEDLAUNCH. html (accessed 9 August 2010).)
GAO released a report criticizing NASA’s plans to acquire rockets and spacecraft for the Vision for Space Exploration program and recommending that the U. S. Congress restrict some of its funding until NASA had completed its review of the program. NASA expected to finish the review during the following year. The report addressed NASA’s plans to sign long-term agreements with the contractors for the project in late 2006. NASA planned for the contractors to design, develop, and produce both the CEV—the the crew exploration vehicle, which would replace the Space Shuttle—and the rocket that would launch it. The report stated that NASA had not completed the first phase of its ongoing design and cost estimates for these projects, and that signing the contracts would place the projects at risk for cost, performance, and schedule problems. GAO recommended postponing the contracts until after NASA had completed its preliminary design reviews for those projects. NASA expected to complete the final phase of the ongoing review by March 2008. The report specifically recommended that Congress restrict NASA’s appropriations and obligations for the CEV, providing only the funds needed to complete the preliminary review.(Mark Carreau, “GAO Warns NASA of Problems with Moon, Mars Strategy,” Houston Chronicle, 27 July 2006; U.S. Government Accountability Office, “NASA: Long-Term Commitment To and Investment in Space Exploration Program Requires More Knowledge” (report no. GAO-06-817R, Washington, DC, 17 July 2006): 1−9, http://www. gao.gov/new.items/d06817r.pdf (accessed 22 January 2010).)
At the National Space Society’s International Space Development Conference, NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale announced NASA’s sponsorship of the Lunar Lander Challenge competition, with prizes totaling US$2.5 million, to develop rockets capable of landing on the Moon. The X Prize Foundation would manage the competition and award the Lunar Lander Challenge prizes at the presentation of the X Prize Cup in October 2006. The challenge would have two levels of difficulty, with prizes awarded at each level. Level 1 would require a vehicle to take off from a designated launch area, rocket to an altitude of 150 feet (50 meters), hover for 90 seconds, and land on a pad 100 meters (320.08 feet) from the launch point. Level 2 would require the same launch altitude and the same distance between launch and landing pad, but the rocket would have to hover for 180 seconds and to land on a rocky site simulating the lunar surface. California entrepreneur Peter H. Diamandis, founder of the X Prize competition, stated that “entrepreneurial companies can build the lunar space ships [necessary for achieving NASA’s goal of returning people to the Moon in the next decade], and a Lunar Lander Challenge can stimulate the required technology in an efficient and rapid fashion.”(Maggie McKee, “Lunar Lander Is NASA’s Biggest Challenge,” New Scientist, 5 May 2006; X Prize Foundation, “X Prize Foundation and NASA Offer $2.5 Million Lunar Lander Challenge Competition To Take Place at ’06 X Prize Cup in Las Cruces,” 4 May 2006, http://www.xprize.org/llc/press-release/x-prize-foundation-and-nasa-offer- 2-5-million-lunar-challenge-competition-t (accessed 23 March 2010).)
An Ariane 5-ECA rocket launched from the space center in Kourou, French Guiana, at 21:09 (GMT), placing two telecommunications satellites into geostationary transfer orbit at 36,000 kilometers (22,400 miles) above Earth’s equator. The two satellites, Mexico’s Satmex 6 and Thailand’s Thaicom 5, had a combined mass of 8.2 tonnes (8,200 kilograms or 9.04 tons), the largest payload ever carried by a European rocket. Satmex 6 would provide telecommunications and television services to North America and South America, and Thaicom 5 would provide those services throughout the Asia-Pacific region.(Space Daily, “Ariane 5 Rocket Launches Two Satellites into Orbit,” 30 May 2006; ESA, “Ariane 5 ECA Carries Record Payload Mass to GTO,” news release, 28 May 2006, http://www.esa.int/easCP/SEMXIO9ATME_index_). html (accessed 26 March 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 631.)
NASA launched the US$700 million New Horizons spacecraft aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas 5 rocket, on a 3-billion mile (4.83-kilometer), 9-year journey to Pluto, at 2:00 p.m. (EST) from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The spacecraft left Earth’s orbit at a speed of 36,000 miles per hour (57,936 kilometers per hour). After the spacecraft’s planned February 2007 flyby of Jupiter, to receive a gravity-assisted velocity boost, NASA projected that it would reach a top speed of 47,000 miles per hour (75,639 kilometers per hour), thereby reducing the flight’s duration by three to five years. NASA expected that the New Horizons spacecraft would have its closest approach to Pluto and its moons in July 2015. Powered by 24 pounds (10.9 kilograms) of plutonium, New Horizons carried seven scientific instruments. Three of these were cameras, which would capture visible-light, infrared, and ultraviolet images of the surfaces of Pluto and its moon Charon. Also on board were three spectrometers, to study the composition and temperatures of Pluto’s thin atmosphere and surface features. After flying past Pluto, the spacecraft would penetrate deeper into the Kuiper Belt, an outer zone of the solar system 9 comprising thousands of icy, rocky objects, including comets and small planets, such as Pluto.
JAXA announced that it had successfully launched its ASTRO-F infrared astronomical satellite after a one-day weather delay. The 952-kilogram (2,099-pound) satellite blasted off from Uchinoura Space Center on an M-5 booster at 21:28 (UT). ASTRO-F carried a 67-centimeter- aperture (26-inch-aperture) infrared telescope, a Far-Infrared Surveyor, and the Infrared Camera. Its mission was to survey all the galaxies for infrared luminance indicating newly forming planets, stars, and protogalaxies, and to collect data on the structure, mass, and composition of new stars. This information would help scientists understand the formation process of stars, planetary systems, and galaxies. Part of a joint mission of JAXA, ESA, and Korean researchers, ASTRO-F was built to survey the cosmos at higher resolutions and with higher sensitivity than the world’s first infrared satellite, the Infrared Astronomy Satellite, which had launched in 1983.(JAXA, “Infrared Imaging Satellite “AKARI” (ASTRO-F),” http://www.jaxa.jp/projects/sat/astro_f/index_e.html (accessed 14 September 2010); Tariq Malik, “Japan Launches New Observatory for Infrared Sky Survey,” Space.com, 21 February 2006, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/060221_jaxa_astrof_lnch.html (accessed 14 September 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 628, 1 March 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx628.html (accessed 22 September 2010).)
An Atlas 5 rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 4:27 p.m. (EDT), carrying the 4.3- tonne (4,300-kilogram or 4.74-ton) geostationary Astra 1KR telecommunications satellite. Lockheed Martin had designed and built the satellite for Luxembourg-based SES ASTRA. International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture between Lockheed Martin and Khrunichev State Research and Production Center in Moscow, had marketed the mission. Once the satellite had achieved its final orbital slot over the equator at 19.2° east longitude, its 32 Ku-band transponders would transmit analog, radio, and digital television signals, as well as Internet and multimedia services throughout Europe.(United Press International, “ASTRA Satellite Ready for Thursday Launch,” 20 April 2006; Justin Ray, “Atlas 5 Rocket Launches TV Broadcasting Craft for Europe,” Spaceflight Now, 20 April 2006; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 630, 1 May 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx630.html (accessed 1 March 2010).)
The French-Russian company Starsem launched COROT on a Soyuz-2 rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 14:23 (UT). CNES had designed the satellite to conduct seismological analyses of stars, gathering data that would enable scientists to determine their age, composition, and internal structure. In addition, CNES had designed COROT to detect
ISRO’s launch of a Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) failed when the GSLV malfunctioned, taking with it an INSAT-4C communications satellite. ISRO had created the GSLV series of rockets to put heavy satellites weighing 2.0–2.5 tonnes (2,000–2,500 kilograms or 2.2–2.8 tons) into geosynchronous orbit. The Indian National Satellite system, INSAT, is a series of domestic communications satellites. ISRO launched the rocket (formally designated GSLV-F02) from the Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, an island off the coast of the southern state of Andhra Pradesh in India. Soon after liftoff, the GSLV’s first stage failed to separate, causing the rocket to veer from its trajectory, falling into the Bay of Bengal. The 85 unsuccessful launch, ISRO’s fourth launch of a GSLV, was the first GSLV launch ever to fail.
NASA launched two meteorological satellites, CloudSat and CALIPSO (Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observations), aboard a Boeing Delta 2 rocket, at 11:02 (UT) from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellites would eventually circle 438 miles (705 kilometers) above Earth in a Sun-synchronous polar orbit. CloudSat, an experimental mission designed to study the effects of clouds on climate and weather, was 1,000 times more sensitive than typical weather radar, using millimeter-wavelength radar to measure the altitude and properties of clouds. CALIPSO carried three instruments to study the role that clouds and atmospheric aerosols (airborne particles) play in regulating Earth’s weather, climate, and air quality. The two satellites would become part of a constellation of Earth-observing satellites known as the A-train, joining the satellites Aqua, Aura, and PARASOL.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 630; NASA, “NASA Launches Satellites for Weather, Climate, Air-Quality Studies,” news release 06-190, 28 April 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/apr/HQ_06190_Cloudsat_ CALIPSO_launch.html (accessed 25 September 2009); Jesco von Puttkamer, “Space Flight 2006—The Year in Review,” July 20, 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/directorates/somd/reports/2006/us.html (accessed 3 March 2010).)
A Soyuz-U rocket launched from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in northern Russia at 17:38 (UT), carrying Kosmos 2420, a Russian military satellite. The Russian federal space agency Roskosmos stated that “the launch took place in the interests of the Defense Ministry.” Observers in the United States speculated that Kosmos 2420 might be a spy satellite intended to bolster Russia’s declining military-intelligence presence in space.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 631, 1 June 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx631.html (accessed 17 March 2010); Stephen Clark, “Russian Soyuz Rocket Launches New Spy Satellite,” Spaceflight Now, 3 May 2006; RIA Novosti, “Russia Launches Kosmos Military Satellite from Plesetsk Base,” 3 May 2006.)
ESA and the European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT) launched the Meteorological Operational Satellite A (MetOP-A), Europe’s first polar-orbiting weather satellite. MetOP-A, which represented a major advance in meteorological capabilities, launched on a Soyuz-Fregat rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 16:28 (UT). Engineers had designed MetOP-A to quickly provide data of unprecedented accuracy and resolution, covering weather and climate variables ranging from temperature to concentrations of ozone gas. The satellite was the first of three scheduled for launch over the next 14 years. Collectively, the three satellites would ultimately form the space-based portion of EUMETSAT’s Polar System (EPS). Polar-orbiting satellites were capable of highly detailed Earth observation, because they orbited at relatively low altitudes—often at altitudes of 800 kilometers (nearly 500 miles), as opposed to the 36,000-kilometer-altitude (approximately 22,400-mile-altitude) orbits of many geostationary satellites. The EPS was Europe’s contribution to a cooperative venture with NOAA, which had provided users worldwide with meteorological data from polar orbit for nearly four decades. In addition, NOAA and France’s CNES had provided five of MetOP-A’s 10 instruments.(ESA, “MetOP at a Glance: Overview,” 16 November 2006, http://www.esa.int/esaLP/ SEMN1FAATME_ LPmetop_0.html (accessed 2 April 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 636, 1 November 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa. gov/spacewarn/spx636.html (accessed 2 April 2010).)
Russia launched the Resurs DK1 satellite aboard a Soyuz-U rocket at 4:00 a.m. (EDT) from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The civilian Earth-observation satellite would operate for three years, the first in an upgraded series of spacecraft with improved capabilities in imaging resolution and communications. Navigating with a system based on Russia’s global navigation system Glonass, Resurs would be capable of surveying up to 700,000 square kilometers daily. Unlike previous Russian civilian remote-sensing craft, Resurs DK1 would carry an advanced communications system enabling it to quickly download recent images of natural resources, natural disasters, sea-ice conditions, and polar weather to Russian ground stations. Russian government agencies would use the images, making them available to national and international organizations, as well as private commercial customers. The satellites would have two attached instruments—Italy’s Payload for Anti-Matter Exploration and Light-Nuclei Astrophysics (PAMELA), which would monitor cosmic rays, and a Russian particle detector, which would identify probable electromagnetic precursors of earthquakes.(NASA, Spacewarn Bulletin no. 632, July 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx632.html (accessed 6 August 2010); Stephen Clark, “Civil Remote Sensing Craft Launched by Russia,” Spaceflight Now, 16 June 2006; RIA Novosti, “Survey Satellite Launched from Baikonur,” 16 June 2006.)
International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin and Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center in Moscow, announced that a rocket carrying an Arabsat 4A telecommunications satellite had failed to reach its proper orbit. The Russian Proton Breeze M rocket, which launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 3:10 p.m. (EST), failed to burn its upper-stage engine for as long as its designers had planned, leaving the satellite stranded in low orbit. EADS Astrium engineers had designed Arabsat to expand and optimize capacity for direct-to-home TV broadcasting, telephony, and data transmission over a coverage zone encompassing North Africa, the Middle East, and part of Western Europe. If the launch had been successful, it would have placed Arabsat in a geostationary transfer orbit with an apogee of 36,000 kilometers (22,369 miles). ILS announced that it would form a failure-review oversight board “to review reasons for the anomaly and define a corrective action plan.” An investigatory Russian state commission would conduct a similar review.(Sergi Manstov, “Proton Failure—Arian Re-sets,” NASASpaceFlight.com, 1 March 2006; Jefferson Morris, “Proton Launch Failure Leaves Arabsat 4A Stranded,” Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, 2 March 2006.)
After months of delays due to various technical difficulties, the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite–N (GOES-N) launched successfully aboard a Boeing Delta-4 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 6:11 p.m. (EDT). GOES-N, which would be renamed GOES- 13 after completing its destination orbit, was the latest in a series of Earth-monitoring satellites that provided the kind of continuous monitoring necessary for intensive data analysis. GOES satellites circled the Earth in a geosynchronous orbit—they orbited the equatorial plane of the Earth at a speed equal to the Earth’s rotation—allowing GOES satellites to hover continuously over one position on the Earth’s surface and to appear stationary. GOES satellites remained constantly vigilant for atmospheric triggers of severe weather conditions, such as tornadoes, flash floods, hailstorms, and hurricanes. GOES-N would carry enhanced imaging and sounding instruments, enabling meteorologists to pinpoint the location of severe weather within 1.5 kilometers (0.9 miles), as well as a solar imager designed to detect and precisely to locate solar flares and coronal mass ejections (CMEs) soon after their occurrence. After reaching its geosynchronous orbit of 22,300 miles (35,888 kilometers), GOES-N would enter on-orbit 65 storage mode, so that it could rapidly replace any existing GOES satellite, in case of failure.
The first successful launch at a commercial spaceport in the United States took place when the Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport launched a rocket called the Minotaur, carrying two satellites. The state governments of Virginia and Maryland had funded the spaceport to serve the commercial space launch market. Other institutions contributing to the venture included Old Dominion University and several aerospace companies. The facility was located on land leased from NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) near Chincoteague, Virginia. Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Virginia, had built the rocket. One of the satellites it carried was a U.S. Air Force tactical surveillance satellite called TacSat-2. The other was a 10-kilogram (22-pound) NASA satellite called GeneSat 1, designed for experiments on E. coli bacteria.(Michael E. Ruane, “At Va. Spaceport, Rocket Launches 1,000 Dreams,” Washington Post, 17 December 2006; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 638, 1 January 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx638.html (accessed 1 July 2010).)
Japan launched into space the Advanced Landing Observing Satellite (ALOS), known as Daichi, on an H-IIA rocket, from Tanegashima Space Center in Kagoshima in southern Japan, at 10:33 a.m. (JST). ALOS had the capability to produce maps of a scale of 25,000 to 1, without using reference points on Earth’s surface. Japan would also use the satellite for precise regional land- coverage observation, disaster monitoring, and resource surveying. Three instruments aboard ALOS would accomplish these tasks: the Panchromatic Remote-Sensing Instrument for Stereo Mapping (PRISM), an optical camera measuring land elevation; the Advanced Visible and Near Infrared Radiometer type 2 (AVNIR-2), observing the material that covers land surfaces; and the Phased Array type L–band Synthetic Aperture Radar (PALSAR), enabling day-and-night and all- weather land observation. Japan had designed ALOS to operate for at least three years, with a program objective for a mission lasting up to five years.(Stephen Clark, “New Earth Observer Launched into Orbit,” Spaceflight Now, 24 January 2006; Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), “Satellites and Spacecraft: Advanced Land Observing Satellite ‘DAICHI’ (ALOS),” 25 February 2009, http://www.jaxa.jp/projects/sat/alos/index_e.html (accessed 12 November 2009); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 627, 1 February 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/ spx627.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
