A UP Aerospace–built SpaceLoft SL-2 rocket launched from Spaceport America in New Mexico, carrying small amounts of the cremated remains of approximately 200 people, including Star Trek creator Eugene W. Roddenberry and Star Trek actor James M. Doohan. The event was the first successful launch into space from the commercial spaceport; the company’s first attempt in December 2006 had failed when the SpaceLoft XL rocket corkscrewed out of control seconds after the launch, never reaching space. The SL-2 rocket reached an altitude of almost 73 miles (117 kilometers) before returning to Earth. The payload landed by parachute at WSMR, 33 miles (53 kilometers) east of the launch site. UP Aerospace President Jerry Larson remarked that the launch’s only malfunction was a signal beacon, an equipment failure that prevented WSMR from tracking the launch vehicle during the opening moments of the 13-minute flight.(Jose L. Medina, “Spaceport Launch a Success,” Las Cruces Sun News (NM), 30 April 2007.)
Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX), a private company based in El Segundo, California, launched its Falcon-1 rocket from Omelek Island in the Kwajawlein Atoll in the Pacific Ocean. The 70-foot-long (21.3-meter-long), two-stage rocket, powered by liquid oxygen and kerosene, successfully reached space, accomplishing stage separation and second-stage ignition before reentering the atmosphere. Although the rocket failed to reach its desired orbit of 425 miles (684 kilometers), SpaceX’s founder Elon Musk, also the cofounder of PayPal, considered the launch a success because the rocket had successfully achieved many of the riskiest milestones of launching and entering space. The company’s first attempt at launching a Falcon-1 rocket in 2006 had failed when leaking fuel caught fire just after liftoff. SpaceX had designed the most recent mission—Demo 2—to gather flight data for the company’s main customer, DARPA, which was seeking more economical means of reaching space. The typical commercial launch service cost US$30 million, but Musk had pledged to launch satellites for US$7 million.(John Antczak for Associated Press, “SpaceX Launches New Rocket Into Space,” 21 March 2007; John Schwartz, “Private Rocket Lost Shortly After Launch,” New York Times, 21 March 2007.)
NASA announced the assignments to NASA’s field centers of specific tasks related to lunar exploration, as part of the Constellation Program. NASA assigned lead responsibility for designing the lunar lander and other lunar-surface systems, such as rovers and astronaut habitats, to JSC in Houston. MFSC would lead the development of the lunar lander’s descent stage and the development of the Earth-departure stage of the Ares-5 rocket. NASA gave ARC lead responsibility for the integrated health-management systems of Ares 5, the lunar lander, and for other lunar-surface systems, as well as a supporting role in developing Ares 5’s payload shroud. DFRC would assist ARC in developing mission-operation simulations capabilities and supporting ground- and flight-test operations for lunar projects. NASA assigned GRC lead responsibility for developing the lunar lander’s ascent stage and Ares 5’s power system, thrust- vector control system, and payload shroud, as well as for testing the Earth-departure stage at Plum Brook Station in Ohio. GSFC would take the lead in developing an unpressurized cargo carrier for Orion and avionics for lunar landers. GSFC would also develop equipment and tools for lunar EVAs. JPL would have a variety of supporting roles in the lunar-lander project and lead responsibility for a particular robotic lunar-surface mobility system—the All-Terrain Hex- Legged Extra-Terrestrial Explorer (ATHLETE), a six-legged robot. KSC would have lead responsibility for final assembly of the human lunar lander, help integrate lunar-habitat modules, and prepare Ares 1 and Ares 5 for launch. NASA assigned LaRC a variety of supporting roles in the lunar-lander project, in addition to lead roles in developing the aerodynamics of Ares 5 and structures and mechanisms for lunar-surface systems. As NASA’s primary rocket-engine testing facility, SSC would continue that role for the Ares 1 and Ares 5 and would support the testing of the lunar-lander descent engine.(NASA, “NASA Announces New Center Assignments for Moon Exploration,” news release 07-234, 30 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07234_ESMD_Work_Assignments.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Brian Berger, “NASA Assigns Field Center Roles for Ares 5, Lunar Lander,” Space.com, 30 October 2007, http://www.space.com/news/071030-sn-ares-fieldassign.html (accessed 28 September 2010).)
NASA announced its selection of four universities to conduct suborbital scientific research. NASA intended the projects to reinvigorate its Sounding Rocket Program. The four projects had a combined value of US$4.2 million. NASA’s Science Mission Directorate’s Heliophysics Division had selected two of the programs, and the Directorate’s Astrophysics Division had selected the other two. The University of Wisconsin proposed to design a payload to make astronomical polarization measurements in the far-ultraviolet spectrum and to explore new diagnostics of the geometry and magnetic fields in stellar envelopes and interstellar medium. Dartmouth College in Hanover, New Hampshire, planned to launch a payload to investigate substorm auroras and their variations. The team from the University of Colorado, Boulder, proposed to investigate the ratio of molecular hydrogen to carbon monoxide in gas clouds of other galaxies, to help determine accurately the masses of those galaxies. The team from the University of Southern California at Los Angeles proposed to test a new photoelectron focusing system, which scientists could use in future solar observations to calibrate space research. A panel comprising external reviewers and representatives from NASA’s scientific staff had selected the proposals, based on each project’s scientific and technical merits, costs, and relevance to NASA programs.(NASA, “NASA Funds Universities’ New Experiments for Suborbital Flights,” news release 07-121, 23 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07121_Suborbital_Grants.html (accessed 24 March 2010).)
A Dnepr rocket launched a German satellite called TerraSAR-X from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 2:14 (UT). The 3,000-pound (1,361-kilogram) TerraSAR-X was a night-vision radar system designed to create the most precise maps and imagery that a civilian space-radar system had produced to date. The craft’s mission was to map Earth and its oceans at a rate of 1 million square kilometers per day (almost 400,000 square miles per day), to capture scientific data such as sea-ice coverage, vegetation and crop estimates, and to acquire military reconnaissance information at a 1.0-meter (3.3-foot) resolution.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 644, 1 July 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx644.html (accessed 13 April 2010); Stephen Clark, “German Radar Imaging Satellite Launched into Space,” Spaceflight Now, 16 June 2007.)
Four years behind its original schedule, JAXA successfully launched Kaguya, also called the Selenological and Engineering Explorer (SELENE), aboard an H-2A solid-fuel rocket from Tanegashima Island at 1:31 (UT). The 2.9-tonne (2,900-kilogram or 3.2-ton) lunar orbiter carried various instruments that would enable it to obtain detailed data about the lunar topography and surface-mineral composition. JAXA had promoted the mission as the most significant lunar expedition since America’s Apollo program of the 1960s and early 1970s, in terms of its scope and ambition. JAXA claimed that the mission would outpace the former Soviet Union’s Luna program, NASA’s Clementine mission of 1994, and NASA’s Lunar Prospector mission of 1998– 1999. Kaguya’s launch occurred at a critical time for the Japanese space agency, which was facing accusations that it lacked a vision capable of challenging the ambition of the People’s Republic of China to lead East Asia in space exploration. At the time of the launch, JAXA also lacked popular and political support. Japan’s citizens had such poor regard for the civilian space program that JAXA had to negotiate with the local fishermen of Tanegashima for acceptable launch times. Because September was one of two launch windows that Tanegashima fishermen’s unions had offered JAXA, Kaguya’s launch took place during typhoon season. Kazuto Suzuki, a specialist in global space issues at Tsukuba University in Tokyo, explained that JAXA was only beginning to realize that, to enhance the political importance of Japan’s space initiatives, it would need to market Japan’s space program to appeal to the Japanese public.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 647, 1 October 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx647.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Bruce Wallace, “After Long Delay, Japan Launches Lunar Orbiter,” Los Angeles Times, 14 September 2007; Associated Press, “Japan’s Space Agency Launches Lunar Probe,” 14 September 2007.)
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) successfully launched a spy satellite aboard an H- 2A rocket from Japan’s southern island, Tanegashima, at 1:41 p.m. (JST). The spy satellite, the fourth of a four-craft constellation, enabled Japan to monitor any point on Earth once each day. Japan had previously relied on the United States for intelligence, but, following North Korea’s 1998 launch of a ballistic missile over Japan, the Japanese government had decided to develop an independent intelligence-gathering capacity and had launched the four spy satellites. The H-2A launch vehicle also carried into orbit an experimental optical satellite, which would carry out tests for future espionage operations.(New York Times, “Japan Launches Its 4th Spy Satellite,” 25 February 2007; Agence France-Presse, “Japan Launches Spy Satellite,” 26 February 2007.)
A Zenit-3SL rocket carrying a commercial communications satellite exploded during launch from the Sea Launch consortium’s floating platform Odyssey. The Netherlands–based SES New Skies NSS-8 satellite would have provided audio, video, data, and Internet services to countries in Africa, Asia, Europe, the Indian subcontinent, and the Middle East. Sea Launch spokesperson Paula Korn stated that the consortium was forming a failure-review oversight board to investigate the cause of the accident. A Sea Launch helicopter dispatched to the launch platform would assess the damage.(Associated Press, “Sea Launch Rocket with Satellite Explodes on Lift-off,” 31 January 2007; Lon Rains, “Sea Launch Rocket Explodes During Launch,” Space.com, 30 January 2007, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/ 070130_sealaunch_explosion.html (accessed 4 November 2009).)
NASA announced that it had signed a US$46 million fixed-price basic contract with S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation (RSC Energia) to provide various hardware items and to integrate them into the structure of the ISS. The contract included the purchase of a spare depress air pump, enabling air conservation when the crew exited the Quest airlock for spacewalks; technical and engineering support for the mechanism enabling Shuttles to dock with the station; software updates for the ISS’s inventory-management system; certification of additional computer hardware for use on the station; and a Russian-designed toilet system that would automatically transfer urine to a U.S. device that generated potable water. Adding the toilet system to the structure was necessary to enable the ISS partners to increase the station crew from three to six members in 2009.(NASA, “NASA Awards Contract for Space Station Hardware,” news release C07-028, 3 July 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_C07028_station_hardware.html (accessed 11 June 2010).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis launched from NASA’s KSC on an 11-day mission, designated STS-117, to continue construction of the ISS. The crew consisted of Commander Frederick W. Sturckow; Pilot Lee J. Archambault; Mission Specialists James F. Reilly II, Patrick G. Forrester, Steven R. Swanson, and John D. Olivas; and Flight Engineer Clayton C. Anderson, who would replace Sunita L. Williams on board the ISS as a member of ISS Expeditions 15 and 16. The launch was nearly flawless. Only one potential problem occurred several minutes into the flight, when on- board cameras captured an image that appeared to show foam flaking off the Shuttle’s external fuel tank, just after the solid rocket boosters (SRBs) had separated from the orbiter. According to Shuttle Program Manager N. Wayne Hale Jr., NASA’s preliminary analysis of the incident indicated that the foam had not struck the craft. NASA planned further analysis.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis Begins Mission to the Space Station,” news release 07-136, 8 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07136_Atlantis_launch.html (accessed 13 April 2010); NASA, “STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight),” NASAfacts, http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/177714main_STS-117.pdf (accessed 21 May 2010), John Johnson Jr., “Flawless Launch, At Last, For Atlantis,” Los Angeles Times, 9 June 2007.)
NASA’s Phoenix Mars Lander launched aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 9:36 (UT). The 350-kilogram (772-pound) Lander carried scientific instruments and a robotic arm that would vertically penetrate the icy soil of the Vastitas Borealis, an arctic plain bearing similarities to central Greenland or northern Alaska. Phoenix’s instruments included eight on- board ovens designed to analyze vapors from soil samples to identify the presence of organic compounds, which would indicate whether biological processes had occurred. To avoid contamination, Phoenix would use each oven just once. Phoenix also carried multi-spectral instruments that would collect data revealing the composition of Mars’s surface minerals and of its atmosphere, to an altitude of 20 kilometers (12.4 miles).(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 646, 1 September 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx646.html (accessed 14 June 2010); John Johnson Jr., “Phoenix Spacecraft Launches to Mars,” Los Angeles Times, 6 August 2007.)
Satellite Association of Argentina, and the Argentina Association for Space Technology had built PehuenSat-1 to provide a platform for Argentinean university students to perform amateur radio experiments.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 639, 31 January 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx639.html (accessed 4 November 2009); Chris Bergen, “India’s PSLV Launches Successfully,” NASASpaceflight.com, 9 January 2007, http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2007/01/indias-pslv-launches-successfully/ (accessed 4 March 2010); K. N. Arun for Associated Press, “India Launches Rocket To Test Re-entry,” 10 January 2007.)
An Atlas-5 rocket launched six satellites from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Two of the satellites were part of the Orbital Express Experiment and four would measure the chemical makeup of the atmosphere and the signal turbulence of satellites. The primary goal of Orbital Express, a joint effort of NASA, the U.S. Air Force, and the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), was to develop a system allowing spacecraft to “act independently and smarter.” Fred G. Kennedy of the U.S. Air Force, DARPA Program Manager for Orbital Express, explained that the Orbital Express mission’s goal was to enable satellites autonomously to refuel, repair, and upgrade—a feat that would “radically change satellite design.” In April 2005, NASA had launched two satellites that were supposed to rendezvous autonomously, but a collision of the two craft during the docking attempt had destroyed them. Because the satellites were preprogrammed, ground controllers had been unable to transmit commands to the satellites’ computers. To avoid such an event in the future, DARPA had designed the Orbital Express satellites to accept guidance from ground controllers.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 641, 1 April 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx641.html (accessed 25 January 2010); Todd Halvorson, “Atlas 5 Launches Satellites,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 March 2007; Shelby G. Spires, “2 Satellites To Test Auto Docking Technology,” Huntsville Times (AL), 9 March 2007.)
The People’s Republic of China launched its lunar orbiter Chang’e 1 aboard a Long March-3A rocket at 10:05 (UT) from Xichang Satellite Launch Center. China named the 5,070-pound (2,230-kilogram) craft for a Chinese goddess who, according to myth, had flown to the Moon. Chang’e 1 carried several scientific instruments, including a stereo camera and spectrometer imager, laser altimeter, gamma-ray and x-ray spectrometer, microwave radiometer, high-energy particle detector, and solar-wind detectors. The Chinese Academy of Sciences and CNSA planned to use the instruments to identify 14 atomic elements, helping scientists determine the mineral content of the lunar surface. The goal of the mission was to analyze the chemical and mineral composition of the lunar surface.
The U.S. Missile Defense Agency successfully launched a Minotaur-1 rocket from the Mid- Atlantic Regional Spaceport launchpad on Wallops Island, Virginia, at 2:47 a.m. (EST). The rocket carried the Near Field Infrared Experiment (NFIRE), which was part of a study to improve the interception of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) and to assess the viability of a laser communication system for missile-defense applications. During the mission, an infrared tracking sensor on board NFIRE would collect exhaust-plume data from two disarmed Minutemen ICBMs, which the agency would launch later in 2007 from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch of Minotaur 1 was the second launch from the Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport. Operated by a consortium including Old Dominion University and the states of Maryland and Virginia, the spaceport was one of six federally licensed spaceports in the United States.(Stephen Furness, “Wallops Spaceport’s 2:47 a.m. Launch a Success,” Chincoteague Beacon (VA), 24 April 2007; Jon W. Glass, “Rocket Launched Successfully from Eastern Shore Spaceport,” Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 25 April 2007.)
An Ariane-5ECA rocket launched the British Defense Ministry’s 4.7-tonne (5.2-ton) Skynet-5A satellite and ISRO’s 3.1-tonne (3.4-ton) Insat-4B civil-communications satellite from Kourou, French Guiana. The Skynet 5A was part of a system designed to deliver secure, high-bandwidth communications for British armed forces, NATO, and other allied forces. Skynet had ultrahighfrequency and super-high-frequency communications instruments, a secure payload-control system, antijamming capabilities, and multiple spot beams. Insat 4B carried 12 Ku-band transponders to reach homes and businesses throughout India, as well as 12 C-band transponders to serve users living in an area stretching from the Middle East to Southeast Asia. Insat 4B was the second Insat-4 craft to reach orbit successfully. Insat 4A had successfully launched in 2005, but Insat 4C’s launch vehicle had exploded in July 2006, destroying the satellite.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 641; Stephen Clark, “British and Indian Satellites Fly to Space on Ariane 5,” Spaceflight Now, 11 March 2007, http://spaceflightnow.com/ariane/v175/ (accessed 9 June 2010 ); Jonathan Amos, “British Skynet Satellite Launched,” BBC News, 12 March 2007, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/6434773.stm (accessed 9 June 2010).)
ESA and Russia successfully launched Foton M-3 aboard a Russian Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome at 11:00 (UT). The 6.4-tonne (6,400-kilogram or 7-ton) satellite carried a payload of approximately 40 European experiments, including a 35-kilogram (77-pound) student-built module called the Young Engineers Satellite 2 (YES2), which the Foton craft would deploy to orbit Earth for 12 days. When the orbiting period had ended, the YES2 mission would use an experimental tether to return the picosatellite and reentry vehicle Fotino to Earth on 25 September. ESA and Russia had planned the tether-technology demonstration to test and produce data related to “space mail,” a concept developed to enable the return of material from space without the use of conventional chemical propulsion.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 647; European Space Agency (ESA), “Young Engineers’ Satellite 2; Mission Facts,” 5 September 2007, http://www.esa.int/SPECIALS/YES/SEMLRV8OY2F_0.html (accessed 5 August 2010); ESA, “Focus On; Foton-M3 Mission To Launch European Experiments,” 11 September 2007, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ SEMN5ZMPQ5F_FeatureWeek_0.html (accessed 5 August 2010).)
NASA announced that, after a full and open competition, it had selected the Boeing Company as the prime contractor for the production, delivery, and installation of avionics systems for the Ares-1 rocket, a key component of the Constellation Program. NASA planned for Ares 1 to launch the Orion CEV into orbit. Under the terms of the US$799.5 million contract, Boeing was responsible for developing and acquiring the avionics hardware, and for assembling, inspecting, and integrating the systems’ components on the upper stage of the rocket. During the performance period, which would last through 16 December 2016, NASA required Boeing to provide one instrument-unit avionics-ground-test article, three flight-test units, and six production-flight units to support integrated flight tests and missions. The selection was the final major contract award for the Constellation Program, wrapping up a five-month period in which NASA had awarded nearly US$5 billion in contracts. The award was the second to go to Boeing, which had also won the US$1.1 billion contract to build the upper stage of the Ares rocket.(NASA, “NASA Selects Prime Contractor for Ares 1 Rocket Avionics,” news release C07-060, 12 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_C07060_Ares_1_Avionics.html (accessed 20 October 2007); Associated Press, “Boeing Wins Final NASA Rocket Deal,” 13 December 2007; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Boeing Wins Final Ares 1 Contract,” 13 December 2007.)
The government of Sweden announced that it had signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the suborbital-space tourism company Virgin Galactic. The agreement established plans for Virgin’s SpaceShipTwo vehicle to launch from a site in Kiruna, Sweden, during the midsummer and midwinter, so that the craft could fly through the aurora borealis. In preparation for future flights, Swedish Space Corporation authorities planned a March 2008 demonstration launch of a small sounding rocket equipped with cameras. SpaceShipTwo designer Burt Rutan would collect data to determine the possible effect of the aurora borealis on passengers or on electronics aboard the spacecraft. The MOU did not call for any exchange of funds, because the Kiruna facility was the site of suborbital sounding rocket and atmospheric balloon launches. Swedish officials stated that the site had sufficient infrastructure to accommodate Virgin Galactic craft without new investment.(Peter B. de Selding, “Virgin Galactic Strikes Deal with Swedish Government,” Space.com, 28 January 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070128_sweden_virgin.html (accessed 9 November 2009).)
A Dnepr rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 7:02 (UT), carrying a variety of small satellites, many of them student-built. Four American-built picosatellites, dubbed Objects T, S, R, and Q—all CubeSats with masses of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds)—were technology demonstrators, including two—CalPoly 3 (CP 3) and CalPoly 4 (CP 4)—that students at California Polytechnic University and Stanford University had built. Students at the University of Louisiana, Lafayette, had built another CubeSat—CAPE 1—with a mass of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds), to collect and store data on the ambient ionosphere and to relay the data to the students. Students at Sergio Arboleda University had constructed Libertad 1, a Colombian 1-kilogram (2.2-pound) CubeSat, for an unspecified purpose. The Dnepr rocket also carried five Saudi Arabian communications nanosatellites. Students and faculty of King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology had built the 12-kilogram (26.5-pound) CubeSats, which were the first five of a planned fleet of 24 nanosatellites that would store and forward communications. Also aboard was EgyptSat 1, a 100-kilogram (220.5-pound) Egyptian minisatellite carrying a multispectral imager for Earth observation.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642.)
Yuzhnoye, the Ukrainian rocket-construction bureau and a member of the Sea Launch consortium, released its findings on the failed 30 January 2007 launch of the Zenit-3SL rocket. Yuzhnoye stated that a stray metal fragment had entered a pump in the rocket’s engine, causing the Zenit-3SL to explode during its attempt to launch a Boeing-built commercial communications satellite for the Netherlands-based SES New Skies. Representatives of the Ukrainian and Russian developers of the Zenit-3SL rocket had comprised the commission that investigated the launch failure.(Associated Press, “Company: Metal Fragment Doomed Rocket,” 14 March 2007; RIA Novosti, “Sea Launch Explosion Due To Engine Failure,” 14 March 2007.)
China National Space Administration (CNSA) and Roskosmos signed an agreement to launch a joint mission to Mars in 2009, marking a milestone in space cooperation between the People’s Republic of China and Russia. The agreement stipulated that a Russian rocket would launch a Chinese satellite to Mars, along with Russia’s Phobos Explorer. The Chinese satellite would explore the Martian atmosphere and the Phobos Explorer would land on the Martian moon Phobos, to collect soil samples to return to Earth.(Agence France-Presse, “China and Russian Plan Joint Mission to Mars,” 28 March 2007.)
A Dnepr rocket carrying Bigelow Aerospace Corporation’s Genesis-2 inflatable spacecraft launched from ISC Kosmotras Yasny Cosmodrome in Russia’s Orenburg region at 15:02 (UT). Bigelow Aerospace had designed and built the 15-foot-long (4.6-meter-long) technology demonstrator, which was part of the vision for an affordable space tourism market. Genesis 2 would deploy eight solar arrays and expand to a diameter of 8 feet (2.44 meters) from its launch width of 6.2 feet (1.9 meters). The craft’s design—involving the use of flexible material,
NASA successfully launched its Dawn spacecraft aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 7:34 a.m. (EDT). Mission Controllers at NASA’s JPL in Pasadena, California, received telemetry data on schedule at 9:44 a.m. (EDT). The data indicated that Dawn had achieved proper orientation in space and that its solar array had succeeded in generating power from the Sun. Dawn’s mission was to travel 1.7 billion miles (2.7 billion kilometers) to explore two asteroids located in orbit between Mars and Jupiter—Vesta in 2011 and Ceres in 2015. The International Astronomical Union had reclassified Ceres as a dwarf planet in 2006. In their search for new information about the collection of rocky materials remaining from the formation of the planets, NASA scientists hoped that the US$474 million mission would provide insight into how size, water, and gravity had influenced the development of Earth and its planetary neighbors. NASA scientists intended to use Dawn’s instrument suite to measure the asteroids’ elemental and mineral composition, shape, surface topography, and tectonic history, as well as to search for water-bearing minerals. While studying how Dawn orbits the asteroids, scientists also planned to measure the masses and gravity fields of Vesta and Ceres. Engineers had designed Dawn to use ion propulsion, a unique hyperefficient system using solar power to ionize xenon, generating thrust. Although this method provided less power than conventional engines, ion propulsion could maintain thrust for months at a time.(NASA, “NASA’s Dawn Spacecraft Enroute To Shed Light on Asteroid Belt,” news release 07-213, 27 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07213_Dawn_Final_Release.html (accessed 4 August 2010); NASA, “Dawn Spacecraft Successfully Launched,” news release 07-212, 27 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07212_Dawn_launched.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Mark K. Matthews, “NASA’s Dawn To Cast Light on Asteroids ‘Frozen in Time’,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 September 2007; Mark Carreau, “NASA’s Launch Starts 3-Billion-Mile Trip to Asteroids,” Houston Chronicle, 28 September 2007.)
XCOR Aerospace announced that it had successfully completed six short-duration test fires of the prototype engine 5M15, the new 7,500-pound-thrust (3.75-ton-thrust or 3.4-tonne-thrust) rocket engine, using liquid methane and liquid oxygen as propellants. Spokesperson Aleta Jackson explained that XCOR had designed the test fires to determine the appropriate length of the chamber for a flight-weight version of the engine. XCOR had developed the engine as part of a subcontract with Alliant Techsystems (ATK), which was developing liquid-methane rocket engine technology for NASA’s future space applications.(XCOR Aerospace, “XCOR Aerospace Begins Test Firing of Methane Rocket Engine: Successful Test Completed for NASA,” press release, 16 January 2007, http://www.xcor.com/press-releases/2007/07-01-16_XCOR_begins_ methane_engine_testing.html (accessed 9 November 2009).)
New Mexico Spaceport Authority announced the successful launch of a UP Aerospace flight vehicle. The company had launched the flight vehicle to test proprietary advanced launch technologies. At the request of UP Aerospace, the New Mexico Spaceport Authority had not publicized the launch, which was the Connecticut-based company’s third launch attempt. In the company’s first launch attempt in September 2006, the vehicle had failed to reach space. Although the April 2007 second attempt had succeeded, locating the rocket after launch had required weeks of searching. In this third attempt, the launch vehicle had reached its planned altitude of 2,500 feet (762 meters).(New Mexico Spaceport Authority, “UP Aerospace Reports Successful Launch at Spaceport America,” news release, 19 December 2007, http://www.spaceportamerica.com/news/press-releases/104-up-areo-reports-success- launch.html (accessed 19 November 2010); Las Cruces Sun-News (NM), “Unannounced Launch Lifts Off from Spaceport,” 20 December 2007.)
ESA launched the sixth Ariane-5 rocket of 2007 from Kourou, French Guiana, setting a record for the agency. The Ariane 5 lifted into orbit the Horizons-2 telecommunications satellite, a joint U.S.-Japanese venture. The rocket also carried the RASCOM-QAF1 satellite, which would offer telephone and Internet service throughout Africa. Horizons 2, the second satellite for the U.S.- based Intelsat and the Japan-based JSAT, would replace Intelsat’s SBS-6 spacecraft, which had been in orbit for 17 years. With 20 Ku-band transponders, the 2,304-kilogram (5079.5-pound) Horizons 2 would provide telecommunications services for 15−17 years to the continental United States, the Caribbean, and parts of Canada. After 10 years struggle to organize an ownership structure, Regional African Satellite Communications Organization (RASCOM) had secured US$370 million in funding from a consortium, comprising a Libyan investment fund, the Libyan General Post and Telecommunications Company, and three African development banks. The consortium intended for its satellite, the Rascom-QAF1, to provide a first step toward 188 establishing the space infrastructure necessary to link poor rural Africans with urban areas.
NASA launched its Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms (THEMIS) mission from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 6:01 p.m. (EST), marking the first time NASA had launched a five-satellite constellation aboard a single rocket. NASA had designed the mission to uncover the catalyst of geomagnetic substorms, the atmospheric events visible in the Northern Hemisphere as a sudden brightening of the aurora borealis. Scientists hoped that the mission’s findings would help protect humans and commercial satellites in space from the effects of particle radiation. NASA had planned the mission to last two years, during which time the five identical satellites would collect data, attempting to achieve what no previous single-satellite mission had been able to do—to pinpoint when and where substorms begin.(NASA, “NASA’s THEMIS Mission Launches To Study Geomagnetic Substorms,” news release 07-47, 17 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_0747_THEMIS_Postlaunch.html (accessed 14 October 2007).)
NASA announced an agreement with the U.S. Air Force to support abort-flight-test requirements for the Orion Project. Under a contract with Orbital Sciences Corporation of Chandler, Arizona, the U.S. Air Force Space Development and Test Wing at Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico, had scheduled flight tests of abort-test boosters. The purpose of the tests, which would begin in 2009 at White Sands Missile Range (WSMR) in New Mexico and would last through 2011, was to support certification of the Orion CEV’s launch-abort system. The system included a small escape rocket designed to ensure the safety of the crew in the event of a launch-vehicle malfunction while on the launchpad or during ascent to orbit. Of the six tests planned, two would simulate a situation involving an abort from the launchpad and would require no booster; the remainder would use abort-test boosters to simulate aborts at three stressing conditions along the Ares launch-vehicle trajectory.(NASA, “NASA Buys Abort Test Boosters for Orion Flight Tests,” news release 07-86, 16 April 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_07086_Orion_ATB_purchase.html (accessed 16 February 2010).)
NASA announced that its SSC in Mississippi had broken ground for the construction of a new rocket-engine test stand, which would provide altitude testing for the J-2X engine. The J-2X would power the upper stages of the Ares-1 and Ares-5 rockets. NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale spoke at the groundbreaking ceremony for the new test stand, recalling that the first stand erected at NASA’s SSC had tested the Saturn-5 rocket for the Apollo program. NASA had first tested the Space Shuttle engines at SSC in the 1970s. The new test stand for the new spacecraft signaled the beginning of a new era of exploration. The 19-acre site in SSC’s A Complex would contain the 300-foot-tall (91-meter-tall), open-steel-frame A-3 test stand; a test- control center; propellant-barge docks; and access roadways. Engineers would generate steam to reduce pressure in the test cell, using the test stand to simulate conditions at different altitudes.(NASA, “NASA’s Stennis Space Center Marks New Chapter in Space Exploration,” news release 07-180, 23 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07180_Stennis_groundbreaking.html (accessed 14 June 2010).)
Russia and India signed an agreement in Moscow for India to participate in Russia’s 2011 Moon- Globe Program to design a spacecraft for lunar exploration. Under the terms of the agreement, Russia and India would jointly build a robotic laboratory, with India supplying the rocket and flight module and Russia developing and producing the landing module of a Moon rover and a scientific complex. The agreement allowed for joint lunar exploration through 2017.
Russia marked the 50th anniversary of the launch of Sputnik with veterans of the Soviet space program laying flowers at the grave of Sergei P. Korolev, the man who had created Sputnik, the tiny satellite that launched the space race between the United States and the U.S.S.R. Korolev’s name had remained a secret while he was alive. Ceremonies also included the unveiling of a monument to Sputnik near Moscow, a tour of S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia for schoolchildren, and Roskosmos’s announcement of a special film about the 1957 launch. President Vladimir V. Putin congratulated Russia’s space scientists, reminding them, “the launch of the Earth’s first satellite was a truly historic event, which started a space age.” The RIA Novosti news agency quoted First Deputy Prime Minister Sergei B. Ivanov as stating, “Fifty years in cosmic terms is a mere instant, and yet it fundamentally changed the nature of all humanity.”(Agence France-Presse, “Russia Marks Sputnik Anniversary,” 5 October 2007.)
NASA launched its Aeronomy of Ice in Mesosphere (AIM) satellite aboard a Pegasus-XL rocket dropped from a Stargazer-L-1011 aircraft. The Stargazer launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 21:26 (UT). NASA had designed AIM to study noctilucent clouds (NLCs) in the polar mesosphere. Observers can only see NLCs at night. Shortly before the mission, these clouds had appeared more often and had grown brighter. Observers had first seen NLCs in the 1880s, soon after the massive volcanic eruption on the Indonesian island of Krakatoa. Space- based satellites had periodically observed the clouds since the 1980s. AIM was the first spacecraft devoted to the study of NLCs. Scientists hoped to answer basic questions about why the clouds form and whether human-caused global warming was responsible for the recent changes. AIM carried three instruments: the Solar Occultation for Ice Experiment (SOFIE) would remotely sense the gases that condense to NLCs; the Cosmic Dust Experiment (CDE) would serve as an in situ sampler of the cosmic dust over the NLCs; and the Cloud Imaging and Particle Size (CIPS) experiment, a panoramic ultraviolet (UV) imager of the NLCs operating in the 265-nanometer-wavelength band, would provide the morphology of the clouds in both hemispheres.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642; NASA, “NASA’s AIM Mission Soars to the Edge of Space,” news release 07-92, 25 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_07092_AIM_launch.html (accessed 16 February 2010); Associated Press, “NASA Launches Satellite To Study Clouds,” 26 April 2007.)
Soyuz TMA-11 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome at 13:22 (UT) carrying three astronauts—a Russian, an American, and a Malaysian—to the ISS. Upon their arrival at the ISS, American astronaut Peggy A. Whitson, as Commander of Expedition 16, would become the first woman to command the space station. Veteran Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko would join Whitson as a member of Expedition 16, each of the two replacing crew members of Expedition 15. Russian cosmonauts Fyodor N. Yurchikhin, Expedition 15 Commander, and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov, who had been aboard the ISS since 9 April 2007, would accompany Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor on the return flight to Earth. Shukor, an orthopedic surgeon from Malaysia, would conduct experiments on board the ISS, studying diseases and the effects of microgravity and space radiation on cells and genes. Shukor was Malaysia’s first astronaut.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 648, 1 November 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx648.html (accessed 13 September 2010); Mansur Mirovalev for Associated Press, “Rocket Lifts Off for International Space Station,” 11 October 2007.)
Europe’s Ariane-5ECA rocket launched a two-satellite payload, weighing 9.4 tonnes (10.4 tons), from Europe’s launch center in Kourou, French Guiana, at 22:29 (GMT), setting a new benchmark for a commercial launch. The heavy-lift rocket carried Galaxy 17, an American geostationary communications satellite, and Astra 1L, a European geostationary communications satellite. Galaxy 1 would provide telephone and television services for South America, North America, and Europe; Astra 1L would provide direct-to-home video and voice links throughout Europe. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin attended the launch to observe the Ariane- 5ECA rocket, which would begin launching payloads to the ISS later in 2007.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 643, 1 June 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx643.html (accessed 26 March 2010); BBC News, “European Rocket Powers To Record,” 4 May 2007, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/ 6621297.stm (accessed 10 June 2010).)
NASA’s Ames Research Center (ARC) and Virgin Galactic signed a MOU, providing a framework to explore potential collaborations, such as developing spacesuits, heat shields for spacecraft, hybrid rocket motors, and hypersonic vehicles. The press also reported that the MOU included provisions for training NASA astronauts, for NASA to buy seats on a Virgin Galactic flight, and for NASA to provide technical advice to Virgin Galactic; however; these provisions were not, in fact, part of the agreement. A newly formed organization in the NASA Research Park at Ames—NASA’s Space Portal—had enabled the negotiation with Virgin Galactic to help NASA promote the development of the commercial space economy.(NASA, “NASA, Virgin Galactic To Explore Future Cooperation,” news release 07-49, 21 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_07049_Virgin_Galactic.html (accessed 14 October 2009); NASA, “NASA Provides Additional Information on Agreement with Virgin Galactic,” news release 07-50, 21 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_07050_Virgin_Galactic_info.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Associated Press, “NASA, Virgin Galactic Sign Agreement,” 22 February 2007; Matthew Moore, “Virgin Galactic To Train NASA Astronauts,” Daily Telegraph (London), 22 February 2007.)
The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) launched two ocean-surveillance spacecraft from Cape Canaveral aboard an Atlas-5 Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV), marking the rocket’s first NRO secret mission. The NRO had designed the two craft to track ships that might be concealing al-Qaeda operatives and to monitor Iranian and Chinese sea-based military operations. However, the rocket had stopped firing prematurely, causing the craft to launch into the wrong orbit. Although the satellites separated safely from the malfunctioning booster, they did not have enough rocket propellant to reach the correct orbit. Lockheed Martin had built the Atlas 5 using a Lockheed Martin Centaur upper stage, with a Pratt & Whitney RL10 rocket engine powered with liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen. United Launch Alliance, which operated the Atlas program, managed the launch in conjunction with NRO and the U.S. Air Force’s 45th Space Wing.(Craig Covault, “NRO Spacecraft in Wrong Orbit,” Aviation Week, 16 June 2007, http://www.aviationweek.com/ aw/generic/story_channel.jsp?channel=space&id=news/mission06157.xml (accessed 20 June 2010).)
The People’s Republic of China launched NIGCOMSAT-1—a communications satellite that China had manufactured for Nigeria—aboard a Long March-3B rocket from Xichang Launch Center in Sichuan Province. The launch marked the first time that China had built and launched a satellite under a contract with another country. China had reportedly secured the US$311 million contract in 2004, in a bidding process that had included 21 companies, in addition to China. The 5.2-tonne (5.7-ton) craft carried four C-band, eighteen Ku-band, four Ka-band, and two L-band transponders, for providing voice, video, and data links to all of Africa, southern Europe, and parts of the Middle East. News reports described the launch as a symbol of China’s broad network of economic relations with African nations, suggesting that the launch signaled China’s wish to cooperate with developing countries in the peaceful use of outer space. Nigerian officials hailed the launch as a breakthrough that signaled the end of the nation’s exclusive reliance on oil. Hammed Rufai, Managing Director of the NIGCOMSAT-1 project for Nigeria, remarked that the satellite would help Nigeria develop knowledge-based industries.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 643; Edward Cody, “China Builds and Launches a Satellite for Nigeria,” Washington Post, 14 May 2007.)
