NASA announced the successful completion of a test firing of the igniter designed to start the Ares-I rocket’s first-stage motor. The firing took place at ATK Launch Systems test facilities near Promontory, Utah. The successful test of the igniter, which was an enhanced version of the flight-proven igniter used in Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters, marked a milestone in the continuing development of the Ares-I first stage and paved the way for the first ground test, scheduled to occur later in 2009. Engineers had designed the Ares-I igniter to take advantage of upgraded liner and insulation materials with improved thermal properties. The materials would protect the igniter’s case from the burning solid propellant. The new igniter, approximately 18 inches (45.7 centimeters) in diameter and 36 inches (91.4 centimeters) long, was a small, high- burn-rate solid rocket motor designed to be secured in the forward segment of the five-segment booster. An ignition command would send a flame down the core of the 142-foot (43.3-meter) solid rocket motor, generating more than 3.5 million pounds (1.59 million kilograms) of thrust to trigger liftoff of the rocket.(NASA, “NASA’s Ares I Rocket First Stage Igniter Successfully Tested,” news release 09-055, 10 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09055_ARES_igniter_test.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
NASA announced the successful test of a critical piece of the Ares-I rocket, marking a key milestone in the next-generation crew launch vehicle’s (CLV’s) development. ATK had conducted the flight test at its facility in Promontory, Utah. Simulating the separation event that should occur following the first-stage flight of Ares I-X, the test had demonstrated that the linear-shaped charge intended to separate the forward skirt extension would sever cleanly. The test had also measured the shock that the charge created. Built as a single, solid aluminum cylinder, 6 feet long (1.8 meters long) by 12 feet in diameter (3.7 meters in diameter), the forward skirt extension’s design enabled it to withstand the loads of the first stage and to support the weight of the upper stage. Michael A. Kahn, Executive Vice President of ATK Space Systems, remarked that the successful test represented an important milestone for the program, validating key parameters to support the upcoming Ares-I-X flight test.(NASA, “Test in Development of NASA’s New Crew Rocket Is Successful,” news release 09-022, 30 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-022_Ares_1-X_Sep_test.html (accessed 14 January 2010); ATK, “ATK Successfully Conducts NASA Ares 1-X Separation Test,” press release, 30 January 2009, http://atk.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=118&item=892 (accessed 7 March 2011); Todd Halvorson, “NASA Stages Key Test in Advance of Ares 1X,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 February 2009.)
NASA announced the first successful full-scale, full-duration stationary test fire of the first-stage motor for the Ares-I rocket, the CLV in development for NASA’s Constellation Program. NASA and its industry partner ATK Space Systems had successfully conducted the test, which consisted of shooting a giant flame through the 154-foot (46.94-meter) rocket as it stood on a horizontal test stand, to ignite the 1.5 million pounds (0.68 million kilograms) of solid propellant coating the booster’s interior. The ignition shot flame at three times the speed of sound. The plume’s temperature reached 4,500°F, and the flame generated 3.6 million pounds (1.6 million kilograms) of thrust. During the firing of the five-segment solid development motor (DM 1), engineers gathered measurements from 650 sensors to evaluate acoustics, thrust, roll control, and motor vibrations. The event marked the second attempt to conduct the 2-minute test at ATK Space Systems’ test stand in Promontory, Utah. NASA had canceled the first test on 27 August, when it was already in progress, with 20 seconds remaining in the countdown. NASA’s engineering team had made this decision when the ground controller unit had a problem with a 30-year-old component that helped to move nozzle controls. Nozzle controls steer a rocket in flight. The engineering team had conducted a detailed investigation and had replaced a faulty part.(NASA, “NASA and ATK Successfully Test Ares First Stage Motor,” news release 09-198, 10 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-198_Ares_DM-1_test.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Mark Stark for Associated Press, “Rocket Test in Northern Utah Goes Off Problem-Free,” 11 September 2009; Todd Halvorson, “Ares I Scores a Victory: A Debut in Flame and Smoke,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 September 2009.)
NASA launched its National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) satellite, NOAA 19, or NOAA-N Prime, aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 2:22 a.m. (PST). The successful launch occurred following two scrubs resulting from technical problems. The Lockheed Martin−built NOAA-N Prime was the latest and final spacecraft in the Advanced TIROS-N (ATN) satellite series. Lockheed Martin had been designing and building for NASA and NOAA since the first Television and Infrared Observational Satellite (TIROS) weather satellite, which had launched in April 1960. Replacing NOAA 18, NOAA-N Prime would become the primary “afternoon” spacecraft, a designation based upon the time a spacecraft’s orbit crosses the equator. NOAA-N Prime was carrying the same primary instruments that NOAA 18 had on board, with the addition of an Advanced Data Collection System (ADCS) and an improved Search and Rescue Processor. France’s national space agency, Centre National d’Études Spatiales (CNES) had provided the ADCS, a system designed to measure environmental factors such as atmospheric temperature and pressure, as well as the velocity and direction of ocean and wind currents. CNES had also provided the Search and Rescue Processor, designed to detect distress calls from emergency beacons on board aircraft and boats, as well as to locate people carrying devices in remote areas.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 664; NASA Spaceflight, “ULA Delta II Launches on Third Attempt with NASA’s NOAA- N Prime,” 6 February 2009.)
The Russian Coronas Photon solar observatory launched at 13:30 (UT) from Plesetsk Cosmodrome aboard a Tsyklon-3 rocket. Russia had dedicated the satellite to research in the fields of solar physics, solar-terrestrial connection physics, and astrophysics. Specifically, its mission was to study the connection between the Sun and Earth, using a suite of instruments designed to measure energetic particles produced by solar flares, the solar atmosphere, and solar activity in relation to magnetic storms around Earth. The Research Institute for Electromechanics in Moscow had manufactured the 4,200-pound (1,905-kilogram, or 1.9-tonne) satellite, and the Moscow Engineering Physics Institute had led the science team. The Photon observatory was the third satellite in the Coronos series; two previous craft had launched in 1994 and 2001 to study the Sun and had successfully concluded their missions.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 663; Stephen Clark, “Solar Physics Spacecraft Launched by Russia,” Spaceflight Now, 2 February 2009.)
NASA announced the successful demonstration of an inflatable heat shield slowing and protecting itself as it entered the atmosphere at hypersonic speeds—the first time that anyone had successfully flown an inflatable reentry capsule. NASA launched the Inflatable Re-entry Vehicle Experiment (IRVE) on a 50-foot (15.2-meter) Black Brant–9 sounding rocket, from NASA’s WFF on Wallops Island, Virginia, at 8:52 a.m. (EDT). Made of several layers of silicone-coated Kevlar, the heat shield inflated with nitrogen several minutes after launch, from a 15-inch- diameter (38-centimeter-diameter) payload to a 10-foot-diameter (3-meter-diameter) mushroom- shaped aeroshell. The inflation process, which occurred on schedule at an altitude of 124 miles (200 kilometers), required fewer than 90 seconds. Six-and-a-half minutes into flight, at an altitude of 50 miles (80.5 kilometers), the aeroshell entered the key phase of the demonstration, experiencing its peak heating and pressure measurements for approximately 30 seconds. An onboard telemetry system collected data from its instruments, broadcasting that information to engineers in real time. The entire mission lasted approximately 20 minutes, ending with splashdown in the Atlantic Ocean approximately 90 miles (145 kilometers) east of Wallops. NASA did not retrieve either the shield or the rocket. IRVE Project Manager Mary Beth Wusk, based at LaRC, remarked that, with the success of the small-scale demonstrator, NASA’s next step would be to build a more advanced aeroshell, capable of handling higher heat rates—a promising development for future planetary missions.(NASA, “NASA Launches New Technology: An Inflatable Heat Shield,” news release 09-188, 17 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-188_IRVE_launch.html (accessed 31 August 2011); Cory Nealon, “The Newest from NASA: Inflatable Brakes,” Newport News Daily Press (VA), 18 August 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “Inflatable Spacecraft Shield Works, Space Test Shows,” Space.com, 17 August 2009, http://www. space.com/7144-inflatable-spacecraft-shield-works-space-test-shows.html (accessed 12 September 2011).)
2011); John Johnson Jr. “NASA Moon Crash Did Kick Up Debris Plume as Hoped,” Los Angeles Times, 17 October 2009. NASA’s ongoing, planned development activities; to consider potential alternative activities; and to formulate options for a safe, innovative, affordable, and sustainable human spaceflight program, once the Space Shuttle Program came to an end. The committee found that NASA had selected the wrong type of rocket and the wrong destination for this program. In the committee’s opinion, NASA should have concentrated on building larger rockets and exploring new places, such as a nearby asteroid or one of Mars’s moons. Augustine explained that NASA could have accomplished either of those goals more quickly than the goals NASA had chosen instead—first, to return to the Moon, within 15 years, and, second, to explore Mars—plans that had appeared sound when NASA developed them in 2005. Because of subsequent budgetary diversions, NASA now lacked sufficient funding for these ventures, and, by September 2014, NASA would need an additional US$3 billion per year for astronauts to travel beyond Earth’s orbit. The commission recommended that NASA extend the life of the Space Shuttle Program until 2011, to complete deliveries to the ISS, and extend the life of the ISS from 2015 to 2020, to allow for more scientific experiments. The report’s main recommendations involved options for the United States’ path forward in space exploration. Three of the committee’s eight members suggested alternative options involving a so-called flexible path, with no Moon or Mars landings. Augustine pointed out that landing on a near-Earth object could occur as soon as the early 2020s. Because of the Moon’s gravity, landing on and returning from an asteroid would require much less fuel than traveling to the Moon. Augustine suggested that NASA might return to the Moon later, not as a major destination, but for training. The committee determined that, if Congress did not make additional funding available, NASA would need to adopt a modest program, involving little or no exploration.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Panel Says NASA Should Skip Moon, Fly Elsewhere,” 23 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, “For NASA, Possible Shifts in Direction,” New York Times, 23 October 2009; see also Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “Seeking a Human Spaceflight Program Worthy of a Great Nation” (report, NASA, Washington, DC, October 2009), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/396093main_HSF_Cmte_FinalReport.pdf (accessed 4 November 2011); Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, “See What the Committee is Doing,” http://www.nasa.gov/offices/hsf/related_documents/what-the-committee-is-doing.html (accessed 8 November 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Options and Issues for NASA’s Human Space Flight Program: Report of “Review of U.S. Human Space Flight Plans” Committee, 111th Cong., 1st sess., 15 September 2009, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname= 111_house_hearings&docid=f:51928.pdf (accessed 18 January 2012).)
NASA announced that it had successfully demonstrated the Max Launch Abort System (MLAS), an alternative system enabling astronauts to escape their launch vehicle in an emergency. In a simulated launch at 6:26 a.m. (EDT), staged at NASA’s WFF in Virginia, NASA had tested the concept—a system that could safely propel a crew away from a launch vehicle during an emergency on the launchpad or during ascent. For the Orion spacecraft, NASA had selected an LAS that used a single solid launch-abort motor. By contrast, the MLAS used four solid rocket- abort motors. The motors were inside a bullet-shaped composite fairing attached to a full-scale mockup of a crew module. For the test, NASA launched the 33-foot-high (10-meter-high) MLAS vehicle to an altitude of 1 mile (1.6 kilometers), with the demonstration beginning after the four solid-rocket motors had burned out. The mock crew module separated from the launch vehicle approximately 7 seconds into flight and parachuted into the Atlantic Ocean. The test demonstrated the unpowered flight of the MLAS along a stable trajectory; the MLAS’s reorientation and stabilization; the separation of the crew module from the abort motors; and the stabilization and parachute recovery of the crew module. The test represented NASA’s first demonstration of a passively stabilized LAS using a vehicle of this size and weight class. This was also NASA’s first attempt to acquire full-scale aero-acoustic data from a faired capsule in flight. NASA planned to use data from the parachute element to help validate the simulation tools and the techniques for developing Orion’s parachute system. The test also provided staff of NASA’s Engineering and Safety Center (NESC) with experience flight-testing a spacecraft concept.(NASA, “NASA Tests Alternate Launch Abort System for Astronaut Escape,” news release 09-156, 8 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ09_156_MLAS_launch_successful.html (accessed 10 August 2011). 98 Michael Schwirtz, “Going to Mars, But Staying Close to Home,” New York Times, 15 July 2009; Agence France- Presse, “Crew ‘Back on Earth’ After Mars Mission,” 15 July 2009.)
NASA announced that the Ares I-X booster rocket tested on 28 October 2009 had sustained damage when it fell into the Atlantic Ocean. A deflated parachute had caused a poor landing, resulting in the damage. NASA officials stated that the test launch itself had succeeded, but one of the three parachutes had failed. All three parachutes had opened, but only one had fully opened. One had deflated for unknown reasons, wrapping around a partially opened parachute, which had caused the booster to land in the ocean with extra force. The recovery crew had captured photographs showing what appeared to be a large crack in the casing on the first stage, in an area called the forward segment, as well as a fractured actuator bracket on the side of the rocket.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA: Booster Rocket Damaged in Test Flight,” 30 October 2009; Todd Halvorson, “Live at KSC: Ares I-X Parachutes Fail During Flight,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 October 2009.)
NASA announced that its LCROSS Mission had successfully created dual impacts on the Moon’s surface, in search of water ice. NASA had launched the LCROSS spacecraft on 18 June 2009 as a companion mission to LRO. The LCROSS craft had traveled 5.6 million miles (9.01 million kilometers) over 113 days. To prepare for the mission finale, the LCROSS satellite had separated from its Centaur upper-stage rocket approximately 54,000 miles (86,905 kilometers) above the Moon on 8 October at 6:50 p.m. (PDT). The Centaur had traveled toward the lunar surface at a speed of 1.5 miles (2.41 kilometers) per second, crashing into the Cabeus crater, a permanently shadowed region near the Moon’s south pole, shortly after 4:31 a.m. (PDT). Instruments aboard LCROSS had observed the impact for approximately 4 minutes, while traveling through the dust created by Centaur’s crash, before impacting the crater itself at 4:36 a.m. (PDT). NASA reported that other observatories, as well as the amateur astronomy community, had captured images and video of both impacts, commenting that NASA intended to share its data with the LCROSS science team. Jennifer L. Heldmann, ARC coordinator of the LCROSS observation campaign, explained that one of the mission’s goals was to encourage people to view the LCROSS impacts in as many ways as possible. She anticipated that the LCROSS campaign would provide an enormous amount of corroborated information, fascinating to many observers.
Commander Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow docked Discovery with the ISS, relying solely on the Shuttle’s powerful primary jet thrusters, marking the first occurrence of this type of docking. All six of the Shuttle’s small nose-and-tail steering thrusters were incapacited when a single forward jet failed, prompting NASA to shut down both of Discovery’s small forward jets, as well as the four small thrusters in the orbiter’s tail. NASA had taken these measures because of concern that toxic rocket propellant could spray onto the ISS solar wings, reducing the wings’ ability to produce power. LeRoy E. Cain, Chair of NASA’s Mission Management Team, explained that, although flying the Shuttle with only the primary jets presented a challenge, NASA had fully certified the alternative docking mode and had trained all crews headed for the ISS for that possibility. NASA commentator Rob Navias described Sturckow’s approach and docking as “textbook,” saying that the “entire rendezvous and docking was smooth as silk.”(Todd Halvorson, “Skipper Nails Tricky Move,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 August 2009. 48)
NASA successfully launched its PharmaSat nanosatellite at 7:55 p.m. (EDT) from its Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) aboard a four-stage U.S. Air Force Minotaur-1 rocket. The rocket also carried the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory’s TacSat-3 satellite, which was the primary payload, and other NASA CubeSat Technology Demonstration experiments—Aerocube 3, CP 6, and Hawksat 1—three 4-inch, cubed satellites developed by universities and industry to measure electron collection, radiation testing, and guidance and control systems. PharmaSat’s mission was to investigate the effects of antifungal agents on the growth of yeast in microgravity, to help scientists better understand how microbes might become resistant to drugs used to treat sick astronauts on long-duration flights. PharmaSat separated from the rocket approximately 20 minutes after launch and entered low Earth orbit at an altitude of 285 miles (458.7 kilometers). Following the checkout period, ground controllers planned to command PharmaSat to initiate its biological experiment, scheduled to last 96 hours. The satellite would transmit radio signals to Ground Control stations at two California locations and would send mission data to the NASA Mission Management Team at ARC. The satellite could continue to transmit this data for as long as six months.(NASA, “NASA Flight Facility Successfully Launches Nanosatellite,” news release 09-114, 20 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-114_PharmaSat_Launches.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 667; Matthew Jones, “Rocket May Launch a Promising Future for Wallops Island,” Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 20 May 2009.)
The People’s Republic of China successfully launched Beidou 2, or Compass G2, into a geostationary orbit aboard a Long March−3C rocket from Xichang Satellite Launch Center in southwest China’s Sichuan Province at 16:16 (UT). Beidou, which means “compass,” was the second satellite in a navigation system that China was building as an alternative to the United States’ GPS. China had launched the first Beidou craft in 2007. Xinhua reported that China planned to launch 30 more satellites before 2015, to complete the system. China had designed the system to provide continuous, real-time passive three-dimensional geospatial positioning and speed measurement, with the first phase covering only Chinese territory. Eventually the system would cover the entire globe.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 666, 1 May 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx666.html (accessed 33 May 2011); Associated Press, “China Launches 2d Satellite in GPS System,” 15 April 2009; Rui C. Barbosa, “China Open 2009 Schedule with BeiDou-2 (COMPASS-G2) Launch,” NASA Spaceflight, 15 April 2009.)
NASA announced that it had signed a contract with American Tank and Vessel of Mobile, Alabama, for the installation of a test-cell diffuser and associated systems in the A-3 test stand at NASA’s Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi. NASA planned to test the J-2X engine for its Constellation Program at the A-3 test stand. Construction had begun in 2007, and NASA had scheduled the first test to take place in 2012. The contract with American Tank and Vessel had a maximum value of US$45 million.(NASA, “NASA Awards Construction Contract for Rocket Engine Testing,” news release C09-006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_C09-006_SSC_A-3_Test_Stand.html (accessed 28 February 2011).)
NASA announced that, together with industry engineers, it had successfully tested the three main parachutes of the Ares-I rocket, which NASA was designing to serve as the booster rocket for the Orion CEV. Engineers had designed the parachutes as the primary element of the rocket’s deceleration system, which included a pilot parachute and a drogue parachute. The main parachutes would deploy in a cluster, open simultaneously, and provide the necessary drag to slow the descent of the solid-rocket first-stage motor to a soft landing in the ocean, allowing their recovery for use on future flights. NASA’s MSFC engineers had conducted the first cluster test at the U.S. Army’s Yuma Proving Ground near Yuma, Arizona. The flight test was the eighth in an ongoing series supporting the development of the Ares-I recovery system. The research team had dropped the 41,500-pound (18,824-kilogram, or 18.8-tonne) load from a U.S. Air Force C- 17 aircraft flying at an altitude of 10,000 feet (3,058-meters). All parachutes and test hardware had functioned properly and landed safely. The parachutes measured 150 feet (45.72 meters) in diameter and weighed 2,000 pounds (907 kilograms, or 0.9 tonnes), making them the largest rocket parachutes manufactured to date.(NASA, “NASA Tests Largest Rocket Parachutes Ever for Ares I,” news release 09-113, 20 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-113_AresI_Parachutes_Test.html (accessed 20 June 2011);)
NASA announced the successful conclusion of the third round of testing of the Common Extensible Cryogenic Engine (CECE) technology, intended to return astronauts to the lunar surface safely. Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne in West Palm Beach, Florida, had conducted the tests to gather data on the concept engine. Engineers had designed the CECE with the flexibility to reduce thrust from 100 percent to 10 percent, allowing a spacecraft to land gently on the lunar surface. The test set a record, with the engine successfully throttled to 104 percent of its potential and then reduced to 8 percent. A careful assessment of test results from the first two rounds of testing had shown pressure oscillations in the engine at lower throttle levels, known as “chugging.” The vibrations from the chugging could potentially resonate with the structure of the rocket, causing problems for the lander and the crew. However, in the third round of testing, engineers successfully eliminated engine chugging. To achieve this, they controlled the flow of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen to the combustion chamber, using a new injector design and propellant feed system that carefully managed the pressure, temperature, and flow of propellants.(NASA, “NASA Tests Engine Technology for Landing Astronauts on the Moon,” news release 09-005, 14 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-005_Cryo_engine_test.html (accessed 14 January 2011).)
South Korea launched its first rocket, the Korea Space Launch Vehicle 1 (KSLV 1), or Naro 1, from Oenaro Island at 4:00 a.m. (EDT), becoming the tenth nation to launch a locally developed scientific satellite in its own territory. South Korean space officials had delayed the launch twice since 30 July because of technical problems. The rocket carried into orbit a 219-pound (99- kilogram) payload, the STSAT 2, which carried a microwave radiometer to measure radiation energy in Earth’s atmosphere and a laser-reflector system to allow ground stations to track its orbit. Naro 1 was the result of a partnership dating to 2002 between the Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI) and the Moscow-based Khrunichev, the Russian aerospace firm responsible for the Proton booster rocket. Khrunichev had provided the hardware for Naro 1’s first stage. North Korea criticized the international response to South Korea’s launch plans; an international outcry had met the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s (North Korea’s) failed launch in April 2009, and the United States had claimed that North Korea’s launch was a disguised missile test. U.S. Department of State spokesperson Ian C. Kelly had responded to North Korea’s complaints, explaining that South Korea had developed its program in an open and transparent manner, in keeping with the international agreements that South Korea had signed, unlike North Korea, which had not abided by its international agreements.(Jin-man Lee for Associated Press, “South Korea Launches First Rocket into Space,” 25 August 2009; Stephen Clark, “South Korea Makes History with Satellite Launch,” Spaceflight Now, 25 August 2009.)
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) launched Ibuki, the world’s first greenhouse gas−monitoring satellite, from Tanegashima, aboard an H2A rocket. In addition to Ibuki, the rocket carried seven small satellites, which JAXA, university research centers, and private industry had developed. Ibuki, also known as the Greenhouse Gases Observing Satellite (GOSAT), would help scientists calculate the density of carbon dioxide and methane at the surface of the Earth, collecting data from 56,000 locations around the world, including locations in developing countries. Two sensors on board GOSAT would track solar, infrared rays that the Earth’s surface or atmosphere reflects and would monitor clouds and aerosols. The seven smaller satellites were Prism, an expandable refracting telescope designed to observe Earth as a technology demonstrator; Small Demonstration Satellite 1 (SDS 1) designed to carry out on-orbit verification of a space-wire demonstration module, a cutting-edge microprocessor, and a thin- film solar cell; Kagayaki, designed to measure orbital debris and observe auroral electrical currents; the Space Oriented Higashi-Osaka Leading Association (SOHLA 1), an exploratory satellite that would observe lightning; Sprite-Sat, a cube satellite that would observe sprites and gamma-rays generated during thunderstorms; and KKS 1, a cube satellite designed to demonstrate a micropropulsion system and three-axis attitude-control functions.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 663, 1 February 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx663.html (accessed 3 February 2011); Agence France-Presse, “Japan Launches Satellite To Track Greenhouse Gases,” 23 January 2009.)
NASA conducted its first test flight of the 327-foot-tall (99.67-meter-tall) Ares I-X rocket, which would launch the Shuttle’s successor craft. The Shuttle’s successor would carry humans to the ISS, the Moon, and beyond. NASA’s Exploration Systems Mission Directorate in Washington, DC, and the Constellation Program’s Ares I-X mission management office at NASA’s JSC in Houston led the Ares I-X efforts. The prototype launched at 11:30 a.m. (EDT) from the newly modified Launch Complex 39B, a former Shuttle launchpad. The first launch of a new type of rocket from NASA’s KSC since 1981, the launch occurred 48 years and 1 day after the inaugural launch of the Saturn rocket. The test vehicle produced 2.6 million pounds (1.18 million kilograms) of thrust, accelerating the rocket to nearly 3 Gs (G-forces) and Mach 4.76, just under hypersonic speed. The test flight lasted 2 minutes, the time needed for the first-stage solid-fuel booster to burn out and separate from the mock upper stage at a suborbital altitude of 150,000 feet (45,720 meters). Parachutes deployed, and recovery ships collected the booster from the Atlantic Ocean. The rocket carried more than 700 sensors designed to collect data in several areas, including assembly and launch operations, separation of the vehicle’s first and second stages, controllability and aerodynamics, the reentry and recovery of the first stage, and new techniques of vehicle design. Engineers would analyze the data to validate computer models used to design rockets and to test the safety of steering a tall rocket with a single solid-rocket motor. The mission lasted 6 minutes, from launch to splash down of the rocket’s booster stage, nearly 150 miles (241.4 kilometers) down range.(NASA, “NASA’s Ares I-X Rocket Completes Successful Flight Test,” news release 09-252, 28 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-252_Ares_I-X_Success.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA’s New Moon Rocket Makes First Test Flight,” 29 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, “NASA Rocket Takes Off as Clouds Break,” New York Times, 29 October 2009; Robert Block, “Ares I-X Flies—But Will Program: Ares I-X Lifts Off from Kennedy Space Center on Short Test Flight,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 29 October 2009.)
On the thirtieth anniversary of the Islamic Revolution, Iran launched its first domestically built satellite aboard a Safir-2 rocket. Iranian scientists had designed the research and telecommunications spacecraft, named Omid, or Hope, to orbit Earth 15 times each 24-hour period. Omid’s mission was to determine orbital measurements.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 664, 1 March 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx664.html, 28 February 2011; Agence France-Presse, “Iran Puts First Home-Built Satellite into Orbit,” 3 February 2009.)
NASA announced the successful completion of the second drop test of a drogue parachute for the Ares-I rocket. The drop test had taken place on 28 February 2009 at the U.S. Army’s Yuma Proving Ground near Yuma, Arizona. The test was the seventh in a series of flight tests supporting the development of the Ares-I parachute-recovery system, which comprised a pilot chute, drogue, and three main parachutes. To test the 68-foot-diameter (20.7-meter-diameter) drogue parachute, researchers had dropped the parachute from a U.S. Air Force C-17 aircraft flying at an altitude of 25,000 feet (7.62 kilometers). The drogue had carried a 50,000-pound (22,680-kilogram, or 22.68-tonne) load, to simulate the rocket’s spent first-stage motor. The parachute and the test hardware had functioned as planned, landing the load safely. NASA engineers had designed the drogue to permit recovery of the rocket’s reusable first-stage motor. They planned to use the design in future Ares-I flights, including launches associated with NASA’s Constellation Program.(NASA, “NASA Successfully Tests Parachute for Ares Rocket,” news release 09-045, 2 March 2009, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-045_Ares_Drogue_Test.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
Walter Jacobi, an original member of Wernher von Braun’s rocket team, which had come to the United States at the end of World War II, died at the age of 91. Jacobi had worked with von Braun’s team at Peenemuende during World War II, building V-2 rockets. After taking him prisoner, the U.S. Army had sent Jacobi, along with von Braun and 116 other German rocket engineers, to Fort Bliss, Texas, where they had worked for the Army. In 1950 Jacobi had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to work at MSFC, where he had handled the component work and design work of the massive valves that moved super-cold fuel and other fluids in the Saturn rockets. After retiring from MSFC, Jacobi had moved to the U.S. Space and Rocket Center, where he had spent several years during the 1970s in the center’s archives, identifying and translating the von Braun team’s German records and documents.(Shelby G. Spires, “Original Von Braun Team Member Jacobi Dies at 91,” Huntsville Times (AL), 20 August 2009.)
ESA’s Ariane-5 rocket launched from Kourou, French Guiana, at 22:09 (UT), carrying a telecommunications satellite for Japan—JCSAT 12—and a broadcasting satellite for Australia— Optus D3. Lockheed Martin had built the 8,900-pound (4,037-kilogram) JCSAT 12, equipping it with 30 active Ku-band and 12 C-band transponders, to provide communications services to Hawaii, Japan, and the Asia-Pacific region for 15 years. Orbital Sciences had built the Optus D3, a 5,400-pound (2,449-kilogram) craft that would use 24 Ku-band transponders to relay communications and direct-to-home television services across Australia and New Zealand. Orbital Sciences had designed the Optus D3 with a 15-year life span, like Lockheed Martin’s JCSAT 12.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 670, 1 September 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx670.html (accessed 8 September 2011); Agence France-Presse, “Ariane 5 Places Japan, Australia Satellites in Orbit,” 22 August 2009; Xinhua News Agency, “Ariane Rocket Launches Satellites for Japan, Australia,” 23 August 2009.)
NASA launched its Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO) aboard a four-stage Taurus XL rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 1:55 am (PST). However, approximately 3 minutes later—7 seconds after the ignition of the third stage, the payload fairing—the nose cone protecting the satellite as it rises through the atmosphere—failed to separate, dooming the craft. The satellite fell back to Earth, landing in the ocean near Antarctica. Had the launch succeeded, the Observatory would have joined Japan’s GoSat, in precisely measuring carbon-dioxide levels in the air. GoSat had reached orbit on 23 January. (NASA, “NASA’s Launch of Carbon-Seeking Satellite Is Unsuccessful,” news release 09-039, 24 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-039_OCO_failure.html (accessed 28 February 2011); Kenneth Chang, “NASA Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit,” New York Times, 25 February 2009.)
Amateur rocket enthusiast Steve Eves broke two world records when he successfully launched his 0.1-scale model of a Saturn-V rocket from the Maryland-Delaware Rocketry Association’s home field on Maryland’s Eastern Shore. At 36 feet (10.97 meters) and 1,648 pounds (748 kilograms), the model rocket was the largest and heaviest amateur rocket launched and recovered to date. Eves had powered his Saturn-V model with nine motors—eight of them were 13,000- Newton-second-N-Class motors and one was a 77,000-Newton-second-P-class motor—that lifted the rocket 4,440 feet (1,353.31 meters) straight up into the air. Eves, an auto-body repair specialist by trade, had begun working on his Saturn-V model two years before the launch, after tracking down schematics on the Internet and locating old NASA drawings. Eves had built the skeleton using seven-ply aircraft-grade plywood and the tubular skin using nearly 300 square feet (91.44 square meters) of Luan plywood, which he had coated with fiberglass made out of 14 gallons (53 liters) of resin. The project cost Eves US$25,000, including US$13,000 for the fuel alone. NASA contacted Eves about displaying the model at the U.S. Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville, Alabama, beneath an original Saturn V. Although Eves had considered launching the rocket a second time, he remarked that he would rather not risk a second launch, preferring instead to retire the model rocket and place it on display for people to enjoy.(Davin Coburn, “Rocket Record: The Largest, Heaviest Amateur Rocket Ever Launched,” Popular Mechanics, 28 April 2009.)
NASA launched its Wide-Field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 9:09 a.m. (EST). Approximately 52 minutes into the flight, the rocket placed the 1,485-pound (673-kilogram) WISE craft into polar orbit 326 miles (525 kilometers) above Earth. From that point, the craft would carry out its mission to map all objects in the sky in infrared light—near-Earth asteroids, stars, planet-forming discs, and distant galaxies. Approximately 3 minutes after separating from the rocket, WISE reoriented itself toward the Sun, enabling it to use its solar panels to generate its own power. Approximately 17 minutes later, valves opened on the craft’s cryostat, a chamber of super-cold hydrogen ice designed to maintain WISE at colder temperatures than the objects the craft would observe. WISE’s primary mission would expire once the frozen hydrogen was depleted, approximately 10 months after launch. Scientists expected the resulting WISE atlas to contain hundreds of millions of objects, which would provide astronomers and space mission designers with a long-lasting infrared roadmap.(NASA, “NASA’s WISE Eye on the Universe Begins All-Sky Survey Mission,” news release 09-286, 14 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/dec/HQ_09-286_WISE_launch.html (accessed 16 December 2011); John Johnson Jr., “NASA Launches New Mapping Spacecraft,” Los Angeles Times, 15 December 2009.)
NASA launched the latest Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES) weather satellite, GOES O, from Space Launch Complex 37 at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, at 6:51 p.m. (EDT), aboard a Delta-4 rocket. The craft’s schedule would place GOES O in its final orbit on 7 July 2009, at which time NASA would rename it GOES 14. Twenty-four hours after launch, Boeing Space and Intelligence Systems would hand engineering control over to NASA; five months later, NASA would transfer operational control of GOES 14 to NOAA. NOAA would perform check-out operations of the craft, store it in orbit, and make it available for activation when one of two operational GOES satellites degraded or exhausted its fuel. GOES O was the second of three of the newest generation of GOES satellites launched. In addition to providing continuous weather monitoring for 60 percent of the planet, these GOES satellites monitored solar flares and tracked climate change.(NASA, “NASA and NOAA’s GOES-O Satellite Successfully Launched,” news release 09-148, 27 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09148_GOES_O_Launch.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Marcia Dunn, “Sophisticated Weather Satellite Rockets into Orbit,” Associated Press, 29 June 2009; Todd Halvorson, “Rocket Launches Weather Satellite,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 June 2009.)
South Korea’s rocket Naro 1, which had launched 25 August, failed to deliver its payload to orbit. South Korean Vice Minister of Education, Science, and Technology Kim Jung Hyun explained to the media that the fairing had failed to separate properly when the satellite reached its target altitude, causing the satellite to overshoot its mark and, probably, to burn up in the atmosphere after falling back toward Earth.(Heejin Koo, “South Korean Satellite Burned Up After Orbit Failure,” Bloomberg News, 26 August 2009.)
NASA announced that X-Prize Foundation and NASA would host the Northrop Grumman Lunar Lander X-Prize Challenge (NGLLXPC) awards at a ceremony in Washington, DC. Masten Space Systems, led by David Masten, had won a first prize of US$1 million for its Xoie rocket prototype, which had competed in the Level-1 contest. Masten Space Systems had also won a second place award of US$150,000 in the Level-2 contest for its Xombie rocket. Texas-based Armadillo Aerospace’s Scorpius rocket had qualified for the Level-1 prize in September but had lost to Xoie in its flight on 30 October in the accuracy category, receiving US $500,000 for second place. Modeled after the US$10 million Ansari X-Prize competition for private-sector spaceflight, NGLLXPC was one of NASA’s Centennial Challenges, intended to encourage the development of new rocket technologies for use in future spacecraft. NASA required contestants to build and fly a rocket-powered vehicle simulating the flight of a vehicle to the Moon. The lander had to take off vertically, travel horizontally, and fly a mission profile designed to demonstrate both power and control, before landing accurately at another spot. Then the craft must take off again, travel horizontally back to its original launch point, and land successfully. The lander must complete the entire exercise within 2 hours and 15 minutes. NASA provided the prize money for the Level-1 and Level-2 contests, and the X-Prize Foundation managed the competition, with commercial sponsorship from Northrop Grumman.
ESA launched its far-infrared space telescope Herschel and its cosmic background mapper Planck on an Ariane-5 rocket from Europe’s Spaceport in French Guiana at 13:12 (UT). With a payload weighing 5.3 tons (4.8 tonnes, or 4,808 kilograms), the Ariane-5 rocket carried the largest telescope ever launched into space. The two spacecraft would carry out their scientific observations from separate orbits at approximately Lagrange point 2 (L2), a virtual point in space approximately 1.5 million kilometers (0.93 million miles) from Earth, in the opposite direction from the Sun, where the combined pull of Earth and Sun creates a gravitational stability point. Herschel would make infrared observations of stars, galaxies, and star-forming regions, using a 3.5-meter-diameter mirror, the largest yet carried into space. Herschel, weighing 3,400 kilograms (3.75 tons), carried three instruments—the Photodetector Array Camera and Spectrometer (PACS), the Spectral and Photometric Imaging Receiver (SPIRE), and the Heterofyne Instrument for the Far Infrared (HIFI). In addition, it carried 2,300 liters (607.6 gallons) of liquid helium, to cool the instruments to a few 10ths of a degree above 0 K. ESA had scheduled Herschel’s mission to continue three years, but the mission could continue until Herschel had depleted its helium. The 1,900-kilogram (2.09-ton) Planck carried an aperture mirror with a diameter of 1.5 meters (4.92 feet) and two cryogenically cooled instruments—the High Frequency Instrument (HFI), which would detect emissions in six frequency bands between 100 and 857 GHz (3 millimeters to 350 microns), and the Low Frequency Instrument (LFI), which would operate between 30 and 70 GHz (10 millimeters to 4.3 millimeters). Scientists expected that Planck would use these instruments to measure minute variations in the cosmic microwave background radiation, gathering detailed information about the age, size, mass, and geometry of the early universe. Planck would also produce two all-sky maps before the end of the planned 15-month mission.(European Space Agency, “ESA En Route to the Origins of the Universe,” ESA news release 10-2009, 14 May 2009, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_10_2009_p_EN.html (accessed 5 July 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 667, 1 June 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx667.html (accessed 5 July 2011).)
NASA successfully launched its Lunar CRater Observation and Sensing Satellite (LCROSS) aboard an Atlas-V rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 5:32 p.m. (EDT). Also on board, with a companion mission, was LRO, which safely separated from LCROSS 45 minutes after launch. The mission planned for the 1,290-pound (585-kilogram) LCROSS and the 5,216-pound (2,366-kilogram) Centaur upper stage was to perform approximately three long, looping polar orbits around the Earth and the Moon, before colliding separately with the Moon on 9 October 2009. NASA had tentatively targeted an impact site at the Moon’s south pole near the Cabeus region, but refused to identify the exact target until 30 days before impact, when its scientists would have had time to study the information collected by LRO, other spacecraft orbiting the Moon, and observatories on Earth.(NASA, “NASA Successfully Launches Lunar Impactor,” news release 09-143, 18 June 2009, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-143_LCROSS_Launch_Success.html (accessed 22 July 2011).)
