China signed a contract with Teresat, Inc. of New York to launch its first satellite for an American firm. The contract called for a Teresat WestarVIS satellite to be launched into orbit aboard a Chinesemade rocket in the first half of 1988. (LA Times, Jan 29/87). During January: The American journal Aviation Week & Space Technology reported two serious Soviet setbacks in space that were not acknowledged by Soviet authorities. The magazine claimed that on January 29 the Soviets deliberately destroyed a Cosmos 1,813 military reconnaissance satellite they had launched on January 15, 1987. When the satellite malfunctioned upon reentry, its selfdestruction system was activated to prevent it from striking a populated area or from falling into western hands. Also according to this source, a Soviet SL12 Proton booster rocket failed during launching on January 30, 1987. Its fourth and uppermost stage failed to ignite and the debris from the rocket and communications satellite it carried fell out of orbit a day later. C Trib, Feb 7/87; NY Times, Feb 7/87)
The National Research Council recommended, in its fifth interim report to NASA, additional testing of NASA's new solid rocket motor before resuming Shuttle launches, raising fears that the scheduled June 1988 launch could be postponed. The Council maintained, however, that the planned June 1988 launch date could still be met by concentrating on the more extensive tests and deferring some less critical ones. (B Sun, Nov 24/87; NY Times, Nov 24/87; W Post, Nov 24/87)
NASA's last AtlasCentaur rocket was extensively damaged in a launch pad accident. A $4million fuel tank was destroyed when it was hit by a work platform. Four General Dynamics Space Division workers were treated for minor injuries. The launch of a military satellite, scheduled for liftoff aboard the AtlasCentaur rocket in the fall of 1987, was grounded indefinitely. (LA Times, July 14/87)
Because of complications encountered in the nozzle fabrication process, NASA moved the test of the flight configuration of the redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM) to middle or late December 1987. (NASA Release 87151)
NASA announced that Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, had invited industry to develop advanced solid rocket motor designs. The preliminary designs called for both a segmented motor design and a monolithic motor design. Requests for these designs, called Phase B studies, followed completion of "Phase A" conceptual studies of alternative solid rocket motor designs. Those designs were done by five aerospace firms. (NASA Release 8790)
The motor section of an MX missile containing nearly 100,000 pounds of rocket propellent exploded at a Morton Thiokol, Inc. plant killing five workers. The explosion at the company's Wasatch Operations plant, 25 miles west of Brigham City, Utah, was the fourth major accident at the plant. The cause of the explosion was not immediately known. Morton Thiokol also was the manufacturer of (#the Space Shuttle's booster rocket. (NY Times, Dec 30/87, 31/87; P Inq, Dec 30/87; W Post, Dec 30/87)
NASA announced that Morton Thiokol, Inc., the builder of the booster rocket that caused the Space Shuttle Challenger explosion, voluntarily accepted a $10 million reduction in fees and agreed to take no profit from $409 million worth of work required to fix future rockets. The company also agreed to replace the rockets lost in the accident. The agreement between Thiokol and NASA negated any lawsuits growing out of the January 28, 1986, accident that destroyed the Shuttle and killed the crew of seven. (C Trib, Feb 25/87; W Post, Feb 25/87; B Sun, Feb 25/87; WSJ, Feb 25/87)
Five aerospace firms were awarded contracts by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, to develop preliminary advanced solid rocket motor designs for the Space Shuttle. The five firms receiving the awards were Aerojet Solid Propulsion Company, Sacramento, California; Atlantic Research Corporation of Alexandria, Virginia; Hercules Aerospace Company's Aerospace division of Salt Lake city, Utah; Morton Thiokol Inc., Brigham City, Utah; and United Technologies Chemical System Division, San Jose, California. The results of the preliminary studies would determine whether NASA will pursue the design, development, test and production of an advanced motor for Shuttle flights in fiscal year 1989. (NASA Release 87120)
James Elliott, a spokesman for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that a NASA rocket exploded about 20 seconds after launch from Poker Flats, Alaska. The small rocket, carrying an upperatmosphere plasma experiment, detonated when its second stage malfunctioned. (W Post, Mar 8/87)
The Soviet Union launched a giant new rocket booster more powerful than the American Space Shuttle. According to the Soviet Tass News Agency, the first two stages of the rocket, launched from the Baikonur test site in Central Asia, fired correctly but a mock satellite failed to enter orbit and landed in the Pacific Ocean. Tass described the untended Energia launch vehicle as a "twostage multipurpose launch vehicle" capable of putting into orbit more than 100 tons of payload, which is 75 tons more than what the U.S. Space Shuttle could carry. (LA Times, May 17/87; C Trib, May 18/87; W Times, May 18/87)
NASA announced that two Shuttle crew escape systems would be tested in November at the Naval Weapons Center in China Lake, California, using dummies and Navy volunteers. NASA is toh)$0*0*0*make a decision early in 1988 on whichif eitherof the two systems would be installed aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery. One of the escape systems involved the installation of twofootlong tractor rockets that would extract the astronauts through an open hatch. The other system consisted of a telescoping slide pole that would extend through the hatch for the crew members to slide down, away from the disabled spacecraft. The crew would be connected to the rocket or the slide pole with a lanyard. Neither system would be of use in a Challengertype explosion that occurred without warning. But either could function in the event of a main engine failure aborting the mission during launch. Both systems require the Shuttle to be equipped with a hatch that can be blown off the spacecraft in an emergency. (NASA Release 87170; H Chron, Nov 13/87; H Post, Nov 13/87; NY Times, Nov 14/87)
A military satellite was lifted into orbit by a Titan 34D, the Nation's largest untended booster rocket. The launch from California's Vandenberg Air Force Base was the first successful launch of a Titan 34D rocket since February 1985. C Trib, Oct 28/87; LA Times, Oct 27/87; W Times, Oct 28/87)
An AtlasCentaur rocket, launched during a driving thunderstorm from Cape Canaveral, Florida, veered out of control 52 second after liftoff and was blown up by NASA safety officials. The launch was NASA's third major mission in 1987. Investigators trying to determine the cause of the accident said that data radioed to the ground from the rocket seconds before it careened off course indicated a major electrical disturbance aboard. Investigators speculated that lightning, prevalent in the area at the time, may have caused the failure. (W Post, Mar 27/87; W Post, Mar 31/87; W Times, Mar 31/87)
A report sent to President Ronald Reagan by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that the first postChallenger Space Shuttle would have an escape hatch. But a decision on the rocket assist system necessary to eject the crew safely in emergency had not yet been made. The escape hatch was one of many significant changes made in the Shuttle Discovery, scheduled for launch in June 1988. Twentyone major changes were made in the Shuttle's main engines alone, in order to increase operating life, safety, and reliability. These and other changes listed in the NASA report to the White House reflected recommendations made by the Rogers Commission, following their H&investigation of the Challenger accident. (C Trib, July 2/87; LA Times, July 1/87; NY Times, July 1/87) During June: General Dynamics Corporation said that it would build 18 rockets over the next 5 years to launch communicationsh)0*0*0*satellites. According to a company spokesman, General Dynamics would spend $100 million to start production of the AtlasCentaur rocket. General Dynamics became the third U.S. company, together with McDonnell Douglas Corporation and Martin Marietta Corporation, to attempt to move into launch vehicles production after the Challenger accident. (WSJ, June 16/87)
NASA announced that the first postChallenger Space Shuttle launch had again been rescheduled, this time for June 1988. The 4month delay was caused by the need to perform further tests on the liquidfuel main engines and because of needed redesigning and testing of the Shuttle's rocket boosters. The postponement caused a decrease in the number of crew tended flights planned for 1988 and 1989. NASA said that three Spaceh)0*0*0*Shuttles, instead of the five originally planned, would be flown in 1988 and seven, instead of the ten planned, would be flown in 1989. The reductions in Space Shuttle launches, NASA believed, would further slow U.S. efforts to regain primacy in space exploration and utilization. (LA Times, May 21/87; NY Times, May 21/87; B Sun, May 21/87; W Post, May 21/87)
Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, formed a new organization, the Martin Marietta Commercial Titan Systems, to sell commercial rockets. The new organization, to be headed by Richard E. Bracken, former head of Space Launch Systems at Martin Marietta in Denver, would sell a modified version of the Air Force Titan 3 rocket to owners of commercial satellites. (W Post, May 4/87) During April: NASA and the Israel Space Agency signed an agreement allowing for the first Israeli space experiment on a future Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 8757; Science, vol. 236, May 1/87) Two top U.S. scientists, serving in advisory positions to NASA, resigned following their criticism of NASA policy and the space station. On April 10, 1987, Thomas Donahue, Chairman of the Space Science Board, National Academy of Sciences, resigned after sending a letter to some members of Congress calling for NASA to place higher priority on expendable launch vehicles for space science missions than on an as yet "poorly defined space station." Donahue was reinstated on April 15, 1987, after resolving hish)0*0*0*disagreement with Frank Press, head of the National Academy of The other scientist to resign was Peter Banks, Chairman of NASA's Task Force on the Scientific Uses of the Space Station. Banks resigned on April 13, 1987, after he criticized the Space Station planning, saying that the schedule for operations should be accelerated and a heavylift launch vehicle should be used. (AvWk, Apr 20/87)
The first fullscale test of the redesigned Space Shuttle booster since the Challenger accident was labeled a spectacular success by all who watched it. The firing of the 126foot Shuttle booster in Utah's Wasatch Mountains, witnessed by 300 officials from NASA and Morton Thiokol, Inc., the company that designed the booster rocket, was the first of six fullscale tests. Also present at this test were the five astronauts scheduled to fly the Space Shuttle in June 1988. (B Sun, May 28/87; NY Times, May 28/87; W Post, May 28/87)
A spokesman for Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative Organization (SDIO) stated that research and an experiment conducted by SDIO demonstrated for the first time that lasers and other highpowered electrical devices can be operated in space without heavy insulation to prevent short circuits. The experiment involved the launching of a 60foot rocket from Wallops Island, Virginia, on December 13, 1987. Extending from the nose cone of the rocket were two probes about 39 inches apart. These probes were alternatively charged with high amounts of electrical power,h)'0*0*0*up to 44,000 volts. Although there was no insulation between them, no arcing of the electrical charge between the two probes occurred, as it would commonly occur on Earth. The experiment confirmed that space is a good insulator in and of itself. (NY Times, Dec 17/87)
NASA announced that a more detailed examination of the results of the December 23 cold weather testfiring of the redesigned booster rocket revealed that an outer ring which anchors the booster's nozzle came apart during the test. The nozzle steers the Space Shuttle during the first two minutes of flight. The setback forced NASA to cancel the June 2, 1987, launch of the Space Shuttle. NASA officials said they were confident the launch would be delayed about three months, since the critical elements of the booster rocket, the redesigned field joints, functioned perfectly during the test. (B Sun, Dec 30/87; NY Times, Dec 30/87; WSJ, Dec 30/87; W Post, Dec 30/87; W Times, Dec 30/87)
Two teams of NASA specialists began an inquiry as to why the testfiring of the reconstructed Shuttle booster rocket on
NASA announced plans to study the feasibility of building an untended rocket to carry heavy materials for use in Space Station construction. The proposed concept calls for a space freighter capable of carrying more than three times as much cargo as the Space Shuttle. The vehicle would use the same type of solid fuel boosters as the Space Shuttle. NASA surmised that such a vehicle, whose estimated costs were put at $1.5 billion, could be delivered in 1993. (H Chron, Aug 6/87; H Post, Aug 6/87; W Times, Aug 6/87; USA Today, Aug 6/87)
Officials at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland,h)0*0*0*reported that NASA scientific satellites, the International SunEarth Explorers ISEE1 and ISEE2, were expected to reenter Earth's atmosphere two minutes apart on September 26, 1987. They were expected to create fireballs as they burned in the atmosphere over Brazil. The two orbiting spacecraft, launched on a single Delta rocket on October 22, 1977, for nearly 10 years studied fluctuations in plasma waves, the magnetic field, proton and electron density, cosmic rays, gamma ray bursts, and the solar wind in the nearEarth environment. (NASA Release 87137)
Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems, New Orleans, Louisiana; Rockwell International Space Transportation Systems Division, Downey, California; and United Technologies Corporation, USBI Booster Production Company, Inc., Huntsville, Alabama; were selected for contracts to perform definition studies for a proposed untended launch vehicle. The new vehicle, called ShuttleC, would supplement the orbiter with an untended cargo element. (NASA Release 87159)
The Air Force announced that it would purchase 20 rockets from the McDonnell Douglas Corporation for launching navigational satellites. Modeled on the existing rockets used by NASA, the Delta 2 medium rocket boosters would also be used commercially for launching communications satellites. (UPI, Jan 21/87; USA Today, Jan 22/87; NY Times, Jan 22/87; W Post, 22/87)
The Pentagon released a Defense Intelligence Agency study which claimed that the Soviet Union had spent $80 billion on military space programs during the last decade. As a result, the Soviet Union was dramatically expanding its ability to boost payloads into space. The study said the Soviet Union operated about 50 types of space systems for military and civilian uses, had successfully tested a heavylift booster rocket in may 1987, and routinely launched five times as many rockets each year as the United States. (P Inq, Nov 15/87)
NASA announced that within hours of its discovery on February 24, 1987, NASA scientists were monitoring the Supernova 1987a with the Earthorbiting International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) and the Solar Max Mission (SMM) spacecraft. Subsequently, as previously announced, NASA began monitoring the supernova with a network of ground antennas. The major supernova science program mounted by NASA and the intense, worldwide scientific interest in the supernova resulted from the fact that the discovery of Supernova 1987a provided scientists the opportunity to study not only the death of the star, but also the resultant rebirth of matter. The explosion, shock waves, and tremendous energies of Supernova 1987a were expected to provide direct evidence of the creation of heavy elements such as silicon and nickel. This marks the first time a supernova has been so close to the Earth and so bright since the 1604 supernova, when the telescope had not yet been discovered. The advantageous circumstances allowed scientists to study the supernova in all radiation wavelengths from nearly the moment of its explosion. Scientists expected that the array of instruments and the variety of NASA'sh)0*0*0*methods of monitoring the supernova would not only yield a new understanding of the chemistry and physics of the comet, but also potentially would provide a better understanding of the creation of The supernova program was expected to extend at least over the next 21/2 years. It would consist of multiple, continuous satellite observations, balloon and sounding rocket missions, aircraft flights, and radio observations. A special computer communications network would allow scientists from NASA, American and foreign universities, and other international scientific organizations to analyze the great amount of data generated by the In addition to the IUE and SMM spacecraft, managed and operated by NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, a Japanese Ginga (AstroC) satellite was used to monitor the Supernova 1987a. The IUE satellite provided data from ultraviolet observations and monitored the overall brightness of the supernova. It also was expected to help define exactly which star in the Large Magellanic Cloud exploded creating the supernova. The SMM satellite, a sunobserving instrument, was used to monitor the expected gamma ray emissions from the supernova. The Japanese Ginga (AstroC) satellite was used to monitor the supernova for Xray emissions. NASA's Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO), a C141 jet transport stationed in New Zealand, was also used in supernova observations to measure infrared energy. It was expected to be involved in a number of flights through the spring of 1989, using new and increasingly more sophisticated instruments. (NASA Release
NASA issued a request to the U.S. aerospace industry for system studies and design concepts of liquidfueled rocket boosters. The request for proposals resurrects the original concept for liquidfueled rockets for the Space Shuttle that NASA had rejected. The request for studies was part of NASA's efforts to find an alternative to the hardtocontrol solidfuel boosters. Four NASA CentersMarshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama; Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas; Kennedy Space Center, Cape Canaveral, Florida; and Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginiawould be involved in this project. (NASA Release 8785; H Chron, May 29/87; H Post, May 29/87)
NASA announced that it had chosen the final design for the Space Shuttle's new rockets. Also, the Agency declared it had resolved the problem of Challenger's leaking seals. Hot gasses escaped during launch and the seals failed to close properly because of cold weather. John Thomas, Manager of the rockets design team at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, stated that henceforth the oring seals would be heated in cold weather rather than constructed of new materials. He also said that the new design would contain three oring seals instead of two. Thomas emphasized that up to eight more test firings of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket motor were planned before flights resume. (NY Times, July 17/87; W Post, July 17/87; W Times, July
NASA launched a GOES7 weather satellite aboard a Delta rocket. The satellite was first placed into an elliptical orbit. Ground command was expected to arrest the satellite in a stationary orbit 22,400 miles above the Atlantic Ocean by firing a booster rocket. GOES7 joined the already orbiting GOES6 weather satellite to provide weather information and patterns in an areah)0*0*0*stretching from the eastern Atlantic to the midPacific Ocean. (B Sun, Feb 27/87; P Inq, Feb 27/87; W Times, Feb 27/87)
The Air Force, after two consecutive failures in 18 months, successfully launched a Titan 3B rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch placed a classified payload into a polar orbit around the Earth. Air Force Secretary Edward C. Aldridge hailed the launch as "the first major step" in the recovery of the American space program after the Challenger accident in January 1986. (LA Times, Feb 13/87; NY Times, Feb `"13/87; W Post, Feb 13/87)
A Soviet rocket burned like a huge fireball as it reentered the Earth's atmosphere, lighting up the skies over a broad area of the West and Midwest. The rocket was used in the launching of Soviet communications satellite Raduga 21 on December 10, 1987. (C Trib, Dec 14/87; LA Times, Dec 14/87)
NASA announced that its fiscal year 1988 budget request did not include funding for the launching of the Mars Observer mission in 1990. Under pressure from the scientific community, NASA considered spending about $130 million for the launching of the Mars Observer from an Air Force Titan rocket. The Agency said it planned to launch the spacecraft in 1992 from the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8732; LA Times, Mar 14/87; NY Times, Mar 15/87)
A number of senators expressed reservations that Morton Thiokol, Inc. remained the sole maker of NASA's Shuttle booster rocket. Members of the Senate Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space complained during the hearing that, despite the fact that Congress had instructed NASA to employ other industries to redesign Shuttle rockets, the Agency appeared locked into using rockets designed by Morton Thiokol, Inc. (NY Times, Jan 23/87; WSJ, Jan 23/87)
New Mexico urged NASA to find a second company, in addition to Morton Thiokol, Inc., to build the booster rocket. (B Sun, Dec h)31/87; H Post, Dec 31/87; USA Today, Dec 31/87; W Post, Dec 31/87;h))0*0*0*W Times, Dec 31/87)
Carver Kennedy, Vice President for Space Services at Morton Thiokol, Inc., said that engineers successfully testfired the company's redesigned Space Shuttle booster rocket, planned for use when NASA resumed Shuttle flights in June 1988. (WSJ, Dec 24/87; W Post, Dec 24/87; W Times, Dec 24/87)
After a lengthy debate, the European Space Agency decided to fund an independent space program that would give it "full autonomy in space." Only Great Britain, which has been pushing for cuts in the space exploration program, refused to go along. The decision was reached during the meeting in the Hague of ministers from the 13 member states, with France and Germany being the primary proponents of the new policy in space exploration. The longrange plan adapted by the ministers included a $3.7 billion "Columbus" project calling for a crewtended space module to be connected to the proposed U.S.international Space Station; a freeflying humantended Station to orbit near it; and a polar Earthobservation platform. The plan also called for about $4.4 billion for the "Hermes" miniature Space Shuttle, a reusable spacecraft with an ejectable cockpit for a crew of three, and $3.5 billion for the "Ariene" 5 rocket, which would be used to boost the Hermes into space. (LA Times, Nov 10/87; NY Times, Nov 10/87; W H&Post, Nov 13/87)
NASA successfully test fired a redesigned shuttle booster in Utah's Wasatch Mountains. NASA officials, very pleased with the test firing, cautioned, however, that the complete success of the firing cannot be fully determined until engineers have taken the hardware apart and fully analyzed it. They added that, at any rate, this was just the first step and much work remained if the Shuttle was to make its flight date in June 1988. The 14storyh)0*0*0*test booster, built by Morton Thiokol, Inc. and known as "DM8," was loaded with 1.1 million pounds of propellent. (B Sun, Aug 31/87; NY Times, Aug 31/87; WSJ, Aug 31/87; W Post, Aug 31/87) During August: Data collected by the Giotto spacecraft, which flew by the Halley comet in March 1986, suggested that tiny chains of formaldehyde chemicals, contained in the comet's gassy halo, may be older than the solar system. (LA Times, Aug 9/87) NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, awarded a 2.6 million contract to the city's Wyle Laboratories' Scientific Services & Systems Group to design and develop the multiple experiment processing furnace. The furnace, for processing metals and alloys in space, was to be carried aboard the Space Shuttle where astronauts would carry out their experiments. Def News, Aug 10/87)
An apparent technical problem forced the cancellation of the test firing of the redesigned 126footlong, 1.2millionpound Space Shuttle solid rocket motor, Development Motor9 (DM9), to be used in the first postChallenger flight. The failed test took place at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Facility near Brigham City, Utah. The test was cancelled one second before ignition. This was the second of at least five fullscale tests planned to check the operation of the booster's redesigned oring joints. The first fullduration test firing of a redesigned motor took place on August 30, 1987. (NASA Release 87183; P Inq, Dec 20/87; W Post, Dec 20/87)
The Air Force placed a military satellite, launched aboard a Titan 34D rocket, into orbit 23,000 miles above the Earth. h)%0*0*0*According to a spokesman from the Federation of American Scientists, the satellite was a DSP5R, one of a series of Defense Support Program satellites providing early warning of a hostile missile attack. (NY Times, Nov 30/87; P Inq, Nov 30/87; W Post, Nov 30/87; W Times, Nov 30/87) During November: Martin Marietta signed an agreement with the British Ministry of Defense to launch a British Skynet 4 satellite aboard its Titan rocket in 1989. The agreement was yet another step in the U.S. effort to shift the launching of communications satellites from NASA to private companies. (W Post, Nov 9/87) A General Accounting Office report found no evidence that NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher, or other space agency officials, had violated conflictofinterest regulations in 1973, when they chose Morton Thiokol, Inc. to produce the solidfuel booster rockets for the Space Shuttle. The investigation, carried out by the General Accounting Office, was requested last December by Senator Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee. (NY Times, Nov 5/87; W Post, Nov 5/87) NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Station, Andrew J. Stofan, selected Grumman Space Systems, Bethpage, New York, and Martin Marietta Astronautics Group, Denver, Colorado, as contractors for definition and preliminary designs studies of the Space Station Flight Telerobotic Servicer (FTS). The FTS is a space robot that will assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and serving of the Space Station and visiting spacecraft. (NASA Release 87176; P Inq, Nov 27/87) A team of British and American astronomers discovered two quasars much further away from Earth than any previously known. The discovery of the two celestial objects, one that is 12 billion light years away, suggests the outer limits of the observable universe are still unknown. The new findings were largely a result of improved methods for reading photographic plates exposed by the latest telescopes. (LA Times, Dec 7/87; NY Times, Dec 3/87; W Times, Dec 3/87)
Former astronaut Donald K. Slayton, President of Space Services, said that his company would be the first private U.S. company to launch satellites into orbit. According to Slayton, the first of five precision navigationlocation Star Find satellites would be launched from NASA's Wallops Island in Virginia in 1988. Space Services would use its Conestoga II rocket system to launch the 300pound satellite into a geostationary orbit 22,000 miles above the Earth. (W Post, May 11/87; W Times, May 11/87) h)0*0*0*May 11: NASA released the findings of the Accident Investigation Board, which had looked into loss of the Atlas/Centaur67 on March 26,1987. In a report to Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Jon R. Busse, Chairman of the Accident Investigation Board, blamed the accident on an electrical transient, caused by a singletriggered lightning flash. Furthermore, the Board found that the launch was made "in violation of the established criteria used to avoid potential electrical hazards." The Board made recommendations concerning weather criteria, the launch decision process, and future launch vehicle. (NASA Release 8772)
A solid rocket motor intended for use in NASA's Delta launch vehicle failed during a test at the Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, Alabama. The Castor IVA booster rocket escaped from the test stand five seconds into the test. A review team was established to determine the cause of the failure and to assess the impact on the Delta flight program. (NASA Release 87128)
Two firms, General Dynamics, San Diego, California, and Martin Marietta, New Orleans, Louisiana, were chosen by NASA for liquidfueled rocket booster design studies. The liquidfueled rocket boosters could be used on the Space Shuttle and future launch vehicles. (NASA Release 87138; H Chron, Sept 17/87)
NASA announced that lightning had destroyed an Orion rocket scheduled for launch. The intense storm at the Wallops Flight Center, Wallops Island, Virginia, also destroyed the scientific experiment payload. (NASA Release 8797; NY Times, June 11/87; W Post, June 11/87; H Chron, June 11/87
A 15story high Ariane 3 rocket, carrying two communications satellites, was launched into an Earth orbit from Kourou, French Guiana. The successful launch marked the reentry of Western Europe into the commercial utilization of space after a 16month hiatus. LA Times, Sept 16/87; NY Times, Sept 16/87)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced NASA planned to develop an advanced solid rocket motor for the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 8747)
NASA announced that Morton Thiokol Space Division, a NASA contractor, would test fire the first redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor on August 27, 1987. The 126footlong, 1.2millionpound development motor (DM8) would be fitted with 250 instruments to measure acceleration, pressure, deflection, thrust, strain, temperature, and electrical properties. (NASA Release 87125)
The fourth fullduration test firing of NASA's redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor was conducted at Morton Thiokol's Space Operations facility near Brigham City, Utah. The test was part of the Shuttle motor redesign program. The 126footlong, 1.2millionpound motor, designated Qualification Motor7 (QM7), underwent a fullduration, horizontal test firing of two minutes. After a preliminary examination of the fired motor, NASA and Morton Thiokol officials declared the test an apparent success. The exercise involved the first use of a new test stand at Morton Thiokol. One remaining fullduration test, Production Verification Motor1 (PVM1), would be conducted in July, prior to the next Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 887; NY Times, Jun 15/88)
The third fullduration test firing of NASA's redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor was carried out at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch Facility near Brigham City, Utah. The 126foot long, 1.2 millionpound motor, designated Qualification Motor6 (QM6), underwent a fullduration horizontal test firing of two minutes. The test, tentatively labeled a success, was the third of five test firings to be carried out prior to the scheduled resumption of Shuttle flights in August 1988. (NASA Release 8851; MSFC Releases 8843, 8844; AP, Apr 20/88; UPI, Apr 20/88; NY Times Apr 21/88; W Post, Apr 21/88; USA Today, Apr 21/88; W Times, Apr0*21/88)
NASA announced August 4, 1988, as the target for launch of the next Space Shuttle mission, STS26. This new launch target was selected following a major program assessment, subsequent to the most recent fullscale firing of the redesigned solid rocket motor (SRM) in December 1987, which revealed a design defect in the outer boot ring of the SRM casetonozzle joint. As a result of the assessment, NASA officials determined that the SRMs that would boost the orbiter Discovery on STS26 would use an alternative outer boot ring configuration tested successfully during the Development Motor8 firing in August 1987. Roll out of Discovery to Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B was scheduled for May 13, and a flight readiness firing of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was to take place on June 13.(NASA Release 8811; NY Times, Jan 28/88; W Post, Jan 28/88; USA Today, Jan 28/88; LA Times, Jan 28/88; P Inq,
The fifth and final shortduration solid rocket motor Nozzle Joint Environment Simulator (NJES) firing test was carried out. The overall objective of the test, part of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor redesign program, was to evaluate the failsafe performance of the redesigned casetonozzle joint with verified defects. (NASA Release 8856)
A United Nations (U.N.) report warned of an alarming increase in the amount of space debris in lowEarth orbit since the first orbital launch in 1957. The report, prepared by Siegfried J. Bauer, Chairman of a U.N. panel on "Potentially Environmentally Detrimental Activities in Space," declared that "action on an international scale is obviously needed to deal with the global issue of space debris." Bauer, a professor at the Institute for Meteorology and Geophysics of the University of Graz, Austria, said most damage in space collisions until now had been caused by debris from "normal" activities in space. However, as a result of the first U.S. antisatellite weapon tests, part of the Strategic Defense Initiative program, "there are already signs of 'willful' fragmentation and production of space debris," he said. Bauer said that in the 30 years of the Space Age, since the first Soviet Sputnik of October 4, 1957, about 18,000 manmade objects had been projected into space. About 7,000 of them, larger than 8 inchesthe visibility limit of radarremain in "near Earth space." Of these, 23 percent are satellite payloads, 10 percent are burnedout rocket stages, and 62 percent are various fragments. Only 5 percent are "active" satellites. Some 50 objects "appear to contain radioactive material." Besides the larger fragments, there are at least 2,000 objects ranging in size from 4 to 8 inches and about 50,000 in the range of 1/2 inch to 4 inches. Below that, there are "millions to billions" of metal and paint chips in the millimeter and submillimeter range" which pose greater danger than would appear from their size. Bauer claimed that a halfmillimeter metal chip moving at 18,500 miles per hour "could easily penetrate a space suit and even kill an astronaut." Most space junk is concentrated between 220 and 800 miles above Earth, "exactly where most of the satellites, the Space Shuttle and space stations Bauer said that at this point "the possibility of a collision with space debris is still very small, but is not completely negligible, particularly compared to the hazard from extraterrestrial material such as micrometeorites." Bauer listed several examples of damage to satellites caused by manmade space debris. (UPI, Jan 27/88)
In response to a civil suit brought under the Freedom of Information Act by the Associated Press and six other news organizations, the Justice Department disclosed documentation showing that the Federal Government and Morton Thiokol paid $7,735,000 in cash and annuities to settle all claims with the families of four of the crew members who died in the explosion of the Shuttle Challenger. Thiokol, maker of the faulty booster rocket blamed for the January 28, 1986, explosion, paid $4,641,000. The Government's share of the settlement was $3,094,000. The settlements were reached on December 29, 1986, with the immediate survivors of the spacecraft crew members, Francis R. Scobee, Ellison Onizuka, Gregory B. Jarvis, and Sharon Christa McAuliffe. Settlements had been reached among Thiokol and two other familiesthose of Judith Resnik and Ronald E. McNair with no Government contribution. A claim by the widow of Michael J. Smith against Thiokol was still pending in Federal court. The Federal Government maintained that it cannot be held liable for the deaths of civilian and military government employees who die on duty. (UPI, Mar 8/88; NY Times, Mar 8/88; W Post, Mar 8/88; WSJ, Mar 8/88; USA Today, Mar 8/88; LA Times, Mar 8/88; W Times, Mar 8/88; C Trib, Mar 8/88; P Inq, Mar 8/88; AP, Mar 13/88)
The European Space Agency (ESA) successfully launched'*0*its first Ariane 4 booster from the Korou launch center in French Guiana. The Ariane 4, the latest and most powerful ESAbuilt booster, carried two European telecommunications satellites. The launch had been delayed by 24 hours because of a faulty sensor on the rocket's third stage. (FBISWeu88238, Dec 11/88; SSR 1988 109CD; NY Times, Dec 12/88)
In a setback for the Space Station program, the Senate approved a $10.1 billion appropriation for fiscal year 1989$1.4 billion less than was requested by NASA and the Reagan administration. The legislation provided only $200 million of the estimated $767.4 million NASA said it needed to continue basic work on the Space Station program. An earlier House appropriations bill approved $902 million of the $967 million requested for the Station. Senior Reagan administration officials warned that the final version of the bill would provoke a Presidential veto if it lacked sufficient funding to continue the Space Station program. UPI, Jul 13/88; WSJ, Jul 14/88; W Times, Jul 14/88; USA Today, Jul 14/88; LA Times, Jul 14/88) 0** An Indianbuilt rocket carrying a weather satellite malfunctioned and plunged into the Indian Ocean shortly after it was launched from India's Sriharikota Island launch facility. The fivestage, 80foot rocket Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV) apparently suffered a malfunction in the solid fueled first stage boosters. This was the second failure of the new rocket, which suffered a catastrophic malfunction during its first launch attempt in March 1987. The launch failure was interpreted by space experts as a major setback for India's civilian space and ballistic missile development programs. (NY Times, Jul 14/88; C Trib, Jul 14/88; P Inq, Jul 14/88; LA Times, Jul 14/88)
A DMSP F9 meteorological observation satellite was successfully launched at 9:53 p.m. aboard an AtlasE rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base Space Launch Complex3 in California. The 1,650pound Department of Defense (DoD) satellite was placed in a nearpolar orbit. (W Times, Feb 4/88; Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1988, 171)
Morton Thiokol, Inc. was fined by Utah state officials for six safety violations in connection with a December 29, 1987, fire that killed five workers and destroyed a missile casting building at Thiokol's Wasatch facility near Salt Lake City. The Utah Occupational and Safety Health Division sought fines of $31,700 against Thiokol, citing violations of safety rules related to protection of workers, deviations from approved procedures, and failure to take precautions against static electricity buildup in a rocketcasting facility. An Air Force investigation into the immediate cause of the fire, which occurred during the casting of solid rocket propellant into the metal casing of an MX missile segment, was pending. (UPI, Mar 16/88; W Post, Mar 17/88; NY Times, Mar 17/88; WSJ, Mar 17/88; W Times, Mar 17/88)
An engineer who, only hours before the Space Shuttle Challenger blew up, warned NASA that it was dangerous to launch the spacecraft in cold weather was named a winner of the Scientific Freedom and Responsibility Award. Roger M. Boisjoly, a former engineer for Morton Thiokol, Inc.the manufacturer of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor blamed for the Challenger accident that0*killed seven crew memberswas honored by the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) for attempting to halt the launch and for his attempts to have the flawed rocket redesigned. The AAAS, in an announcement, cited Boisjoly "for his exemplary and repeated efforts to fulfill his professional responsibilities as an engineer by alerting others to life threatening design problems on the Challenger Space Shuttle and for steadfastly recommending against the tragic launch." Boisjoly was to receive the AAAS award during February 14 ceremonies in Boston. (LA Star News, Jan 27/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced that James B. Odom was the new Associate Administrator for Space Station, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. He replaced Andrew J.0*Stofan, who recently announced he was leaving the Agency on April 1. Odom joined the U.S. Army's rocket research and development team at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, in 1956, as a systems engineer. He transferred to the Marshall Space Flight Center in 1959, where he held various engineering and technical management positions, including that of Chief of the Engineering and Test Operations Branch for the second stage of the Saturn V launch 3 vehicle. He was appointed Manager of the External Tank Project in the Space Shuttle Projects Office in 1972 and became Deputy Manager for Production and Logistics in the Shuttle Projects Office in 1982. He was appointed Manager of the Space Telescope Office in 1983. Odom is the recipient of numerous service awards. (NASA Release 8832)
Morton Thiokol announced that it would not bid on a $1.5 billion contract to build the proposed Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). Instead, Thiokol officials stated they would concentrate on building the current generation of redesigned solid rocket motors, currently undergoing final testing prior to the resumption of Space Shuttle flights in September. (UPI, Jun 6/88; AP, Jun 6/88; NY Times, Jun 7/88; WSJ, Jun 7/88; LA Times, Jun
Two U.S. Navy navigation satellites were launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, into a 600mile circular polar orbit aboard a NASA Scout rocket. The two Oscar satellites were part of the U.S. Navy's longestablished, continuous allweather global navigation system. Made available to nonNavy users in 1967, the spacecraft had since been adapted for diverse civilian uses such as commercial shipping, charting of offshore oil and mineral deposits, and land survey projects. The system provided position information within onetenth of a nautical mile anywhere in the world. This marked Scout's 100th flight and followed closely on the heels of the Scout San Marco D/L launch, which took place on
An ESA Ariane 3 rocket carrying two communications satellites was successfully launched from the Korou Launch Center in French Guiana. The Ariane 3, launched at 7:12 p.m. EDT, carried two satellites belonging to India, and the European Telecommunications Satellite (Eutelsat), into polar orbit. (UPI, Jul 22/88; W Times, Jul 22/88)
After several delays, the Soviet Union successfully completed an automated orbital flight test of the Space Shuttle Buran. The untended Soviet orbiterwhich is almost identical in aerodynamic design and dimensions to the U.S. orbiterswas launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Central Asia. Buran was powered by a 198foot Energia rocket with two strapon boosters in a configuration similar to that of the U.S. Space Shuttle. Unlike the Shuttle, however, the Soviet orbiter does not carry its own main engines, but relies almost entirely on the Energia's engines for ascent to orbit. According to Soviet sources, the Soviet shuttle can be equipped with jet engines to assist landinga capability the U.S. Shuttles lack. After completing two orbits, Buran landed successfully on a 2.7mile runway at the Baikonur facility, ending the 31/2 hour mission. The Tass News Agency hailed the Buran mission as a "major success" and as a prelude to crewtended Shuttle flights. In Washington, NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher congratulated the Soviet Union. (FBISSOV88222,''0*Nov 17/88; SSR 1988 100A; AP, Nov 15/88; UPI, Nov 15/88; NY Times, Nov 16/88; WSJ, Nov 16/88; W Post, Nov 16/88; LA Times, Nov 15/88; W Times, Nov 16/88; B Sun, Nov 16/88; P Inq, Nov 16/88; C Trib, Nov
Engineers at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch facility in Utah concluded that a design flaw had led to the failure of a previously untested Space Shuttle booster part during a fullscale test firing December 23. NASA officials delayed the flight schedule after they discovered that a portion of the booster's nozzle assembly, which guides the vehicle, had fallen apart during testing, a month Engineers finished taking the booster motor apart and recovered all six missing pieces of the failed nozzle part. Known as the outer boot ring, the failed part anchored the booster's nozzle to a flexible rubbery "boot" that allowed the nozzle to swivel. One purpose of the boot ring was to shield the metal and rubber bearing at the core of the swivel mechanism from the intense heat of the rocket gases. During the test firing, the booster's nozzle was deliberately moved to the maximum seven degreessome three degrees beyond what would be required during a normal Shuttle flight. NASA was looking into the possibility that the extreme steering might have caused the boot ring to come apart or A group of officials at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, developers of the original design test requirements for an extreme swiveling of the nozzle, studied whether the maneuver should be repeated in future tests of whatever design is adopted, or whether a less severe maneuver would be an adequate test under the more stringent, postChallenger standards. The test failure would probably force a delay of 6 to 10 weeks in the resumption of Space Shuttle flights, delaying the STS26 flight of Discovery to no earlier than August 1988. (NASA Release 87190; UPI, Jan 4/88; W Post, Jan 5/88; NY Times, Jan 6/88) 0*January 11: Speaking at the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics supported Aerospace Sciences Conference, Ross M. Jones, an engineer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, presented a proposal to launch very small, low cost scientific probes to various destinations in the solar system by using Earthorbiting electromagnetic launchers or railguns. Electromagnetic launchers, which produce strong electromagnetic forces that accelerate projectiles to extremely high velocities, were being developed by the U.S. military for use both on the ground and in space. (NASA Release 884; M News, Jan 11/88; W Times, Jan 11/88; LA Times, Jan 11/88; LA Star News, Jan 12/88)
A NASA Delta 181 launch vehicle carrying a major Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) experimental payload was launched at 5:07 pm EST from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The 6,000 pound payload, the heaviest ever carried by a Delta rocket, consisted of a main orbiting sensor platform and fifteen subsatellites released from the main spacecraft during the first 4 hours of the 12hour experiment. The goal of the $250 million exercise was to test the ability of an orbiting sensor platform to detect and track the various components of Soviet Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs) in flight. Four of the subsatellites were small solidfuel rockets whose exhaust plumes simulated the exhaust from the upper stages of Soviet ICBMs, whereas other test objects simulated real and "dummy" Soviet warhead reentry vehicles. During the mission, the main satellite and subsatellites were monitored by over 100 radar tracking stations, which simulated the groundbased component of an antimissile defense system. In addition, the exercise also included0*the detection, by sensors on the satellite, of a 40foot sounding rocket launched from Kauai, Hawaii. The experiment was declared a success despite the failure of an infrared sensor. The Delta launch, originally scheduled for February 4, was delayed five days because of an apparent valve malfunction on the Delta. Data gathered by the satellite during the 12hour exercise would be transmitted to Earth over a 10day period. (SSR 1988 008AD; UPI, Feb 9/88; NY Times, Feb 9/88; W Post, Feb 9/88; W Times, Feb 9/88; USA Today, Feb 9/88;
NASA and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, St. Louis, Missouri, announced the signing of an agreement providing for use of facilities at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, and technical support from the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, in support of commercial launches. The umbrella agreement would enable McDonnell Douglas to gain access to NASAmanaged launch support facilities when conducting commercial launches of the Delta rocket, expected to begin in 1989. (NASA Release 88124)
The Associated Press and United Press International news agencies reported that U.S. surveillance satellites had detected the explosion of a Soviet solid propellant plant 500 miles southwest of Moscow in the Ukraine. The Soviet Union confirmed that an explosion had occurredkilling three people and seriously injuring five othersbut denied that rocket propellants had been involved in the blast. U.S. intelligence officials claimed that the explosion destroyed several buildings at the plant and put a halt to all solid propellant manufacturing activities at the facility, which was the only source of solid propellant for the SS24 intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM). Two weeks previously, a powerful series of explosions destroyed a solid propellant plant in Nevada, killing two plant employees and injuring hundreds of others. Pentagon officials estimated it would take at least six months for the Soviet facility to resume production of ICBM propellants. (AP, May 18/88; UPI, May 18/88; W Post, May 18/88; WSJ, May 18/88; USA Today, May 18/88; W Times, May 18/88)
The fifth and final test of NASA's redesigned Space Shuttle solid rocket motor, prior to resumption of Shuttle flights, was conducted at Morton Thiokol's Space Operations facility near Brigham City, Utah. The 126footlong, 1.2 millionpound motor, designated Production Verification Motor1 (PVM1), underwent a full duration, horizontal test firing of two minutes. The motor was extensively flawed to demonstrate the failsafe characteristics of the redesign. (NASA Release 88113; AP, Aug 18/88; UPI, Aug 18/88; NY Times, Aug 19/88; W Post, Aug 19/88; WSJ, Aug 19/88; USA Today, Aug 19/88; W Times, Aug 19/88; B Sun, Aug 19/88 )
The Washington Post reported that the Martin Marietta Corporation agreed to launch communications satellites for the General Electric Corporation (G.E.) on untended Titan rockets during the next several years. According to the news account, the agreement to launch 15 satellites would establish Martin Marietta as the dominant company, developed in the two years since the January 28, 1986, explosion of the Challenger, in the domestic rocket business. The ageeement was expected to bring in revenues between $750 million and $1 billion for Martin Marietta through the0*early part of the next decade, one senior company official told the Post. Analysts told the newspaper that the G.E. agreement would make Martin Marietta dominant over two U.S. rivals in the commercial satellite launching businessMcDonnell Douglas Corporation, manufacturer of the Delta rocket, and General Dynamics Corporation, manufacturer of the Atlas Centaur rocket. (UPI, Jan
A classified Department of Defense payload was launched aboard a Titan 34D launch vehicle from launch complex 40 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Sources quoted by the Associated Press said the rocket failed to carry its payload into the correct orbit. The payload was widely believed to be a Vortex reconnaissance satellite. (SSR 1988 077AC; UPI, Sep 2/88; Reuter, Sep 2/88)
NASA and the Air Force, responsible for range safety, mutually determined that the number of persons permitted access to the Kennedy Space Center, Florida, for the launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery, STS26, would be greatly reduced for safety reasons. Studies of the January 1986 Challenger accident, and the loss of an Air Force Titan 34D the following April, showed that the danger to persons on the ground, if an accident occurred, was much greater than previously thought. Under certain conditions, a solid rocket booster released from the vehicle as a result of an accident would follow an unknown ballistic trajectory, rather than tumble on course as previously thought. In addition, upon destruction the'#0*boosters fragmented into thousands of pieces and the explosive properties of unburned solid motor propellant were greater than originally determined in laboratory tests. Because of this new information, NASA and the Air Force determined that the prudent action would be to minimize the population at the closein viewing areas. (NASA Release 88125)
A European Space Agency (ESA) Ariane 2 launch vehicle was successfully launched at 7:58 p.m. EDT from the Kourou Launch Center in French Guiana. The 162foot threestage rocket successfully carried into orbit the 2,619pound Intelsat 5 commercial communications satellite which would eventually propel itself into a 22,300mile geosynchronous orbit. This was the 22nd launch of the Ariane series and the second Ariane 2 launch in 1988. A total of eight Ariane 2 launches were scheduled for 1988. (SSR 1988 040A; AP, May 18/88; UPI, May 18/88)
Aviation Week Space Technology reported that the Soviet Union was assessing a major expansion of its untended Mars balloon/rover mission planned for 1994. Soviet officials were evaluating the possibility of significantly increasing the payload capability of its dual Mars orbiter/lander spacecraft by using aerobraking instead of rocket propulsion to enter Martian orbit. Aerobraking would enable the Soviets to dispense with rockets needed to decelerate the spacecraft sufficiently to enter Martian orbit, thereby making available an additional 3,300 pounds of payload An approved aerobraking maneuver would give the Soviets several new features to the balloon/rover mission, including: a 110pound subsatellite that would be released into Martian orbit to provide Mars gravity data; 10 "meteorbeacons" dropped on the surface that would return data on temperature, pressure, and wind velocity; 2 penetrators that would dive as deep as 16 feet into Mars' surface to return data on chemical composition, soil temperature, and water vapor content; a high resolution orbiter imaging system; and 2 Earthreturn vehicles, which would serve as test vehicles for a future automated soil sample return mission. AvWk, Feb 29/88)
A classified Department of Defense payload was successfully launched aboard a Titan 2 launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. Civilian experts said they believed the rocket was carrying a cluster of Navy recon naissance satellites known as "White Cloud." The Titan 2 launch followed an apparent failure of a Titan 34D rocket to launch a military reconnaissance satellite into proper orbit. (SSR 1988 078AB; NY Times, Sep 6/88; W Times, Sep 6/88; CSM, Sep 6/88)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's NOAA11, meteorological weather satellite was launched aboard a U.S. Air Force AtlasE launch vehicle from Launch Complex 3 at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. NOAA11, and its companion spacecraft, NOAA9 and NOAA10, assist in global and local weather forecasting. In addition, the NOAA satellites are used for hurricane tracking and warning; global sea ice monitoring; various atmospheric studies; and for agricultural, commercial fishing, forestry, maritime, and other industrial uses. NOAA11 was placed in a 540mile Sunsynchronous, near polar orbit, where it would circle the Earth approximately every 102 minutes, observe a different portion of the Earth's surface on each orbit, and view the Earth's entire surface and cloud cover once every 12 hours. `"(NASA Release 88126; Aeronautics and Space Report of the (#President: 1988; SSR 1988 089AC) September 29October 3: U.S. crewassisted space flight resumed after a hiatus of over two years with the successful launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission STS26 from Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39B in Florida. The first Space Shuttle flight since the Challenger accident in January 1986, STS26 followed a'$0*prolonged period of review and reassessment of the entire Shuttle program and redesign of the Shuttle's solid rocket motors (SRMs), which had experienced a catastrophic failure on STS25. STS26 had as its primary payload the Tracking and Data Relay SatelliteC (TDRSC), which would significantly expand communications and data links between Earth and the orbiting Shuttles. In addition, Discovery carried the Orbiter Experiments Program Autonomous Supporting Instrumentation System (OASIS), which would record environmental data in the orbiter payload bay during STS flight phases, as well as 11 secondary payloads. The STS26 mission lasted four days and concluded with a landing at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on October 3. The fiveman crew for STS26 included Navy Captain Frederick H. Hauck (Commander), Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey (Pilot), and Mission Specialists John M. Lounge, Marine Lieutenant Colonel David C. Hilmers, and George D. Nelson. (NASA STS26 Press Kit, SSR 1988 091A; UPI, Sep 29/88; AP, Sep 29/88; Reuter, Sep 29/88; NY Times, Sep 30/88; W Post, Sep 30/88; W Times, Sep 30/88; USA Today, Sep 30/88)
The fifth firing in a series of Transient Pressure Test Articles (TPTA) was conducted in the East Test Area of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. The test, designated TPTA 1.3, was part of the Space Shuttle solid rocket motor redesign program. For this test, flaws were intentionally cut into both the test article's field joints, the casetonozzle joint, and other components of the redesigned motor. Instrumentation on the motor recovered data to verify the structural performance, thermal response, and sealing capability of the redesigned field and casetonozzle joints. (MSFC Release on
NASA successfully launched the first of three suborbital rocket experiments to study Supernova 1987A. The rocket, launched from the Woomera, Australia Range, carried an Xray spectrometer that observed Xray emissions in the 0.37 keV band. Two additional rocket experiments were scheduled for launch during a window lasting until March 20. An earlier series of sounding rocket observations of Supernova 1987A were conducted from Woomera during November and December 1987. Both campaigns used Black Brant IX twostage, solidfuel rockets. (LRC Release 887)
NASA announced selection of the Government sites to be used as production and testing facilities for the Agency's planned Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). The Tennessee Valley Authority property known as Yellow Creek, in northeastern Mississippi, was selected as the location of the ASRM production facility, while NASA's Stennis Space Center near Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, was selected for ASRM testing. Maximum utilization also would be made of available manufacturing and computer capability at the Michoud Assembly Facility and the Slidell Computer Complex, both located in southeast Louisiana, to minimize total program costs. The planned ASRM, which would replace the current Redesigned Solid Rocket Motors in the mid1990s, would incorporate substantive design changes to improve reliability and safety margins, as well as provide a significant added performance capability to the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 88104; MSFC Release 88102; UPI, Jul 27/88; W Post, Jul 27/88; USA Today, Jul 27/88) During July: A team of NASA scientists from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, the Lockheed Company, and the University of Alabama in Huntsville, announced the discovery of a new hightemperature superconductor. According to a paper published in Applied Physics Letters, the scientists demonstrated that "samples of yttriumbariumcopper oxide, when mixed with silver oxide, heat treated, and exposed to 320 degrees Fahrenheit, can be suspended below a rare Earth magnet by the magnetic field trapped in the sample." Because superconducting material excludes a magnetic field, by floating a superconductor beneath a magnet, the two materials are firmly attracted to each other, but never touch. According to Palmer N. Peters, of Marshall's Cryogenics Physics Office and a member of the scientific team, the implications of high temperature superconductors for space technology are numerous. "In space, with the elimination of the weight associated with gravity, it should be possible to develop lowvibration, lowfriction couplings and bearings," Peters said. "The importance of the discovery is that this new material not only has stronger suspension forces but exhibits other unusual magnetic properties: it has demonstrated a lower electrical resistance at normal temperatures, is easier to solder, and is less brittle than other high temperature superconducting materials." (MSFC Release 88104)
Israel launched its first orbital satellite aboard an Israelibuilt rocket. The Horizon I experimental satellite was launched from an Israeli launch facility in the Negev desert aboard what U.S. experts believed was either a Jericho II or a Comet launch vehicle. The Horizon I was expected to have an operational lifetime of one month in low Earth orbit. (SSR 1988 087AB; NY Times, Sep 20/88; W Post Sep 20/88; W Times, Sep 20/88; CSM, Sep 20/88; B Sun, Sep 20/88; LA Times, Sep 20/88)
NASA submitted to the Congress its acquisition plan for the Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). The plan contained NASA's strategy for a full and open competition to introduce an ASRM into the Shuttle system. NASA contended that a new booster design would result in substantive improvements in flight safety, reliability, and performance over the current SRMs produced by contractor Morton Thiokol. The ASRM design considered by NASA would be an advanced version of the segmented boosters currently in use in the Shuttle program. The new boosters would have a more reliable field joint design and would be more powerful than the current SRMs, providing for a 12,000pound increase in the Shuttle's payload capacity. Additionally, the ASRMs would preclude the necessity for throttling the Space Shuttle's main engines during the period of maximum dynamic pressure, thereby reducing or eliminating about 175 "criticality 1/1r" failure modes for the Shuttle system. An important aspect of NASA's ASRM acquisition plan was the proposal that the boosters be developed in a new Governmentowned contractor operated (GOCO) facility and that the contract be subjected to competitive bidding. In response to protests by Morton Thiokol and the Utah congressional delegation, led by Senator Jake Garn, NASA altered the proposal to include the possibility of building the ASRM in a currently existing private facility. The overall cost to develop the ASRM was estimated at just under $1 billion, including modern tooling and equipment, plus $200$300 million for construction of facilities. Under the current production schedule, the first ASRMs would be flight certified by 1993. Thiokol announced it would bid aggressively to build the ASRM at its existing facilities in Utah. (NASA Release 8854; UPI, Apr 18/88; AP, Apr 19/88; USA Today, Apr 19/88; W Times, Apr 19/88; NY Times Apr 20/88; W Post Apr 20/88; WSJ, Apr 20/88; )
A segment of a Space Shuttle solid rocket motor was test fired at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch facility in Utah in a test of the solid rocket motor nozzle joint. The overall test objective was to evaluate performance of the redesigned solid rocket motor casetonozzle joint that had an insulation adhesive defect and damaged oring in order to determine the failsafe performance of the redesigned joint. The redesigned casetonozzle joint included 100 added radial bolts, adhesively bonded insulation surfaces, and an added "wiper" oring designed to keep the adhesive on the insulation surfaces during assembly. The test was part of the Shuttle motor redesign program. (NASA Release 8823)
This date marked the tenth anniversary of the launch of0*NASA's Seasat Satellite, which ushered in a new era in space research focusing on unsolved questions of the world's oceans and weather. Launched on June 26, 1978, on an AtlasAgena rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, Seasat carried a payload of five scientific instruments unlike any package carried on previous remotesensing satellites. Among the experimental instruments Seasat pioneered were a synthetic aperture radar, which provided highly detailed images of ocean and land surfaces; a radar scatterometer to measure nearsurface wind speed and direction; a radar altimeter to measure the height of the ocean surface and waves; and a scanning multichannel microwave radiometer to measure surface temperature, wind speeds, and sea ice cover. The satellite also carried a passive visual and infrared radiometer to provide supporting data for the other four Seasat demonstrated how space sensors could be used in oceanography, serving as a protoype for a generation of international missions that could provide answers to some of the world's most baffling and threatening weather phenomena. (NASA Release 8884)
Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, updated the target for the upcoming Space Shuttle launch to early September and indicated that he was very pleased with the progress of preparations for STS26. The new launch target was selected following a major review covering all aspects of the Shuttle program and Truly's subsequent report to NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Truly said, "Hard work by a lot of people is paying off and the Shuttle program is coming along nicely." Discovery was scheduled to be rolled out to the Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39B the first week of July. A flight readiness firing (FRF) of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was targeted for late July. The final fullscale, fullduration test firing of the redesigned Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM) prior to STS26 was also planned for late July. (NASA Release
NASA announced that TRW, Inc. had been selected for final negotiations leading to the award of contracts for extended definition and development of the spacebased Advanced Xray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The facility would be the third in NASA's series of spacebased great observatories, following the Hubble Space Telescope and the Gamma Ray Observatory into orbit in the mid1990s. These observatories, as well as the Space Infrared Telescope Facility, would permit simultaneous, complementary observations of astrophysical phenomena over different wavelengths of the spectrum. The objective of this project would be to develop a highquality, Xray telescope to be used by the international scientific community, in conjunction with NASA, for an operational period of 15 years. The proposed cost of the contract was approximately $508 million. (NASA Release 88118; MSFC Release 88131)' 0*August 25: NASA launched two U.S. Navy navigational satellites aboard a Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The two Oscar satellites, each weighing 141 pounds, were placed into a 600nauticalmile circular polar orbit. The Oscars were part of the Navy's allweather, global navigation system. The Stacked Oscars on Scout4 (SOOS4) mission marked the fourth and final Scout launch for 1988. (SSR 1988 074AG; NASA Release 88116)
Scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland, successfully launched a rocket experiment aimed at simulating the effect of small comets entering the Earth's atmosphere. Following two aborted attempts, the Environmental Reactions Induced by Comets (ERIC) experiment payload was launched from GSFC's Wallops Flight Test Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, by a twostage suborbital TerrierBlack Brant VC rocket. At the 186mile (300 kilometer) apogee of suborbital trajectory, the payload released a combination of water, carbon dioxide, and ice crystals into the upper atmosphere, simulating the release of gases that would result from the impact of a small comet with the Earth's atmosphere. The gas release was synchronized with the passage of NASA's Dynamic Explorer (DE) satellite over Wallops Island. The satellite photographed the atmosphere over Wallops in ultraviolet (UV) light in order to detect ionospheric depletion resulting from the release of the gases. The purpose of the experiment was to test the hypothesis that the phenomenon of ionospheric depletiona sudden appearance of small holes in the Earth's ionosphereis caused by the impact of small, undetected comets. The principal investigator for the project, Dr. Michael Mendillo, declared the experiment a success and noted, based on preliminary data, that the hole in the ionosphere "seemed to last longer than we had anticipated." (GSFC Release 885; UPI, Jan 29/88)0*January 30: This date marked the thirtieth anniversary of the launch of Explorer 1, the first satellite put into orbit by the United States. The launch of the 31pound satellite aboard a modified Army JupiterC booster marked America's entry into a space race with the Soviet Union following their launch of two Sputnik satellites. In addition, Explorer 1 discovered the Van Allen radiation belts that surround the Earth. (UPI, Jan 30/88) 0*
NASA and the Missiles Division of LTV Missiles and Electronic Group, Dallas, Texas, announced the signing of an agreement that would grant the firm exclusive rights to commercially produce and market the Scout launch vehicle. NASA considered the negotiation of the agreement as another important advance in establishing a strong U.S. commercial launch vehicle industry through the privatization of Government expendable rocket programs. (NASA Release 88167)
A series of powerful explosions destroyed the Pacific Engineering & Production Company oxidizer plant near Las Vegas, Nevada, killing two plant employees and injuring over 350 people. The plant was a major supplier of the ammonium perchlorate oxidizer used aboard the Space Shuttle's solid rocket motors and other military and civilian boosters. The explosions produced flames that shot 100 feet into the air and created a 400 footwide crater at the facility site. Seismographs at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 200 miles away in Pasadena, California, detected two of the blasts registered at 3.0 and 3.5 on the Richter scale. The cause of the explosions was investigated. 0*The destruction of the oxidizer plant raised concerns among NASA and contractor Morton Thiokol over the availability of solid fuel oxidizer beyond the next four Space Shuttle flights. A prolonged interruption of Pacific Engineering's production activities would also threaten the military's missile production schedule. (UPI, May 5/88; AP, May 5/88; NY Times, May 5/88; W Post, May 5/88; WSJ, May 5/88; USA Today, May 5/88; W Times, May 5/88; B Sun, May 5/88;
NASA selected a telescoping pole as the egress method for the Space Shuttle's new crew escape system. The escape system, to be carried on all future Shuttle flights, would provide crew escape capability from the orbiter during controlled, gliding flight following failures or difficulties during ascent or entry where landing at a suitable landing field could not be achieved. Tests conducted in February and March, using a fixed pole extending through a hatchlike opening in a C141 aircraft, demonstrated that the pole would provide adequate orbiter clearance in an emergency egress situation. The telescoping pole system had been chosen over an alternative tractor rocket extraction system. (NASA Release 8850; JSC Release 88014; AP Apr 8/88; NY Times, Apr 8/88; W Post, Apr 8/88; USA Today, Apr 8/88; LA Times, C Trib, Apr 9/88; Apr 8/88; P Inq Apr 8/88; H Post, Apr 8/88; H Chron, Apr 8/88)
NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced his resignation, effective April 8. Dr. Fletcher had served as NASA Administrator for a total of nine years, from April 1971 to May 1977, and again since May 1986, following the Challenger accident. Dr. Fletcher, who reluctantly agreed to return to the Agency at the request of President Ronald Reagan, supervised the adoption of a new management system that put greater emphasis on quality control and safety for the Shuttle program. During his second term, Dr. Fletcher had oversight of the redesign of the Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters and successfully lobbied Congress for continuation of the Space Station program. In his resignation announcement, Dr. Fletcher said he now felt that he could "safely place the leadership of NASA in another's hands." NASA Deputy Administrator Dale Myers served as Acting Administrator until a successor was named by President George Bush. (NASA Release 8936, Mar 21/89; AP, Mar 21/89; UPI, Mar 21/89; NY Times, Mar 22/89; WSJ, Mar 22/89; USA Today, Mar 22/89; B Sun, Mar 22/89; LA Times, Mar 22/89)
The first attempt to launch a fully private funded rocket ended in failure when the 58foottall "Koopman Express" sounding rocket caught fire while still on the launch pad. The rocket was to have flown on a 15minute suborbital flight from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, during which it would have released a cloud of inert gas to test sensors on a military Delta Star satellite. The rocket was also scheduled to deploy an engineering model of a Parashield during reentry into the atmosphere. (NY Times, Oct 6/89; W Post, Oct 6/89; USA Today, Oct 6/89; W Times, Oct 6/89; B Sun, Oct 6/89)
The Soviet weekly magazine Ogonyok revealed additional details on the circumstances surrounding a mysterious launch pad explosion of a Soviet rocket in 1960 that killed dozens of workers and the commander of the Soviet Union's rocket forces. Ogonyok attributed the accident, which took place at a secret launch facility at TuraTam, near the Aral Sea, to a flouting of safety rules during a crash program to catch up with the United States in the development of Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs). The head of the Soviet Rocket Forces, Chief Artillery Marshal Mitrofan I. Nedelin, was killed along with dozens of workers and soldiers who were situated near the pad when the rocket exploded. AP, Apr 17/89; B Sun, Apr 17/89; W Times, Apr 17/89; C Trib, Apr
Apollo 11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin Jr., and Michael Collins participated in the first of several planned ceremonies at NASA facilities commemorating the twentieth anniversary of the first crewassisted lunar landing on July 20, 1969. Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins gathered at the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida, with a crowd of 6,000 NASA employees and their families to commemorate the launching of their Saturn V rocket from KSC on July 16, 1969. The ceremony included a playback of the final three minutes of the Apollo 11 countdown and statements by the former astronauts. Following the ceremony, the astronauts rode in a 20mile motorcade to Cocoa Beach, where they `"attended a luncheon in their honor. (UPI, Jul 16/89; USA Today, Jul (#17/89; B Sun, Jul 17/89)
The Soviet Union successfully launched a Proton launch vehicle carrying three satellites from the Baikonur launch facility in Kazakhstan. The Proton was carrying the Cosmos 2,022, 2,023, and 2,024 satellites. The Tass News Agency reported that the third stage of the booster failed to burn up completely in the atmosphere and that unburned fragments may have fallen to Earth in the U.S.Canadian border region near International Falls, Minnesota. (SSR 1989 039AH; UPI, June 2/89; AP, June 2/89; LA Times, June 3/89)0*June
Engineers from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology returned from a visit to the Soviet Union with photographs of a crewassisted lunar landing vehicle that was to be used to land Soviet cosmonauts on the Moon in 1968. The westerners were given the first concrete evidence of a Soviet lunar landing program when they were shown components of a lunar lander at the Moscow Aviation Institute and were allowed to take photographs. Soviet officials confirmed that a race to land astronauts on the Moon had indeed occurred during the 1960s but that the Soviets had0*fallen behind the United States as a result of several launch failures of their N1 rocket. At the time of the successful lunar mission of Apollo 11, the Soviet Union had denied having a crewtended lunar landing program. (UPI, Dec 18/89; NY Times, Dec 18/89; USA Today, Dec 18/89; W Post, Dec 18/89; W Times, Dec 18/89; P Inq, Dec 18/89; C Trib, Dec 18/89; B Sun; Dec 18/89)
Iraq launched a threestage rocket capable of putting a satellite into space on a suborbital trajectory from the Al Anbar base in northern Iraq. The launch of the Iraqi rocket was confirmed by the U.S. and Israeli governments. (FBISNes89235, Dec 8/89; UPI, Dec 9/89; NY Times, Dec 9/89)
This date marked the twentieth anniversary of the first crewassisted landing on the Moon by Apollo 11 astronauts Neil A. Armstrong and Edwin E. Aldrin. Armstrong, Aldrin, and their crewmate, Michael Collins, commemorated the lunar landing with ceremonies at the National Air and Space Museum, Washington, DC, and the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. During the Washington ceremony, attended by President George Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle, the President proposed a long range program of humanassisted space exploration, including a permanently habitable base on the Moon and a crew expedition to Mars, but did not establish a specific timetable. The President cited Space Station Freedom as an important stepping stone toward missions to the Moon and Mars. Speaking at the National Air and Space Museum, Neil Armstrong, the first astronaut to step on the lunar surface, said: "The Apollo program enjoyed a certain nobility of purposea program not to conquer enemies, but to conquer ignorance. A program not to exploit, but to explore. A program not to take from others, but to give to all, to give new knowledge, to enlarge the human horizon." (UPI, Jul 20/89; NY Times, Jul 21/89; W Post, Jul 21/89; WSJ, Jul 21/89; USA Today, Jul 21/89; W Times, Jul 21/89; P Inq, Jul 21/89; B Sun, Jul 21/89)
During a visit by Soviet journalists to the Plesetsk Space Center, the Soviet government revealed that a launch pad explosion of a Vostok rocket had killed 50 people in 1980. The Soviet government also revealed that a Cosmos rocket had also exploded on the launch pad in 1973, killing nine technicians and soldiers. (FBISSov89185, Sep 26/89; NY Times, Sep 28/89; W Times, Sep 28/89; P Inq, Sep 28/89)
NASA announced that it had awarded a $1.1 billion contract to Lockheed Corporation of Calabasas, California and GenCorp, Inc. of Fairlawn, Ohio, for the development of the Space Shuttle advanced solid rocket motor (ASRM). The ASRM, which would replace the current Shuttle SRMs built by Morton Thiokol, would be a nextgeneration solid fuel propulsion system that would use an elongated single rocket casing instead of the current segmented case design. According to NASA, the new design would improve Shuttle safety and performance, allowing an additional 12,000pound payload capacity aboard the orbiters. Lockheed and GenCorp would eventually replace Morton Thiokol as prime contractors for Shuttle solid rocket propulsion. A faulty field joint on one of Thiokol's segmented boosters was blamed for the catastrophic explosion of the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1986. Under the terms of the sevenyear contract, Lockheed's Missile System division and GenCorp's Aerojet Space Booster Company would design, develop, and test the new generation of motors, and produce enough for six Shuttle flights beginning as early as 1994. The contract also had an option, valued at approximately $1 billion, for NASA to purchase ASRMs for 40 additional Shuttle flights and eight test firings. (NASA Release 8957, Apr 21/89; UPI, Apr 22/89; NY Times, Apr 22/89; W Post, Apr `"22/89; LA Times, Apr 22/89; WSJ, Apr 24/89)
The U.S. Government released results of a sixmonth interagency study on orbital debris. The study, cochaired by NASA and the Department of Defense, cited satellite and rocket body fragmentation as the principal source of orbital debris and concluded that, left unchecked, the growth of debris could threaten the safe and reliable operation of crewtended and untended spacecraft in the next century. (NASA Release 8920, Feb 17/89)
The first commercial launch of a licensed private rocket was successfully carried out at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico. A twostage Starfire suborbital rocket built by Space Services, Inc. carried a canister of experiments on a 198mile ballistic trajectory. The experiment canister, which carried several microgravity materials processing experiments, was retrieved intact at the conclusion of the 15minute suborbital flight. Space Systems, Inc. had previously launched a test rocket carrying a dummy payload in 1982. (NY Times, Mar 30/89; W Post, Mar 30/89; WSJ, Mar 30/89; W Times, Mar 30/89; B Sun, Mar 30/89; P Inq, Mar 30/89; C Trib, Mar 30/89)
The European Space Agency announced the Hipparchos 1 star mapper satellite had been reprogrammed to function in its current orbit. Hipparchos became stranded in a lower than expected orbit after its orbital booster rocket failed to ignite in August. P Inq, Nov 8/89)
In a major test of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), a Delta Star SDI test satellite was successfully launched aboard a Delta launch vehicle at 4:51 p.m. from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The threeton satellite would be used to test remote sensing equipment used to detect rocket launches and laser beam emissions from Earth in conditions that would simulate the initial stages of a nuclear conflict. The threeton satellite carried a laser radar, seven video imaging cameras, and an infrared imager. The Delta Star was expected to carry out tests throughout the next six to nine months. (SSR 1989 026A; NY Times Mar 25/89; W `"Post, Mar 25/89; C Trib, Mar 25/89)
Morton Thiokol conducted a fullscale test firing of a Space Shuttle solid rocket motor (SRM), Qualification Motor 8 (QM8), under conditions simulating a coldweather launch. The QM8 was the sixth and final test of the redesigned Space Shuttle SRMs. A major objective of the test was to determine the performance of the SRM's redesigned field joints under cold weather conditions. LA Times, Jan 21/89, P Inq, Jan 21/89)
This date marked the thirtieth anniversary of the first hypersonic flight of the X15 experimental rocket plane. North American Aviation pilot A. Scott Crossfield was at the controls for the first flight. The X15 research aircraft flew a total of 199 flights in what is widely regarded as one of the most successful aeronautical research programs ever conducted. (NASA Release 8982, May 30/89)
NASA's Office of Commercial Programs sponsored plans to develop a system for launching and recovering commercial spaceborne experiments. Assisted by numerous universities, the Commercial Experiment Transporter would be launched on an expendable rocket and contain both a recovery system and a service module. The two would then separate so that the experiments aboard the recovery system could land in the United States while those not requiring recovery could remain in orbit. (NASA Release 9083)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Thomas E. Utsman as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight. He was to assist William Lenoir, Associate Administrator, in daily management of space flight programs. Utsman began at NASA in 1963 as a facilities design engineer in the Apollo program and later was named to head the Design Engineering Directorate's Project Engineering Office. He also served as Deputy Director of Project Management, Associate Director of Design Engineering, Operations Management Director of Technical Support, Director of Shuttle Operations, and Director of Shuttle Management and Operations. Truly also named James A. Thomas as Deputy Director of the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Thomas joined0*NASA in 1962 and served as lead engineer for prelaunch testing and communications for the Apollo program. He worked on the initial Shuttle program and served as lead flight engineer, as chief Shuttle flight project engineer, in the Shuttle Engineering Directorate, and as Director of Shuttle Launch and Landing Operations. (NASA Release 903)
A Government industry board selected the gas generator power cycle engine, similar to the J2 engine used on the Saturn moon rockets, for the rocket engine to be designed and built to power the NASA/USAF Advanced Launch System. Chosen over the closed expander power cycle, the engine would power next century launch vehicles, capable of delivering a wide range of payloads into Earth orbit at a reduced cost. (NASA Release 90113)
A Delta rocket was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, successfully carrying an International Maritime Satellite Organization communications satellite into orbit. The satellite was intended to expand international telephone and facsimile services aboard ships, planes, trains, and other vehicles. (W Post, Oct 31/90) During October: Photographs sent back from the Magellan spacecraft since September 15 were ten times sharper than any seen before. The images "revealed a whole new planet" and "almost everywhere you look on Venus you see volcanic features," said scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California. (CSM, Oct 25/90)
An Ariane rocket carrying two Americanbuilt Japanese satellites exploded over the Atlantic Ocean shortly after liftoff from French Guiana; a fire in the rocket's propulsion system was suspected to be the cause of the explosion. Ariane had a record of 17 successful flights previous to this accident; it held more than 50 percent of the international market for commercial launches. (The European Space Agency later admitted that a cloth inadvertently left in the rocket had caused the failure by blocking water supplies to one of its first stage engines.) (FBIS Paris AFP in English, Apr 13/90; W Times, Feb 23/90; NY Times, Feb 23/90)
A Delta rocket carried two satellites into space from Cape Canaveral, Florida, to test laser technology planned for the Strategic Defense Initiative program. One satellite, the Relay Mirror Experiment, was to reflect a beam fired from a mountain top in Hawaii back to another nearby point on Earth using a mirror. The other satellite, the Low Power Atmospheric Compensation, was to correct laser strike distortions caused by dust, moisture, and gases. The media generally opined that success of the experiment might induce Congress not to slash the $4.5 billion that President George Bush had requested for further research into the project in budget year 1991. (W Times, Feb 15/90; NY Times, Feb 15/90)
NASA Administrator Richard Truly addressed the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee and defended the projected 24 percent budget increase that President George Bush0*had proposed for the agency. Truly warned that any attempt to slash the budget would render the Space Station defunct, a project whose expected cost had risen from the original 1984 estimate of $8 billion to $20 billion, despite reduction in design. Also discussed was the status of the planned ShuttleC, an crewassisted heavylift cargo rocket that representatives claimed could be built by private industry. It was doubtful that the rocket could be ready in time to aid construction of the Space Station. William Lenoir, NASA Associate Administrator, said the new rocket was not necessary for building the Space Station, but would have other uses. In a related matter, Truly released to the White House and Congress his plan to increase NASA's budget by 60 percent over the next three years: $15 billion in 1991, $17.6 billion in 1992, $19.3 billion in 1993. The increases, he said, were needed for the Space Station Freedom, the Earth Observing System, and crewassisted Moon and Mars explorations. (Hearings before the Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Feb 6, 8, 21, 27/90; Sp News, Feb 1511/90; H Chron, Feb 7/90; UPI, Feb 6/90)
A White House commission, formed in July as a result of the Hubble Space Telescope problem and temporary grounding of the Shuttle fleet, released its report concerning future space plans. The 12member panel emphasized a new system of crewless launch vehicles for a number of NASA missions in order to reduce reliance on the Space Shuttle. It also recommended a greater pursuance of scientific study and less emphasis on the accomplishment of engineering feats for their own sake, that is, crewassisted space flight. In addition, it recommended a gradual phasing out of the Space Shuttle; redesign of the Space Station to make it cheaper and simpler, with a focus on life in space; and restructuring of Agency management. William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, said that a heavylift rocket would take $10 billion to design and take 7 to 10 years to complete. He also said that new Space Station designs were underway, but would be similar to the original ones. WSJ, Dec 7/90; Dec 11/90; NY Times, Dec 11/90; W Post, Dec 11/90; H Post, Dec 14/90; NASA Release 90161)
Government officials said that the mirrors attached to the Nation's next generation of weather satellites used to reflect images from Earth's atmosphere into internal sensors would warp from the Sun's heat, according to recent tests. NASA formed a team of nine experts from Ford and ITT, makers of the spacecraft, to correct the problem, in time to meet the 1992 launch date. A single Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite was in orbit at the time. Officials were worried that, if it failed, the Nation would have to rely on planes, radar units, and other satellites that were not capable of giving the comprehensive overview needed, for example, to follow storms.0*There were normally two satellites of this type in orbit, but one was destroyed in 1986 when a Delta rocket malfunctioned. Solutions for the GOESNEXT flawed mirrors ranged from repairing them, which would cause a sixmonth delay, to remanufacturing, and causing a delay of more than one year. (NY Times, Aug 8/90; W Post, Aug 9/90; W Times, Aug 9/90)
Orbital Sciences Corporation successfully launched its Pegasus rocket from a NASA B52 aircraft to boost a 422pound payload into polar orbit over the Pacific Ocean. The experimental rocket deployed a NASA scientific satellite and a Navy communications satellite, opening a new avenue for launching small payloads. The elimination of a costly ground booster, said company president David Thompson, provided a means by which payloads could be delivered inexpensively. (W Post, Apr 6/90; WSJ, Apr 6/90; NY Times, Apr 6/90; LA Times, Apr 6/90)
NASA scientists reported to the American Astronomical Society preliminary information obtained from the Cosmic Background Explorer spacecraft, launched on November 18, 1989, aboard a Delta rocket. The data gleaned by the Far Infrared Absolute Spectrophotometer, the Differential Microwave Radiometer, and the Diffuse Infrared Background Experiment0*supported the Big Bang theory, but at the same time minimized the belief that other releases of energy had subsequently occurred. Scientists reported that instruments aboard the craft performed with unprecedented precision. This precision was predicted to increase over the spacecraft's estimated two more years of data gathering. (NASA Release 905; P Inq, Jan 15/90)
NASA was scheduled to launch two Multiple Access Communications Satellites (MACSATs) later in May aboard a Navy owned Scout rocket. The MACSATs were designed for a global storeandforward message relay. (NASA Release 9064)
After three delays, NASA and General Dynamics Corporation launched a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, that carried a $189 million satellite to study the Earth's magnetic and electrical fields. The Combined Release and Radiation Effects0*Satellite (CRRES), a joint effort by NASA and the Department of Defense, carried 24 canisters containing chemicals that were to be released in fall 1990 and become ionized by the sun's rays. Visible clouds would then spread along magnetic field lines, allowing scientists to see how electrical fields interact with normally invisible charged particles. The CRRES releases were to be augmented by chemicals released from 10 sounding rockets launched from Puerto Rico and the Marshall Islands. (P Inq, Jul 26/90; NY Times, Jul 26/90; NASA Release 9097; 9098)
NASA announced a recently revised 1990 schedule for Space Shuttle launches that called for 9 flights instead of the previously announced 10. The reason behind the shuffling hinged0*on a threeweek delay to launch the Hubble Telescope, originally planned for deployment March 26, because of an unsatisfactory leak check of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket booster. This delay threatened the highpriority Ulysses mission scheduled for October 5. The mission had to be sent up within an 18day time period in order to slingshot Jupiter and head back toward the Sun, where it would achieve polar orbit around the star. The new agenda for Shuttle launches and their payloads is as follows: Jan 9: Columbia; Navy communications satellite and retrieval of another. Feb 22: Atlantis; classified military satellite. Apr 18: Discovery; the Hubble Telescope.
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS31, was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with the $1.5 billion, 25,000pound Hubble Space Telescope in its cargo bay. Seven years of delays, the latest occurring last April 10, when a power failure in the orbiter caused the mission to be scrubbed, preceded the event. The craft ascended to a 381mile orbit, the highest altitude yet obtained by a Shuttle. On April 25 the Hubble telescope, which had an expected 15year duration, was deployed; the telescope was to probe the universe with 10 times the clarity ever before achieved. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California, on April 29, with a test of stronger, carbon brakes that would allow future landings at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, reducing both time and money for NASA's Shuttle launches. Scientists, however, could not receive data from the telescope immediately after it had been deployed because of an antenna entangled in a power cable. The entangled antenna could not rotate and relay information to a TDRS satellite. The low, 381mile orbit prevented all data from reaching ground stations. The six to eightweek chore of powering up and calibrating instruments on the telescope could not begin until the problem was resolved. Engineers zeroed in on and only partially resolved the next day. (B Sun, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; W Post, Apr 25/90; H&Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; May 1/90; NY Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; W Times, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; P Inq, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90)0*During April: NASA began acting on some of the recommendations from its principal independent safety review organization, which had predicted that the approximately 100 flights planned by the agency would probably entail another Shuttle loss. Among the panel's main engineering concerns were the Shuttle main engine, the redesigned solid rocket motor, orbiter structural loads, longterm orbiter maintenance, and human factors. NASA Associate Administrator William Lenoir explained that the safety panel acts as a "devil's advocate" and noted that conclusions drawn by them were intentionally exaggerated. (AvWk, Apr 23/90; CSM May 8/90)
Lockheed Corporation received a $971 million contract from NASA to oversee design and development of a new generation of rocket motors for the Space Shuttle. Twenty more powerful solid rocket motors were to begin lifting the Shuttle in 1995, according to the contract, and sources said that if NASA exercised the option to order 88 more, the contract would be worth $1.39 billion. (WSJ, May 15/90; NASA Release 9068)
Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS41, was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida after a 5month dry spell; the fleet was grounded during much of this period because of hydrogen'!0*leaks. Ulysses, the craft's 814pound nuclear powered payload, was released later that afternoon, and a threestage solidfuel rocket began the craft on its long trip to Jupiter. Ulysses was to sling shot Jupiter in order to achieve polar orbit about 120 million miles from the Sun in May 1994. In order to escape an Earth orbit, the $750 million joint mission between NASA and the European Space Agency reached 34,130 mph, the greatest velocity yet required by an interplanetary probe for the task. The scientific mission also included a controlled fire to see how flames behave in weightlessness and release of the craft's 50foot robotic arm, which had a special material attached to estimate effects of deterioration on the Intelsat satellite, launched earlier this year into a low and useless orbit. Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on October 10, ending a fourday, practically flawless mission. (W Post, Oct 7/90; Oct 11/90; NY Times, Oct 7/90; Oct 11/90)
NASA announced that Steven A Hawley had been named Associate Director at Ames Research Center, California. He was selected as an astronaut in 1978 and was the veteran of three Shuttle flights. (NASA Release 9077) 0*June 8: The Air Force launched a Titan 4 rocket from Cape Canaveral in Florida and put a classified payload into orbit. The Titan 4, manufactured by Martin Marietta Corporation, was designed to replace the Space Shuttle as the military's principal means of reaching space. This was the second successful launch of the rocket, although the maiden voyage in 1989 almost resulted in a catastrophe because of a malfunctioning engine nozzle. (W Post, Jun 9/90; NY Times, Jun 9/90)
Japan successfully tested its new H2 rocket, which promised to lift large, sophisticated satellites. The rocket using an LE7 engine, similar to the hightechnology propulsion system used by the Space Shuttle, was slated for service in March 1992. (AP, Mar 6/90)
The Air Force launched a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, which successfully carried a NAVSTAR satellite into orbit. The navigation satellite was the eighth in a planned series of 21 that promised to give military units their locations to within 50 feet. (W Post, Aug 3/90)
A Delta 2 rocket carried a $654 million navigation satellite, NAVSTAR, into orbit from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. This was the eighth launch of the Air Force's Delta 2 rocket, designed for heavier payloads than the original Delta. It was number 7 of a planned 21 satellite constellations that were to help ground units, ships, and aircraft locate their precise positions. (UPI, Mar 26/90)
The European Space Agency successfully sent up an Ariane 4 rocket from its launch site in French Guiana and its payload, a SPOT 2 observation satellite and six smaller satellites, that included four tiny U.S. spacecraft for education and science. It was the first 1990 launch for ESA, the thirtyfirst since 1979. All seven satellites were successfully deployed. (UPI, Jan 22/90)
NASA launched a Delta rocket carrying a West German observatory into a 360milehigh orbit from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The observatory consisted of an Xray telescope and a widefield camera for detecting extreme ultraviolet light; scientists hoped the observatory would yield information about forces associated with the center of our galaxy, intergalactic gasses, quasars, black holes, hot stars, and objects on the edge of the universe. The observatory was dubbed Rosat, after the German Scientist Wilhelm Roentgen who discovered Xrays in 1895, and promised to be 100 times more sensitive than even the Einstein Xray Observatory launched in 1978. It was originally scheduled for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in 1987. (LA Times, Jun 2/90; NY Times, Jun 2/90; B Sun, Jun 2/90; P Inq, Jun 2/90)
The official Soviet Tass News Agency reported that their most advanced rocket, a Zenit booster, had blown up seconds after liftoff and destroyed much of the launch pad in the Kazakhstan Republic. The payload, said Western analysts, was likely a recon naissance satellite. The rocket had earlier been promoted for sale in the West and had been used to fly some versions of the Soviet Space Shuttle. (W Post, Oct 12/90)
A German scientific satellite, ROSAT, scheduled for NASA launch on a Delta II rocket, in early summer, arrived at Cape0*Canaveral, Florida, on this date from the Federal Republic of Germany aboard a 747 cargo plane. The spacecraft was to perform "all sky" surveys with two xray imaging telescopes, after which it would focus on detailed xray sources. (NASA Release 9027)
A Delta rocket carried a British television broadcasting satellite, Marcopolo 2, and put it into orbit from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The only problem for the ninth U.S. commercial launch of a payload into orbit was a twohour delay0*caused by thunderstorms in the area. (AP, Aug 18/90)
A Soviet rocket carrying a TM11 space capsule was launched into orbit from Kazakhstan Republic in Central Asia on this date. Accompanying the two cosmonauts on board was a Japanese television reporter, making him the first journalist in space. Japan's biggest private television company, TBS, as well as other Japanese companies, had their slogans emblazoned on the rocket. B Sun, Dec 3/90; LA Times, Dec 3/90)
The Air Force launched a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, that carried a $65 million NAVSTAR Global Positioning System satellite into orbit. The navigation satellite was 10th in a series of 21 that the United States hoped to have `"in orbit by 1992. (W Post, Nov 27/90; USA Today, Nov 27/90)
The Galileo spacecraft, launched from Space Shuttle Atlantis October 18, 1989, fired its thrusters so it could come closer to Earth and use our planet's gravity to slingshot in December toward the Sun for a 1995 rendezvous with Jupiter. The'$0*flyby would mark the first time Earth had been approached by a spacecraft from Venus, or anywhere inside Earth's orbit. The craft was scheduled to study Earth during the maneuver, slingshot the Sun and study our planet again on the return trip in 1992, and then study Jupiter's atmosphere for 2 more years after reaching the planet. The loop around the solar system was necessary because the rocket that launched the craft was too weak to propel Galileo directly on its 2year trip to Jupiter. (Fla Today, Nov 14/90; P Inq, Nov 14/90)
Orbital Communications Corporation requested Federal approval for deploying a global satellite system for data transmission, 20 small satellites that would mostly be used for emergency services. Orbital planned to deploy them, beginning in April with its Pegasus rocket, launched from a B52 aircraft. (W Times, Mar 6/90; NASA Release N9018)
On this date, China put its fifth relay satellite into space on a Long March 3 rocket sent up from the Xichang center in western China and announced that it was ready to launch foreign satellites. China had scheduled launches for Hong Kong and Australian companies who wanted to send up three Americanbuilt satellites beginning in April of 1990. (Beijing Xinhua domestic service in Chinese, Feb 20/90; W Times, Feb 5/90)
A Titan 4 rocket booster exploded at Edwards Air Force Base in California during tests, killing one worker and injuring nine others. The Air Force was further developing the rocket, which experts called problem plagued, hoping to replace the Space Shuttle for launching of heavy payloads. (C Trib, Sep 8/90; LA Times, Sep 9/90)
A satellite launched by Martin Marietta from Cape Canaveral, Florida, failed to reach a useful orbit because of a wiring problem that did not allow separation from the Titan 3 rocket's second stage. Ground engineers successfully took the craft to a higher, but still useless, orbit, so that it would not be as likely to reenter the atmosphere. One plan offered by Orbital Sciences Corporation in Virginia was to attach a rocket' 0*to the satellite via the Space Shuttle so it could obtain the necessary 23,000 mile orbit. Martin Marietta, which had only two remaining contracts, believed it was in jeopardy of not getting any more contracts because of the incident. (WSJ, Mar 15/90; W Post, Mar 17/90; NY Times, Mar 16/90)
Martin Marietta Corporation successfully launched a Titan 3 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, on this date that carried a replacement satellite into orbit for the Intelsat 6 stranded in March. The new communications satellite was to join 14 others in September and would transmit 3 television channels and 120,000 telephone calls simultaneously. (P Inq, Jun 24/90; W Post, Jun 24/90)
NASA and Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science agreed to launch Japan's Geotail spacecraft on a Delta II rocket from Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, in 1992. The craft was to study the stored energy in the geomagnetic tail of the Earth, a magnetic field drawn by the solar winds on the Earth's night side and responsible for the Aurora Borealis. (NASA Release
An Ariane rocket carrying both a French and a German TV satellite was successfully launched from French Guiana. The rocket was identical to the one that exploded shortly after liftoff last February 22. (W Post, Jul 25/90; WSJ, Jul 25/90)
A Titan 4 rocket blasted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with a classified payload outside experts believed was a $180 million advanced missile warning satellite. It was the third launch of the Titan 4 and followed a 2month delay caused by undisclosed technical problems. The satellite, they added, would likely observe Iraq. The Space Shuttle Atlantis, which occupied a nearby launch pad for liftoff on the November 15, also had a (#classified cargo aboard thought to be for the same purpose. (W Post, Nov 13/90; W Times, Nov 13/90)
ST Systems Corporation, Vienna, Virginia, announced its selection by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center to provide support for the High Energy X-Ray Telescope Sounding Rocket Program. (PR Newswire, Jul 9/91)
NASA announced that Joust 1, a commercial suborbital rocket, would be launched from Cape Canaveral on June 7. (NASA Release, unnumbered)
The Washington Times also dealt with space law and the risks involved in such matters as rocket launches. In the latter connection, it cited Orbital Sciences Corporation and its difficulties. Because most commercial space companies had NASA or the U.S. government as a customer, changes in government had an impact on the legal aspects. (W Times, Sep 29/91)
McDonnell Douglas Space Systems awarded Hercules Aerospace of Magna, Utah, a contract to continue production of graphite epoxy solid rocket motors (GEMS) for the Delta II expendable launch vehicle. (PR newswire, Mar 28/91)
Representative Lamar Smith, Republican, Texas, wrote NASA Administrator Richard Truly expressing concern that NASA's Comet rocket program may keep new firms from entering the commercial space industry. Truly's office was preparing a reply. (Washington Technology, Mar 7/91)
The media reported the launch from Cape Canaveral by Orbital Sciences Corporation of a small Aries rocket carrying Star Wars experiments for the Defense Department. The experiments were intended to help in designing sensors to measure heat-emitting "signatures" of ballistic missiles in flight. (AP, Oct 14/91; W Times, Oct 15/91)
The media reported the Air Force announcement that the second attempted launch of an Aries rocket carrying Star Wars experiments was postponed for at least one month because of a technical problem. (AP, Sep 2/91; NY Times, Sep 3/91; W Post, Sep 3/91; W Times, Sep 3/91; P Inq, Sep 3/91; USA Today, Sep 3/91; C Trin, Sep 3/91; LA Times, Sep 3/91)
The Philadelphia Inquirer, quoting AP, reported that a hydraulic fuel tank in one of Space Shuttle Atlantis's solid rocket boosters burst after a test on October 31. However, according to NASA spokeswoman Lisa Malone, the rupture should not delay the scheduled launch of Atlantis. (P Inq, Nov 1/91)
The media reported that the Air Force had launched an unmanned Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral July 3. The rocket contained a $65 million satellite that joined 10 advanced Global Positioning System spacecraft already circling the globe in order to assist military forces on the ground, at sea, and in the air to determine their location. (UPI, Jul 4/91; W Times, Jul 5/91)
NASA announced its Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, would participate in two experiments to study the July 11 solar eclipse from the ground and from space. A new cryogenic instrument attached to NASA' Infrared Telescope Facility atop Mauna Kea, Hawaii, was to test a theory about the sun's atomic processes in its infrared regions. Also, an x-ray telescope in a sounding rocket, to be launched from White Sands, New Mexico, was to study the solar corona. (NASA Release 91-108)
A $40 million communications satellite was launched by a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The satellite was owned by GTE Spacenet Corporation of McLean, Virginia. The satellite was scheduled to take over the work of the present Westar spacecraft in June and increase GTE's transponder capacity for relaying information. (AP, Apr 13/91; UPI, Apr 13/91; CSM, Apr 15/91)
The Huntsville Times reported that engineers at Marshall Space Flight Center had successfully tested a 17.5-foot-long solid rocket motor on September 26. (Htsvl Tms, Sep 27/91)
According to the Los Angeles Times, an Air Force-funded research center in El Segundo, California, was to begin in the fall to study the effect of rocket launches on the Earth's fragile ozone shield. Aerospace Corporation planned to investigate the role of solid rocket fuel combustion in the destruction of the zone. These studies would supplement studies of ozone depletion done by NASA and would likely influence the types of fuels to be used in the National Launch System, a new generation of rockets scheduled for use after the year 2000. (LA Times, Jul 25/91)
The Washington Times carried an article on Baikonur, the rocket workers' town in the Soviet Union founded by the military in the same year as the Cosmodrome, 1955. No permanent residents were registered in Baikonur, known as Leninsk, but the city had 100,000 inhabitants crammed into a 4.5 square mile area. Tables of Soviet "space firsts" and "space endurance records" were included. Another article in the same issue described Soviet efforts to sell or rent space gear, including parts of the orbiting Mir Space Station, to ease the financial situation of the space program.
According to the Huntsville Times, Boeing donated $300,000 on September 26 toward building a full-size mockup of Space Station Freedom at the U.S. Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. (Htsvl Tms, Sep 27/91)
According to a space publication, NASA's cost estimate for its Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM) program had increased to about $3 billion, and NASA formally announced that the main ASRM goal was to aid the construction of the Space Station. The ASRM was intended to launch an extra 8,000 pounds of Space Station equipment on each Shuttle flight carrying Space Station hardware. (SP News, Jul 8-14/91)
A Business Week article on attempts to make the commercial space-launch business profitable, quoted NASA Deputy Administrator James R. Thompson Jr. He stressed the need for "real, nongovernmental customers" in order to make the program a success. The article summarized the work of various commercial firms and mentioned a number of instances of unsuccessful rocket launches. (Bus Wk, Aug 12/91)
According to Aviation Week and Space Technology, quoting the Earth Observing System (EOS) Engineering Review Panel, NASA's plans for EOS satellites A and B "should be completely reconfigured." The panel also stated that the EOS Data and Information System was incorrectly configured and lacked central control of data archiving and distribution. NASA released the report on September 23. The same issue of the magazine reported that NASA was discussing with Martin Marietta reintroducing the Titan 3 booster to launch the EOS spacecraft into polar orbit from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, in the late 1990s. (AvWk, Sep 16/91; NASA Editor's Note N91-64)
Peenemunde, Germany was the place where the first self-propelled rocket left the Earth's atmosphere. This occurred on October 3, 1942 when the Nazis launched a 5 1/2 ton V-2 rocket to a height of more than 50 miles. A museum was scheduled to open on the site. (LA Times, Apr 9/91)
NASA announced that Joust 1, a commercial suborbital rocket carrying 10 materials and biotechnology experiments, would be launched on March 29 from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The mission was sponsored by the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space (UAH CMDS), a NASA Center for Commercial Development of Space. Space Data Division of Orbital Sciences Corporation would provide rocket and launch services to lift the payload approximately 400 miles into space. In addition to UAH CMDS, four other NASA commercial development centers and two industrial firms were involved. (NASA Release 91-33)
UPI reported that General Dynamics concluded from its investigation that a piece of debris sucked into a pump apparently triggered an engine failure April 18 that sent a commercial Atlas-1 rocket tumbling out of control. The rocket was carrying a satellite for the Japan Broadcasting Corporation. (UPI, Jun 27/91)
The Council on Competitiveness in its report found the United States leading the world or holding its own in 61 of 94 technologies considered crucial to future economic progress, including rocket engines, computer software, biotechnology, and advanced welding techniques. However, it deemed the United States trailing in 33 other fields including laser technology and semiconductor chips. International competition and joint efforts to develop a supersonic plane with a new "hypersonic engine" are discussed. Gordon Adams, director of the Defense Budget Project, commented that although most such research would be global, many US firms still did not see themselves as part of a global industry. (W Post, Mar 21/97; P Inq, Mar 21/97)
Orbital Sciences Corporation in Fairfax, Virginia, made a reputation for fast, frugal flights into space that won it a number of contracts with NASA and the Air Force. It developed the Pegasus rocket, which was launched from under the wing of a B-52 in 1990. Since then it has developed various other rockets designed to boost Shuttle payloads. (W Times, Apr 12/91)
The Pentagon was secretly developing a nuclear-powered rocket for boosting heavy military payloads into space as part of the Strategic Defense Initiative, known as "star wars." The program was disclosed by the Federation of American Scientists and was confirmed by government documents obtained by the New York Times. NASA reportedly was quietly evaluating the program. The Federation opposed the program because of the risk of radiation release. (B Sun, Apr 3/91; W Post, Apr 3/91; UPI, Apr 3/91; WSJ, Apr 3/91; W Times, Apr 4/91)
AP reported that after a delay caused by a battery failure in one of the experiments, a three-ton Starfire 1 rocket blasted off from the White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico. After its 15-minute flight peaking at 185 miles above Earth, researchers recovered the rocket's payload in the missile range 50 miles from the launch pad. The rocket spent seven minutes in microgravity, an area of little gravity on the edge of space, where nine experiments were conducted. (AP, Nov 16/91)
An experimental rocket motor being tested for the Air Force Titan 4 rocket exploded at Edwards Air Force Base in California. No one was injured in the explosion. The Titan 4, the largest unmanned rocket in the US fleet, was scheduled to replace NASA's manned Shuttle in flying photo reconnaissance spy satellites and other heavy military payloads. (UPI, Apr 1/91; W Post, Apr 2/91; W Times, Apr 2/91; USA Today, Apr 2/91; NY Times, Apr 2/91; C Trin, Apr 3/91)
Media coverage of the launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis on November 24 and the release of a $300 million Air Force early warning satellite on November 25 was extensive. Reports thereafter concentrated on the experiments conducted by the astronauts aboard the Shuttle, including spotting preselected Earth sites from space. On November 28 Atlantis maneuvered out of the way of a chunk of a Soviet rocket. (B Sun, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 25/91; W Post, Nov 25/91; W Times, Nov 25/91; USA Today, Nov 25/91; P Inq, Nov 25/91; WSJ, Nov 25/91; AP, Nov 25/91; UPI, Nov 25/91; NY Times, Nov 26/91; AP, Nov 26/91; B Sun, Nov 27/91; USA Today, Nov 27/91; C Trin, Nov 27/91; AP, Nov 27/91; UPI, Nov 27/91; B Sun, Nov 28/91; NY Times, Nov 28/91; W Times, Nov 28/91; UPI, Nov 28/91; B Sun, Nov 29/91; P Inq, Nov 29/91; W Times, Nov 29/91; USA Today, Nov 29/91; LA Times, Nov 29/91; UPI, Nov 29/91; W Post, Nov 30/91)
A Soyuz rocket blasted off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome for the Mir Space Station carrying an Austrian electronic engineer and the first cosmonaut from the Republic of Kazakhstan, where Baikonur is located. The joint Soviet-Austrian mission was part of a Soviet effort to help pay for the space program with joint international flights. Tass reported the rocket docked with Mir on October 4. On October 10, two Soviet cosmonauts and the first Austrian in space returned to Earth, according to Tass. (AP, Oct 2/91; UPI, Oct 2/91; P Inq, Oct 3/91; C Trin, Oct 3/91; AP, Oct 4/91; AP, Oct 10/91)
A mysterious object was scheduled to fly near Earth in December. Scientists do not know whether it is a new type of asteroid or a 20-year-old Apollo rocket that shot past the moon and was returning home. Subsequently, it was reported to be a tiny asteroid in circular Earth orbit. However, further reporting by another team of observers indicated it was more probably a cartwheeling rocket carcass. (W Times, Nov 20/91; NY Times, Nov 20/91; USA Today, Nov 21/91; P Inq, Dec 1/91; W Post, Dec 9/91)
Maryland Democratic Senator Barbara Mikulski, chair of the Senate Science Space and Technology subcommittee, visited the Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville and NASA's Space Camp for young people. According to the Huntsville Times, Mikulski strongly supported the Space Station and said "The space program excites our young people to become concerned about math and science." (Htsvl Tms, Jun 30/91)
Orbital Sciences Corporation in Fairfax County, Virginia was issued its first license for commercial space launches. The Department of Transportation licensed three launches to be used for experiments on the impact of weightlessness on payloads for the Center for the Commercial Development of Space at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. Orbital, which launched an experimental winged Pegasus rocket from a NASA B-52 bomber last year, was to use a different technology for the DOT-licensed flights. It would launch Prospector rockets developed by the company from a Cape Canaveral, Florida, launch pad refurbished by Orbit. The first launch was scheduled for March 1991, followed by launches in December 1991 and December 1992. (W Post, Jan 3/91)
According to UPI, an Orbital Sciences Corporation winged Pegasus rocket, carrying seven Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency "Microsat" research satellites, was launched on July 16 from a B-52 jet. However, controllers lost track of the payload after a possible malfunction. On July 18 Orbital Sciences heard signals from space and learned that the satellites were functioning but had entered a flawed orbit, limiting their lives to less than three years but sufficient to test a new military communications system. (UPI, Jul 17/91; USA Today, Jul 18/91; WSJ, Jul 18/91; W Times, Jul 18/91; LA Times, Jul 18/91; AP, Jul 18/91; W Post, Jul 19/91; USA Today, Jul 19/91; P Inq, Jul 19/91; W Times, Jul 19/91; LA Times, Jul 19/91)
NASA gave an update about the launching of Joust 1, a commercial suborbital rocket being launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. Because of bad weather, the launch was postponed to June 9. (NASA Joust 1 Update, Jun 7/91)
NASA announced that the first flight of a NASA ozone instrument on a Soviet spacecraft would occur in August. NASA's Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) was to be flown on a Soviet Meteor-3 meteorological satellite to be launched August 15 from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome aboard a Soviet Cylone rocket. (NASA Release 91-127; LA Times, Aug 16/91)
AP reported that The Save Our Wetlands environmental group had filed suit against NASA to stop the testing of an advanced solid fuel rocket motor for Space Shuttles on the Mississippi Gulf Coast. The group also asked that the Environmental Protection Agency make NASA comply with clean air and water laws. NASA officials maintained that NASA received the needed state and federal permits to test the boosters. (AP, May 29/91)
NASA announced that the next Shuttle launch, scheduled for late February, would be delayed until early March in order to replace three thrusters used to steer the ship in orbit. During the eight-day flight, the 44 thrusters would be used to maneuver the ship into unusual positions. The ship's re-entry engines also would be fired so a satellite temporarily placed in orbit could observe the rocket exhaust plumes. The aim was better identification of the plumes of missiles aimed against the United States in future wars. NASA also displayed the Gamma Ray Observatory scheduled to be carried into orbit in early April. (P Inq, Jan 30/91; B Sun, Jan 30/91; USA Today, Jan 30/91; AP, Jan 30/91; NY Times, Jan 31/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said that NASA would ask Congress to increase its budget by 13 percent in the next fiscal year, emphasizing projects with short-term ecological benefits and helping schools and teachers to encourage students with an aptitude for mathematics and science. Truly added that manned space flights would be downgraded in importance compared with unmanned programs and pure scientific research, particularly research that would benefit the life sciences and development of a new rocket engine. (SF Chron, Jan 25/91)
AP reported that statistically it was inevitable that astronauts would be obliged to make detours to avoid space junk. It happened twice within the previous three months, most recently with Atlantis a week and a half earlier, when it had to dodge 3,200 pounds of rocket debris. Under mission rules adopted after the Challenger explosion in 1986, astronauts must distance themselves from orbiting objects if they are expected to pass within a security zone that is 3.1 miles long, 1.2 miles wide, and 1.2 miles deep. NASA estimated there was one chance in 100,000 that a detectable object would collide with a spacecraft once inside that zone. (AP, Dec 9/91; NY Times, Dec 10/91)
Michael Griffin, deputy for technology at the Pentagon's Strategic Defense Initiative Organization, said that the reason the Aries rocket of Orbital Sciences Corporation had to be destroyed when it went off course on August 20 was that a technician loaded the wrong computer program into the rocket's guidance unit. The matter would be investigated. (P Inq, Aug 27/91; W Times, Aug 27/91; W Post, Aug 27/91; NY Times, Aug 27/91; USA Today, Aug 27/91; LA Times, Aug 27/91; AP, Aug 27/91)
An article emphasized the problems of the Soviet space program arising from economic and political causes. The Space Shuttle unveiled two years previously had not yet carried astronauts into space. The 100-foot long Mir Space Station underwent repeated cuts and in 1988 the "permanent" Space Station was left empty for four months; recently, three-man crews were reduced to two. Military rocket launchings continue but space program funds were cut 10 percent two years in a row. As a result, the reusable Shuttle Buran, which was to rendezvous with Salyut 7 and bring it back to earth, was unable to do so. Soviet efforts to fund the space program through foreign sales proved disappointing. (NY Times, Jan 8/91)
Nippon Television Network asked to borrow from the Smithsonian the Space Shuttle Enterprise, an Apollo capsule, a moon conveyor vehicle, a rocket, and a spacesuit. The Enterprise is stored at Dulles Airport and transporting it--the back of a 747 or by ship would be difficult. The space gear was to be used to celebrate the company's fortieth anniversary in Tokyo in 1993. (W Post, Feb 23/91)
The Birmingham Post-Herald, in a series of articles on the space program, expressed concern that quality assurance at the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, had declined since the Apollo program, which was at its height in 1970. In contrast to civil service staff, by 1989 contractor employees working on some 20 Marshall projects numbered 13,398, more than four times as many. This meant that contracts sometimes could not be monitored closely, which probably was a factor in the cost overrun of the orbital maneuvering vehicle, leading to NASA's cancelling the program. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Jan 7/91)
NASA announced it was scheduled to launch a $3 million U.S. Air Force Radiation Experiment (REX) Scout rocket June 28 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The REX was designed to test sophisticated communications in a high-radiation environment. (NASA Release 91-93)
According to the New York Times, Japan was reassessing its decision that preserving good trade relations with the United States was more important than quickly developing a competitive space industry. Because its own heavy-lift rocket program ran into endless problems and delays, Japan turned to foreign companies to launch its satellites. But the two satellite accidents, of which the most recent was the loss of the Atlas Centaur rocket launched from Cape Canaveral by General Dynamics Corporation earlier in 1991, caused considerable Japanese concern. The loss had major impact on Japan's high-definition television projects, which were developing rapidly.(NY Times, May 22/91)
The press quoted the official Notimex news agency as reporting that the rocket that was to provide data about the sun during the total eclipse on July 11 failed to send back any data. The project was jointly sponsored by the Florida Institute of Technology and the National Autonomous University of Mexico. (AP, Jul 11/91; B Sun, Jul 12/91)
UPI reported that workers at Baikonur Cosmodrome had rolled a Soyuz TM-12 rocket into place to take two Soviet cosmonauts and a British woman to the Mir Space Station in a commercial mission. (UPI, May 16/91; AP, May 16/91)
Orbital Sciences Corporation, Fairfax, Virginia, rescheduled its launch of the Joust 1 rocket at Cape Canaveral for June 5, according to the Washington Times. (W Times, May 21/91)
Wayne Littles, head of the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center office charged with designing a heavy-lift launch vehicle for military and NASA purposes, commented on work underway. Still in the early stages, the heaviest lift models would carry at least 200,000 to 250,000 pounds. New advanced solid rocket boosters were planned as well as work on developing an unmanned version of the Shuttle, called Shuttle C. (Birmingham Post-Herald, Feb 11/91)
Astronauts on Space Shuttle Discovery aimed a research satellite at rocket fuel spewed in space, then captured the satellite and put it back in the Shuttle's cargo bay. (W Post, May 3/91; WSJ, May 3/91; NY Times, May 3/91; LA Times, May 3/91; AP, May 3/91; UPI, May 3/91)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the award of the George M. Low Trophy, recognizing the best contractors on the space program, to Grumman Technical Services Division, Titusville, Florida, and Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations, Brigham City, Utah. Grumman provided hardware and support services to the integrated launch team at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Thiokol provided the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion system that produced 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. (NASA Release 91-185; PR Newswire, Nov 7/91)
On the night of November 19, NASA delayed the launch of Atlantis for at least five days because of the malfunction of a navigation unit in the satellite rocket that provided liftoff. (P Inq, Nov 20/91; NY Times, Nov 20/91; W Post, Nov 20/91; USA Today, Nov 20/91; LA Times, Nov 20/91; AP, Nov 20/91; UPI, Nov 20/91)
The Space Propulsion newsletter commented on the report of the Stanford University professors who, together with Soviet aerospace engineers, projected that at a cost of $60 billion (about one-eighth NASA's estimate) a joint venture using the Soviet Energia heavy-lift rocket could land humans on Mars by 2012. In contrast, the Stafford Synthesis Group estimated 2014 as the earliest date to reach Mars, using lunar bases established in the interim. Some civilian space experts found flaws in the Stanford study. In line with comments on the Stanford report, the New York Times featured a lengthy article on the designer of the Energia rockets, currently visiting New York and seeking a U.S. buyer for the rocket. (SP News, Jul 8-14/91; NY Times, Jul 9/91)
According to the media, a small Prospector rocket, launched by Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, was blown up shortly after liftoff when it veered off course. This was Orbital's third attempt to launch the rocket for the University of Alabama in Huntsville, one of 16 NASA commercial space development centers. (AP, Jun 18/91; NYT, Jun 19/91; USA Today, Jun 19/91; W Times, Jun 19/91; WSJ, Jun 19/91; B Sun, Jun 19/91; W Post, Jun 19/91; C Trin, Jun 19/91; LA Times, Jun 19/91; AP, Jun 19/91; UPI, Jun 19/91; H Chron, Jun 20/91)
An Atlas-2 rocket boosted an $85 million European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Eutelsat) 2 communications satellite into orbit from Cape Canaveral. The satellite was the third in a series of French-built relay stations designed to route television and radio telephone signals across Europe. (UPI, Dec 7/91)
NASA selected the 49-foot Pegasus rocket made by Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, for seven launches worth about $56 million, with an option for three more. This contract was additional to one for about $43.5 million for ocean observation. (W Post, Mar 5/91)
The Washington Post highlighted Japan's rocket industry, which after 30 years of sending the country's own payloads into space, was preparing to win rights to launch foreign satellites. Its H-II was a heavy-lifter rocket, which should be ready for test flight in 1993, according to Hiroshi Imamura, executive vice president of Rocket System Corporation. (W Post, Oct 25/91)
NASA announced that the second mission of the Pegasus air-launched space booster was scheduled for July 17. Pegasus was to be launched from below the wing of a NASA B-52 aircraft based at Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. Pegasus was to carry seven small Defense Department satellites for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and put them into low Earth orbit. (NASA Release N91-49)
UPI quoted the publication Aviation Week and Space Technology as saying that a huge Soviet SL-16 Zenit rocket carrying a spy satellite exploded shortly after launch on August 30. (UPI, Sep 7/91)
Royce Mitchell, NASA's Advanced Motor Project Manager at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, announced that NASA would begin a series of sub-scale test firings to evaluate materials intended for use in the new Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor. The first of five nozzle tests would occur on April 10, conducted by Aerojet Corporation, ASRM Division in Iuka, Mississippi. (NASA Release 91-51)
NASA and the Defense Department were expected to present the National Space Council with a proposal to build a new, heavy unmanned booster for the late 1990s. It would be based on a Space Shuttle external tank equipped with oxygen/hydrogen engines, using strap-on solid rocket motors. Jack Lee, director of the NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, told the US Space Foundation Symposium in Colorado Springs that the belief was that the new device could achieve a payload cost to orbit as low as $500-$1,000 per pound. (AvWk, Apr 15/91)
A University of Alabama, Huntsville-managed sounding rocket launch was canceled on November 12 when an electrical problem occurred with one experiment. The launch of the Consort 4 from the White Sands New Mexico Missile Range was reset for November 16. (Htsvl Tms, Nov 13/91; AP, Nov 13/91)
NASA announced a contract with Thiokol Corporation of Ogden, Utah, to manufacture 68 additional flight sets (136 motors) of redesigned Solid Rocket Motors and six additional motors for flight support for the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release C91-bb)
The Soviet Union launched a large new space satellite, Almaz-1, using a giant Proton booster rocket. Tass said Almaz-1 was launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Central Asia. The radar satellite would survey territory of the Soviet Union and other countries "in the interest of geology, cartography, ecology, and agriculture." The Almaz-1 was the first Soviet satellite to provide commercial services for the American market under long-term contracts. One of its principal customers was to be the US Defense Mapping Agency; other enterprises include oil companies that need detailed images of the Earth. (UPI, Apr 1/91; AP, Apr 1/91; LA Times, Apr 2/91)
NASA announced that the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space, a NASA Center for the Commercial Development of Space, had selected EER Systems Corporation, Vienna, Virginia, to provide vehicle, launch, and recovery services for the next series of Consort suborbital rocket missions. (NASA Release 91-194)
AP covered the three-day conference attended by more than 500 people, in Cleveland, home of NASA's Lewis Research Center, to discuss advanced Space Exploration Initiative technology. A number of NASA officials participated and cited the need to get the support of the American public to send people back to the moon and on to Mars. Nuclear rocket technology and space mechanics were among topics covered. (AP, Sep 5/91; Cleveland Plain Dealer, Sep 5/91)
An unmanned $45 million Delta 2 rocket carrying a $110 million NATO communications satellite to replace an older military spacecraft was launched on January 7 from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The rocket was built by McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company and was the 202d launch of a Delta. The satellite, which would enable political and military leaders in the NATO area to communicate with one another, was the first of two advanced NATO 4 satellites built by British Aerospace. (AP, Jan 7/91; NY Times, Jan 9/91)
The media reported on the failure of Orbital Science Corporation's Prospector rocket to take off from the NASA launch pad at Cape Canaveral. The rocket, produced by the Fairfax, Virginia firm, contained 500 pounds of scientific experiments. The flight was sponsored by NASA's Commercial Space Development Center at the University of Alabama in Huntsville. (W Post, May 7/91; W Times, May 7/91; LA Times, May 7/91)
NASA's launch of the UARS satellite to study the ozone layer was covered extensively by the media. The launch was slightly delayed by communications hitches between ground and the satellite and communications difficulties continued after the launch. Later reports, however, indicated controllers had succeeded in getting the faulty data receiver to work. On September 16 the Discovery temporarily had to move to a lower orbit to avoid possible collision with an old Soviet rocket. (NY Times, Sep 15/91; B Sun, Sep 15/91; P Inq, Sep 15/91; W Post, Sep 15/91; AP, Sep 15/91; UPI, Sep 15/91; NY Times, Sep 16/91; B Sun, Sep 16/91; USA Today, Sep 16/91; W Post, Sep 16/91; W Times, Sep 16/91; B Sun, Sep 17/91; W Times, Sep 17/91; P Inq, Sep 17/91)
Gregg Easterbrook, contributing editor for Newsweek and Atlantic Monthly, wrote a lengthy article criticizing NASA's slow response to the need for various reforms. He particularly faulted the formation of commissions as being easier than correcting errors and discussed the U.S. lack of a "throwaway space booster." (W Post, Aug 18/91)
The media reported that a British woman, Helen Sharman, went into space in a Soyuz TM-12 rocket with two Soviet astronauts, destined for Space Station Mir. The astronauts were to remain on Mir to do repairs while Sharman was to return with the two Soviet astronauts now on Mir. (AP, May 18/91; UPI, May 18/91; B Sun, May 19/91; P Inq, May 19/91; NY Times, May 19/91; LA Times, May 19/91)
The Los Angeles Times described at some length the Yellow Creek Advanced Solid Rocket Motor Facility, to be located on the Tombigbee Waterway of the Tennessee Valley Authority, in the home district of Jamie L. Whitten, chairman of the House Appropriations Committee. The $3 million project was to introduce a solid rocket system that was mandated by Congress but which NASA's advisory panel said was not needed and might not be as reliable as existing systems. The unemployment rate in this district of northern Mississippi was more than 20 percent, and critics maintained this was the reason for the facility being constructed here. (LA Times, Nov 25/91)
Thirteen European countries--Austria, Belgium, Britain, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland--met to discuss European Space Agency plans that were threatened by Germany's lack of funds. The German research budget was short $930 million because of an economic slowdown and the huge costs of German unification. The space agency's German Ariane rocket boosted at least 17 satellites into space and according to Germany's ZDF television network, was assured of funds. The question of funds for other projects, for which Germany and France were major funders, remained unclear. (AP, Nov 18/91; Science and Technology, Nov 25/91)
The Synthesis Group, an advisory panel headed by former astronaut Thomas P. Stafford, outlined ways to create a lunar base and make the 35-million-mile trip to Mars. The group's report was expected in May, and John E. Pike, space policy expert for the Federation of American Scientists, said it was expected to recommend that the best method for the flight would be a nuclear reactor-powered rocket. Nuclear power would cut the time of the trip in half from the 450-500 days needed using conventional chemical rockets. It would require convincing the public of the safety and desirability of such nuclear power, which to date has been used only to produce electrical power for long, unoccupied trips such as that of Voyager that photographed the outer planets. (Plain Dealer, Apr 2/91)
The Environmental Quality Permit Board for the state of Mississippi in Jackson approved an air emissions and waste water discharge plan of NASA, needed to test-fire rocket motors at the John C. Stennis Space Center near Bay St. Louis. Water quality certification remained to be granted. The Board had one opposing vote from the head of the Department of Wild Life because of NASA's plans to fill in 69 acres of wetlands and clear 150 to 200 acres. The official considered this plan contrary to the president's policy that there be no net loss of wetlands. (Poplarville Democrat, Jan 3/91)
According to UPI, a French Ariane rocket successfully boosted the first in a new series of advanced European environmental remote sensing satellites into orbit from the European Space Agency's jungle complex on South America's northern coast. The satellite, with a three-year life, had a radar system and other equipment to study Earth's oceans, ice packs, and land areas in great detail. (UPI, Jul 16/91; P Inq, Jul 18/91)
According to the Press Trust of India, quoting the Indian Space Research Organization, India's second remote-sensing satellite, launched on August 29 by a Soviet rocket from the Baikonur cosmodrome, sent back its first pictures August 30. (AP. Aug 30/91)
NASA announced November 13 as the launch date for Consort 4, a commercial suborbital rocket carrying nine microgravity experiments. The experiments was to be launched from the Naval Ordnance Missile Test Station at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, with material from the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space. (NASA Release 91-173)
The Discovery astronauts held a press conference at which they answered questions about their flight. They indicated it was easy to avoid the Soviet rocket chunk but that space debris could be a major threat to future crews. The amount of haze in the atmosphere from Mount Pinatubo or other sources, particularly struck astronauts who participated in earlier flights and aroused concern for the environment. (AP, Sept 27/91; UPI, Sep 27/91; LA Times, Sep 28/91)
Bill Moyers, a member of a national panel of experts involved in Project Censored, a compendium of the most underreported stories of 1990, dealt with NASA and the ozone. Soviet scientists first raised environmental questions about the solid rocket fuel used by the Space Shuttles. They said it left 250 tons of hydrochloric acid eating up the ozone layer after every launch. The Earth Island Journal and the San Francisco Chronicle reported the story. On the program, environmental activist Helen Caldicott spoke of chlorine molecules that chomp up ozone molecules. (P Inq, Feb 25/91)
The Washington Post carried a lengthy article describing the need for a new cheaper, dependable space launch system and work being done to develop a new family of rockets. The proposed new National Launch System was to be a hybrid of old and new technology to reduce costs. The booster shell would derive from the Shuttle's external fuel tank, topped by a Titan 4 cargo housing. The core would be a newly developed oxygen-hydrogen engine. The rockets would use from one to several engines and for heavy payloads could strap on advanced solid fuel boosters being developed. (W Post, May 13/91)
The media covered the destruction after launch of Orbital Sciences Corporation's Aries rocket carrying secret Pentagon experiments for Star Wars. The rocket went out of control soon after liftoff and had to be destroyed. (AP, Aug 20/91; UPI, Aug 20/91; NY Times, Aug 21/91; WSJ, Aug 21/91; W Post, Aug 21/91; USA Today, Aug 21/91; P Inq, Aug 21/91; W Times, Aug 21/91; B Sun, Aug 21/91; C Trin, Aug 21/91; LA Times, Aug 21/91)
Ariane 44L, the most powerful rocket of the Ariane series of Arianespace, the commercial branch of the European Space Agency, blasted into space the night of January 15 from the northeast coast of French Guiana in South America. The rocket carried two European communications satellite: Italsat I, the first experimental communications satellite of the Italian Space Agency, and Eutelsat II-F2, the second communications satellite of the European satellite organization. (W Times, Jan 16/91)
The upper stage of a commercial Atlas rocket made by General Dynamics Corporation carrying a satellite for the Japan Broadcasting Corporation failed after liftoff from Cape Canaveral. Ron Maehl of General Electric Aerospace Group, which made the satellite, refused to state the cost for the spacecraft and the launch, saying only that the rocket cost slightly more than the satellite. The accident was described as a major setback for General Dynamics whose Atlas program lost $300 million in 1990. Details of the stages of the Atlas-Centaur rocket and its intended use to replace the satellite destroyed in the explosion of a European Ariane rocket in February 1990 were given. (NY Times, Apr 19/91; B Sun, Apr 19/91; WSJ, Apr 19/91; UPI, Apr 19/91; AP, Apr 19/91; NY Times, Apr 20/91; W Post, Apr 20/91; P Inq, Apr 20/91)
According to UPI, an Atlas-2 rocket built by General Dynamics Corporation was seriously damaged during a fueling test at the launch pad on August 25. As a result, the rocket's launch, which was to ferry a Defense Satellite Communications System satellite into orbit for the Pentagon, was postponed till November. (UPI, Sep 4/91)
NASA inspectors announced that they had discovered a pinhole-size leak in an O-ring seal of a solid rocket booster intended for Space Shuttle Discovery's November 15 launch. Technicians replaced the seal, which was similar to the one that caused the 1986 Challenger explosion. (USA Today, Sept 23/92; W Times, Sept 23/92; AP, Sept 23; UPI, Sept 23/92)
A German and two Russian astronauts were launched into space in the first space mission of the post-Soviet era. The 160 foot Soyuz TM-14 rocket was scheduled to rendezvous on March 19 with the Mir Space Station orbiting 200 miles above Earth. Russian officials hoped the launching would attract more foreign investment for future joint missions to help finance future space explorations. (NY Times, Mar 18/92; W Post, Mar 18/92; LA Times, Mar 18/92)
An Atlas 1 rocket tumbled out of control after one of two Centaur second-stage engines failed to ignite, destroying a cable television satellite in a $150 million failure for General Dynamics' commercial-launch business. It was the second catastrophic failure in seven flights for General Dynamics Space Systems Division of San Diego, California, which was trying to overtake the European consortium Arianespace for control of the world's commercial launch market. Lost with the Atlas 1 was a  Galaxy 1R cable television relay station, a satellite built by Hughes Aircraft Company. (UPI, Aug 22/92; WSJ, Aug 24/92; LA Times, Aug 23/92)
Advanced techniques used to place criminals are now being employed in NASA's continuing investigation of microbial activity in the weightless environment of orbiting spacecraft. Since the Apollo program, medical researchers have investigated the possibility of microbial cross-contamination between astronauts confined to a spacecraft. The advent of recent methods such as DNA fingerprinting, which studies organisms at the molecular level, has allowed scientists to track the transfer of a specific microbe within the environment of the Space Shuttle orbiter, according to a joint study by NASA's Johnson Space Center and the University of Texas Medical School. (NASA Release 92-79)
As part of the 1993 budget, President Bush approved the cancellation of two major NASA projects--a scientific mission to rendezvous with an asteroid and a program to build more powerful Space Shuttle boosters. Under the budget plan, the White House cancelled the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM), a $3 billion program to develop new and more powerful boosters for the Space Shuttle, as well as the Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby mission, a $700 million spacecraft slated for launch in the late 1990s. The 1993 Bush plan allocated a $700 million increase over the 1992 $14.3 billion NASA budget. (Space News, Jan 28/92)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena was added to the federal Superfund list of the nation's most dangerous dump sites because toxic solvents used 40 years ago during research on liquid rocket propellants had leaked into ground water. (LA Times, Oct 14/92; AP, Oct 14/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that the end of the Cold War had created a new era of space cooperation with Russia and Western Europe. Goldin spoke to a public meeting at the University of Washington in Seattle. NASA intended to study the possibility of using the Soyuz capsule as a "life raft" for Space Station Freedom and might begin using some Russian booster rockets in the future, he added. At the same time, NASA would have to balance these advantages against the risks associated with such cooperation. (Seattle Post-Intelligencer, Dec 17/92)
A Starfire I rocket manufactured by EER Systems Corporation of Vienna, Virginia, failed to achieve suborbital flight after launch from the White Sands Missile Range. The flight carried nine microgravity experiments. At a cost of $3 million, the Starfire rocket was thought to be an inexpensive way to carry out experiments without the costs associated with programs such as the Space Shuttle. (Las Cruces, NM, Sun News, Sept 11/92; El Paso Times, Sept 11/92)
A 15-story unmanned Atlas rocket was launched into space with a military communications satellite intended to link the White House with U.S. forces around the world during nuclear attacks or other crisis. In peacetime, the $130 million satellite was to serve as a switchboard for the Defense Department personnel. (B Sun, Feb 11/92; AP, Feb 11/92)
It was reported that NASA's decision to kill off a multibillion-dollar program to develop a new, more powerful solid rocket booster for the Space Shuttle fleet was a carefully planned move actually intended to help save the project. The advanced solid-rocket motor program, which would have cost nearly $500 million in 1993, was eliminated with the expectation that funds for the project would be restored by Representative Jamie L. Whitten (D-Miss.), chairman of the House Apppropriations Committee. (LA Times, Feb 3/92)
NASA managers decided to replace all three main engines aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour because of problems with powerful oxygen pumps that came to light after an engine test firing. Rocket engineers initially believed that Endeavour had sailed through its flight readiness firing in good condition, with no signs of any major problems in the ship's propulsion system. But detailed analysis of data from the 22-second test indicated the liquid oxygen high pressure turbopump bolted to main engine No. 2 had experienced high vibration levels during engine operation, apparently because of abnormal bearing wear. NASA decided to replace all three of the engines to minimize the impact on the Shuttle's launch processing. (UPI, Apr 8/92; AP, Apr 8/92)
Chinese engineers blamed a faulty ignition circuit for botching the launch of an Australian communications satellite. Investigators checking the Long March-2E rocket that failed to blast off on March 22 found a fault in the ignition system circuits that led to an emergency engine shutdown. According to Chinese officials, the launch will be attempted again later during the year. (P Inq, Mar 30/92)
*NASA's Mars Observer space probe, the first American mission to Mars in 17 years, blasted off from Cape Canaveral. The probe was to search for future landing sites and map the planet's geology and climate. Despite a radio blackout before a critical rocket firing that left flight controllers in the dark for nearly two hours, the spacecraft was successfully boosted out of Earth orbit on an 11-month, 450-million-mile journey to Mars after a flawless launch atop a Titan 3 rocket. It was also the first mission for the Transfer Orbit Stage, a 13-foot thrusting unit designed to fire for two and a half minutes to provide the final shove to put the probe on its 11-month coast to Mars. The launch heralded an era of unprecedented United States-Russian cooperation in space. Eleven Russians were part of the spacecraft's science team, and the orbiter was designed to help relay pictures and data from Russian probes scheduled to land on Mars in 1995 and 1997. (UPI, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; AP, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; W Post, Sept 25/92, Sept 29/92; The Sun, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; P Inq, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; NY Times, Sept 26/92; W Times, Sept 26/92)
A U.S.-French satellite roared into orbit aboard a European Ariane 4 rocket from Kourou, French Guiana. The $706 million Topex-Poseidon satellite carried a $30 million altimeter designed for NASA by Johns Hopkins University scientists to measure ocean topography to within 1.2 inches or less from 830 miles in space. During the next three to five years, scientists hoped to use the altimeter to make a comprehensive map of ocean currents, aiding the study of how they pump heat from the tropics to the poles. NASA said the research could eventually improve long-range climate forecasts and predict large-scale weather patterns, such as the El Nino warming trend in the eastern Pacific Ocean, and help in understanding the impact of green-house gases on climate. Also in the payload were a small South Korean communications satellite and a French technological satellite. (The Sun, Aug 10/92; USA Today, Aug 11/92; AP, Aug 10/92; LA Times, Aug 13/92)
NASA launched a rocket carrying a Japanese scientific satellite called "Geotail" that will swing by the moon and be flung by lunar gravity nearly a million miles into space. The satellite was intended to explore the effect of the solar wind on the tail of the magnetosphere, a comet- shaped region surrounding Earth and containing radiation belts. The $160 million, four-year mission was a joint project between NASA and the Japanese Institute for Space and Astronautical Science. (W Post, Jul 25/92; APn, Jul 24/92)
Technicians at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida placed the Mars Observer spacecraft atop its upper-stage rocket in preparation for launch sometime during the September 16 to October 13 launch window. The craft was expected to take 11 months to cover the 450 million miles (740 million kilometers) to Mars. Once there, Mars Observer was expected to compile the first comprehensive database of Martian geophysics and climate. (CSM, Aug 26/92; H Chron, Aug 20/92)
It was reported that for the first time in a generation, NASA and the Air Force were developing a new rocket engine and launch system. The National Launch System (NLS), which was to consist of three new vehicles, would become operational in 2002, and will, among other missions, carry supplies to Space Station Freedom. (W Times, Apr 2/92)
India launched a research satellite into orbit using local technology in what officials called an important milestone in the country's ambitious space program. The 750-foot rocket blasted off from an island off the southern state of Andhra Pradesh. Nine minutes into the flight, the $7 million rocket propelled a research satellite into orbit 280 miles above earth. The flight was pronounced a total success. (W Times, May 21/92)
NASA and Thiokol Corporation officials were working on a modification to prevent a field joint lining from creating leaks in the cases of solid rocket boosters for the Space Shuttle. This effort came after engineers discovered a leak in a segment of the booster rocket assembled for the Space Shuttle Discovery's scheduled November launch. (AvWk, Sept 28/92)
Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, suffered another failure of one of its rockets. Ground controllers blew up the rocket about seven minutes into its flight at Wake Island in the Pacific Ocean, conducted as part of the Pentagon's "Brillinat Pebbles" program. (W Post, Nov 4/92)
It was announced that NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite had achieved two of the three goals of its $400 million mission to study the "big bang." In 1991 COBE had shown that the wavelength or "color" of the cosmic background radiation was consistent with what the big-bang theory predicted, said John Mather, project scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists also said that COBE had met its second goal: detecting the oldest structures in the universe, thereby explaining how matter first started clumping together in the young universe to produce galaxies and stars. COBE was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on November 18, 1989. It was carried into a 559-mile-high, near polar orbit by a two-stage Delta rocket with nine strap-on boosters. (AP, Apr 23/92; LA Times, Apr 24/92; B Sun, Apr 24/92; NY Times, Apr 24/92; USA Today, Apr 24/92; NASA Release 92-51)
Associated Press reported that a military satellite capable of guiding warplanes, ships and tanks with an accuracy of 50 feet or better circled Earth Monday after a ride on a Delta rocket. (AP, Feb 24/92)
Directors of the U. S. and Russian space agencies announced plans in Moscow to put a Russian cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle in November 1993 and to fly an American astronaut on a Soyuz rocket to the Mir Space Station in 1995. In addition to the projects involving cosmonauts and astronauts working together in space, plans were announced to put American instruments on board an unmanned Russian scientific flight to Mars in 1994. (NASA Release 92-165; UPI (Oct 5/92; NY Times, Oct 6/95; W Times, Oct 6/92; W Post, Oct 6/92; The Sun; Oct 6/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; SCM, Oct 14/92)
White House administration officials reported that President Bush had called for an 11 percent increase in the Space Station project for 1993, as well as additional money to put robots on the moon and build a new space launch system and a hypersonic transport plane. The Space Station project, which aims to launch a permanent orbiting platform by 1996, was slated for $2.25 billion. Bush also requested $8 million to develop a NASA plane that could make direct flights from Earth to orbit without using the traditional rocket booster launch system. If successful, it would revolutionize air travel by flying around the world in a fraction of time compared to conventional aircraft. (NY Tines, Jan 25/92; P Inq, Jan 25/92; WSJ, Jan 27/92)
The Air Force reported that a Titan 2 rocket was launched into space carrying a secret military payload into a polar, low-earth orbit. The two-stage rocket, a modified Titan intercontinental ballistic missile, was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, about 250 miles northwest of Los Angeles. (W Times, Apr 26/92)
The House of Representatives approved a $47.3 billion space program for the next three years after voting to limit spending on development of an advanced solid-fuel rocket motor motor. The bill reauthorizing NASA for fiscal years 1993 through 1995 was passed by voice vote and sent to the Senate. The House included $7.5 billion for the proposed manned Space Station, nearly $8 billion for other space science applications, and $12.5 billion for the space shuttle program. Before approving the bill, the House agreed to cut in half, to $260 million, the 1993 budget for the next generation solid-fuel rocket, designed to enable the Space Shuttle to carry heavier payloads, including key components of the Space Station. (AP, May 5/92)
NASA headquarters reported that eight finalists had been chosen for the 1992 George M. Low Trophy--NASA's Quality and Excellence Award. The finalists were: Cray Research Inc., Honeywell Inc., IBM Federal Sector Division, McDonnell Douglas Space Systems, Paramax Systems Corp., Rocket Research Co., Stanford Telecommunications Inc., and Technical Analysis Inc. (NASA Release 92-57)
Lockheed Corporation formed a joint venture with Russian aerospace firm Krunichev Enterprise to market the Russian-built Proton rocket for commercial satellite launches, a move that could help make Russia one of the dominant forces in the world-wide commercial launch business. Lockheed was to be responsible for marketing the Russian rocket to Western customers and would provide payload integration. Rockets were to be launched from the Baikonur site in Kazakhstan. (WSJ, Dec 29/92; LA Times, Dec 29/92; NY Times, Dec 29/92)
NASA launched the first of its new, low-cost spacecraft, the Solar, Anomalous, and Magnetospheric Particle Explorer satellite (SAMPEX) aboard a four-stage Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The spacecraft was designed to study anomalous cosmic rays in an effort to improve understanding of the evolution of the sun, the solar system, and the Milky Way Galaxy. (NASA Release 29-102; The Sun, Jul 4/92; P Inq, Jul 4/92; W Times, Jul 4/92; W Post, Jul 4/92; LA Times, Jul 5/92; NY Times, Jul 5/92)
The "Brilliant Pebbles" missile-defense system suffered a new setback when the test of an experimental rocket was aborted 55 seconds after launch. It was the second failure in three experimental launches. (W Post, Oct 25/92)
The Air Force test-fired a new booster for the Titan IV rocket and said it was the second successful test since an explosion ruined a firing last year. The new booster would allow Titan IVs, which launch U. S. spy satellites, to carry heavier payloads. (AP Oct 16/92)
NASA launched a small satellite on a $19 million mission to help the Pentagon develop its strategic missile detection system. A Scout rocket lifted the Miniature Seeker Technology Integration-1 satellite into orbit. The satellite carried miniaturized cameras and sensors designed to detect an attack by medium-and short-range missiles. (W Times, Nov 23/92; W Post, Nov 23/92; AP, Nov 21/92; P Inq, Nov 22/92)
Germany announced that it would go ahead with a celebration to mark the 50th anniversary of the first launch of the V-2 rocket despite British protests. The organizers said the event would celebrate the "first step into space" and did not represent a glorification of a Nazi weapon. (W Post, Sept 28/92;  The Sun, Sept 26/92)
Technicians searching for a leak in a Space Shuttle solid-fuel booster rocket found a 1-inch hair pressed into a secondary seal, a NASA spokesman said. The leak was detected yesterday in a segment of a booster for the Shuttle Columbia, which was being prepared for a February launch date. It was a leak in an O-ring seal that was blamed for the 1986 Shuttle Challenger explosion in which seven astronauts were killed. (W Times, Dec 27/92; W Post, Dec 17/92; The Sun, Dec 27/92)
The launch of Consort 5, a commercial suborbital rocket carrying nine microgravity experiments, was scheduled for September 10 by the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space. A two-stage Starfire solid fuel rocket would carry the payload to an altitude of 200 miles and provide the experiments with seven to eight minutes of microgravity exposure or weightlessness. The rocket and launch services were funded by a grant from NASA's Office of Commercial Programs.(NASA Release 92-133)
Reacting to a wave of international protest and some severe domestic criticism, Germany canceled a celebration of the 50th anniversary of the first successful V-2 rocket launch at the Peenemunde range on the north German coast. The first V-2 rocket was fired on October 3, 1942, under the direction of Werner von Braun, then a young scientist. The date is generally recognized as the birth of the space age. (LA Times, Sept 29/92; W Post, Sept 29/92)
David H. Suddeth, 63, a NASA engineer who was honored by the agency for his work on propulsion systems for spacecraft, died Jan 25 at Bowie, Maryland. His research included work on hydrazine-fueled rocket engines used to guide satellites and the Viking spacecraft, which landed on Mars in 1976. He was with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center from its inception in the late 1950s until he retired in 1990. (W Post, Jan 30/92)
A spokesman for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization said a 23,000--pound rocket motor clamped to the marrooned Intelsat 6 satellite by the crew of Space Shuttle Endeavour fired fllawlwssly at 1:25 p.m. EDT while both were orbiting about 230 miles over Africa. The 122-nation consortium, based in Washington, owns and operates the $150-million satellite. (LA Times, May 15/92)
NASA launched a rocket from Puerto Rico's north coast at 7:55 p.m. EDT to study radio waves in the ionosphere. The launch, originally set for May 18 but delayed due to bad weather, was the first time NASA had launched from the Caribbean island since 1967. (USA Today, May 26/92; AP, May 26/92)
In a letter sent to the chairwoman of the subcommittee that funds NASA, Senator Howell T. Heflin said killing the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor would cost almost twice as much as building it. NASA and the White House had moved to cancel the $3 billion program, saying the cost of keeping it going wouldn't fit in NASA's tight budget request of $15 billion for fiscal year 1993. Using figures obtained from NASA and from the ASRM's contractors, Heflin calculated that killing the program would cost NASA $2.65 billion through the year 2000. By contrast, he said it would cost $1.29 billion to finish building the rocket, not including $510 million to buy the first six sets of motors. (Htsvl Times, Apr 7/92; Birmingham News, Apr 12/92)
Dr. David M. Rust, chief scientist for the Flare Genesis project, a powerful solar telescope project developed by a team at Johns Hopkins University, said the telescope could be launched as early as December 1993. Rather than be launched on a NASA rocket or from a Space Shuttle, which might take a decade of planning and cost hundreds of millions of dollars, the telescope was to be dragged 19 miles above Antarctica by a balloon. The project would be another in a series of long-duration research flights using large balloons. Project scientists hoped to use the telescope to explore the precise cause of solar flares. (The Sun, Sept 15/92)
The first student managed and built payload flown on a NASA sounding rocket was launched successfully from the NASA flight facility on Wallops Island, Virginia. (NASA Release 92-156)
It was reported that in the upcoming flight of the Shuttle Endeavour, NASA would try for the first time to revitalize a crippled satellite while in orbit. During a four-day procedure, Endeavour's crew were to rendezvous with Intelsat 6, pull the satellite into the spaceship's cargo bay and mate it to a new solid rocket motor. Intelsat 6 then would be released and its rocket motor fired to send it into a 22,300 mile-hight orbit. The hope was that then, for the next 14 years, Intelsat 6 would relay trans-Atlantic telephone calls and television shows from Europe to North America and South America. (W Times, Apr 18/92)
Yuri P. Semenov, general director of NPO Energia, the Russians' civilian manned space program, invited U.S. officials to lease room aboard the Mir Space Station, orbiting 240 miles above Earth, to conduct experiments. In addition, Semenov also proposed selling Russians' most powerful rocket, the Energia, which exceeds the lifting capacity of any U.S. launch vehicle. (W Post, Feb 23/92; NY Times, Feb 23/92)
L. Eugene Root, a pioneer U.S. aircraft builder who led Lockheed Missile and Space Company to maturity and was a member of the RAND think tank died in Menlo Park, California, at the age of 87. As president of the Institute of Aeronautical Sciences in 1962, Root combined his organization with the American Rocket Society, co-founding the major U.S. aerospace society, the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (LA Times, Jan 25/92)
NASA announced that on January 6, 1992 administrator Richard H. Truly will officially present the NASA 1991 George M. Low Trophy, would be presented to Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations employees, Bringham City, Utah. The trophy recognizes NASA prime contractors, subcontractors, and suppliers for outstanding achievements in quality and productivity improvement and Total Quality Management (TGQM). Thiokol's Space Operations provides the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion that produces 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. In addition, Thiokol provides engineering services for sounding rocket design for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. (NASA Note N92-1)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin appeared ready to abandon the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane program with its goal of constructing and flying a single-stage-to-orbit air-breathing vehicle in favor of a hypersonic research effort. The latter, the NASA Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility effort, centers on a manned, Mach 10-class reusable test aircraft launched from the back of a NASA/Lockheed SR-71A, and on an unmanned platform launched atop a rocket to explore physical phenomena at speeds approaching Mach 25. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
A pinched piece of rubber filler--not a faulty O-ring seal--caused a leak in a solid rocket booster being readied for the launch of Space Shuttle Discovery, NASA said. The booster's three O-rings seals were in good condition. (AP, Sept 24/92; UPn, Sept 24/92; W Times, Sept 25/92)
It was reported that a Delta 2 rocket carrying a $65 million military navigation satellite was launched into space. The Global Positioning System "Navstar" satellite is the 12th in a globe-spanning network of such spacecraft that allow military forces on the ground, at sea and in the air to determine their location and altitude to within 53 feet anywhere in the world. After a flawless boost into space, the satellite was released into a preliminary orbit about 25 minutes after liftoff. On-board rockets were scheduled to fire later to put the satellite in a circular 12-hour orbit 12,5000 miles up. (UPI, Feb 23/92; B Sun, Feb 24/92; W Times, Feb 24/92; USA Today, Feb 24/92)
President George Bush signed an appropriations bill providing $2.1 billion for NASA's Space Station in fiscal year 1993. Other projects to be funded include the Consortium for International Earth Science Information Network, which was to provide social scientists with Earth science data beamed from NASA environmental monitoring satellites to understand issues such as land use and population growth. A program for developing a new NASA-Pentagon rocket to put satellites into space, ensuring continued use of Martin Marietta's Titan IV booster for satellite launchings, was terminated. (P Inq, Oct 7/92; AP Oct, 7/92; W Post, Oct 7/92; Space News, Oct 12-18)
Air Force officials employed a revised and more accurate computer model of wind direction and speed in the launch of the Mars Observer. The officials insisted on ideal weather conditions before allowing the launch because of concerns that a plume of harmful nitrogen tetroxide could drift over nearby populated areas should the Titan 3 rocket explode within the first 20 to 30 seconds of flight. The new computer model allows the Martin Marietta-built Titan family of rockets to continue as launch vehicles, although the modelling may make it more difficult to launch on time. (Fla Today, Oct 4/92)
The Washington Post reported that the U.S. Space & Rocket Center was operating two nonprofit Space Camps, one in Huntsville, Alabama, and the other in Florida, near the Kennedy Space Center. The programs at the camp were designed to encourage young people to think about careers in science, technology, and the aerospace industry when they grow up, or to encourage them to try to become astronauts. Since the program began in 1982, more than 150,000 students have graduated from the program. (W Post, June 1/93)
An article in the Washington Post discussed the failed launch of the 14-story Atlas-Centaur rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida on March 25. The rocket partially lost power 24 seconds after liftoff and sent its military communications satellite into a useless orbit. This was the third problem-filled General Dynamics launch in two years. Future launches were placed on hold until completion of investigation of the failed launch. (W Post, Apr 6/93)
The first test flight of a re-usable single-stage rocket, called the Delta Clipper Experimental, was scheduled to occur shortly at the White Sands test facility, a Federal site in the New Mexico desert.  The 42-foot, 20-ton prototype was built by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation for the Defense Department. (NY Times, Aug 10/93)
Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin said that Russia would start selling foreign countries space technology without the machinery to launch nuclear missiles. Chernomyrdin spoke before leaving Moscow for an official visit to the United States that had been set for June but cancelled after a dispute with Washington over rocket technology sales to India.
The Washington Post reported that two separate investigations of a failed Atlas rocket launch last March had concluded that the mishap was caused by the loosening of a tiny screw that helps regulate the flow of liquid oxygen propellent. The completion of the investigations allowed General Dynamics Corporation, the company that built the rocket, to resume launches. (W Post, June 9/93; USA Today, June 9/93; H Chron, June 9/93)
The United States and Russia appeared to be nearing a compromise in a dispute over a proposed Russian sale of rocket engines and associated technology to India. Under the expected compromise, Washington would allow Moscow to sell the rocket engines to India but halt the transfer of some associated technology that initially was to be a key part of the deal. The technology was meant to give India the capability to manufacture its own ballistic missile engines, which could be used for either military or commercial space launch vehicles. (AP, Jul 13/93; W Post, Jul 14/93; UPI, Jul 14/93)
The three main commercial sponsors of the 52-foot Conestoga 1620 rocket scheduled to be launched this spring from Wallops Island, Virginia, were selling ad space on the shell of the rocket. The price: $500,000 for 58 feet of space. The Conestoga launch was part of NASA's Commercial Experiment Transport program. (P Inq, Jan 14/93; USA Today, Jan 13/93; Advertising Age, Jan 11/93; W Post, Jan 26/93)
According to the Wall Street Journal, five aerospace companies were proposing to revive planning for a advanced new rocket to carry satellites and other commercial payloads into space. The companies had asked NASA to join in planning and researching the project; they anticipated that it would help the U.S. gain a greater share of the commercial launch business now dominated by Arianspace, a European joint venture. (WSJ, May 6/93)
Loral Corporation's Loral Vought Systems unit announced that Japan had agreed to buy a multiple-launch rocket system. The four-year contract was for $250 million. The agreement included 1,300 tactical and practice rockets, 47 launcher trainer pods, and 36 launchers for the ground-to-ground defense system. (WSJ, Jan 26/93)
House-Senate conferees killed NASA's program to search for signs of intelligent civilization beyond Earth and reduced funding available for a reflight of the agency's lost Mars Observer mission. In approving a total agency budget of $14.5 billion, the legislators barely preserved a program to build a more powerful rocket booster for the Space Shuttle and provided very little funding for developing new technology needed for the National Aerospace Plane.  The planned Space Station was fully funded at $2.l billion for fiscal 1994. (W Post, Oct. 2/93; AP Oct 2/93)
A New York Times article reported that a debate is going on over the degree of danger posed by the Space Shuttle's solid-fueled rocket boosters.  Repeatedly this year, the boosters have shown alarming variations in their thrust, prompting a number of quiet NASA investigations and accusations by critics that the problem is a time bomb waiting to go off.  (NY Times, Dec 4/93; Fl Today, Dec 7/93
Clinton Administration officials reported that the White House was completing plans to permit the export of U.S. rocket technology that had been restricted out of fear it would be used to develop ballistic missiles,  The proposal to allow the sale of space technology under strengthened safeguards was part of a review of export policy ordered by President Clinton. (LA Times, Aug 10/93)
After back-to-back failures, rocket-maker General Dynamics successfully launched a booster with a military communications satellite built to survive nuclear attack.  The 15-story Atlas blasted of from Cape Canaveral, Florida. (P Inq, Jul 20/93)
European space officials in Paris announced that Western Europe's Ariane rocket had deployed a U.S.-built television satellite on Wednesday after a launch from French Guiana. (RTw, May 11/93)
The Washington Times reported that a Russian communications satellite had been lost in a low orbit after the booster rocket apparently ran out of fuel. (W Times, May 29/93)
Launch of the Commercial Experiment Transporter (COMET), which was scheduled to lift off March 31, was postponed for at least two months. NASA contributed $85 million toward three launches of the COMET; the spacecraft was to carry ll experiments from NASA's commercial space development centers. COMET was also serving as the first space billboard. Columbia Pictures paid $500,000 to advertize an upcoming Arnold Schwarzenegger movie on the rocket. (Space News, Mar 8-14; AP, 9/93, Mar 10/93)
Western Europe's Ariane 42P rocket deployed an American communications satellite into space on June 24. The rocket, which was launched from French Guiana after a long series of delays, was owned by the Los Angeles based Hughes Space and Communications Company. (RTw, June 24/93)
NASA announced the formation of an investigation board to examine the causes of a simultaneous detonation of two Super*Zip explosive cords, one primary and the other a backup, that occurred during the deployment of the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite(ACTS) and its Transfer Orbit State (TS) booster from Discovery during Shuttle Mission STS-51 (September 12-20, 1993). (NASA Release 93-184)
Officials at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico announced that the Delta Clipper-Experimental rocket had successfully completed its first test flight, boosting backers's hopes that the single-stage design would be cheaper and more reliable than current space launch rockets. During the test flight, which lasted only about a minute, the rocket hovered briefly, flew about 350 feet to one side, and then touched down vertically on a landing pad. It was the first time a spacecraft had landed vertically on Earth.  A second test flight was tentatively set for Aug. 27. In that test, the rocket was scheduled to go up about 650 feet.  (AP, Aug 18/93; WSJ, Aug 19/93; H Chron, Aug 19/93; H Post, Aug 19/93; W Times, Aug 21/93; Time, Aug 30/93)
NASA took action to limit expenditures on the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM) program.  NASA informed its field installations involved with the ASRM that if the pending appropriations bill becomes law, it would require termination of the ASRM program. (NASA Release 93-189)
The Wall Street Journal reported that technical problems had delayed until August the launch of the unmanned Comet space rocket on which Columbia Pictures had a giant outer-space billboard advertising its major summer movie, "Last Action Hero." (WSJ, May 6/93; W Times, May 7/93; NY Times, May 11/93)
Arthur L. H. Rudolph, a German-born scientist who played a crucial role in developing the Saturn 5 rocket used in the American moon landings, lost his attempt to regain his American citizenship. He gave up his citizenship in 1984 when he faced deportation for Nazi war crimes.
Computers halted Shuttle Discovery's countdown only 19 seconds before launch when they sensed a problem with one of the spaceship's two booster rockets.  NASA said that the flight could not be rescheduled until sometime in the first week of August, after engineers had replaced a bad hydraulic power unit in the booster.  It was the second launch delay.  Five astronauts aimed to deploy an experimental communications satellite during the mission. (Rtw, Jul 24/93; AP, Jul 24/94; UPI, Jul 24/93; W Post, Jul 25/93; NY Times, Jul 25/93; W Times, Jul 25/93; USA Today, Jul 26/93)
A Titan 4 rocket carrying an expensive military spy satellite system exploded minutes after liftoff from Vandenberg Air Force Base.  This, the first failure of the four-year-old Titan 4 program, was a $2-billion accident, said John Pike, director of the space policy project at the Federation of American Scientists in Washington, a liberal group that researches classified aerospace projects. Pike consistently has criticized U.S. spy satellites. The accident wiped out most of the savings Congress took from the intelligence budget during the year. (RTw, Aug 2/93; AP, Aug 3/93; USA Today, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93; LA Times, Aug 3/93; W Times, Aug 3/93; NY Times, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93; W Post, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93)
The Russian foreign ministry announced that Russia had fully suspended a $359 million contract to sell India rocket engines and the technology needed to make them. (RTw, Aug 4/93)
Plans called for the Topaz 2 reactor to be put into an orbit 1,000 feet high; over the span of a year, the spacecraft housing the reactor would be lifted to 19,000 feet by an electric propulsion system powered by the reactor. The mission was projected to cost $l50 million. To stay within this budget, the Pentagon would need to use the planned Delta rocket rather than a more expensive Atlas rocket. (NY Times, Jan 12/93)
Western Europe's second Ariane-5 booster was tested in a jungle clearing in French Guiana, space officials announced. The first Ariane-5 rocket was scheduled for launch in 1996. (RTw, June 25/93)
A Pegasus rocket launched from a B-52 bomber flying eight miles above the Atlantic Ocean propelled a Brazilian environmental satellite into orbit. The Pegasus was dropped off the wing of the B-52, which was modified by NASA. After five seconds of free fall, the rocket motors were fired one by one and lifted the satellite into an orbit about 470 miles high.
The New York Times reported that an Orion rocket being prepared for launch at the European Space Range in Kiruna, Sweden, ignited while on its flatbed and shot through two buildings, killing a technician and injuring three others. The 20-foot rocket was to have measured the earth's ozone layer, using equipment from a German Space organization. (NY Times, Mar 1/93; RT, Feb 27/93)
The Washington Times reported that Space Shuttle Endeavour had to delay firing a jet to avoid possibly coming in contact with a piece of space trash, in this instance, a 27-year-old spent Russian rocket. This was the fourth time in two years that Shuttle astronauts had to take measures to avoid trash in space. There were hundreds of thousands of pieces of trash floating in space as a result of space missions. (AP, June 23/93; W Times, June 24/93; NY Times, June 24/93)
Florida Today reported that NASA was launching a new type of air-launched Pegasus rocket that activates only after being released from the wing of an aircraft. The winged vehicle, which was developed by Orbital Sciences Corporation, has a solid-fuel rocket that gives it the ability to put small satellites into orbit at a bargain price. Plans called for the Pegasus to carry a Brazilian remote sensing satellite. (Fl Today, Jan 4/93)
Engineers from Russian and American rocket companies were at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, displaying a pair of Russian engines for sale to the American space program.  Aerojet and Russian engineers briefed Marshall Center propulsion engineers on the design, manufacturing and test history of the engines, which date to the Soviet manned lunar program in the 1960s. (Huntsville Times, Dec 15/93).
Reuter reported that Arianespace had signed a contract for the launching of an Israeli Amos-l telecommunications satellite by an Ariane rocket in 1995. (RTw, May 28/93)
Reuter reported that Australian rocket scientists had completed the world's first successful test flight of a model scramjet, a supersonic air-breathing engine that might make sub-orbital space flight common. (RTw, May 31/93)
U.S. and European space officials announced that they had postponed a planned rocket firing intended to move the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA) to a position where it could be retrieved by a Space Shuttle next month. An apparent gyroscope problem aboard the orbiting research satellite forced the postponement. (RTw, May 18/93)
NASA announced that when the first U.S. commercial rocket lift off in May, its main fuselage and booster rocket were scheduled to carry the logo, "Last Action Hero," the title of a Columbia Pictures summer movie release starring Arnold Schwarzenegger. Columbia paid $50,000 for the ad, which was to be orbiting earth for more than two years. (WSJ, Mar 3/93; B Sun, Mar 3/93; W Post, Mar 3/93; LA Times, Mar 3/93; USA Today, Mar 3/93; UPI, Mar 3/93; AP, Mar 3/93)
Orbital Science Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, announced that it was again planning to launch its Pegasus orbital rocket after scrubbing launches three times in the past two months because of technical problems.
India announced that it would develop powerful rocket technology that it said it had been denied as a result of an accord between Washington and Russia. In that accord, Russia agreed to sell some rockets to India but, bowing to  U. S. pressure, agreed not to provide India with the accompanying technology. (NY Times, Jul 18/93)
After a two-day trip, a Soyuz rocket docked with the Mir Space Station, using an apparatus designed to link the orbiter with a U.S. Shuttle. On board were two Russian cosmonauts. They were scheduled to replace the two cosmonauts who have been on Mir for the past six months. James Oberg, an expert on former Soviet science and technology, said that "the success of this test clears some worries about the hardware functioning properly." (B Sun, Jan 27/93; UPI, Jan 26/93)
Three days before the Mars Observer spacecraft was scheduled to begin orbiting the red planet, NASA engineers lost communications with the $1 billion probe. Radio contact broke off after engineers commanded the spacecraft to prepare for a crucial rocket firing on August 24 that was designed to send the spacecraft in orbit around the planet. Mars Observer was programmed to automatically fire its rockets, but NASA needed to hear from the spacecraft to be certain that had happened. If the commands were not received, the ship could fly past Mars completely. NASA officials expressed grave concern over the problem but said that communications could be restored at any moment. (UPI, Aug 22/93; AP/Aug 23/93; Rtw, Aug 23/93; WSJ, Aug 23/93; P Inq, Aug 23/93; B Sun, Aug 23/93; USA Today, Aug 23/93; W Post, Aug 23/93; NY Times, Aug 23/93; C Trib, Aug 23/93; LA Times, Aug 23/93; RT, Aug 23/93)
Intelsat and Martin Marietta reached a tentative settlement of lawsuits connected with a communications satellite that Space Shuttle astronauts rescued after it was stranded in low orbit. The lawsuit stemmed from Martin Marietta's 1990 launch of a $157 million Intelsat satellite, which went into a low, useless orbit after a Martin Marietta rocket launcher failed. Spacewalking astronauts attached a new rocket booster package to the satellite in May 1992, and the satellite then fired itself into its proper orbit. (W Times, June 12/93; W Post, June 12/93)
Officials said that talks between Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin to discuss mutual space exploration had been put off indefinitely because of friction over a $400 million contract for Russia to sell rocket engines to India. (UPI, June 24/93; RTw, June 25/93)
At a public hearing on July 20, the National Transportation Safety Board described a scene of confusion in the mission control room during the launch of a Pegasus rocket made by Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia. Control room operators at a NASA command center in Wallops Island, Virginia, ordered the launch of the Pegasus from a B-52 bomber, then ordered the launch aborted, only to rescind that order seconds later. Federal safety officials want stricter controls over commercial satellite launches. (AP, Jul 21/93)
Astronomers have discovered a huge concentration of mysterious "dark matter," which scientists believe may make up as much as 95 percent of the universe. The finding was the first to "indicate that there may be enough material to close the universe," said the research team's Richard F. Mushotzky of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. In a closed universe, the expansion of the universe, which is being slowed by the pull of gravity, would come to a halt or nearly so. The discovery was detected by the international ROSAT x-ray satellite observatory. ROSAT, an acronym for Roentgen Satellite, is a joint project of Germany, the United States, and the United Kingdom. It was launched on a Delta II rocket from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, on June 1, 1990. (NASA Release 93-1; W Post, Jan 5/93; W Post, Jan 8/93;  B Sun, Jan 5/93, Jan 8/93; NY Times, Jan 5/93; Arizona Republic, Jan 5/93; P Inq, Jan 8/93; Newsweek, Jan 18)
A Deutsche Aerospace AG (DASA) executive called on Europe and the United states to cooperate in setting quotas for launches of Russia's Proton booster rocket until such time as market economy conditions prevailed in Russia. Werner Heinzmann, president of DASA's space systems group, told a news conference that currently the Proton costs only a fraction of a Western launcher because of the value of the rouble. (RTw, June 10/93)
General Dynamics Space Systems Division of San Diego proposed returning to the moon for a 21-day, two-person mission in 1999. The mission would use a capsule and return vehicle transported by the U.S. Space Shuttle and a Titan 4 rocket with a Centaur upper stage; the proposal did not call for the construction of a new launcher. However, NASA's head of exploration called many of the calculations in the proposal overly optimistic. NASA's own rough draft for a lunar base program entailed construction of a new launcher and higher costs than those projected in the General Dynamics proposal. (Space News, March 8-14/93)
A 240-pound Array of Low-Energy X-ray Imaging sensors (ALEXIS) satellite was launched into orbit April 25 aboard an Air Force Pegasus rocket for the Los Alamos National Laboratory in Mew Mexico. Officials at the New Mexico laboratory had hoped to demonstrate that they could handle space missions faster, better, and cheaper than NASA. However, one of the satellite's four solar panels was damaged during the launch, and the satellite was deemed a loss.
A NASA safety panel reported that inspection of recovered Space Shuttle solid rocket motors had found traces of soot on O-rings and recommended a redesign of one of the motor's main joints. The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP) warned NASA on March 18 that the possibility of a problem was "sufficiently high" to warrant the joint's redesign. (Space News, Mar 22/93)
The LA Times announced that Russian space officials had signed a contract in late April for the first commercial launch of a Western-built satellite by a Russian rocket. The agreement was signed with Inmarsat, a 67-country consortium that puts up satellites for mobile communications. (LA Times, May 11/93)
Washington Technology reported that Rich Fleet, president of Herndon/Virginia-based PacAstro, planned to build an inexpensive launch rocket. Using technology from Apollo-era liquid rocket boosters and other reliable time-tested components, Fleeter intended to offer 750-pound, low-earth-orbit access for $5 million a shot. This amount was half of what other mainline smallsat launch firms such as Orbital Sciences and EER were asking. FLeeter also runs PacAstro's sister company AeroAstro, a manufacturer of low-cost smallsats. (Washington Technology, Jan 28/93)
The French National Space Agency announced that Western Europe's first Ariane-5 solid-fuel rocket booster had undergone successful tests at a launch center in French Guiana. (RTw, Mar 6/93)
The Washington Times reported that the launch of a rocket with a "star wars" payload had been scrubbed on May 22, just a minute before its scheduled launch. The Air Force blamed the failed launch on a power outage in a computer. The launch was rescheduled for May 23. (W Times, May 23/93)
The United States and Russia reached a last-minute agreement on the sale of rocket engines and related technology  to India.  The deal would allow some of the rocket engines to be transferred to India but would limit the transfer of technology and would not impose any sanctions on Russia, (Reuters, Jul 16/93; APn, Jul 17/93
NASA unreeled 1,640 feet of cooper wire above Earth and conducted electricity through the line in a space tether test. When refined, such tethers could be used to dispel electrical charges from spacecraft and change spacecraft orbits. The tether spool was carried into space by a Delta 2 rocket launched by the Air Force. (AP, June 26/93; RTw, June 26/93; NY Times, June 27/93; W Post, June 27/93)
The first flight of NASA's Small Expendable-tether Deployer System (SEDS) was scheduled to be launched aboard a U.S. Air Force Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, no earlier than March 18. The SEDS tether system would be a secondary payload on the Delta 2 launch vehicle. (NASA Advisory, Mar 11/93)
NASA was scheduled to launch an unmanned Delta rocket with a military navigation satellite and NASA's tagalong tether experiment. The 12 1/2-mile tether, which is just three-hundredth of an inch thick--is wound around a spool. One end of the cord is tied to a 57-pound aluminum box. Everything is mounted on the rocket's second stage. NASA planned to pop the box off the spent booster an hour after the launch. As it shoots away, the box should cause the tether to unwind. Instruments on board would record the speed and tension of the tether and send the data to earth. (AP, Mar 18/93)
The Delta Clipper-Experimental (DC-X) rocket's first flight was scheduled for August 18 at White Sands Missile Range in Southern New Mexico. The 42-foot-tall, bullet-shaped DC-X is a one-third scale prototype of single-stage, reusable rocket that would be light enough to reach orbit and return without needing expensive lower stages or boosters that get thrown away on every flight.  It would fire its engines to land vertically. The DC-0X was developed by McDonnell Douglas with funding by the federal Ballistic Missile Defense Organization. (AP, Aug 17/93)
A commercial suborbital rocket carrying seven experiments was scheduled to be launched on February 10 by the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space (UAH CMDS), a NASA Center for the Commercial Development of Space. The Consort rocket and launch services are funded by a grant from the space agency's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology. (NASA Release 93-22)
According to a report in the Baltimore Sun, Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off with a pair of pliers stuck on a rocket booster. Officials said the pliers posed no danger during liftoff, but the incident was getting much attention in management circles. A Kennedy space center spokeswoman said that the pliers were noted missing in a daily tool inventory at Discovery's launch pad on April 2 but that a proper lost-and-found report, which would have prompted a search, was not filed. Nasa was also investigating how a foot-long metal scrap that could have set off an explosion became lodged in one of four launch-pad posts that held up one of Shuttle Discovery's rocket boosters. (B Sun, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 15/93)
NASA announced that bad weather had forced the military to postpone launch of a rocket scheduled to unfurl a tether in space and that the delay had forced NASA to bump the launch of shuttle Columbia from Sunday to Monday. (RTw, Mar 19/93; AP, Mar 19/93; UPI, Mar 19/93; W Post, Mar 19/93)
Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, announced agency plans to use its nearly completed Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM) Yellow Creek facilities in Iuka, Mississippi, for manufacture of nozzles for the current Space Shuttle Redesigned Solid Rocket Motor (RSRM) program. (NASA Release 93-215)
Russia agreed to help build a U.S. atom smasher in Waxahachie, Texas. Russian scientists would be involved in the design, engineering, and production of two of the Collider's booster accelerators in addition to its experimental detectors. According to the terms of the agreement, which could add $100 million to the Russian economy and save the U.S. a similar amount, Russia would provide Russian hardware at half price. (WSJ, Jan 7/93; USA Today, Jan 7/93)
A Delta 2 rocket successfully ejected a television-size satellite on 12 and 1/2 miles of cord. The experiment demonstrated that tethers could be used to deploy small payloads in space, NASA said. The tether, which was thin as a kite string, dangled the 57-pound box for 90 minutes at an altitude of 450 feet. (W Post, Mar 31/93; NY Times, Mar 31/93; P Inq, Mar 31/93)
According to Space News, in a March l0 letter to Vice President Gore, Senator Howell Heflin, D-Alabama, argued against canceling the Advanced Solid Rocket Mojtor program. Heflin said he opposed a proposal to close the rocket motor plant in Iuka, Miss; those opposing the closing hoped that the plant eventually would be used to build a hybrid rocket motor for a National Launch Center. (Space News, March 15-21/93)
The Air Force launched a Titan 4 rocket with a Defense Department secret payload from Cape Canaveral, Florida. (Reuters, May 3/94; H Chron, May 4/94; H Post, May 4/94)
NASA ground controllers were to send final commands to the Magellan space probe on October 7 to send it crashing to its death in the atmosphere of Venus on October 11. The robot had been in a highly successful Venus orbit since 1990 but its solar panels were failing and its gyroscopes worn out. On October 12 NASA announced that Magellan was expected to burn up within two days. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, declared Magellan dead on October 12. However, Magellan lasted long enough to radio back telemetry showing how much rocket power would be required to offset the increasing atmospheric turbulence, which was useful data for future designers seeking to use the atmosphere of Mars for orbit purposes. (LA Times, Oct 6/94; AP, Oct 6/94; USA Today, Oct 7/94; C Trib, Oct 9/94; W Post, Oct 10/94; AvWk, Oct 10/94; AP, Oct 11/94; Reuters, Oct 11/94; W Times, Oct 12/94; LA Times, Oct 12/94; CSM, Oct 12/94; NASA Release 94-170; Fla Today, Oct 12/94; Reuters, Oct 12/94; W Post, Oct 13/94; NY Times, Oct 13/94; SP News, Oct 17-23/94)
The launch of the H-II (also seen as H-2) rocket created by the Japanese consortium Rocket Systems Corporation was scheduled for February 4. The rocket, large enough to lift a two-ton payload into geostationary orbit, cost $2.5 billion to develop and was two years behind schedule. (CSM, Feb 3/94; Reuters, Feb 4/94; UP, Feb 4/94; LA Times, Feb 7/94)
A Russian Soyuz rocket was launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying two Russian cosmonauts and a German physicist. Its destination was the Mir Space Station where the crew would exchange places with existing Mir cosmonauts. The rocket docked with Mir on October 6. On October 12 the Interfax news agency reported that Mir was experiencing power supply problems because of the drain on its power cells from the presence of six astronauts during the change-over period. On October 28 the German astronaut was scheduled to break the record for the longest space flight by a West European. (UP, Oct 4/94; Reuters, Oct 4/94; AP, Oct 6/94; AFP, Oct 6/94; Reuters, Oct 6/94; NY Times, Oct 7/94; CSM, Oct 7/94; AvWk, Oct 10/94; AP, Oct 12/94; Reuters, Oct 28/94)
NASA announced that a small quantity of nitrogen tetroxide (N2O4) was accidentally released from the Thermochemical Test Area at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, during a test setup. The resulting cloud of N2O4 gradually dissipated, but area traffic was halted briefly and some 46 people were treated in local medical facilities for mild respiratory symptoms. Nitrogen tetroxide is an oxidizer used in some rocket engines. (NASA Release 94-030; AP, Apr 21/94; Reuters, Apr 21/94; H Chron, Apr 22/94; NY Times, Apr 22/94; W Post, Apr 22/94; USA Today, Apr 22/94; UP, Apr 22/94)
U.S. firms such as Martin Marietta and Lockheed and the U.S. Air Force were interested in learning from the Moscow-based Design Bureau of Transport Machinery (DBTM) ways in which the United States could modernize its aging launch site structure. DBTM was working with Martin Marietta in evaluating upgrades to the company's Atlas launch sites. Lockheed was interested in Russian automated launch pad technology for its propose single-stage-to-orbit vehicle. And the U.S. Air Force was impressed by the simplicity and operability of Russia's Zenith prelaunch process: "There is no need for human presence on the launch pad as the booster is automatically erected, connected, and launched." According to DBTM managers, the highly automated techniques used at the Baikonur Cosmodrome Zenith launch site enabled two of the powerful boosters to be launched from the same pad within five hours. Robert Ford, Martin Marietta Astronautics' manager of Russian programs, said his firm was looking at seven potential jobs for DBTM on the Atlas launch pads, ranging from introducing higher levels of automation to controlling burn-off effects after each liftoff. In the future Martin Marietta might also have DBTM look at its Titan launching system as well. In other Russian-related activity, Martin Marietta was moving ahead on its evaluation of two Russian enginers for use on an upgraded Atlas. (AvWk, Nov 21/94)
NASA announced that it had selected the science team for the first spacecraft designed to rendezvous with an asteroid, the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) mission. The NEAR spacecraft was scheduled for launch in February 1996 aboard a Delta 2 rocket and should arrive in orbit around asteroid 433 Eros in early January 1999. It would survey Eros for a minimum of one year, at altitudes as close as 15 miles. The NEAR Science Payload would consist of six instruments: a multispectral imager system, a near-infrared spectrograph, an X-ray/gamma-ray spectrometer, a magnetometer, a laser altimeter, and the spacecraft's radio, which was sued also for gravity measurements. Members of the science team were assigned to each of these instruments. (NASA Release 94-159)
The U.S. company Space Express Corporation planned to build a rocket launch site in northern Germany to send satellites into space, according to Stern magazine. Richard Coleman, head of the Washington, D.C.-based company, discussed the project with NASA. (UP, Apr 27/94)
The European Space Agency (ESA) Governing Council announced in Paris it would proceed with a manned space program by the year 2000. Jean-Marie Luton, the French director general of ESA, said member states had approved a $227 million Manned Space Transportation Program and construction of a $299 million Columbus module to form part of the U.S. Freedom Space Station being prepared by NASA. The program was to include a crew transportation vehicle (CTV) to be launched by a European Ariane rocket. Meanwhile, Jan-Baldem Mennicken, chief of Germany's space agency DARA, revealed Germany's 1994 space program. Costing $940 million, it was $117 less than than for 1993. The budget included $579 million for ESA, with the remainder including funds for international programs for earth observation and a 20-nation project to send a satellite to Mars from the Russian Baikonur Space Center in October 1994. (Reuters, Feb 16/94)
In a patent case, Hughes Aircraft Company won $114 million from the U.S. Government (represented by the Defense Department and NASA) as opposed to the $4.8 billion it sought. At issue were royalties due under a patent developed by former Hughes engineer Donald D. Williams in 1959 for a single rocket nozzle for satellites. (NY Times, Jun 18/94; P Inq, Jun 19/94; W Times, Jun 19/94; WSJ, Jun 20/94)
An Air Force Titan 4, the most powerful U.S. unmanned rocket, boosted a $1 billion military communications satellite (Milstar) into space. The satellite formed the initial link in a controversial $17.3 billion data relay network designed to provide secure communications during a nuclear conflict. (W Post, Feb 8/94; WSJ, Feb 8/94; B Sun, Feb 8/94; AP, Feb 8/94)
The University of Houston (UH) was scheduled to take over from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology as home for a rocket laboratory researching the feasibility of charged plasma propulsion for future interplanetary flight. The facility was to be called the Advanced Space Propulsion Laboratory. Astronaut and plasma-physics expert Franklin Chang-Diaz was appointed the facility's director. Chang-Diaz hoped to create a small test rocket to release from a Shuttle. (H Post, Jan 21/94)
Some 20 students in the Student Rocket Program at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks, built a rocket from scratch over the preceding year and a half. The rocket was to be launched when NASA radar technicians came to Poker Flat for other planned launches. NASA and other U.S. government agencies invested millions of dollars to upgrade 25-year-old Poker Flat, the world's only university-owned rocket range, which had an excellent far northern location. The objective of the rocket flight was technical performance: to get the $20,000 rocket into the Earth's stratosphere and to keep in contact with it during its brief flight by satellite-relayed signals. (AP, Apr 25/94)
NASA reportedly transferred $990,000 to the Defense Department's Ballistic Missile Defense Organization to maintain the Delta Clipper program. McDonnell Douglas Aerospace had developed a rocket that takes off and lands vertically, which is covered by this program. NASA wished to keep the option of using the DC-X as a flight demonstrator of single-stage-to-orbit technologies in support of NASA's advanced launch technology effort. The program was operated from the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. (RTw, Jan 31/94; H Post, Feb 3/94)
Volodymyr Gorbulin, head of Ukraine's space agency, appealed to the West for full space research cooperation to save Ukraine's aeronautics industry from collapse. Gorbulin expressed disappointment that NASA officials had refused to discuss joint space construction at talks in Kiev the following week because Ukraine had not yet signed international agreements on proliferation of advanced rocket technology. (Reuters, Mar 15/94)
The group of scientists from Phillips Rocket Laboratory investigating the disappearance of the Mars Observer more than one year ago concluded the probable cause of the accident. Phillips aeronautical engineer and project manager said the likely cause was failure of a small pyro valve that allowed propellants to mix. This in turn could cause the rupture of a tube and result in the Observer tumbling out of control. (Antelope Valley Press, Dec 1/94)
Jack Levine, Director of Flight Programs in NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology, said that after considering the findings of a technical review panel, NASA decided to cut off funding for the Commercial Experiments Transporter (Comet) in FY 94. Comet was conceived as an alternative to the Space Shuttle; it would use an expendable rocket to orbit commercial experiments, some of which would be brought back to Earth aboard a recovery capsule after 30 days. Costs exceeded estimates and for that reason and the panel's findings, NASA decided to discontinue the program. (Defense Daily, May 5/94)
Russian Military Space Forces official Sergei Gorbunov said that Russia had decided to develop a new giant booster rocket that was to have a reusable first stage and burn a special, safer low-pollution fuel mixture. The rocket, Angara-24, would be appropriate for a new Far Eastern launch site if Russia decided to build it as an alternative to the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The booster was to be tested in 1998 and the first launch was planned for 2000. (Reuters, Apr 5/94)
NASA announced the signing of a memorandum of understanding with the Commission for Space Activities of the Federative Republic of Brazil (COBAE). The two parties were to conduct a sounding rocket campaign in Brazil from July through October 1994 to investigate the electrodynamics and irregularities in the ionosphere and mesosphere along the Earth's magnetic equator and study their relationship with the neutral atmosphere and winds. NASA was to launch, with the support of COBAE, 33 rockets from the new Brazilian launch range, Centro de Lanamentos de Alcntara in Maranho. Brazilian scientific participation was to be coordinated by the Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE) and was to be named the Guara Campaign after a lovely bird native to the equatorial region of Brazil. (NASA Release 94-51)
A German company set up a joint venture with China, called EurasSpace, to develop  state-of-the-art satellites. It expected to launch its first high-capacity data  transmission satellite, the Sinosat-1, in 1997 for the People's Bank of China. The satellite would be assembled and tested in China and boosted into orbit by a Chinese Long March rocket. (UP, Sep 21/94)
NASA announced the members of the crew of the Space Shuttle mission for the fall of 1995 under the command of Brian Duffy. A Japanese National Space Development Agency specialist was included and one of the mission objectives was to retrieve a science satellite scheduled to be launched by a Japanese H-2 rocket in early 1995. The Shuttle would also retrieve another science satellite, the Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy (SPARTAN). In addition, two spacewalks would be conducted. (NASA Release 94-208)
Turkey scheduled the launch of its first satellite aboard an Ariane-4 rocket from French Guyana. (B Sun, Jan 19/94)
Japan's new H-II rocket was aborted six seconds before liftoff when its main liquid fuel engine was ignited but the solid fuel booster rockets failed to ignite. Japan's National Space Development Agency said the problem appeared to be in a ground-control computer known as the countdown sequencer rather than in the rocket. On August 28 the H-II rocket was launched again. However, Japan's space agency said on August 31 that it was abandoning efforts to put into orbit an experimental satellite launched by the H-II rocket. (NY Times, Aug 19/94; O Sen Star, Aug 19/94; Reuters, Aug 28/94; NY Times, Aug 29/94; CSM, Sep 1/94)
In the administration budget presented to Congress, NASA suffered a $281 million cut for the Space Shuttle program, the first cut in 22 years. The budget proposals increased amounts for new technology, aeronautics, computers, and global warming research but required cancellation of the Long Duration Orbiter, the Commercial Experiment Transporter, and the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor. (Reuters, Feb 7/94; B Sun, Feb 8/94; USA Today, Feb 8/94; AP, Feb 8/94; W Post, Feb 10/94)
France's national space agency CNES launched a public relations campaign featuring its astronauts in order to improve strained relations between CNES and the inhabitants of French Guiana on South America's northeast coast, where the Ariane rocket series was launched. The Guiana space center gave France independent launch capacity for civilian and military satellites. (Reuters, Nov 19/94)
Russian Space Mission Control spokesman Alexander Volchenkov announced that the Soyuz TU-18 rocket had lifted off Saturday for rendezvous with the orbiting MIR Space Station. Aboard were three cosmonauts, one of whom may attempt a new record for living in space. The craft was scheduled to dock with Mir for a crew change, after 200 days in space for the current crew.
Orbital Sciences Corporation launched the Taurus rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, placing two military satellites into orbit. (C Trib, Mar 14/94; W Post, Mar 15/94)
Jean-Marc Artaud, program director for the Ariane-5 rocket for the French National Space Agency (CNES) in Guiana, discussed the launch that took place of a solid propellant booster that was part of the new generation rocket. The rocket was launched from a European Space Agency (ESA) center in the jungle of French Guiana on the northeast coast of South America in a test aimed at keeping the ESA in the lead in launching heavy satellites into the next century. (Reuters, Sep 30/94)
NASA announced that recent results from the Haystack Orbital Debris Radar measurements of orbital debris were good news for the International Space Station. The radar, which was operated for NASA by the MIT Lincoln Laboratory, showed that the measured debris at low altitudes (250-400 miles) was below predicted levels. The improvement resulted in part from NASA's Orbital Debris Mitigation Program under which NASA informed other nations of the hazards resulting from third stage rocket explosions, which led Japan, China, and Russia to join NASA in modifying their launch vehicles and satellites. Other reasons were the decreased military space activities of Russia and the U.S. and the decrease in worldwide space launches. (NASA Release 94-136)
An unmanned DC-X (Delta Clipper Experimental) rocket made an emergency landing at the White Sands Missile Range following a mysterious explosion soon after its engines started. The Ballistic Missile Defense Organization developed the missile, and McDonnell Douglas Corporation manufactured it. The flight was the fifth for the unusual rocket, which was made to take off and land vertically. The DC-X was grounded in the fall of 1993 when the project ran out of money. However, NASA came up with enough funds to keep the program going until Congress appropriated $5 million to complete its flight test program. Ultimately the rocket was to be turned over to NASA. (NY Times, Jun 28/94)
Joseph P. Martino, senior research scientist at the University of Dayton Research Institute, examined space launch costs in a study released by the Los Angeles-based Reason Foundation. Because of high costs, he noted that the United States was now farther away from having people on the moon than when President Kennedy launched the Apollo program. In 1994 it cost $3,500 per pound to put items into orbit. The cost increase started in the 1950s, when high performance of ballistic missiles was needed at any price and has been continued by NASA's policy of developing new technology for each new mission. Launch costs must be lowered and can be by three new approaches: use of commercial practices for vehicle construction, long production runs of single designs, and designing launchers to be reusable like aircraft instead of producing single-use like missiles. (W Times, Jan 25/94)
Western Europe's 70th Ariane rocket sent a U.S. PanAmSat communications satellite worth more than $150 million plunging into the Atlantic Ocean off French Guiana after its third stage malfunctioned. This was the second Ariane rocket failure in 1994 and the seventh since Western Europe began launching the Ariane series in 1979. (Reuters, Dec 1/94)
The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) ordered NASA in 1991 to conduct a sitewide investigation of longstanding environmental problems across its 352-acre complex on the western border of Cleveland Hopkins International Airport. The problems included dumps containing spent rocket fuel and contamination of soil and water by mercury. To date there was little evidence of progress apart from much discussion of how the eventual cleanup would be done. (Plain Dealer, Oct 16/94)
Martin Marietta Corporation announced it would eliminate 1,800 of its 2,100 jobs at its recently acquired space launch business in San Diego. The company planned to move the production of Atlas and Centaur launch systems to its Titan rocket plant in Denver. (LA Times, Jun 17/94)
NASA announced that its Office of Safety and Mission Assurance, Washington, D.C., was to receive valuable data from a flight test in June of a new laser-diode initiated ordnance system on Orbital Science Corporation's Pegasus air-launch space booster. (The intent is that space flight operations be safer and more efficient than with present electrical systems.) (NASA Release 94-36)
U.S. Defense Secretary William Perry arrived in Kazakhstan from Russia. On March 20, he visited the formerly super-secret Baikonur space center. He saw a Soyuz space rocket being readied for an unmanned mission to Russia's Mir Space Station and the former Soviet Union's grounded Space Shuttle rockets. Baikonur had launched more than twice the 453 space launches of Canaveral since 1957. Bob Clarke, a NASA administrator who accompanied Perry, noted that ground crews for Soyuz-manned flights could prepare the pad for a new launch only six hours after one capsule took off whereas the Cape Canaveral turn-around time was one month. Admiral William Owens, vice chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, marveled at the workmanship of the welds on the Soyuz rocket being readied. (Reuters, Mar 19/94; AP, Mar 20/94; Reuters, Mar 20/94; W Post, Mar 21/94; NY Times, Mar 21/94; Moscow Times, Mar 22/94)
NASA announced the appointment of Earle K. Huckins III as Cassini Program Director in the Office of Space Science. An international program, Cassini was designed to explore the planet Saturn, its rings and moons, and the surrounding environment. Scheduled for launch on a Titan IV Centaur in October 1997, the Cassini spacecraft was to swing by Venus, the Earth, and Jupiter before being inserted into orbit around Saturn in June 2004. Cassini was projected to orbit Saturn for four years. (NASA Media Advisory Aug 11/94)
NASA was pressuring the European Space Agency (ESA) to allow U.S. personnel greater access to European industry, laboratories, and reviews in order to provide additional assurance that the U.S./European Cassini mission to Saturn would succeed. The mission was of great importance to NASA and it felt that ESA's contribution to Cassini was not being coordinated fully with NASA. The pressure was creating sharp controversy among Europeans who did not want such extensive U.S. access although NASA proposals included greater European access to U.S. facilities. NASA managers raised the issue with their European counterparts behind the scenes at the International Astronautical Federation conference taking place in Jerusalem. NASA pressure resulted from NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin's instruction to NASA Cassini managers that they must assume responsibility for quality control not just for the orbiter but the whole mission, including the Martin Marietta Titan-4 booster and the ESA probe. (AvWk, Oct 24/94)
The fact that each year a Space Shuttle liftoff was seen as more unremarkable than the preceding year testified to the small and particular miracles of engineering, mechanics, and electronics that made each mission fly. The process of mating the orbiter to an enormous external fuel tank and two solid rocket boosters, constituting the Shuttle, was described in some detail as well as the fueling of the Shuttle. (Destination Discovery, Nov 94)
An Air Force Titan 4 rocket was launched successfully from Cape Canaveral Air Station and deployed "in the desired orbit." The classified satellite was thought to have an electronic eavesdropping platform capable of tapping into military and civilian communications. (Reuters, Aug 27/94; W Post, Aug 28/94)
Interfax news agency reported that following unsuccessful talks with Kazakhstan about extending the use of its traditional base at Baikonur, Russia planned to launch a post-Soviet space ship in 1996 from its own territory, using the rocket complex at the city Svobodny-18 in the northeastern Amur region. (Reuters, May 5/94)
NASA's Office of Space Science was scheduled to use the Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Island Flight Facility to manage a Sounding Rocket Program of almost 50 missions worldwide in 1994. One study over Fairbanks, Alaska, was to examine auroras by using eight unguided suborbital sounding rockets at altitudes of 55 to 287 miles. One rocket was to carry a 21-foot-long payload called the Auroral Turbulence Rocket, with 28 instruments on a main payload and two subpayloads. The latter two would be deployed from the main payload in space, and simultaneous measurements from the three spacecraft would permit a study during 9 of the 12 minutes of flight. They were to measure the acceleration process that energizes particles and causes the emission of light called auroras. (NASA Release 94-12)
Norman Augustine, chairman of Martin Marietta Corporation, said the company would not buy General Dynamics Corporation's space-launch business for $208.5 million as planned unless the government agreed to pay more for those services. Martin Marietta wanted a part of the more than $400 million in savings it anticipated that the government could realize over 10 years as a result of Martin Marietta merging its Titan IV heavy-launch rocket business with General Dynamics' medium-lift Atlas-Centaur system. (WSJ, Feb 22/94)
Lockheed Corporation in Calabasas, California, and Rocketdyne, the Canoga Park division of Rockwell International, teamed up to compete with other aerospace companies for $167 million in grants from NASA over the next five years to explore the feasibility of a "single-stage-to-orbit" (SSTO) rocket. It was uncertain whether the White House and the Pentagon favored such a plan, which NASA considered a cost-saving alternative to updating current rockets. (LA Times, Apr 12/94)
Reporting on Spacecraft Clementine, an $80 million joint military-civilian venture, which sent the first close-up pictures of the moon in more than 20 years, the mission was considered a possible model for NASA. On May 3, Clementine's rocket was to be fired to leave lunar orbit and head for a rendezvous at the end of August with a small asteroid, 1620 Geographos. Soon thereafter Clementine might disappear from view; hence the name. Meanwhile Eugene M. Shoemaker, Clementine's chief scientist and a planetary geologist assigned by NASA, was studying pictures sent by the spacecraft, including the possible existence of ice at the lunar poles. The mission was considered an example of a "cheaper, faster, better" approach that could pay off. (NY Times, Apr 26/94)
Richard DalBello, assistant director for space programs in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, said that NASA's competion for a reusable rocket to replace the Space Shuttle was on hold while White House budget officials mulled over the technical, financial, and political prospects for the program. The White House Office of Management and Budget must sign off on the NASA plan before NASA officials invited the U.S. aerospace industry to submit competing designs for the rocket. Most U.S. aerospace firms already had competing blueprints for a reusable rocket. (SP News, Nov 21-Dec 4/94)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced agency plans to proceed with the use of the nearly completed facilities at Yellow Creek in Iuka, Mississippi, originally designed for use with the proposed Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM), for use with the manufacture of nozzles for the current Space Shuttle Redesigned Solid Rocket Motor (RSRM) program. NASA and the Thiokol Corporation worked out plan implementation, which was scheduled to take approximately two and a half years. Thiokol plans to move all of its nozzle operations to the Yellow Creek facility. In view of the federal government's investment of taxpayer money in the construction of the Yellow Creek facility, NASA was committed to obtaining maximum return while seeking to mitigate the economic impact on the region resulting from the ASRM termination. (NASA Release 94-68)
Dale Hemke, a spokesman for the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, said that not only does NASA want the public to know about some of the important work being done at the Center but also it wants children to participate in the technology so that their interest in mathematics will continue. Children can spin in the gyro chair, command a mock Gemini spacecraft, and retrieve a satellite. But the most popular event occurs on the first and third Sundays of the month when a launch pad is set up and enthusiasts may watch or participate in safe model rocket launches. (B Sun, May 8/94)
After 12 years of work, Orion Network Systems, a Rockville, Maryland, firm, launched its first satellite. Orion was the first company to apply in 1982 to the Federal Communications Commission to provide international satellite communications. Orion won FCC approval in 1987 and Intelsat approval in 1989 on condition that it not harm any existing Intelsat business. Orion formed a consortium, Orion Atlantic, which included British Aerospace, which built the satellite, and Martin Marietta Corporation of Bethesda, Maryland, which provided the Atlas rocket. (W Post, Nov 30/94)
The previous week NASA had released documents laying the ground rules for what was certain to be a heated competition among U.S. aerospace contractors. Final documents were scheduled to be released in mid-November. NASA's need was for a revolutionary rocket to replace the Space Shuttle, a Reusable Launch Vehicle (RLV). It was to be a cooperative project between NASA and industry, with industry participating in the funding of the RLV. The goal was an operational single-stage-to-orbit rocket that would replace the Space Shuttle in 2010 or 2012. (SP News, Oct 24-30/94)
NASA announced the signing on April 7 of a technology reinvestment program agreement to develop hybrid rocket motor technology between NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, and a consortium of three U.S. aerospace companies. The firms consisted of Martin Marietta Manned Space Systems, New Orleans; United Technologies Corporation's Chemical Systems Division, San Jose, California; and the American Rocket Company, Ventura, California. (NASA Release 94-59)
NASA announced that the second mission of its Small Expendable-tether Deployer System (SEDS-2) was scheduled for launching from a U.S. Air Force Delta II rocket no sooner than March 9 from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. The project was designed to demonstrate an economical way of delivering smaller payloads, such as micro-satellites, to higher orbits. (NASA Release 94-35)
Donna Shirley, director of NASA's newly formed Office of Mars Exploration at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasenda, California, discussed NASA's plans to send up to 28 orbiters, landers, and rovers to Mars within the next decade. Glenn Cunningham, program manager for NASA's Mars Global Surveyer, was quoted in connection with keeping the program within cost limits and the November 1996 scheduled launched of the Mars Global Surveyor aboard a Delta 2 rocket. (Fla Today, Aug 27/94)
NASA's last SCOUT (Solid Controlled Orbital Utility Test) launch vehicle was scheduled to blast off May 6 from Vandenberg Air Force Base, Lompoc, California, the final of 118 space missions that began July 1, 1960. Called the Miniature Seeker Technology Integration spacecraft, the satellite is one in a series of military spacecraft being launched to develop sensors for ballistic missile devices. Since the mid-1960s, NASA gradually has gotten out of the unmanned rocket business, which was transferred to commercial manufacturers. (Fla Today, May 2/94; NASA Release 94-72; Fla Today, May 9/94; Reuters, May 9/94)
NASA announced that November 3 was the launch date for Space Shuttle Atlantis and its six-person crew on an 11-day mission. The launch date was predicated on successful launch of the Wind spacecraft on November 1 aboard a Delta rocket. (NASA Release 94-173; H Chron, Oct 20/94; USA Today, Oct 28/94)
A solid-fuel booster for Ariane-5, the new rocket designed to keep Western Europe in the lead in launching heavy satellites into the 21st century, was tested successfully in the jungles of French Guiana, according to Jean-March Artaud, Ariane-5 program director for the CNES French national space agency in Guiana. (Reuters, Dec 16/94)
An Air Force Delta 2 rocket blasted into orbit carrying the final advanced satellite in the U.S. military's Global Positioning System, Navstar. Delta 2 also carried NASA's experiment to test a space tether 12.5 miles long to determine how long it survived in orbit among space junk. The tether could ultimately be used for various purposes such as generating electricity or changing spacecraft altitudes. (Reuters, Mar 9/94; UP, Mar 9/94; AP, Mar 10/94; NY Times, Mar 11/94; NY Times, Mar 15/94)
China successfully launched a new telecommunications satellite, the Dongfanghong III, using a Long March 3A rocket from the Xichang base in Sichuan province, southwestern China. (AFP, Nov 30/94; Xinhua news agency, Nov 30/94)
A NASA B-52 successfully launched a standard Pegasus booster carrying an Advanced Photovoltaic and Electronic Experiments (APEX) spacecraft, which Orbital Sciences Corporation had developed for the U.S. Air Force. APEX was the first satellite developed using Orbital's standard satellite platform and represented the first Pegasus mission that maximized the payload and weight capability of the standard booster. (AvWk, Aug 8/94)
Japan scheduled the launch of the H-2, its first rocket built without U.S. technology, whose development has taken ten years and $2.4 billion. A consortium of 74 Japanese companies built it and formed the Rocket Systems Corporation to market it. (C Trib, Jan 23/94, NY Times, Jan 26/94, WSJ, Jan 31/94, Reuters, Jan 30/94, Reuters, Jan 31/94, Reuters, Jan 30/94; CSM, Feb 3/94)
India signed a new agreement to buy seven rocket engines from Russia's commercial space organization, according to U.R. Rao, outgoing head of the Indian Space Research Organisation. The first engine was to be delivered in 1996 and the remainder over a three-year period. (Reuters, Mar 30/94)
A leak of toxic rocket propellant on an Air Force Titan 4 rocket forced the postponement of the rocket's launch to December 20. (Fla Today, Dec 17/94; Fla Today, Dec 18/94; O Sen Star, Dec 20/94; Fla Today, Dec 20/94)
In a press release, Jim Waterman, Boeing Space Station manufacturing manager, said that Boeing had built 18,700 pounds of hardware to date for the International Space Station and was on schedule to complete almost 50,000 pounds of hardware within the next year. Using the manufacturing facility at Marshall Space Flight Center originally built for fabricating Saturn rocket stages, it had made a good start on three pressurized modules for the Station as well as hatches and experiment racks. (Aerospace Daily, Oct 26/94)
Intelsat, the US satellite operator, signed a record $2 billion insurance contract for 10 satellite launches with the insurance firm International Space Brokers, Inc. The contract covered launches on the Ariane 4 rocket of the European Arianespace Consortium and on China's Long March rocket. (Reuters, Jan 11/95)
Russian rocket engines will be offered by United Technologies for sale in the United States. United Technologies Corp.s Pratt & Whitney unit agreed to market two of Energomashs rocket engines. The hope is that the engine will power the X-34 reusable rocket. (Space News, Jun 26/95; WSJ, Jul 19/95)
A Conestoga rocket exploded 45 seconds after liftoff from NASAs Wallops Island, Virginia. Built by EER Systems Corp., the rocket was ending its first stage when it blew up. (NY Times, Oct 24/95; W Post, Oct 25/95; W Times, Oct 25/95; USA Today, Oct 24/95; Space News, Oct 9/95, Oct 30/95 & Dec 11/95; AvWk, Oct 30/95)
The Delta 3 launch vehicle has a new second stage rocket engine planned for use in 1998. The new engine will be capable of generating 24,000 pounds of thrust. In combination with the larger solid-fueled boosters, the McDonnell Douglas Delta 3 will be able to carry twice the weight of the Delta into an orbit 22,300 miles above the surface of the Earths equator. (Fla Today, Jul 7/95; AvWk, Sep 25/95)
NASA is working with industry to develop an air-launched, fly-back booster called the X-34. The U.S. hopes that a financially viable X-34 will return it to leadership in commercial space transportation. (Fla Today, Mar 31/95; AvWk, Apr 3/95)
NASAs Galileo spacecraft has confirmed it has reached the inside of Jupiters magnetosphere. Direct measurements of the Jupiter system may now begin. Final tuning of the flight path is scheduled for December 2. On December 7, Galileos previously deployed atmospheric probe will plunge into Jupiters cloud tops and descend into the giant planet on a parachute. An hour after the probe mission is completed, Galileo will begin to fire its onboard rocket beginning a two year mission of close-up studies of the planets large moons, Jupiter itself, and the magnetosphere. The spacecraft was launched aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis and an Interim Upper Stage (IUS) on October 18, 1989. (NASA Releases 95-207 & 215; NY Times, Dec 3/95, Dec 7/95, Dec 8/95 & Dec 11/95; W Post, Dec 4/95, Dec 8/95 & Dec 11/95; USA Today, Dec 1/95, Dec 7/95 & Dec 8/95; Fla Today, Dec 7/95; WSJ, Dec 7/95; Time, Dec 11/95; Newsweek, Dec 18/95; AvWk, Nov 27/95, Dec 4/95 & Dec 11/95; Science, Dec 15/95)
A Russian booster rocket placed a US commercial communications satellite into orbit for the first time. The FAISAT satellite was owned by Final Analysis, Inc., of Greenbelt, Maryland. (H Chron, Jan 25/95; ITAR-TASS, Jan 24/95)
Lockheed Martins new rocket malfunctioned as it was launched from Vandenburg AFB, California. The Lockheed Launch Vehicle (LLV-1) was designed to place payloads weighing up to one ton into low Earth orbit. (USA Today, Aug 16/95; Fla Today, Sep 3/95; Space News, Oct 2/95; AP, Aug 16/95; AvWk, Aug 14/95, Aug 21/95; Aug 28/95, Sep 4/95 & Dec 18/95)
NASA requested proposals for two vehicles, X-33 and X-34, to prove the concept of single-stage to orbit. The X-33 would be a technology demonstrator vehicle and the X-34 would be a reusable, or partially-reusable, booster for placing small payloads into a low Earth orbit. Significant cost-sharing by industry was anticipated. (NASA Releases 95-1, 23, 38 & 40)
A Russian booster rocket placed a US commercial communications satellite into orbit for the first time. The FAISAT satellite was owned by Final Analysis, Inc., of Greenbelt, Maryland. (H Chron, Jan 25/95; ITAR-TASS, Jan 24/95)
NASA scientists expressed concern about space trash from spent satellites and burned out rocket boosters that pose a hazard to functioning satellites and space shuttles. Instead of attempting to collect such debris, NASA has been concentrating on preventing its further buildup by programming satellites and boosters to spiral into the atmosphere and burn up harmlessly. In the future, however, NASA may take a closer look at the possibility of retrieving space debris. At that point, the research of Kumar Ramohalli, formerly of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, who was attempting to develop a debris retrieving satellite, should be useful. (CSM, Jan 9/95)
A Chinese Long March 2E rocket carrying a telecommunications satellite exploded and crashed to earth moments after launch, a setback to space ambitions of China and major global broadcasters. The Apstar 2 satellite, built by Hughes Aircraft, would have provided television, telephone, and digital communications to a vast swath of Asia, Eastern Europe, North Africa, and Australia. (W Post, Jan 26/95; USA Today, Jan 26/95; Xinhua News Agency, Jan 26/95; Reuters, Jan 26/95; AP, Jan 25/95; UPI, Jan 25/95; WSJ, Jan 27/95; LA Times, Jan 27/95; CSM, Jan 27/95)
NASA invited bids from the nation's aerospace companies to develop two reusable rocket designs under a novel strategy that called for the industry to pay much of the cost. The goal was to enhance the competitive footing of U. S. companies in the lucrative global commercial launch market while lowering the amount spent annually by the federal government on space transportation.
NASA has selected four companies to enter into negotiations for the X-33 and X-34 reusable launch systems. Around the end of the decade, the results of the X-33 competition and subsequent flight demonstration could lead to a decision to develop an operational next-generation reusable launch system. The X-34 booster will demonstrate advanced technologies that may apply to reusable launch systems and provide significantly reduced mission costs for placing small payloads into low Earth orbit. The three X-33 selectees are: Lockheed Advanced Development Co.; McDonnell Douglas Aerospace; and Rockwell International Corp., Space Systems Division. The X-34 selectee is Orbital Sciences Corp., Dulles, Virginia. After tests are completed in 1999, it would be up to the aerospace industry to build and operate any new rockets. (NASA Release 95-23; NY Times, Mar 12/95 & Jun 19/95; Fla Today, Jul 2/95; AvWk, Mar 13/95, Mar 27/95 & Jun 19/95)
Japans National Space Development Agency (NASDA) experienced a setback when one of its prototypes for a small, robotic spacecraft landed in the ocean and sank. The Japanese officials had anticipated the ocean landing immediately after the launch of the Hyflex shuttle, the Hope-X, from an island in southern Japan. In spite of the loss of its shuttle, NASDA did not consider the exercise an entire failure. The Hope-X had launched successfully, separated from its rocket at a height of 70 miles (113 kilometers), and then returned to Earth 19 minutes later, as planned. The problem occurred when the craft splashed into the ocean, and a rope connecting the 1-ton (900- kilogram or 0.9-tonne) shuttle to its flotation device broke, causing it to sink. NASDA reported that it had intended to collect data during the flight to test the shuttles fitness for reentry, but had been unable to procure much of the information needed. Japan had manufactured the US$37 million shuttle domestically, planning the exercise as a part of its effort to bolster its fledgling space program.(Associated Press, Japanese Shuttle Sinks, 12 February 1996.)
NASA spacecraft managers reported the failure of two scientific satellites. NASA had designed the Scientific Applications Satellite-B (SAC-B), launched three days earlier from NASAs Wallops Flight Facility, to survey solar flares and gamma-ray bursts. The project was a cooperative effort between NASA and Argentina. NASA scientists had intended the second satellite, HETE (High Energy Transient Experiment), to remain dormant until it detected sunlight, at which time it would deploy, transmitting signals. Scientists doubted this would ever occur, because the satellite had fallen into a tumbling pattern. Officials hypothesized that the satellites had not deployed properly and, therefore, had orbited uselessly, lacking electrical power. NASA valued both satellites at more than US$20 million. The launch failure was the third miscue in two years for the Pegasus rocket program. The Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Virginia, developed and ran the program.(John Mintz, Orbital Sciences Fails in Another Launch, Washington Post, 5 November 1996; Associated Press, NASA Reports Failure of Scientific Satellites, 7 November 1996; NASA, SAC-B/HETE Spacecraft No Longer Operational, news release 96-231, 7 November 1996.)
Russia postponed the scheduled launch of Progress M-33, a cargo vehicle loaded with supplies for the two Russian cosmonauts and the one American astronaut aboard the Mir space station. The delay highlighted once again the severe budget crisis of the Russian Space Agency. A lack of funding held up the production of the rocket booster needed to send the craft into space. The crew on Mir had sufficient supplies aboard the space station, but missed the visit from Earth. Besides supplying food, regular planned visits provided needed contact for the space dwellers. The postponement was the fourth time in 1996 that Russia had delayed the scheduled launch to Mir because of problems paying for the production of Soyuz-U boosters. Reuters announced that because of the delay, a group of laboratory monkeys, already wired to monitor the effects of space travel, would die without ever leaving Earth.
The experimental DC-XA flight vehicle completed a successful test flight, flying nearly 2,000 feet (610 meters) above the desert of the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico and landing safely. NASA researchers and administrators hoped that the rocket would one day replace the Space Shuttle as the primary means of space exploration. The reusable, unpiloted rocket, taking off and landing from a vertical position, would cut significantly the costs of delivering payloads into orbit. NASA announced that the vehicle had been renamed Clipper Graham, in honor of Lieutenant General Daniel O. Graham. Graham, who died on 31 December 1995, had served as an advisor to President Ronald Reagan and had been an early proponent for the development of reusable rockets. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin expressed optimism that NASA would be able to replace the Shuttle with the DC-XA flight vehicle: We are going to fly the [S]huttle safely until we can replace it. But, by God, we are going to replace the [S]huttle.(NASA, Revolutionary New Launch Vehicle Renamed for Space Pioneer, news release 96-114, 7 June 1996; Associated Press, Reusable Rocket Ends Flight, 7 June 1996.)
NASA convened a five-member investigation board to determine the cause of the postlanding explosion of the Clipper Graham (DC-XA) rocket on 31 July 1996. The Clipper Graham had successfully flown a 2-minute, 20-second flight profile, but had tipped over and caught fire after landing when one of its four landing gears failed to deploy. The DC-XA had tested successfully three times before the explosion destroyed it. Former astronaut Vance Brand chaired the panel, bringing together representatives from NASAs Dryden Flight Research Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, and Kennedy Space Center. Researchers hoped the investigation would illuminate any flaws in the Clipper Grahams design, allowing engineers to make necessary adjustments in future prototypes.(NASA, Clipper Graham Incident Investigation Board Convenes, news release 96-158, 5 August 1996.)
NASA and Orbital Sciences Corporation signed a contract, which was not a cooperative agreement, whereby Orbital Sciences would build a new X-34 reusable launch vehicle, smaller than that originally planned. NASA had first made public the original X-34 program in 1994. NASA had intended the program, also known as the Reusable Small Booster Program, to stimulate the development of a reusable commercial launch vehicle to place smaller payloads in low orbit. In addition, NASA planned for the X-34 program to demonstrate that an industry-led partnership between NASA and the aerospace industry could accomplish this objective within 30 to 36 months and within a fixed government budget. On 12 January 1995, NASA released a final cooperative agreement notice for the X-34 program, and in March 1995, NASA selected Orbital Sciences Corporation as its industry partner. Over the next eight months, as design of the X-34 progressed, problems arose over the selection of an appropriate rocket engine, resulting in NASAs temporarily shutting down the program on 2 November 1995. In January 1996, Orbital Sciences Corporation suggested that NASA explore the potential of a smaller vehicle. Orbital Sciences then issued stop-work orders to all its X-34 subcontractors, effectively ending the program. Because NASA wanted to use remaining federal dollars to develop a smaller vehicle, capable of demonstrating various reusable launch technologies, it rebid the contract in March 1996. On 10 June 1996, NASA selected Orbital Sciences to build the new X-34.(NASA History Division, X-33 History Project, Fact Sheet #7: The Policy Origins of the X-33, Part VII: The X- 34, March 25, 2000, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/pao/History/x-33/facts_7.htm.)
Arianespace, the commercial arm of the European Space Agency, suffered a major setback in its bid to maintain control of the satellite-launching market in the face of competition from U.S. companies. Only seconds after the launch of Ariane 5, a huge rocket intended to launch satellites, Arianespace had to blow up the rocket when it veered severely off course. Arianespace had spent 10 years and more than US$7 billion to develop the 674-foot (205-meter), 821-ton (750,000- kilogram or 750-tonne) vehicle. Also lost in the explosion were satellites valued at more than US$500 million. Arianespace had projected a launch reliability of 98.5 percent for the rocket, considering failure so unlikely that the company had guaranteed a free launch to customers if the launch failed. A spokesperson for Arianespace acknowledged the disappointment of the failed test, but promised that the company would continue as the worlds leader in launching satellites. Aerospace industry analysts predicted that U.S. companies such as Lockheed Martin would likely gain an increased foothold in the market because of the European companys misfortune.(Kathleen Day, Losing a Rocket and a Satellite Edge? Washington Post, 5 June 1996; Craig Whitney, Costly Failure: Space Launch Is Aborted, New York Times, 5 June 1996.)
The Communist Party of China acknowledged for the first time that a failed satellite launch occurring on 15 February 1996 had killed six people and injured 57 others. The Long March 3B rocket had exploded, destroying the 15 Intelsat satellite and damaging 80 homes. The secretive government of the Peoples Republic of China had denied the major accident, announcing simply that a setback had occurred. However, foreign news sources had captured video footage of the launch rocket as it careened out of control and exploded in a highly populated area. The Chinese government ended the news blackout, which had prevented its own citizens from learning of the disaster, stating Chinas intention to delay future launch plans.(Reuters, China: Fiery Launch Killed 6, Injured 57, 4 March 1996.)
Russia successfully launched the 21-ton (19,000-kilogram or 19-tonne) Priroda module, the last major component of the aging Mir space station, aboard a robotic rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Russian scientists designed the Priroda module primarily as a laboratory for observing Earth. The module also contained equipment for NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucids stay aboard the station. NASA officials at JSC monitored the launch. Priroda carried a magnetically levitated experiment platform, a spectrometer, and a glove box, allowing astronauts to handle potentially hazardous material. The module was the sixth major portion of the Mir complex launched by Russia since the Soviet Union began the project in 1986. Budget shortfalls in the Russian space program had caused some concern that the final module might not reach Mir as planned.(Mark Carreau, Russia Launches Final, Major Mir Component, Houston Chronicle, 24 April 1996.)
Shuttle Columbia landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, ending the longest Space Shuttle mission ever. The mission, lasting nearly 17 days, set a new space endurance record for the crew. The astronauts had bested their previous record by nearly 7 hours. Columbia had carried into space a torch for the 1996 Olympic relay, and upon landing, two members of the crew joined the Olympic torch relay team in a special ceremony. The astronauts had overcome several small malfunctions to conduct the successful mission and land the Shuttle on time. Less than 2 hours before the Shuttles scheduled arrival, the crew had discovered a clogged cooling line, but the astronauts were able to flush ice from the system to clear the line. In addition, the mission brought to light a potential ongoing problem for Columbia. In studying the launch, NASA officials had observed gas and flames issuing from the rocket boosters, probably through the O- ring joints used to connect the boosters fuel segments. Although Columbias crew was not in danger, NASA officials decided that the Shuttle would not launch again until scientists had determined how well the new water-based adhesive would function under extreme heat. NASA had discontinued the adhesive used previously on the rocket boosters, because the adhesive was an ozone-depleting agent.(William Harwood, Record Shuttle Flight Ends; Problem May Delay Next Launch, Washington Post, 8 July 1996; Associated Press, Columbia Ends 17-Day Mission, 8 July 1996.)
The U.S. Space Foundation inducted into its Space Technology Hall of Fame three technologies that NASA had originally developed for its astronauts: antishock trousers, flame-retardant seat materials, and the radiation barrier. The Space Foundation recognized the technologies as pathbreaking discoveries that had enhanced the quality of life on Earth. Scientists and engineers at Ames Research Center had developed the first two technologies, and members of the Apollo program at Johnson Space Center (JSC) had discovered the radiation barrier. NASA employees had often referred to the dual use of its technologies as spin-offs, recognizing that such inventions served to validate the expenditure of taxpayers funds on NASAs research projects. According to a NASA spokesperson, the technologies are not merely secondary applications. They provide direct, quantifiable, and invaluable benefits to the American taxpayer and the domestic economy. The U.S. Space Foundation made the inductions at the National Space Symposium, in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The Foundation had inducted 25 technologies into the Hall of Fame since the establishment of the awards in 1988.(NASA, NASA Life-Saving Technologies Enter Space Hall of Fame, news release 96-69, 10 April 1996.)
NASA discovered the second of two misplaced hand tools left inside the propulsion system of the recently landed Shuttle Atlantis. Although the Shuttle had experienced no problems during its 10-day flight, NASA formed an investigative panel to determine who had left the tools inside the Shuttles engine compartment after completing work. Inspectors had discovered the first missing tool inside the electronic control compartment of the Shuttles reusable rocket booster when they retrieved the booster from the Atlantic Ocean shortly after the launch. Workers discovered the second tool during a routine postflight inspection of Atlantiss rocket engine compartment. Although the tools likely posed no threat to the safety of the Shuttle crew, a NASA representative said that, for safety reasons, NASA intended to find out how workers had made the error and, if possible, to identify the Shuttle contractor responsible.(Mark Carreau, Another Wrenching Experience for Shuttle, Houston Chronicle, 3 October 1996.)
NASA successfully launched its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer Earth Probe (TOMS-EP) aboard the Japanese Advanced Earth Observing Satellite, via an Orbital Sciences Pegasus XL launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base. A jet flying roughly 7 miles above the California coast released the rocket that was carrying the satellite, placing the TOMS-EP in a successful orbit. The McMurdo Sound Tracking Station in Antarctica acquired the satellite almost immediately and determined that the spacecraft was functioning properly. After it reached a circular orbit, the TOMS-EP was ready to conduct its scientific mission.(NASA, Pegasus/TOMS Launch Successful from Vandenberg AFB, news release, 2 July 1996; Associated Press, BRFSatellite Launch, 2 July 1996.)
The European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Eutelsat) launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas 2A rocket, a satellite aimed at serving the burgeoning European television market. The satellite Hot Bird 2 cost US$100 million to develop and was powerful enough to beam television images throughout Europe and the Middle East. Eutelsat led a consortium of co-owner companies from the 45 different countries that co-own the satellite. Eutelsat assumed responsibility for operating Hot Bird 2, calling it the most powerful commercial satellite launched to date.(Todd Halverson, Atlas Sends $100 Million Satellite into Orbit, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 November 1996.)
NASA launched its second unpiloted craft, Mars Pathfinder, less than a month after the first, continuing its concentrated program of Mars exploration. The US$196 million Pathfinder lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta II rocket, on a mission planned to cover more than 300 million miles (480 million kilometers). NASA researchers expected the six-wheeled craft to land on Mars, on 4 July 1997, and to journey across the planets surface, gathering images of rocks and soil. Depending on how useful the images were, scientists planned for Pathfinder to roam Mars for at least one week and perhaps for months, straying no farther than approximately 60 feet (18 meters) away from its landing site.(John Noble Wilford, U.S. Launches Second Craft on a Mission To Study Mars, New York Times, 5 December 1996.)
Russian officials announced that the necessity of cutting costs at the Russian Space Agency had caused a 40-day delay in returning cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev from the Mir space station to Earth. Russian budget cuts had slowed the production of the Soyuz booster rockets needed to fuel a return trip for the cosmonauts. Because Mir was deteriorating, Russia could not leave it without a crew. This was the second time that financial and technical difficulties had led Russia to delay the return of the two men. The episode signaled a deepening crisis for the Russian space program, the United States key partner in building the International Space Station (ISS).(USA Today, Russian Cosmonauts, 24 June 1996; Associated Press, Moscow, 21 June 1996.)
NASA agreed to restructure and extend its contract with USBI Company, which had previously assembled and refurbished the Shuttles solid rocket boosters. The new contract extended the partnership for 45 months, paying US$500 million to USBI to support the Shuttle program. Based on the terms of the agreement and on USBIs production schedule, NASA estimated that the partnership would cover approximately seven Shuttle missions annually for the duration of the contract.(NASA, NASA Restructures/Extends USBI Contract for Solid Rocket Booster Elements, news release C96-c, 8 March 1996.)
The Boeing Company, Honeywell Space Systems, and the S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), based in Kaliningrad, Russia, announced a new venture to reduce significantly the cost and time involved in transporting payloads to the Mir space station. Boeing estimated that the service would save one year and would cut the cost of transporting a standard payload to space by at least US$7 million. The three companies split duties to maximize efficiency. Boeing assumed control of the overall management and payload-system integration; Honeywell accepted responsibility for providing payload-interface units and payload-integration support; and RSC Energia signed on to provide launch services and to oversee installation on Mir. Decreasing the expenses involved in sustaining Mir had become urgent in the 1990s, when both Russian and American space agencies had to respond to their governments respective budget cuts.(The Boeing Company, Boeing, Honeywell, and Energia Join in Offering New Commercial Payload Service to Russian Space Station, news release, 21 May 1996.)
NASA announced the six-week delay of astronaut Shannon W. Lucids return from her outpost aboard the Mir space station. NASA made the schedule change because of concerns about the reliability of the joint sealant used on the Shuttles reusable rocket boosters during the June launch of Columbia. NASA planned to replace the booster before launching Atlantis, scheduled to retrieve Lucid. The reusable rocket boosters, packed with fuel, launch the Shuttle. After pushing the Shuttle into space, the boosters fall off and descend, attached to parachutes, into the ocean. Upon retrieving the rocket boosters, engineers disassemble them into smaller pieces, repack them with fuel, and rebuild them for a new Shuttle launch, sealing each of the rockets three field joints with an O-ring. NASA sought to fortify these joints further, and the adhesive used to secure them, before launching another Shuttle mission. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway stated that NASA remained confident in the overall design of the rocket booster and in the joint, but wanted to take no avoidable risks.(William J. Broad, Astronauts Ride Home Is Delayed for 6 Weeks, New York Times, 13 July 1996.)
Space Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2:55 p.m. (EST). In addition to a five-day delay because of the weather, NASA had delayed the mission for a week so that its engineers could conduct a careful check of possible problems with the rocket nozzles. News agencies reported that the fifteen-year-old Columbia, the nations oldest Space Shuttle, was carrying into space sixty-one-year-old F. Story Musgrave, the oldest astronaut. With his sixth spaceflight, Musgrave became the first astronaut to fly on all five of NASAs Shuttles. In Mission STS-80, NASAs final Shuttle flight of 1996, the crew planned to deploy and retrieve two free-flying spacecraft, conduct spacewalks, and carry out a number of microgravity research experiments. Additionally, NASA and the National Institutes of Health planned to collaborate on tests further exploring how the human body reacts to the space environment. Only hours after Columbias launch, Shuttle crew released the U.S.-German Orbiting Retrievable Far and Extreme Ultraviolet Spectrometer, designed to make as many as 300 observations of stars and interstellar gas during the Shuttles mission.(Reuters, Shuttle Crew with Oldest Astronaut Is Set To Fly, 19 November 1996; John Noble Wilford, Shuttle Blasts Off on Mission with 2 Scientific Satellites, New York Times, 20 November 1996; NASA, Space Shuttle Mission STS-80Press Kit, news release 96-206, November 1996; Associated Press, Astronauts Release Ultraviolet Telescope, 20 November 1996.)
Because of delays in launching Shuttle Atlantis, astronaut Shannon W. Lucid broke Elena V. Kondakovas record for longest single flight in space by a woman. NASA engineers had delayed the launch because they suspected that the O-rings on the solid rocket boosters were faulty and wanted to replace them. During Lucids stay in space aboard Mir, she and the two Russian cosmonauts had conducted a variety of scientific experiments.(NASA, Lucid To Break Record; Latest Images of Hurricane Fran, video advisory V96-111, 6 September 1996.)
Mars Global Surveyor passed a critical test on its journey toward the Red Planet, when it successfully opened valves allowing high-pressure rocket propellant to enter its fuel lines. The same task had thwarted the 1993 Mars Observer at a similar juncture during its trip to Mars. Mars Global Surveyor had traveled for 10 months and for more than 435 million miles (700 million kilometers) to reach Mars. According to Glenn E. Cunningham of NASAs JPL, the process of transforming Global Surveyor from a high-speed-travel spacecraft into a slow-moving craft subject to Marss gravitational pull was a nail-biter. Without the powerful propellant, the transition could not occur, which would have ended any hope of the missions gathering data. With the opening of the valves complete, NASA scientists were optimistic that the US$250 million probe would descend slowly into a tight orbit of Mars, yielding new information about the planet.
During the terminal countdown of a demonstration test of the Titan IV-B rocket designed for the Cassini mission to Saturn, engineers noticed liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen leaking from the Centaur stage of the rocket. NASA had scheduled Cassinis launch for early October 1997. NASA officials delayed the launch until they could complete further tests, offering no immediate estimate of how long that might take. Interested scientists and engineers, however, predicted that the problem could postpone the mission by months or even years. Under the missions original timetable, NASA had expected Cassini to launch in October 1997, reaching Saturn in July 2004. Because of the length of the journey from Earth to Saturn, the scientific community expected that NASA would find it difficult to reschedule the flight. Moreover, experts warned that the alignment of planets providing an ideal launch date, such as that in October 1997, would not occur again for 12 to 14 years. At US$3.2 billion, Cassini was one of the last of NASAs high- stake, multibillion-dollar missions, drawing considerable attention during the climate of steady cost reductions that characterized the 1990s.(NASA, Countdown Test Reveals Fuel Leaks on Cassini Mission Centaur Upper Stage, 7 August 1997; Associated Press, Rocket Leak Could Postpone Landing on Saturn by Years, 8 August 1997.)
Japans National Space Development Agency (NASDA) unveiled its key contribution to the ISS, two satellites named after starsOrihime and Hikoboshi, which Japan planned to launch aboard an H-2 rocket. The satellites would make it easier to perform unpiloted docking experiments on the ISS. Japans interest in robotic space research fueled the proposal, which complemented NASDAs plan to build an unpiloted space shuttle to ferry Japans experiments to the ISS.
A Russian Zenit-2 rocket carrying a military satellite exploded moments after taking off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. According to Russian space officials, the failure occurred 38 seconds after liftoff, when an engine inexplicably shut off. The Russian Space Agency suspended all further launches until an investigation could determine what had caused the explosion. NASA believed that the destroyed satellite was a spy satellite intended to replace in orbit one of Russias many outdated satellites. Russia had not insured the satellite, valued at US$17 million.(Richard C. Paddock, Russian Rocket Bearing Military Satellite Fails, Los Angeles Times, 21 May; Associated Press, Russian Booster Fails, Explodes During Satellite Launch, 20 May 1997.)
The White House Office of Science and Technology Policy formally approved the mid-October launch plan of the controversial plutonium-powered Cassini Mission. Critics had subjected to intense scrutiny the exploratory mission to Saturn and its moon Titan, because it used nuclear power. The Florida Coalition for Peace and Justice, among other organizations, had protested the mission and attempted to derail it, but had failed to spark widespread public outrage. Activists worried that the rocket might release plutonium if the launch failed, despite NASAs more than a dozen safe launches using the hazardous fuel. The mission required nuclear power because Saturn has extremely dim sunlightnot enough to provide adequate solar power to prevent the Cassini spacecrafts instruments from freezing. NASAs policy required that the White House give final approval of the launch, because the mission used nuclear fuel. NASA had begun work on the Cassini Mission in 1989, with cooperation from the European Space Agency and the Italian Space Agency. Many regarded the missionthe first time a space probe had attempted to land on the moon of another planetas NASAs boldest and most ambitious endeavor. This aspect of the mission especially interested scientists, who theorized that Titan has an Earth-like atmosphere. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said of the mission: I fully expect that it will return spectacular images and scientific data about Saturn.(NASA, Cassini To Survey Worlds of Saturn and Titan; Sends First Probe to Moon of Another Planet, news release 97-190, 3 September 1997; NASA, NASA Receives Approval To Launch Cassini Mission, news release 97-225, 3 October 1997; Maurice Tamman, Protestors Set Stage, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 September 1997.)
The Cassini spacecraft lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, beginning a seven-year, 2.2 billion-mile (3.5 billion-kilometer) journey to and around Saturn. After several delays, including a two-day delay immediately before the launch because of high winds, the takeoff was flawless. Before the launch, activists had protested Cassinis fuel source, 72 pounds (33 kilograms) of radioactive plutonium; to calm public anxiety, NASA planned to sample air quality at 25 stations surrounding the launchpad, including several samples taken as far as 10 miles (16 kilometers) away. Additionally, a U.S. Department of Energy aircraft flew through the trailing gases of the rocket booster to make sure that no radioactive material had leaked. The US$3.4 billion mission set out to survey the planet Saturn, its rings, and its moon Titan. Engineers had programmed the Cassini spacecraft to conduct a number of gravity-assist swingbys, flying twice past Venus and once past Earth and Jupiter, to build up the speed necessary to make the long journey to Saturn. About seven years into the mission, NASA planned for Cassini to release a disc-shaped Huygens probe toward Titan. Throughout the mission, Cassini was to make more than 40 close flybys of Titan, gathering far more vivid images of the moon than ever before. NASA intended Cassinis camera to take more than 300,000 colored pictures of Saturn and its moons. Scientists hoped that the mission would expand considerably the knowledge of the planet gained through the earlier Voyager missions.(NASA, Cassini Launch, news release, October 1997; Earl Lane, Plutonium-Bearing Craft Set for Saturn Trip, Birmingham News (AL), 5 October 1997; Paul Hoversten, Nuclear Powered Craft Fuels Fury Before Launch, USA Today, 13 October 1997; Karl Grossman, The Risk of Cassini Probe Plutonium, Christian Science Monitor, 10 October 1997; Associated Press, Cassini Spacecraft Lifts Off for Saturn, 16 October 1997.)
The Russian Space Agency paid cosmonauts Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin belated bonuses for their six-month Mir mission, payments that Russia had withheld until investigators had determined the two mens roles during the troubled mission, which included the crash of a robotic cargo craft into Mir. S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), the company that built Mir, had blamed Tsibliyev and Lazutkin, suggesting that Russia deny the two cosmonauts their salaries. However, once the Russian government had determined that human error had been only one among many causes of the crash, RSC Energias President Yuri P. Semyonov had retracted the companys demand that Russia punish the cosmonauts and had supported their right to receive payment. Tsibliyev received about US$100,000 and Lazutkin about US$80,000. Both men had expressed dismay at the negative reception they had received upon returning to Earth after the difficult mission.(Associated Press, Mirs Pay Day, 25 December 1997.)
NASA launched an unpiloted Delta rocket carrying the Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE), a US$100 million solar-observatory satellite bound on a 1 million-mile (1.6 million-kilometer) journey. The launch took place one day later than expected because, on the original launch date, a commercial fishing boat had come within range of the launch danger zone. Scientists launched ACE toward an imaginary point 1 million miles (1.6 million kilometers) from Earth and 92 million miles (148 million kilometers) from the Sun, a point at which scientists believe that the gravity of the Earth and Sun balance each other. NASA planned for ACE to orbit for as long as five years, analyzing particles streaming from the Sun. In keeping with NASAs focus on improved efficiency, NASA engineers collaborated with the Boeing Company to build ACE and launch the mission, at a cost of US$200 millionmore than US$30 million under budget.(Associated Press, After 1-Day Delay, NASA Launches Bargain-Priced Solar Observatory, 25 August 1997; Associated Press, Launch Delayed by Errant Shrimpers, 25 August 1997.)
Flight International published a story claiming that, more than 10 years after the explosion of Challenger, aerospace engineer Ali Abu Taha had discovered new evidence in Time-Life photographs demonstrating that a breach and a fire in Challengers right solid rocket booster (SRB) had caused the explosion. One photograph, taken about 20 seconds after liftoff, revealed a 3-meter-long (10-foot-long) flame issuing from an SRB joint, and another clearly showed a white object separating from the same SRB seconds later. The discovery seemed to support Tahas controversial theory that the booster had caught fire at liftoff and burned continuously until the explosion occurred. In contrast to Taha's findings, which focused on dynamic liftoff loads, the congressionally mandated Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission) had reported that faulty O-rings caused the tragedy. Automatic cameras set up around the Cape Canaveral, Florida, launch site had taken the photographs that Taha used as evidence for his theory, images never released to the public. Tahas photographic analysis also revealed that the explosion had propelled Challengers crew compartment thousands of meters away from the explosion, partially explaining why investigators had taken 40 days to locate the shell. Taha suggested that a shock wave had killed the crew instantly, although NASA had never found evidence of a shock wave. News of the photographs and of Tahas research kept alive the debate surrounding the decade-old accident.(Tim Furness, New Evidence Reveals Fire on Doomed Challengers Booster, Flight International, 511 February 1997.)
KSC officials broke ground on a complex for testing a NASA experimental rocket, the X-34. Engineers had designed the vehiclea small, winged rocketto launch into orbit from an airplane and to return to Earth, landing like an airplane. Planning flight tests to begin in 2000, KSC hoped the new facility would attract commercial space enterprises, such as Lockheeds VentureStarTM, still under development. Facilities anywhere in the country would be able to launch the VentureStarTM, once completed, because it would not use boosters or fuel tanks and, therefore, would not require a coastal launch site.(Robyn Suriano, NASA Breaks Ground for $8 Million Complex To Serve New Rocket, Attract VentureStar, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 December 1998.)
Russias first privately owned satellite, a Bonum-1 communications satellite, launched successfully from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta rocket. NASA had canceled the first three attempts to launch the satellite because of numerous technical problems. The launch was also the first time a U.S. rocket had placed a Russian commercial satellite in orbit and the first time an American company had built a satellite for a Russian company. Hughes Space and Communications had built the Bonum-1 for Moscow-based Media Most, owner of Russias largest television network. The chairperson of the board of Media Most, Vladimir A. Goussinsky, described the event as a revolution, because the satellite would provide up to 50 television channels for 200 million viewers in Russia, western Siberia, and Eastern Europe.(Robyn Suriano, Delta Lifts Russian Satellite, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 November 1998; Orlando Sentinel (FL), U.S. Broadcast Satellite Was Launched for Russia, 23 November 1998.)
A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a spy satellite. Civilian observers speculated that the spacecraft's name was Orion, and that it would play an important role in listening in on foes of the United States. With a wire mesh antenna the size of a football field, the satellite was so sensitive that it could detect transmissions from a radio the size of a wristwatch or a very small cell phone. The satellite could also monitor electronic transmissions between military bases. At the time of the launch, the Titan was the most powerful American booster in use.(Robyn Suriano, Titan Rocket Sends Spy Satellite into Orbit, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 May 1998. 476 Associated Press, U.S. Satellite Launched from Russian Rocket, 9 May 1998.)
An Orbital Sciences Corporation Pegasus XL rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, carrying a NASA satellite to study solar events that could endanger astronauts and spacecraft. The Small Explorer (SMEX) satellite program, under the management of NASAs Goddard Space Flight Center, had developed the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) satellite.(Associated Press, BRFSatellite Launch, 2 April 1998; PR Newswire, Orbitals Pegasus Rocket Successfully Launches TRACE Spacecraft for NASA; Advanced SMEX Satellite Will Study the Sun; Spacecrafts First Signals Indicate Early Success, 2 April 1998.)
After two delays, one because of mechanical problems, the other because of strong winds, a Japanese H-2 rocket blasted off from Tanegashima Space Center, carrying a US$370 million communications satellite intended to conduct a three-year series of communications and broadcast tests. However, an engine breakdown prevented the satellite from entering a geostationary orbit; instead, the launch left the satellite floating in space, useless for its intended mission. Engineers were looking for ways to rescue the mission.(Mari Yamaguchi for Associated Press, Japan-Satellite, 21 February 1998.)
Aerojet announced it had won a US$485,000 contract to build a rocket injector for NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) that would help JPL scientists develop propulsion technologies for NASAs Mars Sample Return Vehicle.(Sacramento Bee (CA), Aerojet Lands Contract, 11 June 1998.)
A West European Ariane 4LP rocket blasted off from French Guiana, carrying two communications satellites, Brasilsat-3 and Inmarsat-3. Twenty-one minutes after takeoff, the first satellite, belonging to Brazil, separated from the rocket. Five minutes later, the second satellite, a 2-ton (1,800-kilogram or 1.8-tonne) worldwide mobile communications satellite, separated from the rocket. The launch successfully placed both satellites in orbit.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), European Ariane Rocket Puts 2 Satellites into Orbit, 5 February 1998.)
Boeing successfully launched, from a California launch site, five satellites for the Iridium World Communications network, aboard a Delta II rocket. The Delta II launched two weeks after the disastrous maiden flight of the new Delta III rocket, which had exploded during liftoff. Officials announced on 5 September that a problem with the rockets control system had caused the explosion, but that they had not yet determined the exact chain of events. The five satellites launched aboard the Delta II rocket replaced satellites that had malfunctioned and could not be included in the Iridium telecommunications constellation.(Justin Ray, Delta 2 Lifts Five Satellites into Orbit, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 September 1998.)
The Boeing Company appointed Michael T. Kennedy to a newly created position, Vice President for the Boeing Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle and Delta IV Programs. Since 1996, Kennedy had been Vice President of Delta III and had shown his ability to manage launch vehicle development effectively by bringing Delta III on line for its first launch this summer. As Kennedy moved into his new position, Boeing promoted Daniel J. Collins to Program Director for Delta III, and Jay L. Witzling became Vice President of Delta II and Titan Programs. Kennedy had joined Boeing in 1970, working on the Skylab, Saturn SIVB, Titan, Delta, SPACEHAB, and ISS programs.(PR Newswire, Boeing Selects Vice President for EELV/Delta IV Program, 26 March 1998.)
Pentagon officials announced that, on 12 August, a split-second power outage had caused a Titan IV rocket to explode while launching a secret spy satellite into space. A battery powering the guidance system had failed, interrupting the flow of electricity for a fraction of a second. After the restoration of battery power, the guidance control system had sent a command causing the rocket to pitch down and to the right, while traveling at 675 miles (1,100 kilometers) per hour at 17,000 feet (5,200 meters). The rocket had begun to break up, and the malfunction had triggered the automatic destruct system. In addition, when it had begun to explode, range safety officers had sent the rocket destruct commands, to ensure it would not threaten the coastal population.(Todd Halversen, Titan 4 Blast Blamed on Brief Battery Power Outage, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 September 1998.)
NASA regained control over SOHO and, after successfully thawing the crafts fuel, determined that its rocket thrusters were useable. NASA spokesperson William A. Steigerwald of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) explained that flight controllers would check each individual system and instrument next, and would then reestablish full automatic gyroscopic control.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, Solar Probe Back Under Control, 17 September 1998.)
During a meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin directed MSFC officials to draw up a new plan for meeting the goals of the Bantam Program. The programs original goal had been to develop, by 2001, a rocket capable of launching 150-kilogram or 0.15-tonne (331-pound or 0.2-ton) payloads, at a cost of no more than US$1.5 million. None of the rockets developed with NASA funding would have met that cost target. Bantam Program Manager Sherry Buschmann reiterated NASAs commitment to achieving a capability to launch small payloads frequently at an affordable cost, saying that the plan would meet a legitimate need within the science community.(Warren Ferster, NASA Shifts Gears on Low-Cost Launcher: Goldin Renews Commitment to Bantam Goals, Space News, 814 June 1998.)
Fritz Haber, a German engineer recruited after World War II to work on the American space program, died at the age of 86 in Connecticut. An aeronautical engineer, Haber developed a way to simulate a gravity-free environment by flying a plane in a roller-coaster pattern. NASA first used this simulation to train the astronauts in the Apollo program. Before coming to the United States, Haber had developed a way to transport missiles by piggybacking them on another aircraft. Engineers had never used his piggyback design during World War II, but NASA had implemented his idea, carrying the Space Shuttle on a modified Boeing 747 from its landing site in California back to its launch site in Florida.(Ford Burkhart, Fritz Haber, 86, Dies; Simulated Weightlessness of Space, New York Times, 29 August 1998. 572 Reuters, Three Russian Cosmonauts Return Safely to Earth, 25 August 1998; Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, Russias Orbiting Bureaucrat Returns to Earth, 25 August 1998.)
Progress M-38 launched on a Soyuz-V rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying a 900-kilogram (2,000-pound) propulsion unit. Mirs crew planned to attach the unit to the Quantum module of the space station. The cargo craft also carried 1,500 kilograms (3,300 pounds) of repair tools, replacement parts, food, and water.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 533, 1 April 1998, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx533.html (accessed 20 October 2008).)
Launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, a Proton-K Russian booster carried into orbit an American EchoStar IV communications satellite, to relay broadcast signals to the central and western United States. Lockheed Martin Corporation had built the satellite and, under a partnership agreement between Lockheed and the Russian Khrunichev company, International Launch Services launched the spacecraft.
The Chinese Long March 2C rocket launched two U.S. satellites into orbit, from the Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center in Shanxi province in northern China. The satellites were part of a mobile telecommunications system that Motorola Corporation had developed for the Iridium World Communications network scheduled to begin commercial service on 23 September 1998. The Iridium contract had boosted Chinas launching industry, which had been struggling to recover from a string of launch disasters in 1995 and 1996.(Associated Press, China Puts 2 Satellites into Orbit, 3 May 1998.)
NASA announced that JSC had modified its contract with United Space Alliance, awarding the contractor more Shuttle work. Three other NASA contractors had previously performed the more than US$900 million of work on the Space Shuttles solid rocket booster and other elements. USBI Company at Kennedy Space Center had worked on the boosters; Lockheed Martin Corporation in Houston, Texas, had designed and produced the primary Shuttle avionics software; and Boeing Aerospace Operations in Houston had processed flight equipment.(NASA, NASA Awards More Shuttle Work to USA, news release c98-h, 7 July 1998.)
The U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Museum in Cape Canaveral, Florida, celebrated the 40th anniversary of the successful launch of the modified Redstone rocket, which had carried into orbit Explorer I, the United States first satellite. The launch occurred four months after the Soviet Union had placed Sputnik I in orbit. In addition to achieving orbit, the 31-pound (14- kilogram) Explorer I had discovered the Van Allen Radiation Belt. The museum at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station held an open house and a space fair and launched a model rocket to celebrate the anniversary of this milestone and to educate the public about the United States 40 years in space.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), Explorer 1 Anniversary Event Will Bring History to Life, 31 January 1998.)
Rocket engineer Max E. Nowak died of natural causes at the age of 89. An original member of Wernher von Brauns German rocket team, which developed the V-1 and V-2 rockets during World War II, Nowak had been among the first of the team members to move to the United States after the war. He had been the assistant to the director of the manufacturing engineering lab during the Apollo program and had directed the assembly of systems for the Saturn I nose cones and Saturn V launch systems.(Associated Press, 3 Rocket Scientists Die, 12 July 1998.)
After a one-day delay to correct a software problem, Mars Climate Orbiter launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, atop a Delta II rocket. NASA had scheduled the 1,400-pound (635-kilogram) robotic craft, paired with Mars Polar Lander, to launch on 3 January 1999. Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, the second pair headed to study Mars following Mars Pathfinder and Mars Global Surveyor, were part of NASAs long-term strategy for Mars exploration, calling for small robotic craft to leave Earth two at a time, about every two years. According to NASAs plan, Climate Orbiters first task would be to provide a two-way communications relay between ground controllers and Polar Lander after Landers arrival and during its planned 6090 day mission. Thereafter, Orbiter would generate weather maps and profile the Martian atmosphere for a full Martian year, or 687 days.(Kathy Sawyer, Mars Probe To Examine Climate; NASA Launch Is First of Two Designed To Shed Light on Potential for Life, Washington Post, 12 December 1998.)
A Zenit rocket, launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, failed when a computer error caused a premature engine shutdown during the second-stage burn. The rocket fell, crashing in Siberia. The rockets failure destroyed 12 of Globalstar Inc.s communications satellites.(Pavel Polityuk for Reuters, Ukraine Appeals for Rocket Launch amid Kazakh Row, 13 July 1999; Globalstar Chronology, 13 July 1999, http://www.astronautix.com/craft/glolstar.htm (accessed 6 August 2008).)
A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket, carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office of the Pentagon, exploded 1 minute after liftoff from Cape Canaveral, Florida. More than 20 stories high and weighing nearly 2 million pounds (907,000 kilograms), the Lockheed Martinbuilt Titan IV was the largest crewless rocket used in the United States. The rocket used solid-fuel boosters similar to those used to launch NASAs Space Shuttle. The explosion destroyed about US$1.3 billion worth of hardware, making it one of the worst American rocket- launch failures to date. The rocket was about 20,000 feet (6,100 meters) above the Atlantic when it exploded, and the ocean carried the debris and toxic substances away from land. This was the second time a Titan IV had exploded during launch; the first explosion occurred in 1993.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Rocket Explosion, 12 August 1998; Kathy Sawyer and William Harwood, Rocket Explodes, Destroying Spy Satellite, Washington Post, 13 August 1998.)
NASA announced its selection of Litton/PRC of Mclean, Virginia, to perform work under NASAs sounding rocket operations contract, consolidating several previous contracts. The four- year contract, an indefinite deliveryindefinite quantity contract worth between US$11.9 million and US$211.8 million, included two three-year options worth up to an additional US$572.5 million. Goddard Space Flight Centers (GSFCs) Wallops Flight Facility, at Wallops Island, Virginia, was to provide services, including design, fabrication, integration, testing, and performance of mission operations for sounding rocket missions. NASA considered the contract an integral part of the Wallops 2000 strategic plan, initiated in 1997 to ensure the facilitys future stability and vitality.(NASA, NASA Selects Litton/PRC for NASA Sounding Rocket Program, contract announcement C98-t, 1 December 1998.)
NASA successfully tested a fuel tank made of a new metal mixture, aluminum lithium, never before used in major U.S. manufacturing. The tank made of the new alloy was 30 percent stronger and 5 percent lighter than the aluminum magnesium tanks in use since the days of the Apollo program. The tank showed no leaks, pressure bulges, or other problems, when loaded with 537,000 gallons (2,033,000 liters) of liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel. Lockheed Martin had developed the new fuel tank to help ensure that NASA would be able to haul large sections of the ISS into orbit.(Seth Borenstein, Shuttles New Fuel Tank Test a Success, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 19 May 1998.)
One thousand Puerto Ricans protested against NASAs plans to launch, from a nature preserve in Puerto Rico, suborbital rockets filled with chemicals. The Coqui Dos program planned the launch to measure high-level winds and turbulence in the upper atmosphere. Coqui Dos continued the El Coqui program of 1992, part of NASAs Suborbital Sounding Rocket program, which launched 25 sounding rockets annually from locations worldwide. Because the rockets would disperse aluminum trimethol before crashing into the sea, the protesters demanded that NASA produce studies proving that the launch would not damage the environment. The mayor of Vega Baja led the protest outside the entrance to the Tortuguero Recreation Area, the section of the nature preserve where the rocket launches would take place, threatening to sue NASA to force it to release environmental impact studies from the 1992 launch.(NASA, NASA Studying Space Weather from Puerto Rico, news release 98-23, 6 February 1998; Mario Maldonado for Associated Press, Puerto Rico-NASA, 1 February 1998; Lance Oliver, 11 Launches Will Attract Protesters: Many in Puerto Rico Fear Damage by Research Rockets, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 2 February 1998.)
The Huntsville Alabama L5 Society (HAL5), a chapter of the National Space Society, failed in its second attempt to become the first group of amateurs to launch a rocket into space. The society attempted to use a hot-air balloon from a NASA barge in the Gulf of Mexico to launch its rocket, a launch concept known as a rockoon. According to the rockoon concept, a small rocket may obtain very high altitude because there is little air to slow it down during launch. James A. Van Allen had been the first to fly rockoons in the 1950s, as part of a joint U.S. Navy- University of Iowa project. The U.S. Navy had abandoned the technique after large, ground- based, sounding rockets became available. NASAs MSFC signed a cooperative agreement with HAL5 in 1996, continuing the relationship for the High Altitude Lift-Off mission. MSFC had supplied HAL5 with the barge, helium for the balloon, nitrous oxide for the rocket, and some funds for materials. HAL5 sought to make space more affordable for students, amateurs, experimenters, and researchers. NASA was examining alternate launch sites and methods in an effort to find ways of reducing the cost of rocket launches.(HAL5 Project, Space Group Hopes To Launch First Amateur Rocket into Space, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 June 1998; Orlando Sentinel (FL), Space Buffs in Alabama Cant Get Rocket Launched, 21 June 1998; William R. Corliss, Chapter 4: Development of the First Sounding Rockets, in NASA Sounding Rockets, 1958 1968: A Historical Summary (Washington, DC: NASA Scientific and Technical Information Office, 1971), http://history.nasa.gov/SP-4401/contents.htm (accessed 30 January 2008).)
The newly developed Delta III rocket exploded during liftoff, destroying the Galaxy X communications satellite it was carrying into orbit. The launch was the maiden flight of Boeings newest version of the Delta rocket, designed to carry 8,400 pounds (3,800 kilograms), twice the payload of the previous version.(Seth Schiesel, New Type of Rocket To Carry Satellites Explodes in Liftoff, New York Times, 27 August 1998. 574 NASA, International Candidates Join 1998 Astronaut Class, news release 98-155, 27 August 1998.)
After a delay of more than a year, a Russian Proton booster rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit the first module of the International Space Station (ISS), the 41.2-foot (12.6-meter) Zarya. The role of Zarya, translated as Sunrise, would be to act as a space tugboat in the early stages of construction, providing propulsion, power, and communications.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, Russia Puts First Segment of International Space Station in Orbit, 20 November 1998.)
The Iridium World Communications system global, digital wireless communications network completed a series of deployment missions, with the launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California of five Iridium satellites aboard a Boeing Delta II launch vehicle. The successful launch had completed the entire Iridium constellation in just twelve months. The worlds first global, wireless telephone company scheduled its commercial service to begin four months following this last launch, once it had completed integrating and testing the Iridium system.(PR Newswire, Boeing Delta II Rocket Places Iridium Satellites into Orbit, 17 May 1998.)
A modified L-1011 jetliner flying at 40,000 feet (12,000 meters) dropped a Pegasus XL rocket carrying the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS), designed to study the formation of stars and planets. The launch marked the beginning of a two-year, US$64 million mission to learn more about the composition of interstellar clouds and monitor how they cool as they collapse to form stars and planets. The 397-pound (179-kilogram) SWAS would study water, molecular oxygen, atomic carbon, and isotopic carbon monoxide, by means of submillimeter wave radiation, which scientists cannot observe from the ground. NASAs GSFC managed the mission.(Associated Press, NASA Launches Probe To Study Stars, 5 December 1998; CNN.com, NASA Launches Satellite To Study Star Formation, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/space/9812/05/swas.launch/ (accessed 27 October 2008).)
An Atlas rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 1:37 p.m. (EST), after NASA had scrubbed the flight three days in a row. The Lockheed Martin rocket, which carried a classified spacecraft for the Pentagons National Reconnaissance Office, separated from its passenger 112 hours after launching, with the satellite successfully placed in orbit. The satellite, viewing two-thirds of the globe, was to circle the Earth in an egg-shaped orbit, taking it from 24,000 miles (39,000 kilometers) above the northern latitudes to just 200 miles (322 kilometers) above Antarctica.
An Athena II rocket carrying Lunar Prospector launched from the renovated U.S. Navy test- launch site, Launch Complex 46, marking the first time that the government-based space transportation agency, Spaceport Florida Authority, had managed a launch from the complex. The rocket carried aboard some of the ashes of geologist Eugene M. Shoemaker, who had died in a car crash in July 1997. Among his many professional accomplishments, the sixty-nine-year-old Shoemaker had selected lunar landing sites and trained Apollo astronauts. On 5 January, NASA had cancelled Athena IIs first scheduled launch for safety reasons, after U.S. Air Force radar necessary to track the rocket failed. The unpiloted rocket launched at 9:28 p.m. (EST) and, after 1 hour, propelled the 4-foot (1.2-meter), 650-pound (291-kilogram) Lunar Prospector out of low- Earth orbit toward the Moon.(Lynne Bumpus-Hooper, Prospector Off on Historic Trip to Moon, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 1998; Jim Erickson, Late Flagstaff Astronomers Ashes Are Headed for Moon in Fitting Tribute, Arizona Daily Star (Tucson, AZ), 7 January 1998; Washington Times, NASA Launches Mission to Moon Seeking Water for Future Settlers, 7 January 1998.)
U.S. Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott (R-MS) announced that Alliant Techsystems would build composite materials, such as booster nose cones, for the Boeing Delta IV rocket at Iuka, Mississippi, a former site of the Tennessee Valley Authority and NASA. The rocket would compete for Air Force and commercial contracts for satellite launches, while Senator Lott and U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Chairperson Richard Shelby (R-AL) would continue to investigate whether launching U.S.-made satellites on Chinese rockets was compromising U.S. security. Rod Bitz, the director of corporate communications for Alliant, said, Iuka was chosen in part because the large structures can be easily shipped by barge to Decatur. Engineers at the new Boeing plant in Decatur, Alabama, would assemble the rocket.(James W. Brosnan, Iuka Revving Up for Rockets Again Will Be Part of Delta IV Project, Commercial Appeal (Memphis, TN), 7 July 1998.)
Heinrich K. Paetz, an original member of Wernher von Brauns German rocket team, died of natural causes at the age of 88, the second team member to die within the week. Before retiring from NASA in 1970, Paetz had participated in the Redstone, Jupiter, Saturn I, and Saturn V programs as a member of the test branch.(Associated Press, 3 Rocket Scientists Die.)
Rocket scientist Albert E. Schuler died of natural causes at the age of 83, the third original member of Wernher von Brauns rocket team to die in the same week. Schuler had retired from NASA in 1969, after a career overseeing measurement of instrumentation on test stands and rockets during static firings and overseeing flight instrumentation, guidance, and control on rocket flights.(Associated Press, 3 Rocket Scientists Die.)
Eberhard R. M. Rees, deputy and later successor to Wernher von Braun as chief of American rocketry efforts, died at age 89, after suffering from Alzheimers disease. Rees, born in Germany, had graduated from the Dresden Institute of Technology in 1934 with an advanced degree in mechanical engineering. He had worked as a technical plant manager with the German Guided Missile Center beginning in 1940, but after Germanys defeat in World War II, Rees became one of 118 scientists who surrendered to the West under the so-called Project Paperclip, becoming a U.S. citizen in 1954. In the United States, he had first worked at White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico, where he shared his expertise on the V-2, a German rocket- propelled bomb, and on guided missile projects. In 1950 Rees had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to serve as Deputy Chief of the Guided Missile Development Division at Redstone Arsenal. Among the projects Rees had managed were the Hermes II Project, the Redstone and Jupiter missile programs, the Explorer satellite project, and the Saturn program. Between 1956 and 1960, Rees had been Deputy Director of the U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agencys Development Operations Division. He had received a Distinguished Service Medal from NASA for his role in the Apollo 11 Mission. Rees had succeeded Wernher von Braun as Director of NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center in 1970, retiring in 1973.(Ford Burkhart, Eberhard Rees, Rocketry Pioneer, Dies at 89, New York Times, 4 April 1998. 128)
After experiencing two disastrous launch failures in 1996 and 1997, the European Space Agency (ESA) successfully launched its French-made Ariane 5 rocket and recoverable space capsule from Korou, French Guiana. The 1.6 million-pound (800-ton, 726,000-kilogram, or 726-tonne) rocket carried a 2.6-tonne (2.9-ton, 5,700-pound, or 2,600-kilogram) mock-up of a telecommunications satellite and a 2.8-tonne (3.1-ton, 6,200-pound, or 2,800-kilogram) recoverable capsule. With the successful recovery of the capsule from the Pacific Ocean, France became the fourth country to develop such technology, following the United States, Russia, and China. French scientists had designed the Ariane 5 rocket to carry payloads of 5.96.8 tonnes (6.57.5 tons, 13,00015,000 pounds, or 5,9006,800 kilograms) into geostationary orbit, using twice the power of the Ariane 4; to provide launches for low-altitude orbits and interplanetary space probes; and to lift the cargo vehicle that would be the ESAs contribution to the ISS.(John-Thor Dahlburg, Third Trys the Charm for European Rocket, Los Angeles Times, 22 October 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, Ariane Capsule Test Called a Success, 21 October 1998.)
Lockheed Martin and its Russian business partners announced the appointment of Wilbur C. Trafton as President of International Launch Services (ILS); Trafton had been Acting President since the previous December. Lockheed Martin, Russias Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center, and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia had established ILS in 1995, as a joint venture to market commercial launch services on Russian Proton rockets and Lockheed Martin Atlas rockets. Before joining ILS, Trafton had been Associate Administrator for NASAs Office of Space Flight. In that position, he had headed NASAs Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise. Ray Colloday, President of Lockheed Martin Astronautics, remarked that Trafton had brought to ILS years of experience working on joint space programs with Russia. Colladay said that Traftons background, together with his knowledge of the Atlas product line, made him particularly well suited to lead ILS.(Lockheed Martin, Wilbur Trafton Named President, International Launch Services, news release, 26 March 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/WilburTraftonNamedPresident Internat.html (accessed 21 December 2007).)
NASA launched its Wide-Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE) aboard the three-stage Pegasus-XL rocket. Orbital Sciences Corporations L-1011 jet carried the rocket to an altitude of 40,000 feet (12,200 meters) before releasing it. Shortly after WIREs release into orbit, it encountered difficulties maintaining its stability, and NASA immediately began to investigate the malfunction. The satellites scientific instrument was a cryogenically cooled telescope designed to shed light on the history of star formation in the universe, as part of NASAs Origins program. The 12.5-inch-aperture (31.8-centimeter-aperture) telescope aboard WIRE had no moving parts and was enclosed in a cooling system to keep its mirrors below -436F (-260C), to prevent its own heat emission from overwhelming the light it would detect from space.(Associated Press, NASAs Star-Gazing Wire Satellite Successfully Launched, 4 March 1999; Associated Press, Satellite Launch, 5 March 1999.)
U.S. Air Force officials announced that, despite initial media reports of a successful launch, the previous days launch of the USA 142 aboard a Titan IVB rocket had failed. The USA 142, also called the DSP 19, an American geosynchronous military satellite, had launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The failed launch had placed the Defense Support Program satellite in a useless orbit after an attached rocket engine failed. This was the first launch attempt since the explosion of a Titan IVA in August 1998. Engineers had designed the Titan IVB, an improved version of the Titan IV, to survive the electrical malfunction that had led to its predecessors demise. Because of a policy of secrecy concerning military spy satellites, the U.S. Air Force had delayed informing its public affairs office about the launch failure. Although senior Air Force officials knew of the loss of the satellite, they were unable to make the event public until they were certain that the failure had not entailed the release of classified information. The Air Force had designed the satellite, a highly sensitive, 2-ton (1,800-kilogram or 1.8-tonne), infrared telescope, to detect missile launches and nuclear detonations.(Robyn Suriano, Air Force Says Security Questions Delayed Announcement, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 13 April 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 546, 1 May 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx546.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
A Russian Proton rocket carrying a communications satellite manufactured by Lockheed Martin exploded 6 minutes after launching from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, the second failure of a Proton rocket in three months. The Russian Space Agency formed a commission to investigate the crash. Kazakhstan had temporarily banned Proton launches from Baikonur following a launch failure on 5 July, but Proton rockets had launched from the facility successfully on 6 and 26 September.(Miles OBrien, Russian Rocket Explodes After Liftoff: Incident Likely To Delay International Space Station, CNN.com, 27 October 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/space/9910/27/proton.explodes/ (accessed 10 April 2008). 817 United Press International, Kazakhstan Bans Russian Space Launches, 28 October 1999.)
Two satellites, the China-Brazil Earth Resources Satellite (CBERS-1), sometimes called ZY-1 in Chinese reports, and the Brazilian Saci-1 satellite, launched atop a Chinese Long March 3B rocket from Taiyuan Launch Center in central China. Brazil and China had jointly financed the 1,500-kilogram (3,307-pound) CBERS-1, which carried three high-resolution cameras for monitoring environmental and vegetation conditions in Brazil and China, as well as in other, unspecified locations. Brazil had designed the 60-kilogram (132-pound) Saci-1 microsatellite to monitor cosmic rays, the magnetic field, and plasma. Shortly after launch, communications with the craft failed.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 552, 1 November 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx552.html (accessed 6 August 2008).)
Lockheed Martin announced a sweeping reorganization of key leadership positions, in response to recommendations of the review panel chaired by A. Thomas Young. The Young Panel had urged the company to make structural changes to correct quality-control problems at Astronautics, the unit responsible for Atlas, Titan, and Athena rocket development. In response to the panels recommendation to divide the two tasks of product assurance and mission success, Astronautics President G. Thomas Marsh appointed John P. Mari as Vice President of Product Assurance and Roman Matherne as Vice President for Mission Success. Marsh named John Parker, President of the former Mission Success and Product Assurance Section, to head the operations post in Lockheed Martins VentureStarTM Program, which the company hoped to develop into a future reusable launch vehicle with the potential to replace the Space Shuttle. Marsh appointed Joel S. Porter as Vice President for Business Development and Advanced Programs for Astronautics, succeeding Matthew B. Foster, who resigned. Other changes at Astronautics included the appointment of Claude McAnally as Vice President of Operations; the appointment of Grover W. Hall Jr. as Vice President of Technical Operations; and the separation of Technical Operations from Manufacturing Operations to better delineate responsibility and accountability, according to the recommendations of the Young Panel. Lockheed tasked Gareth D. Flora, under Marshs supervision, with developing, managing, and improving subcontract management. In addition, Flora became responsible for ensuring that the company properly implemented the recommendations of the investigating team, as well as those of a separate U.S. Air Force review of the aerospace industry.(Jeffrey Leib, Lockheed Replaces Key Staff in Astronautics Unit, Denver Post (CO), 21 September 1999.)
Landsat-7 launched successfully from Vandenberg Air Force Base. Although Lockheed Martin, Missiles and Space, had built Landsat-7, the newest land-surface observation satellite, with a design life of five years, the companys spokesperson remarked that 15 years after its 1984 launch, Landsat-5 continued in operation. The upper stage of the rocket that launched the commercially built Landsat-6 in October 1993 had failed to fire the satellite into orbit, destroying the craft and prompting NASA and the U.S. Geological Survey to resume control of the Landsat program in 1994. The latest model in the satellite series carried a new generation of remote-sensing devices far more sophisticated than the equipment on satellites mapping Earth over the past decade. Raytheon Remote Sensing of Santa Barbara, California, had built the crafts enhanced thematic mapper to measure solar radiation reflected off the Earths surface. The device was capable of capturing images of Earths surface in 114-mile-wide (183-kilometer- wide) swaths and could resolve images as small as 50 feet (15 meters) across.(Frank Sweeney, New Earth Camera Launched into Orbit, San Jose Mercury News (CA), 20 April 1999.)
After a two-day delay because of high-altitude winds, the Boeing Company successfully launched a Delta II rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar communications satellites. An hour after launch, the rocket deployed the 988-pound (448-kilogram) satellites in pairs, bringing the total number of satellites in Globalstar Inc.s constellation to 28, 4 less than the 32 needed to begin network service.(Justin Ray, Third Try Was the Charm for Delta 2 Rocket, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 July 1999. 741 Washington Times, Air and Space Director Killed in Glider Crash, 14 July 1999.)
NASA announced that it had completed negotiations for a contract worth up to US$1.73 billion, to purchase 73 Space Shuttle reusable solid rocket motors from the Thiokol Propulsion company. Each Shuttle flight used two of these motors as the primary component of the Shuttle solid rocket boosters, providing 6.6 million pounds (2.9 million kilograms) of thrust, 71.4 percent of the thrust needed for liftoff. The contract covered the manufacture and delivery of the new motor components through September 2004, as well as postflight review of the last motors flown through 2005.(NASA, NASA, Thiokol Complete $1.7 Billion Shuttle Motor Agreement, news release c99-c, 24 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/1999/c99-c.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
Lockheed Martin cleared its Atlas II rocket to resume the 1999 launch schedule, after having placed its schedule on hold when a Delta III launch failed in early May. Deltas RL10B-2, upper- stage engine was similar to the RL10A-4 used on Atlass Centaur upper stage. The Boeing Company and Pratt & Whitney had led the investigation of the Delta III launch failure, with the support of Lockheed Martin. Meanwhile, Lockheed Martin Astronautics had formed two panels to ensure that no aspects of commonality between the RL10 engine versions were overlooked. The Senior Engineering Review Panel and the Senior Management Review Team had addressed potential causes of launch failure identified in the Delta III investigation, ruling out those factors that did not apply to Atlas flights. When the investigators had determined that an engine- brazing process that left voids in combustion chamber structural jacket splice joints was common to all RL10 engines, Lockheed Martin had instituted a new set of inspection and analysis measures for accepting or rejecting each engine. Lockheed Martin intended to use the inspection techniques on new production chambers; Pratt & Whitney planned to continue using its standard procedure, with its Flight Certification Board certifying each set of RL10 engines for all Atlas missions.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martins Centaur RL10 Engines Cleared for Flight, news release, 30 August 1999,)
At the 14th Annual NASA Continual Improvement and Reinvention Conference on Quality Management, Administrator Daniel S. Goldin presented the George M. Low Award, NASAs highest honor for quality and technical performance, to four U.S. companies: 1) Barrios Technology Inc. of Houston, Texas, for its small-business product; 2) Kay and Associates of Edwards, California, for small-business service; 3) Raytheon Support Services Company of Annapolis Junction, Maryland, for the large-business service category; and, 4) Thiokol Space Operations of Brigham City, Utah, for the large-business product category. NASA had evaluated the recipients for performance, delivery according to agreed cost and schedule, innovation, management leadership, alignment of organizational goals with NASAs strategic plans, customer orientation, and adherence to the Total Quality Management philosophy. Thiokol Corporation, which had won the Low Award in 1991 and Marshall Space Flight Centers Contractor Excellence Award in March 1999, had manufactured the reusable solid rocket motor for the Space Shuttle, as well as providing launch support and refurbishment services for the motor. Over the past seven years, Thiokol had never delayed its delivery of hardware. Its cost reduction efforts had saved NASA US$152 million.(NASA, Four Aerospace Firms Win NASAs Highest Honor for Quality, news release 99-53, 22 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-053.txt (accessed 7 February 2008); Cordant Technologies Inc., Thiokol Propulsion Wins NASAs Highest Honor for Quality, news release, 3 May 1999.)
Robert S. Ruggeri, a retired NASA engineer and pioneer in de-icing research, died at the age of 75. Ruggeri had begun working for NASAs predecessor agency in 1944, retiring from NASA in 1980. NASA had applied his findings from studying ice buildup on airplane wings in the 1940s and 1950s, to the development of rockets and Space Shuttles. When the United States sought to speed up its space program following the Soviet Unions launch of Sputnik, Ruggeri had also researched the effects of cavitationpartial vacuums in flowing liquidson cryogenic rocket pumps, looking for ways to make the pumps more efficient for rockets. Later in his career at NASA, Ruggeris work had focused on the design of compressors for advanced aircraft engines, as he sought ways to increase fuel efficiency, reduce air pollution, and minimize the noise of jet engines.(Robert Ruggeri, NASA Engineer Was a Pioneer in Aircraft De-Icing, Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 26 December 1999.)
NASAs GRC announced that, for the first time, researchers had suspended particles of frozen hydrogen in liquid helium, the first step toward creating new rocket fuels that could revolutionize rocket-propulsion technology. Researchers had poured small amounts of liquid hydrogen at a temperature of 14 K (-435F or -259C), just above freezing point, onto the surface of liquid helium of a temperature just above absolute zero, at 4 K (-452F or -269C). The liquid hydrogen had formed small, solid hydrogen particles, which floated on the surface of the helium. Scientists planned to use the suspension to create futuristic atomic fuels, making it possible to develop rockets with liftoff weights one-fifth that of todays [rockets] or with payloads three to four times more massive. In addition, the suspension could reduce or eliminate on-orbit assembly of large space vehicles, thereby contributing to the exploration of the entire solar system.(NASA Glenn Research Center, Rocket Fuels Researchers Suspend Frozen Hydrogen Particles in Helium, news release 99-65, 12 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/glenn/news/pressrel/1999/99_65.html (accessed 25 February 2008).)
Pending the outcome of an investigation into the crash of a Russian Proton rocket the previous day, the Kazakhstan government banned Russian launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, causing a potentially significant disruption to Russias commercial satellite launch program. Kazakhstans foreign ministry informed the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs that launches from the facility would cease until investigators had identified the causes of the crash and evaluated the damage sustained. The ministry did not indicate how long the ban would remain in effect. Kazakhstan investigators collected soil and water samples to test for possible hazardous material dispersed in the crash.
A Boeing Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar cellular telephone satellites. Counting this launch, Globalstar Inc. had placed in orbit 24 of the 32 satellites the company needed to begin regional cellular phone service. The company had planned to begin offering global cellular service in the latter part of 1998, but in September 1998, a failed launch destroyed a dozen satellites aboard a Ukrainian Zenit II rocket. Globalstar had launched its first eight satellites on Delta II rockets, during February and April 1998, and 12 more satellites, early in 1999, on three Russian Soyuz rockets. Globalstar was competing with its industry rival Iridium World Communications Inc., which had placed a complete constellation of 66 satellites in orbit and had begun offering global cellular service before the end of 1998. To meet Globalstars launch demands over the summer of 1999, Boeing had increased the pace of manufacturing at its Pueblo, Colorado, rocket factory. In addition, Boeing brought 50 to 70 workers from its Delta launch team at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California to join its Cape Canaveral workforce in Florida.(Todd Halvorson, Boeing and Globalstar Begin Flurry of Launches, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 June 1999.)
NASA announced that Administrator Daniel S. Goldin would present Simon Ramo and Bernard A. Schriever with NASAs Distinguished Public Service Medal on 5 November at the start of a daylong conference. NASA, the U.S. Air Force Space Command, the National Air and Space Museum, the Space Policy Institute at George Washington University, and the National Space Society were cosponsoring the conference, Developing U.S. Launch Capability: The Role of Civil-Military Cooperation. The award recognized the leadership of Ramo and Schriever during the early years of the U.S. space program. Ramo had been the chief scientist and leading civilian in the Air Force program to build the first U.S. intercontinental ballistic missile system. His work had fostered cooperation between the U.S. Air Force and aeronautics industry, the necessary foundation of the space program. Schriever had pioneered the development of the first ballistic missile for the United States; the resulting rocket technology had led to NASAs successes in its early human spaceflight programs.(NASA, NASA Honors Missile Pioneers at Launch Vehicle Conference, news release N99-56, 2 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/note2edt/1999/n99-056.txt (accessed 12 March 2008).)
A Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a NAVSTAR Block 2R GPS satellite, the third in a new series of GPS spacecraft; Lockheed Martin was under contract with the U.S. Air Force to launch 21 GPS craft. The NAVSTAR Block 2R military navigational satellite became the 28th operational spacecraft in the GPS constellation, to replace an older satellite in the network after completing a one-month test period. The U.S. Air Force had originally planned to launch the replacement craft in May 1999, but after a rainstorm had damaged the satellite while it was sitting on the launchpad, the Air Force had returned it to Lockheed Martin Missile and Space for repairs. Two hurricanes, a tropical storm, and other rainstorms had caused additional weather delays, preventing the launch of an alternate replacement satellite.(Irene Brown, Delta Rocket Soars into Space, Space.com, 7 October 1999.)
China confirmed that it had fired its new Dong Feng-31 (DF-31) missile during a test launch on 2 August, publicizing details of the successful launch of the long-range, ground-to-ground, intercontinental, strategic ballistic missile. The Chinese Guangzhou Daily reported that the three-stage, solid-fuel rocket was launched from northern Shanxi province and crashed down in the western territory of Xinjiang. Janes Defence Weekly estimated that the DF-31 had an 8,000-kilometer (5,000-mile) range and was capable of carrying a 700-kilogram (1,500-pound) nuclear warhead. Robert Karniol, a foreign correspondent covering Asia for the defense industry publication Janes, remarked that the DF-31 should be operationally deployed by China in 2000, and that the country expected to build 10 to 20 of the missiles, some replacing 1960s-era missiles with half the range of the DF-31. The Guangzhou Daily also reported that China had developed the technology for piloted spaceflight. Wang Xinqing, head of the China Carrier- Rocket Research Institute, which designs military- and civilian-use rockets, stated that the core of the program was the development of a new series of carrier rockets, Long March 5. Wang Xinqing also refuted a report by the U.S. Congress alleging that China had stolen the United States missile and nuclear warhead technology, insisting that China had perfected the rocketry before the United States had achieved it.(Matt Pottinger for Reuters, China Details Missile Test, Planned Space Flight, 12 August 1999.)
Kazakhstan imposed a new ban on Russian launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome following the previous days crash of a Proton booster rocket, which had malfunctioned shortly after launch. Without naming a figure, Kazakhstan announced that it would require Russia to pay compensation in an amount significantly higher than the fee that Kazakhstan had charged Russia after the 5 July Proton crash. In addition, the Kazakhstan government formed a special commission headed by Deputy Prime Minister Alexander Pavlov to investigate the accident.
Lockheed Martin launched a Navy communications satellite aboard an Atlas 2A rocket, a badly needed success in a year of launch failures, delays, investigations, and diminishing business. The company had failed to put three satellites in orbit in April, sustaining a total loss of US$1.5 billion. Investigations into the launch failure of a rocket using similar parts had delayed Lockheed International Launch Services maiden flight of the Atlas IIIA, causing its first customer, Space Systems/Loral, to launch its Telstar 7 satellite on a European Ariane booster, instead. NASA had lost contact with its US$125 million Lockheed Martinbuilt Mars Climate Orbiter in September and, in the subsequent investigation, had discovered that Lockheed had used English units of measurement instead of metric, resulting in miscalculations in navigational data. Although for many years Lockheed Martin had supplied satellites to the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), the U.S. government agency responsible for spy satellites, in September the NRO had awarded a major contract to the Boeing Company to develop the next generation of imaging-reconnaissance satellites. Lockheed Martin also faced increased competition from Russias new Dnepr rocket, Europes Eurockot, and the U.S.-based Orbital Sciences Corporations Pegasus.(United Press International, Lockheed Martin Struggles Through Year, 23 November 1999.)
At a Boeing Company awards ceremony, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and U. S. Representative Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) recognized members of the Delta launch team who were instrumental in sending NASA spacecraft to Mars, awarding Jay L. Witzling, Vice President of Delta Programs, with NASAs Public Service Medal. Other critical leaders in the program also received awards for their dedication and participation. In his remarks, Goldin commented on the characteristics that made Boeings Delta rocket more and more the launch vehicle of choice. Goldin explained that the Delta rocket was the least expensive launch vehicle, had the fastest turnaround, and had demonstrated the highest degree of reliability. Goldin also commented that the four launches to Mars aboard Delta rockets had changed the face of the space program.(PR Newswire, Mars Missions Earn Honors for Boeing Delta Employees, NASAs Goldin and Congressman Rohrabacher Present Awards, 27 January 1999.)
A Russian Soyuz booster launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome 450 miles (724 kilometers) north of Moscow, carrying German, French, and Swedish research devices. In selecting the launch location, Russia was attempting to increase its use of the Plesetsk launch facility because of its problems continuing to launch from Baikonur Cosmodrome. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia had rented the Baikonur launch facility from Kazakhstan.(Reuters, Russian Rocket Blasts Off from Plesetsk Cosmodrome, 9 September 1999. 220)
Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center in Chinas Shanxi Province launched two Iridium World Communications satellites into orbit aboard a Chinese Long March 2C rocket, replenishing the 66-satellite Iridium constellation, which provides telephone, paging, and fax communication services worldwide. The satellite was the 57th launched from Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center and the 15th consecutive successful launch since October 1996 for the Long March rocket series.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), Iridium Launches Two More Satellites, 11 June 1999.)
The main engine of Japans H-2 rocket malfunctioned 4 minutes after launching from Tanegashima Space Center, failing to put the Mtsat satellite into orbit. Fearing they could lose control of its trajectory, officials ordered the rockets destruction 8 minutes into its flight, marking the first time the National Space Development Agency of Japan had destroyed a rocket in flight. It was the second launch failure for the H-2 rocket during 1999; another H-2 had failed to place its payload in orbit in February. However, before the February malfunction, Japan had launched five H-2 rockets successfully. The Mtsat satellite, intended to replace the Himawari 5 satellite, would have observed weather patterns and monitored aircraft.(Associated Press, Japan Destroys Rocket in Midair as It Lifted $95 Million Satellite, New York Times, 16 November 1999; Dow Jones Newswire, Japan Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit, Rocket Destroyed, 15 November 1999.)
The U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) successfully conducted the first of a series of tests of a proposed missile defense system. An unarmed Minuteman missile, carrying a dummy warhead and decoy balloon, launched over the Pacific Ocean from Vandenberg Air Force Base; 20 minutes later an Exoatmospheric Kill Vehicle, a 55-inch-long (1.4-meter-long), 120-pound (54.4-kilogram) device built by Raytheon Corporation, launched aboard a booster rocket from the Marshall Islands. The two missiles collided 10 minutes later, 3,000 miles (4,800 kilometers) from California and 140 miles (225 kilometers) above the ocean. According to the CIA, when DOD conducted the test, North Korea, Iran, and Syria were developing long-range missiles that could hit the United States.(Associated Press, Missile Test Sparks Russian Gripes, 4 October 1999.)
A European Ariane 4 rocket launched, carrying two communication satellites from French Guiana. The rocket placed into orbit an Arabsat 3A satellite, providing television broadcasting and telephone communications to the Middle East, North Africa, and Southern Europe, as well as the Skynet 4E satellite, a British armed forces strategic and tactical communications satellite. Both craft would move into geostationary orbits.(BBC News, Ariane Blasts Off Successfully, 27 February 1999.)
NASA announced the appointment of N. Jan Davis, Director of the Human Exploration and Development of Space Independent Assurance Office, as Deputy Director of the new Flight Projects Directorate at NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, effective July 1999. NASA had tasked the Directorate with overseeing development of crucial parts of the ISS, such as connecting Nodes 2 and 3, the Multi-purpose Logistics Modules, commercial EXPRESS (EXpedite the PRocessing of Experiments to the Space Station) racks, the environmental and life support systems, and the Payload Operations Integration Center. Davis had begun her NASA career at MSFC in 1979, leading a team responsible for structural analysis of the Hubble Space Telescope, the telescope-servicing mission, and the Chandra X-ray Observatory. She had also served as lead engineer for the redesign of the Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster External Tank attach ring before becoming an astronaut in 1987. Davis had flown on three Shuttle missions, logging more than 670 hours in space.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, Astronaut Jan Davis Returns to Marshall Space Flight Center, news release 99-102, 21 June 1999, http://www.msfc.nasa.gov/news/news/releases/1999/99-102.html (accessed 11 February 2008); James McWilliams, Ex-Astronaut Named Marshall Executive, Huntsville Times (AL), 22 June 1999.)
After a one-day delay, a Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the US$128 million Stardust spacecraft. Stardust launched on a mission described as NASAs first attempt to return to Earth solid extraterrestrial material from beyond our [M]oons orbit. Astronomers expected that, after traveling for about five years, the craft would rendezvous with a medium-sized comet. A device aboard the Stardust would collect tiny particles from the comet before returning to Earth on 15 January 2006.(Michael Cabbage, Stardust Is Launched To Sweep Comet Debris, New Orleans Times-Picayune, 8 February 1999.)
A large section of the outer wall of one of the Lockheed Martin X-33 rocket planes two liquid hydrogen fuel tanks separated 2 hours after completing pressure and structural tests at NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center. Lockheed intended the X-33 prototype to lead to the development of its VentureStar TM Reusable Launch Vehicle (RLV), and NASA planned to replace its fleet of Space Shuttles with a fleet of Lockheeds VentureStarTM RLVs after 2012. The latest problem potentially delayed the X-33s first test flight at least an additional six months, essentially guaranteeing that Lockheed Martin would be unable to produce an operational VentureStarTM vehicle by 2004. NASA had placed a huge wager on the VentureStar TM, committing US$941 million to the X-33 program, which had been threatened by technical problems and cost overruns for more than a year. U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) examiners had criticized the project for its rising costs, warning that delays in the prototype would harm NASAs plans for a full-scale reusable vehicle.(Jeff Leeds, Test Mishap Delays Development of Lockheeds X-33 Rocket Plane, Los Angeles Times, 6 November 1999.)
A Boeing Delta III rocket, carrying an Orion satellite for Loral Space and Communications, malfunctioned shortly after launch, leaving the satellite in the wrong orbit. In the inaugural launch in August 1998 of a Boeing Delta III, a rocket designed to carry twice the payload of the Delta II, the rocket had exploded in midair. In this second attempt at flight, the rocket had survived the initial launch, but malfunctioned when the second stage failed to ignite properly, leaving Orion in an orbit lower than planned. Engineers were uncertain whether it would be possible to boost the satellite using on-board fuel and thrusters.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, New Boeing Rocket Malfunctions, Satellite Enters Wrong Orbit, 5 May 1999.)
Lockheed Martin Corporation named former Martin Marietta President and Chief Operating Officer A. Thomas Young to lead an independent review of the management, engineering, manufacturing, and quality control processes of its space and missile business, specifically Astronautics, Missiles and Space, and Michoud Space Systems. The company had experienced a series of expensive and well-publicized failures of its rockets and satellites, including two in the previous week, when a Titan IV placed one military satellite in the wrong orbit and when another satellite, the remote-sensing Ikonos, lost contact with the ground. The company instructed the panel to submit a report to senior Lockheed management by 1 September.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Announces Comprehensive Space Sector Review, Former Martin Marietta President Will Chair Independent Panel, news release, 4 May 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_ releases/1999/LockheedMartinAnnouncesComprehensiv.html (accessed 7 February 2008); Tim Smart, Panel To Review Lockheed Failures: Former Company President To Head Probe of Aerospace Foul-Ups, Washington Post, 5 May 1999.)
The National Research Council Committee on Space Shuttle Upgrades released a report cautioning NASA not to wait too long to choose between keeping the Shuttle until 2020 or scrapping it after 2012 in favor of a new vehicle like Lockheed Martins proposed VentureStar. The committee, led by former astronaut and former head of the Space Shuttle Program Bryan D. OConnor, advised NASA to make a timely decision to either phase out the Shuttle upgrade program or make the major investments necessary for the Shuttle to carry out reliably its long- term mission. The panel specifically addressed the Liquid Fly Back Booster (LFBB), the most expensive Shuttle upgrade under consideration, with development costs estimated at between US$2 billion and US$7 billion. The panels report revealed that NASA had not investigated enough alternatives to the LFBB to ensure that it was the most appropriate way to meet the needs of the Shuttle and other programs.(Aerospace Daily, NRC Panel Worried NASA Hasnt Studied Alternatives to LFBB, 13 January 1999.)
Lockheed Martin launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base an Athena II rocket, carrying the Ikonos I satellite, a civilian satellite capable of capturing the detailed images that only spy satellites could produce in the past. Launch officials had planned to cease communications with the craft 8 minutes after liftoff and to reestablish contact later in the flight, but had not been able to reestablish contact once initial communications ended. Officials were unable to determine whether the craft had remained in orbit. Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems had built the satellite; Raytheon had built the communications, image processing, and other elements of the system; and Eastman Kodak had built the digital camera system. The camera on board Ikonos I was capable of resolving objects as small as 1 square meter (11 square feet), enabling the satellite to distinguish between a car and a truck. Before the manufacture of Ikonos, only military satellites had possessed the ability to photograph Earth in such detail.(John Antczak for Associated Press, Contact Fails During Flight: Civilian Satellite Lost After Launch, 29 April 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force successfully launched a Titan II rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base carrying the first of a new generation of military weather satellites, a Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) Block 5D-3 spacecraft. Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space had built the DMSP Block 5D-3 craft under contract with the U.S. Air Force, and Lockheed Martin Astronautics had supplied the launch vehicle. U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Systems Center at Los Angeles Air Force Base managed the DMSP and Titan programs. The first launch of a Titan II since 19 June 1999, it was the ninth consecutive successful launch of the space launch vehicle. The Titan II, a type of booster previously used as an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) and a fundamental element of the United States strategic deterrent for two decades, was one of 14 two-stage, liquid-fueled former ICBMs that Lockheed Martin Astronautics had refurbished for Air Force space launches. NASA had also used Titan II rockets during its Gemini program in the 1960s, launching 10 piloted and 2 unpiloted missions. The DMSP Block 5D-3 series accommodated larger sensor payloads than previous models, featuring a larger power supply; a more powerful on-board computer with increased memory, giving the craft greater autonomy; and increased battery power, intended to extend the missions duration. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration operated DMSP, a program for strategic and tactical weather prediction to aid the U.S. military in planning sea, land, and air operations.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Companies Launch Military Weather Satellite, news release, 12 December 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINCOMPANIESLAUNCH MILITA.html (accessed 13 March 2008).)
A Lockheed Martin Titan II rocket launched successfully, carrying JPLs QuikSCAT satellite. Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation had built QuikSCAT in 11 months, setting an industry record. JPL stated that the satellite had opened its solar arrays as planned an hour after launch, and a tracking station in Norway acquired the first signal from the spacecraft 18 minutes later. NASA had originally scheduled the satellites launch for November 1998, but delayed it when a Titan IVA exploded after launch, carrying a payload for the National Reconnaissance Office. NASA had postponed the QuikSCAT launch until engineers could determine whether Titan II used any of the hardware that had caused the explosion on the Titan IVA. Following the launch of a Titan IVB rocket that placed a Milstar satellite in a faulty orbit, NASA had again delayed the QuikSCATs launch, pending investigation of the failure. The successfully launched QuikSCAT satellite was on a two-year mission with the option of a third year, to gather about 400,000 detailed measurements of the speed and direction of winds over the oceans surface. NASA intended the US$98 million mission to improve weather forecasting and detect the onset of conditions like El Nino. Engineers had designed the QuikSCAT to radiate microwave pulses over wide areas and to listen for the pulses echo. Those return signals would allow scientists to determine wind speeds and directions at the surface of the oceans. Understanding the interaction [of wind and ocean circulation] is important for weather prediction. Under the terms of NASAs first contract using the Rapid Spacecraft Acquisition process, Ball Aerospace had provided the QuikSCAT spacecraft bus, launch interface, system integration, test, launch support, and two years of mission operations.(Dow Jones Newswire, Lockheed Martins Titan Launches with QuikScat Satellite, 20 June 1999; Satellite Launched on Weather Mission, New York Times, 20 June 1999; Aerospace Daily, QuikSCAT Makes It to Space After Six-Month Delay, 22 June 1999; Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corp., BATC Launches Its First Commercial Spacecraft, news release, 19 June 1999, http://www.ballaerospace.com/page.jsp?page=30&id=30 (accessed 25 February 2008).)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) detached the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite-L (GOES-L) from an Atlas IIA rocket, returning the satellite to the integration facility Astrotech, where engineers planned to recondition its batteries and purge it of gaseous nitrogen, to prevent degradation. NOAA had planned to store the satellite in orbit, ready to replace one of the weather satellites, GOES-8 or GOES-10, but GOES-L had been on the launchpad since 6 May. On 15 May, NASA and NOAA had decided to delay the launch of GOES-L until they had received the results of the investigations into the recent Titan and Delta launch failures.(NOAA, Weather Satellite De-mated from Launch Vehicle, NOAA and NASA Announce, news release, 15 June 1999, http://www.publicaffairs.noaa.gov/releases99/june99/noaa99GOESDemate.html (accessed 12 February 2008).)
The U.S. Air Force officially declared the US$1.2 billion launch of a communications satellite on 30 April a mission failure. A malfunction in the upper stage booster of the Titan IVB rocket had stranded the Milstar satellite in the wrong orbit. The Air Force established an investigation into the failure, which was its third costly space failure in nine months.(Reuters, U.S. Air Force Investigates Costly Satellite Loss, 4 May 1999.)
Europes new 746-ton (677,000-kilogram or 677-tonne) Ariane 5 rocket launched smoothly on its first mission, carrying the European Space Agencys 3.7-ton (3,400-kilogram or 3.4-tonne) X- ray Multi-Mirror (XMM) scientific satellite into orbit. In what France called an industry milestone and hailed as proof of Europes superiority in the commercial launch market, the powerful rocket lifted off at the opening of its launch window from Europes facility in Kourou, French Guiana, depositing the satellite in orbit exactly on schedule, 29 minutes later. Jean-Marie Luton, chairperson of Arianespace, the France-based commercial space company that dominated the worlds commercial satellite-launching market, remarked that, although the United States remained its most serious competitor and China was catching up quickly, Europeans were still one step ahead. Arianespace intended the Ariane 5, twice as heavy and twice as powerful as the Ariane 4, to carry 10- to 12-ton (9,100- to 10,900-kilogram or 9.1- to 10.9-tonne) payloads by 2005, transporting space-exploration modules and serving the ISS. The XMM satellite was the largest scientific satellite ever built in Europe, equipped with three powerful telescopes, with 58 mirrors each, and capable of observing everything from supernovas to the remains of exploded stars.(Jean-Marie Godard for Associated Press, Mission Accomplished for Powerful New European Launcher, 10 December 1998.)
Interfax news agency reported that Russia had agreed to pay Kazakhstan US$400,000 in damages following the 27 October crash of a Proton rocket during its launch from Baikonur Cosmodrome. After reaching an agreement on compensation, Kazakhstan had lifted its launch ban for all Russian launches except the Proton rocket.(Associated Press, Russia-Kazakstan-Rockets, 19 November 1999.)
A dummy satellite reached its orbit, 23,000 miles (37,000 kilometers) above Earth, signaling an important success for the Sea Launch Company. The international consortium, which had invested US$500 million to develop the first commercial, marine-based launch system, launched the dummy satellite from the Odyssey, a converted oil rig located 1,400 miles (2,300 kilometers) south of Hawaii. A Zenit-3SL rocket, built jointly by Ukraine and Russia, carried the satellite aloft. One hour after launch, the satellite separated from the third stage of the rocket at an altitude of 1,200 miles (1,900 kilometers), to continue to its ultimate position.(Associated Press, Satellite Reaches Orbit After First Commercial Launch from Ocean, 30 March 1999. 689 European Space Agency, Mission to Mars Set To Revolutionize ESAs Working Methods, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 March 1999.)
A Russian rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, carrying a scientific satellite into orbit. It was the second launch from the facility since Kazakhstan partially lifted the launch ban imposed following the crash of a Proton-K rocket on 5 July.(Washington Times, Russian Satellite Launched in Kazakhstan, 18 July 1999. 210)
Keith R. Hall, Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Air Force for Space and Director of the National Reconnaissance Office, and Edward C. Pete Aldridge Jr., Chief Executive Officer of the Aerospace Corporation, which provides technical analysis for the United States and international space programs, testified before the U.S. House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligences Subcommittee on Technical and Tactical Intelligence, regarding three rocket-launch failures. All of the launch failuresan explosion after launch in August 1998, a missile-warning satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 9 April 1999, and a military communications satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 30 April 1999had involved Lockheed Martin Titan IV rockets. The three mission failures had cost taxpayers at least [US]$3 billion. Hall explained that the U.S. Air Force had traced the three launch failures to human error. The investigators had traced the most recent failure specifically to a misplaced decimal point. Aldridge, whose company had been responsible for checking U.S. Air Force rockets for defects prior to launch, explained that the mistake got through, despite the system in place to prevent such occurrences. Aldridge remarked that his companys workforce of engineers, scientists, and support personnel had decreased by 30 percent since 1993, and that the recent launch failures had caused further delays, resulting in increased costs for the Titan program. Both Aldridge and Hall requested federal funding. House Subcommittee Chairperson Michael N. Castle (R-DE) asked whether the military rocket program, which receives less supervision than NASA, needed greater congressional oversight. Castle announced that the subcommittee would hold further public hearings on the failures.(Stephen Sobek for Gannett News Service, Human Error Called Culprit in 3 Rocket Launch Failures, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 16 June 1999.)
NASA launched its Terra satellite, carrying instruments made in the United States, Japan, and Canada, from Vandenberg Air Force Base atop a Lockheed Martin Atlas IIAS rocket. NASA had originally scheduled the mission to launch on 14 December, but a computer had aborted the launch moments before ignition. Terra carried five sophisticated instruments for observing the interactions among Earths landmasses, atmosphere, ocean, and biosphere. NASA considered the craft the flagship of its Earth Observing System because of its instruments measurement capabilities and accuracy. The five instruments were 1) the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER), designed to capture high-resolution images of Earth in visible, near-infrared, shortwave-infrared, and thermal-infrared areas of the spectrum; 2) the Clouds and the Earths Radiant Energy System (CERES), a set of two broadband scanning radiometers for measuring Earths radiation; 3) the Multi-Angle Imaging Spectroradiometer (MISR), an instrument using nine cameras to measure the amount of sunlight scattered in different directions; 4) the Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), designed to view the entire surface of the Earth every one to two days and to make observations in 36 spectral bands; and 5) the Measurement of Pollution in the Troposphere (MOPITT), designed to observe the interaction of the lower atmosphere with the land and oceans.(Associated Press, NASA Launched Earth Observing Satellite on $1.3 Billion Mission, 20 December 1999. 849 NASA, Mission Archives STS-103, Third Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-103.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
A Russian Progress M42 cargo spacecraft launched with a Soyuz-U rocket to deliver supplies to the Mir space station. Supplies included equipment necessary to keep an uninhabited station operational and equipment for conducting a controlled reentry, in the event that Russia could not obtain the resources necessary to continue operation. The launch was the first since Kazakhstans partial relaxation of a launch ban at Baikonur Cosmodrome.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 549, 1 August 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx549.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
NASA launched Mars Polar Lander from Cape Canaveral, Florida, atop a Boeing Delta II rocket, three weeks after the launch of its companion craft, Mars Climate Orbiter. The crafts main purpose was to search Mars for signs of water. Lander carried machinery and two microprobes, as well as a microphone to record the sounds of Martian wind. Mars Polar Lander and Mars Climate Orbiter formed a pair, the second launched in a 12-year series of dual missions to explore Mars, with the ultimate goal of collecting a sample of Martian soil to bring to Earth by 2008.(Reuters, U.S. Mars Probe Launched from Florida, 3 January 1999; Beth Dickey, Craft Joins Mars Quest for Water, New York Times, 4 January 1999.)
President Nursultan Nazarbayev set Kazakhstans conditions for permitting Russia to launch a Progress cargo craft carrying supplies to the Mir space station, scheduled to lift off from Baikonur Cosmodrome on 14 July. Kazakhstan had suspended all Russian launches from the facility, following the crash of a Russian Proton-K rocket on 5 July. Nazarbayevs terms for permitting the launch of the Progress craft included Russias payment of its US$300 million debt for the lease of Baikonur Cosmodrome and a visit of high-level Russian officials to the Proton-K rockets crash site.(Sujata Rao for Reuters, Kazakhstan Sets Terms for Russian Space Launch, 13 July 1999.)
A Taurus rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying satellites for NASA and the Korean Aerospace Institute, as well as 36 capsules holding 7 ounces of cremated remains for Celestis Inc., a Houston-based company that arranged to send human remains to space. NASAs 253-pound (114.8-kilogram) Active Cavity Radiometer Irradiance Monitor (EOS ACRIM III), expected to return data for a minimum of five years, was deployed to measure sunlight reaching Earths atmosphere, oceans, and land, data needed for scientists to study whether slight changes in solar output affected global warming and cooling. ACRIM III was the third in a series of long- term, solar-monitoring tolls that NASAs JPL had built. ACRIM IIIs data would expand the database begun with the ACRIM I mission in 1980, aboard the Solar Maximum Mission spacecraft, and continued with the ACRIM II mission in 1991, aboard the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. ACRIM I was the first instrument to demonstrate clearly that the total radiant energy from the Sun is not a constant. The Korean satellite, built by TRW Inc. for a three-year mission, carried three instruments for creating digital elevation maps of Korea, studying the biology of the ocean, and performing physics experiments on the effects of radiation on electronics. The Celestis mission carried 36 capsules of human remains, which would orbit for 45 years before burning up in Earths atmosphere.(NASA, Item 1ACRIMSAT LaunchHQ, NASA Daily News Summary, 21 December 1999, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/media/1999/m99-262.txt (accessed 13 March 2008); Associated Press, NASA Satellite, Korea Probe Rocket into Space, 21 December 1999.)
Kazakhstans Finance Minister, Uraz Dzhandosov, announced that Russia had paid US$12.5 million as a first installment of its debt to Kazakhstan, fulfilling a condition of the agreement between the two countries. Kazakhstan had demanded the payment as part of the terms of lifting the launch ban it had imposed on Russia when a Russian Proton rocket exploded after liftoff from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan.(Russia Today, Russia Pays First Part of Baikonur Debt, 12 August 1999. 214)
Boeing launched a Delta II rocket from Californias Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying the first science satellites from Denmark and South Africa and the U.S. Air Forces Advanced Research and Global Observation Satellite (ARGOS). The Air Force intended the Boeing-built ARGOS to spend three years in space, collecting data on the Earths global environment and performing technology demonstrations for top-priority military space programs, as well as testing advanced space technologies for use on the ISS. The launches of Denmarks Orsted and South Africas SUNSAT (Stellenbosch University, South Africa, satellite) were critical milestones for both countries space programs. SUNSAT carried remote-sensing experiments to produce images from space at lower cost than larger systems, and Denmark deployed Orsted to study Earths magnetic fields and electrical properties.(CNN.com, Rocket Carries Trio of Science Satellites into Orbit, 23 February 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/ space/9902/23/argos.launch/index.html (accessed 10 April 2008).)
A Russian Soyuz rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome carrying four Globalstar satellites into orbit. The launch was Russias first from the space center in Kazakhstan, since a Proton rocket exploded after launch on 27 October, prompting the Kazakhstan government to reimpose its launch ban. Kazakhstan had lifted the ban partially after Russia agreed to pay US$400,000 in compensation. Media reports indicated that Russia had earned US$70 million from commercial launches such as that conducted for Globalstar Inc., an important income source for the Russian space program.(Associated Press, Russia Launches First Rocket Since October Explosion, 22 November 1999.)
Kazakhstan lifted its ban on launches of Russian Proton rockets after Moscow paid US$270,000 in compensation for the 5 July crash of one of the booster rockets and completed an agreed-upon joint investigation. The lifting of the ban cleared the way for two Russian Yamal-100 communications satellites to launch aboard a Proton rocket on 6 September. Although initially the country had banned all launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, which Russia had rented since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Kazakhstan had modified the ban to bar only Proton rocket launches, pending a joint investigation of the accident.(Russia Today, Kazakhstan Ends Russia Proton Rocket Ban, 1 September 1999.)
NASA successfully launched its Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) telescope aboard a Delta II rocket. FUSEs three-year mission was to measure the abundance of deuterium, or heavy hydrogen, which stars consume every day and convert to helium. Astronomers hoped that the study of deuterium would help them understand better what the universe was like moments after creation. The FUSE scientists sought to determine how much deuterium still exists and how much of it stars consume regularly, thereby calculating the original makeup of the universe. NASA had nearly cancelled the FUSE project in the early 1990s, because of cost overruns and missed deadlines, but in 1994 NASA had asked Johns Hopkins University to manage the project. Project managers at Johns Hopkins had scaled down the scientific instrument and used existing equipment instead of developing new technologies. The Canadian Space Agency had provided the camera, the French Space Agency had provided the spectrograph, and other U.S. universities had provided various parts for the telescope. Orbital Sciences Corporation had built the spacecraft using an existing design to reduce costs further. NASA considered the spacecraft and its launch a success; NASAs Science Director Edward J. Weiler remarked, We have never had a satellite as sensitive as FUSE.(Washington Times, Special Telescope To Look for First Signs of Creation, 25 June 1999; Steven Young for Reuters, NASA Launches Telescope To Seek Universes Origin, 24 June 1999.)
http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINSCENTAURRL10ENGINESCL. html (25 February 2008). The Independent Assessment Team on Mission Success, which Lockheed Martin had commissioned in May 1999 after a series of Titan IV launch failures, met its 1 September deadline, reporting its findings and recommendations to Lockheeds senior management. Lockheed Martin had tasked the investigating team with assessing program management, engineering and manufacturing processes, and quality-control procedures within the companys Space and Strategic Missiles Sector. Having discovered problems in accountability, quality, subcontract and supplier management, and cost emphasis, the Team recommended that the company develop a fly-out plan for Titan IVs remaining missions, improve its quality control, and improve its management of suppliers and subcontractors. Chairperson of the review panel A. Thomas Young remarked that regardless of the problems the team had uncovered, the panel had also found enormous fundamental technical strengths throughout the sector, as well as highly capable and dedicated staff. Young also commented that the new leadership team was off to a positive start. Vance D. Coffman, Chairperson and Chief Executive Officer for Lockheed Martin, endorsed the panels findings and pledged Lockheed Martin to implementing its recommendations.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin Implements Space Panel Recommendations, news release, 8 September 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINIMPLEMENTSSPACE PANELR.html (accessed 27 February 2008).)
The Russian Defense Ministry launched Raduga-1, an early-warning-system satellite for detecting missile launches, aboard a Proton-K booster rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Ground controllers lost communication with the satellite minutes after its launch, and just as it reached its preliminary orbit, both the satellite and the second stage of the rocket crashed in a remote region of Kazakhstan. Russian space officials initially stated that the satellite had crashed in an uninhabited area, but a Russian television network reported that a large piece of the Proton rocket had fallen onto farmland in the Karaganda region of Kazakhstan, nearly hitting a house. Nobody was injured in the crash.(United Press International, Russian Satellite Crashes into Kazakhstan, 6 July 1999. 737 Sujata Rao for Reuters, Kazakhstan Halts Russian Space Launches, 6 July 1999.)
The Peoples Republic of China announced it had launched into orbit its first piloted spacecraft, a non-reusable capsule named Shenzhou, which carried a mannequin for test purposes but was capable of carrying a crew of four. Xinhua news agency reported that the capsule, launched from Jiuquan satellite launch center aboard the new model Long March 2F, had spent 21 hours in space, orbiting Earth 14 times. China had built a new land- and sea-based, space-monitoring-and- control network for the launch. China heralded the launch as a breakthrough in the Chinese governments effort to join the United States and Russia in the elite club of manned space flight. The Chinese had abandoned the pursuit of human spaceflight in the late 1960s, because Premier Zhou Enlai thought it was too costly, but in 1992, President Jiang Zemin had decided to renew Chinese efforts, with the goal of putting a human in space by the end of the century. The head of Chinas Manned Spaceflight Program told Xinhua news agency that the successful test flight of the Shenzhou capsule demonstrated that the Chinese spacecraft and the new Long March rocket performed superbly. During the mission, the Chinese had conducted experiments in remote sensing, environmental monitoring, space materials, astronomy, and physics. Shenzhou had landed in Inner Mongolia using a parachute.(Michael Laris, Chinese Test Craft for Manned Orbits: Space Launch Boosts National Pride, Washington Post, 22 November 1999; Washington Times, Chinese Successfully Launch First Spacecraft, 22 November 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 553, 1 December 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx553.html (accessed 6 August 2008).)
Ukraines Prime Minister Valery Pustovoitenko appealed to Kazakhstans Premier Nurlan Balgimbayev to permit the launch of the Okean-O research satellite aboard a Ukrainian Zenit rocket, despite the launch ban following the 5 July crash of a Russian rocket. Ukrainian officials expressed concern that a delay beyond 15 July, with the rockets lengthy stay on the launchpad, would endanger the prospect of a successful launch. The Ukrainian space program, seeking to compete in the lucrative commercial space market, was under pressure to make a successful launch after the crash in September 1998 of a Zenit rocket, destroying 12 of Globalstar Inc.s communications satellites.(Pavel Polityuk for Reuters, Ukraine Appeals for Rocket Launch amid Kazakh Row.)
Following a series of recent launch failures, Boeing Company announced the convening of an independent panel of experts to examine its rocket programs, specifically Boeings Delta, Sea Launch, and Inertial Upper Stage programs. To head the panel, Boeing had selected Sheila E. Widnall, former Secretary of the U.S. Air Force and a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The panel was tasked with examining organizational roles and responsibilities within Boeing; recent launch failure investigation findings; processes used for government, civil, and commercial launches; acceptance processes for major subsystems and complex assemblies from suppliers; and manufacturing, assembly, transportation, and storage activities of Boeing launch programs.(Associated Press, Boeing Forms Independent Panel To Review Space Failures, 9 June 1999.)
In its third consecutive failure, the second loss within one month, the U.S. Air Force launch of a Titan IV rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, placed a geosynchronous military communications satellite, the USA 143, also known as Milstar 2, in a useless low-Earth orbit. (Associated Press, Air Force Declares Military Satellite Dead, 12 May 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 546, 1 May 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx546.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
Oleksandr Serdiuk, head of the International Relations Department of Ukraines Space Agency, announced that Ukraine and Brazil had signed an agreement the previous week, allowing Ukraine to use Brazils Alcantara space complex to launch a new generation of Cyclone-4 booster rockets, medium-weight rockets capable of putting 4 tons (3,600 kilograms or 3.6 tonnes) of payload into a geostationary orbit. In 1992, when the USSR dissolved, Ukraine had retained part of the former Soviet Unions space program, using several former Soviet factories to build rockets and selling rocket space to commercial satellite companies. Before the agreement with Brazil, Ukraine had only used launchpads in other former Soviet countries. However, Ukraine wanted to take advantage of the location of the Alcantara space complex near the equator, where spacecraft reach orbit more easily and commercial launches a
A Sirius-2 communications satellite launched aboard a Russian Proton-K rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The launch marked the second success for the Sirius Company, which planned to broadcast digital radio to the United States. Sirius had placed its first satellite in orbit on 1 July 2000, scheduling a third launch for November 2000.(Reuters, Kazakhstan: Russia Launches U.S. Satellite from Kazakhstan, 5 September 2000.)
Nature published a letter from physicist Leonard Reiffel revealing that, during the Cold War in the 1950s, the United States had funded a research program focused on detonating a nuclear bomb on the Moon, part of a plan to demonstrate the strength of the U.S. military. The Armour Research Foundationnow a part of Illinois Institute of Technologyhad directed the project, known as A Study of Lunar Research Flights. Astronomer Carl Sagan, then a young graduate student, had worked on the project. As Reiffel explained, Cold War politics had dramatically affected science agendas during the period: There was lots of talk on the part of the Air Force about the [M]oon being military high ground. The scenario had called for the U.S. Air Force to launch a small nuclear device from an undisclosed location and detonate it on the Moon. Those planning the detonation had selected an atomic bomb, because a hydrogen explosive would have been too heavy for a rocket to carry 238,000 miles (383,000 kilometers) to the lunar landing spot. Military leaders eventually called off the plan because of concern that, during the building and launch of the bomb, a nuclear accident could occur on Earth.(Leonard Reiffel, Sagan Breached Security by Revealing U.S. Work on a Lunar Bomb Project, Nature 405, no. 6782 (4 May 2000): 1314; Associated Press, Physicist Says U.S. Contemplated Detonating an Atom Bomb on the Moon, 18 May 2000.)
Mitsuyuki Ueda of the Aeronautics and Space Development Division of Japans Science and Technology Agency announced that Japan had decided to freeze the development of an unpiloted space shuttle, which was four years behind schedule, because of problems in Japans shuttle program, as well as in its H-2 rocket program. Japan had originally conceived its planned 20-ton (18,000-kilogram or 18.1-tonne) shuttle in the 1980s, modeling it after the U.S. Space Shuttle, and designing it to conduct scientific experiments and to carry into space payloads of up to 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes). Technical and financial setbacks within Japans shuttle program contributed to the freeze. In addition, because the original plan had called for Japan to launch the space shuttle aboard a Japanese-designed H-2 rocket, a launch failure of an H-2 rocket had influenced the decision to halt Japans shuttle program. In the failed launch of November 1999, officials had to destroy the rocket in midair, leading an advisory panel to suggest that Japans planned shuttle should launch from a reusable high-speed jet plane, rather than atop a rocket.(Associated Press, Japan Freezes Plans To Make Unmanned Space Shuttle, 2 August 2000.)
As Russias Zvezda module, its major contribution to the ISS, continued its journey toward the ISS, NASA celebrated the 25th anniversary of one of the first international, collaborative missions. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project had launched on 15 July 1975, when American astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton lifted off aboard an Apollo spacecraft atop a Saturn 1B rocket. During the course of their nine-day mission, the NASA crew had docked the United States Apollo with Russias Soyuz 19 spacecraft, successfully and without incident. The Cold Warera mission, testing the ability of NASA spacecraft to link with Russian ones, had represented a significant step toward the development of international collaboration in future space exploration(NASA, Anniversary of Apollo Soyuz Test Project Observed, news release, N00-30, 11 July 2000; Reuters, US, Russia Mark Space Jubilee as New Era Beckons, 11 July 2000.)
Russia successfully launched a Soyuz test rocket equipped with a Fregat accelerator unit able to carry payloads into high orbit, but lost the Fregat unit upon its reentry to Earth. The rocket took off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying only a dummy payload into space, in a test that was part of Russias ongoing research into developing vehicles and technologies that would eventually serve the orbiting ISS.(Dow Jones Newswire, Russia Tests, Then Loses Rocket with Union for Higher Orbit, 9 February 2000. 878 Orlando Sentinel (FL), Thousands Walk Out on Boeing in Seattle, 10 February 2000.)
News reached the United States that space debris had crashed to the ground near Johannesburg, South Africa, prompting NASA to respond. Several metal balls had fallen from the sky, leaving 8-inch (20-centimeter) dents in the ground. NASA scientists clarified that the debris probably came from a Delta rocket launched in 1996. Chief Scientist for Orbital Debris Nicholas L. Johnson explained that manufactured objects sent into space plummet back to Earth nearly every day, landing mostly in the ocean. Johnson also stated that NASA would compensate anyone hurt by the falling debris, remarking that no such injuries had occurred in more than 40 years.(Associated Press, Hail of Metal Balls Puzzles Farmers, Until NASA Steps In, 3 May 2000.)
The Russian Space Agency announced another delay in the launch of the crew compartment for the International Space Station (ISS), after two Proton rockets exploded when metal and mineral particles contaminated their engines. The Russian Space Agency had planned to use a Proton rocket to launch the ISS module. The S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia, which built the boosters, promised to replace the Proton rockets faulty parts. Funding problems had previously slowed construction of the crew compartment, disrupting the timeline for the international project.(Associated Press, Russia Again Delays Launch of Space Station Unit, 12 January 2000; Associated Press, Space Station Launch Delayed, 12 January 2000.)
EarthWatch Inc., a Colorado-based company developing a network of satellites to capture images of various regions of the Earth for commercial applications, launched its QuickBird 1 craft from Plesetsk Cosmodrome, aboard a Russian Cosmos-3M rocket. However, ground stations did not pick up its signals as planned. U.S. tracking data listed the crafts orbit as decayed, and a Russian Aerospace Agency spokesperson described the craft as effectively lost. EarthWatch had lost its first satellite, Early Bird 1, four days after its 24 December 1997 launch because of a power-system problem.(Stephen Clark, Commercial Eye-in-the-Sky Appears Lost in Launch Failure, Spaceflight Now, 21 November 2000.)
A GE-7 satellite, built by Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems for GE American Communications (GE Americom), launched from Korou, French Guiana, aboard an Ariane 5 rocket. The C-band satellite supplemented GE Americoms fleet of 12 satellites servicing the Americas, replacing the GE SATCOM C1 craft. A member of the A2100 family of satellites, the GE-7 joined four othersthe GE-1, GE-2, GE-3, and GE-4to provide distribution of cable, broadcast television and radio, business television, and broadband data distribution across the contiguous United States, Mexico, the Caribbean, and South America. The GE-7 would provide service to regional and national customers, in-orbit protection for many current cable and radio customers, plus critical telecommunications services delivered by AT&T Alascom.(Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martin-Built GE-7 Satellite Successfully Launched from Kourou, French Guiana Launch Site, news release, 14 September 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/Lock heedMartinBuiltGE7SatelliteSucc.html (accessed 25 April 2008).)
International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin, Khrunichev State Research, and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia, launched a Russian Proton rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The Proton launch, the fourth in the year for ILS, successfully placed into orbit a United Statesbuilt GE-1A communications satellite serving customers in parts of Asia, including China, the Philippines, and India.(Jim Banke, Proton Rocket Lifts American Satellite into Earth Orbit, Space.com, 2 October 2000, http://www. space.com/missionlaunches/launches/proton_launch_001001.html (accessed 14 April 2008).)
Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-101 bound for the ISS. The seven-astronaut crew comprised AmericansJames D. Halsell Jr., Scott J. Horowitz, Susan J. Helms, James S. Voss, Mary Ellen Weber, and Jeffrey N. Williamsand Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev. The crew planned to make repairs to the space station, focusing primarily on replacing four malfunctioning solar-powered batteries. The crew also planned to use the thrusters of the Shuttle to realign the ISSs orbit. Having been unoccupied and underpowered for nearly a year, the station had fallen below the optimal orbiting altitude. The station had gradually descended at a rate of about 1.5 miles (2.4 kilometers) per week. The Shuttle mission plan also called for Atlantiss crew to repair a damaged radio antenna and stabilize a shaky construction crane mounted on the outside of the ISS. Because of volatile weather in April 2000 and a full docket of rocket launches, NASA had delayed Atlantiss launch three times, pushing the Shuttles liftoff into mid-May. Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, a veteran of two tenures aboard Mir, had spent more time in space than the rest of Atlantiss crew combined.(Tom Breen, NASA Goes for 4th Launch Try in a Month, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 May 2000; Reuters, USA: Update 1Shuttle Atlantis Lifts Off from Florida, 19 May 2000; Associated Press, Atlantis Lifts Off on Fourth Try, 18 May 2000; Associated Press, Six Americans, One Russian Bound for Space Station, 19 May 2000.)
Scientists at the American Astronomical Society convention also unveiled the first detailed map of the region of the universe inhabited by Earth. Using an Australian robotic telescope, which measured distances between more than 100,000 galaxies, researchers had charted the locations of galaxies, dark regions, and cosmic clusters. Perhaps most significantly, the new map supported a long-standing theory regarding the size limits of cosmic structures. Because of the relatively small scope of previous mapping surveys, scientists had questioned whether the known standards of cosmic size were representative. The newest map, however, did not reveal any cosmic structure outside of previous standards. Therefore, scientists could support with greater conviction the idea that size limits existed as the universe evolved. The researchers termed the limits the end of greatness.(James Glanz, Robotic Telescope Affirms Assumption on Universes Birth, New York Times, 7 June 2000. 933 Mark Carreau, Rocket Gives Space Station a Life, Houston Chronicle, 7 June 2000.)
After two earlier unsuccessful trials, Russia launched, without incident, a modified Proton rocket carrying a large Gorizont communications satellite. Propulsion-system flaws had triggered explosions of the Proton rocket in previous trials. The United States viewed the successful test launch as a positive sign of Russias commitment to the ISS project, a boost for the strained relationship between the two countries. After the failed tests, a joint NASA-Russian Space Agency research crew had determined that production flaws in the turbomachinery of the rockets second and third stages, including the presence of contaminants such as asbestos cloth and metal fragments, had caused the problems. Russia planned to test the Proton rocket again before scheduling the much-delayed delivery of its crew module to the ISS.
A Russian Proton-K rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit the Russian Ministry of Defenses Raduga-1-5 spacecraft, a military communications satellite with the alternate names Globus-1 and Cosmos 2372. Although the Globus-1 was a classified program, news sources reported that the craft would use a geostationary orbit to serve as a relay link for Russian military forces. At the time of the launch, many Raduga craft remained in orbit, but only five were operational.(Justin Ray, Proton Rocket Lofts Russian Military Satellite, Spaceflight Now, 28 August 2000; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 562, 1 September 2000, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx562.html (accessed 6 August 2008). 975 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Duxbury Named Project Manager of Stardust Mission, news release 2000- 084, 30 August 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/duxbury.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
Two Earth-monitoring satellites launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base aboard a Boeing Delta II rocket, successfully reaching orbit. NASA launched its Earth Observing I (EO-I) satellite, part of its New Millenium Program, to test several advanced technologies for possible use in future missions. NASA planned to fly the US$193 million craft within 2 miles (3 kilometers) of the Landsat 7 satellite to collect the same images, with the Landsat 7 images serving as the benchmark for the new imager aboard the EO-I. The second satellitethe multinational SAC-C satellite, a joint venture of NASA, Argentina, Brazil, Denmark, France, and Italycarried 11 instruments for studying the Earths surface, atmosphere, and magnetic field, including an instrument to observe the migration of the Franca whale.(Associated Press, Two Earth-Monitoring Satellites, 21 November 2000.)
Space Media Inc. and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), prime contractor of the Russian service module of the International Space Station (ISS), announced a new multimedia partnership called Enermedia LLC. Under the new partnership, Space Media Inc. would use the Russian Space Program archives to develop and provide multimedia, which the Russian service module would broadcast on television and the Internet.(SPACEHAB, Space Media Inc and RSC Energia Join Forces Forming New Multimedia Partnership, news release, 2 August 2000, http://www.spacehab.com/news/2000/00_08_02.htm (accessed 8 May 2008).)
The Zvezda service module successfully docked at the ISS, immediately increasing the size of the space station by 50 percent. Through a series of rocket firings, Zvezda had drawn steadily closer to the ISS during its two-week journey to its new home 220 miles (354 kilometers) from Earth. Experts had deemed the successful launch and docking of the Russian component of the ISS vital to the long-term success of the collaborative venture. The Russian-built Zvezda, nearly identical to a core section of the Russian Mir space station, was to provide living quarters for researchers on the station, as well as vital electronic, computer, and communications systems. Anticipating significant interest in the historic linkup, NASA provided information on its Web site explaining how to view the space station as it traveled over Earth.(Warren E. Leary, Space Station Is Connected to Module from Russia, New York Times, 26 July 2000; NASA, No Telescopes Needed: NASA Web Sites Let Stargazers Track Impending Space Station Nuptuals, news release)
In a much-anticipated launch, the Astro-E satellite lifted off aboard an M-5 rocket from the Kagoshima Space Center on the Japanese island of Kyushu. However, soon after launch, Astro-E was lost when the rocket suffered a control system breakdown, propelling the satellite into a lower orbit than planned. U.S. officials monitoring the launch determined that the satellite had most likely burned up in Earths atmosphere. Astro-E, the product of a joint venture between the United States and Japan, carried new x-raysensing equipment, which scientists had hoped would further illuminate the material surrounding black holes. Scientists had designed the new equipment to sense minute changes in the heat of single protons. The specialists overseeing the launch and mission had hoped that Astro-E would orbit and gather data for five years. The satellite had cost more than US$100 million to develop.(NASA, Japanese-U.S. Satellite Ushers in Golden Era of X-ray Astronomy, news release 00-18, 2 February 2000; Associated Press, Japan Suffers Another Setback When Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit, 10 February 2000; Justin Ray, Astro-E Believed Lost Following Botched Launch, Space Flight Now, 10 February 2000.)
After nearly two years of delays and many questions regarding the Russian Space Agencys commitment to the ISS, Russia successfully launched the Zvezda module aboard a Proton rocket. Building the 22-ton (20,000-kilogram or 20-tonne), US$320 million module, to provide living quarters for researchers aboard the ISS, had severely taxed the Russian space program. To bring the project to fruition, Russia had relied on the resourcefulness of its scientists and engineers, as well as resorting to creative financing arrangements, such as selling the U.S.-based Pizza Hut Company an advertisement for display on the side of the Proton launch rocket. Russia had insured Zvezdas launch for more than US$1 billion. Hundreds of spectators, representing aerospace companies from Russia and Western countries, witnessed the launch from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Watching the launch with Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin praised the successful completion of the long-awaited module: The Russians have gone through all sorts of difficulty with their economy, the political changes, and a whole variety of other problems, and they came through and did what they said they were going to do. Koptev made clear the high stakes for future Russian space projects, based on the successful launch and linkup of Zvezda: This is 10 years of work and the success of this launch will determine to a large extent whether the Russian space programme continues or not. The international space community greeted news of the launch as a sign that the much-postponed ISS was nearing completion. Although Russia had plans to contribute further portals to the ISS, none of its subsequent contributions had as much potential to delay the international effort.(Associated Press, Russian Launching Clears Way for Space Station, 13 July 2000; USA Today, Russia Sends Module of Space Station into Orbit, 12 July 2000; Newsday (Long Island, NY), Launch of Key Module for Space Station Is Set, 11 July 2000; Reuters, Russia Space Station Launch Insured for over $1 Bln, 12 July 2000; Reuters, Kazakhstan: Update 2-Russia Launches Key Module for ISS, 12 July 2000.)
NASA successfully launched the GOES-L satellite aboard an Atlas 2A rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The new weather satellite would provide the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration with detailed readings on severe weather systems affecting the United States. NASA deemed the GOES-L satellite a top priority because of the declining returns of the aging GOES-8 satellite. NASA had delayed the US$220 million satellite project because of engine problems, causing anxiety to weather forecasters who depended on the satellites to track the powerful hurricanes that affected the United States in 1999. As Director of the National Weather Services Southern Region, William Proenza explained, It is vitally important that we have continuity of data or we may be finding ourselves impaired in our ability of forecasting. NASA had kept the May 2000 launch of the GOES-L on track, despite some calls to postpone it so that NASA could launch Shuttle Atlantis on an urgent repair mission to the International Space Station (ISS). However, NASA officials had determined that the risk of inadequate weather forecasting was too great to take a chance on delaying the launch.(Associated Press, NASA Launches Hurricane-Tracking Satellite, 3 May 2000; Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, Weather Satellite Has Successful Launch, Heads for Orbit, 3 May 2000.)
Russia launched a new defense and spy satellite aboard a Proton-K rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome. More concerned with the launch vehicle than with the military satellite, U.S. space officials praised the successful operation of the Proton-K rocket, a rocket similar in type to those that had been involved in several launch accidents during 1999. The United States had a particular interest in the launch, because Russia planned to carry a module built for the International Space Station (ISS) aboard a Proton rocket. Russia had built the Zvezda module to provide living space for the ISS crew. A spokesperson for the Russian Space Agency stated that the rockets successful launch confirmed Russias ability to transport its Zvezda module: This launch is important in estimating the readiness of the Proton-K booster rocket for a more important mission July 12 when the same kind of booster will carry the Russian-built Zvezda service module to the ISS. The Russian Space Agency had overcome significant financial shortfalls to complete production on both the Proton-K rocket and the Zvezda module.(Reuters, Russia: Russia Launches Proton Rocket Ahead of Space Lab, 5 July 2000.)
A Starsem Soyuz-Fregat rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit for the European Space Agency (ESA) the final pair of Cluster II scientific satellites, Rumba and Tango. The launch was the 10th consecutive success for the French-Russian Starsem consortium. The first pair of Cluster II satellites, named Salsa and Samba, had launched on 16 July 2000. Designed to determine the physical process of the interaction between the solar wind and Earths magnetosphere, the missions main objective was to increase understanding of space weather, viewed as an increasingly significant obstacle to satellite activity, thereby improving scientists forecasting abilities. Each of the four spacecraft contained a collection of instruments for detecting plasma fields, waves, and particles. The Cluster II mission, designed to last for two years following an initial three-month period of instrument and system commissioning, was an international effort of more than 200 scientists from Canada, China, the Czech Republic, ESA member states, Hungary, India, Israel, Japan, Russia, and the United States. The original Cluster mission had ended during its inaugural launch in 1996, when a malfunction had caused the explosion of Arianespace Inc.s Ariane 5 rocket.(European Space Agency, Lift Off for Second Pair of Cluster II Spacecraft, news release 52-2000, http://www. esa.int/esaCP/Pr_52_2000_p_EN.html (accessed 8 May 2008); Space Business News, Soyuz Launches Second Pair of Cluster Probes Igniting Science Mission; Tenth Successful Launch in 18 Months, 16 August 2000.)
NASA launched the most advanced communications satellite it had ever developed, the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite-H (TDRS-H) created to provide communication between the Space Shuttles, ISS, HST, and NASA control centers. Intended to replace a communications satellite that had been in place since 1983 and had surpassed its mission-designed lifetime, the new TDRS-H was the first of three communications satellites planned to link NASAs space-bound vehicles. NASA had designated nearly US$500 million for the design, building, and launch of the three new satellites. The TDRS-H launched aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas IIA rocket, separating from it after about 30 minutes of flight. Once the satellite reached 171 longitude, it became operational.(Lockheed Martin Inc., International Launch Services and Lockheed Martin Provide Mission Success for NASA Satellite Launch, news release, 30 June 2000; NASA, Advanced Communications Satellite Ready To Serve New Millennium Space Projects, news release 00-98, 21 June 2000.)
Following a 24-hour delay caused by a computer anomaly, NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) successfully launched the Lockheed Martinbuilt, NOAAL spacecraft from Vandenberg Air Force Base, aboard a Titan II rocket. Ground controllers confirmed that the craft had deployed its solar array and verified a power-positive condition. NASA and NOAA had designed the satellite, the second in a series of five polar-orbiting spacecraft, to collect meteorological data and to transmit the information to users worldwide. NOAAs National Weather Service planned to use the crafts data for long-range weather and climate forecasts. Although NASA had managed the project of building and launching the satellite, it intended to transfer operational control to NOAA 10 days following the launch.(NOAA, NOAA-L Weather Satellite Successfully Launched, news release 2000-069, 21 September 2000, http://www.publicaffairs.noaa.gov/releases2000/sep00/noaa00069.html (accessed 29 April 2008); Associated Press, Weather Satellite Launched After Delay, 21 September 2000.)
The Russian spacecraft Soyuz lifted off from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan propelled by a Soyuz-U rocket. The spacecraft carried one of the most controversial space travelers in historyAmerican businessman Dennis A. Tito. Tito had paid the Russian Space Agency for the opportunity to accompany cosmonauts Talgat A. Musabayev and Yuri M. Baturin on the mission to the ISS. Many space officials, regarding the endeavor as unsafe and capricious, had opposed Titos presence on the flight. Only days before the launch, Tito had gained the final approval of the consortium of nations building the ISS, becoming the highest profile space tourist to fly into orbit.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 570, 1 May 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx570.html (accessed 24 July 2008); Warren E. Leary, Russia Wins Fight To Be First Space Travel Agent, New York Times, 25 April 2001.)
Roy Estess, Acting Director of NASAs JSC, appointed Randy Stone as Deputy Director of JSC. As Deputy Director, Stone would be responsible for planning, organizing, and controlling activities necessary to meet the Centers goals and objectives. Stone had worked for Mission Control in Houston and for JSC for 34 years and, before his appointment as Deputy Director, had served as JSCs Acting Associate Director of Management. He had begun his career with NASA in 1967, developing equipment for the lunar landings of the Apollo program. During his tenure with NASA, he had worked on numerous programs, including Skylab, the Space Shuttle, and the ISS.(NASA JSC, Mission Control Veteran Randy Stone Named Johnson Space Center Deputy Director, news release J01-111, 15 November 2001.)
The Russian Space Agency launched a crewless logistics and resupply mission to the ISS. The Progress automatic cargo spacecraft launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 9:32 a.m., Universal Time (UT),108 on a Soyuz-U rocket. The mission, officially designated as M-45, carried to the ISS 2.5 tonnes (2,500 kilograms, 2.8 tons, or 5,512 pounds) of fuel, oxygen, equipment, and other supplies.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 574; Jesco von Puttkamer, Space Flight 2001: The Year in Review, http://spaceoperations.nasa.gov/2001/yearinrev/01YearReview.html (accessed 10 November 2008).)
NASA announced that it had canceled the X-33 rocket development project, an endeavor that many in the space industry had hoped would produce a vehicle to replace the Space Shuttle. NASA ended the five-year program after having invested nearly US$1 billion in developing a reusable launching vehicle. The X-33 program, contracted to Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company, had sought to build the worlds most technologically advanced space vehicleshaped like an arrowhead and protected by a heat-resistant metallic covering. Because of its capability to ascend to space without having to drop weight by discarding boosters after launch, the new vehicle would have significantly improved on the Shuttle. NASA officials had hoped that the X- 33 would lead to development of the VentureStar vehicle, for transporting people and cargo into space. Operating at considerably less expense to NASA than the Space Shuttles, the VentureStar would permit more space missions per year. NASAs decision to cut funding for the X-33 was part of its general effort to reduce its budget. NASA officials in charge of the Space Launch Initiative (SLI) had determined that, although the X-33 program had yielded significant new knowledge, it had not advanced to a point at which NASA engineers could readily implement the new technology. Arthur G. Stephenson, the Director of NASAs MSFC, which had managed the program, called the decision to deny further funding a very tough decision.(NASA, NASA Reaches Milestone in Space Launch Initiative Program; Also Announces No SLI Funding for X- 33 or X-34, news release 01-31, 1 March 2001; Warren E. Leary, NASA Ends Project on Rocket Meant To Replace Space Shuttle, New York Times, 2 March 2001; Kathy Sawyer, NASA Kills $1.3 Billion Space Plane Project, Washington Post, 2 March 2001; Los Angeles Times, NASA Ends X-33 Project that Sought To Cut Spaceflight Costs, 2 March 2001.)
A rocket carrying a NASA satellite and other payloads failed to reach orbit. The 91-foot (27.7- meter) Taurus rocket launched at 11:49 a.m. Pacific Daylight Time (PDT) from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, and within minutes, NASA observed indications of problems with the rocket, including a skewed trajectory near the time of the first-stage separation. The rockets manufacturer Orbital Sciences Corporation was uncertain about the exact details of the launch problem but presumed that the rocket had not reached orbit. The rocket was carrying NASAs ozone-analyzing Quick Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (QuikTOMS) satellite, a private imaging satellite called OrbView-4, and a private payload with the cremated remains of individuals who had paid to have their remains launched into orbit.(Associated Press, Rocket Launch with NASA, Orbital Sciences Payload Goes Awry, Satellites Probably Lost, 21 September 2001.)
India successfully launched its first experimental geosynchronous satellite (GSAT-1) aboard the Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV). The successful test suggested that India was poised to launch its own communication satellites. In a previous trial, India had halted a GSLV launch only moments before liftoff, when sensors indicated that the booster had insufficient power. Subsequent tests remedied the problem, enabling the successful 18 April launch. The Indian government praised the mission as the culmination of a decade of research and development aimed at achieving Indian launch capability.(Indian Embassy, GSLV Launched Successfully, news release, 18 April 2001, http://www.indianembassy.org/press_release/2001/april/apr_18.htm (accessed 1 July 2008); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 570, 1 May 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx570.html (accessed 24 July 2008).)
Russian President Vladimir Putin appointed a new director of Russias largest manufacturer of spacecraft and rockets, the Khrunichev State Research and Production Company. Putin selected Alexander I. Medvedev to succeed Anatoly Kiselyov, who had headed the company for 26 years. At the time of the change in leadership, Kiselyov had reported failing health. Companies with interests in Russian space exploration continued to adjust to postcommunist operations. The Khrunichev State Research and Production Company, providing much of the revenue to keep Russias space projects alive, manufactured Proton booster rockets used to launch commercial and communication satellites.(Associated Press, New Chief for Russia Space Company, 7 February 2001.)
NASA, conducting a test over the Pacific Ocean, aborted a planned attempt at the speed record for aircraft when the Pegasus rocket carrying a prototype X-43A jet veered out of control. NASA had employed a B-52 to carry the X-43A and the Pegasus rocket to 45,000 feet, where the test was to begin. According to the plan, the plane would release the Pegasus, which would then carry the X-43A to 100,000 feet (30,500 meters) before releasing the jet. Instead, however, the Pegasus rocket had gone out of control almost immediately after its release. NASA spokesperson Alan Brown explained: The Pegasus went out of control. It appeared parts were breaking off of it. NASA ordered the Pegasus destroyed after only a few seconds, and the ensuing explosion resulted in the loss of the scramjet as well. NASA officials and flight enthusiasts had hoped that the US$185 million experimental plane would top speeds of Mach 7. Instead, engineers scrambled to determine the cause of the accident.(Peter Pae, Hypersonic Aircraft Test Fails; Plane Is Destroyed, Los Angeles Times, 3 June 2001; New York Times, NASA Halts Scramjet Test, 3 June 2001; Washington Post, NASA Aborts Bid for Speed Mark, Blows Up Rocket, 3 June 2001.)
The Russian Space Agency launched a module of the ISS designed to expand the space stations size and provide other capabilities. The module, called Docking Compartment One (DC-1) or Pirs (Russian for pier), launched at 11:44 p.m. (UT), on a Soyuz-U rocket, from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. A cargo craft called Progress M-SO1 would transport the module to the ISS. The Russian Space Agency intended the DC-1 to provide additional stowage space for the ISS, an airlock for spacewalks, and an additional docking port for future Soyuz and Progress vehicles. The 8,000-pound (3,600-kilogram), 16-foot-long (4.9-meter-long) module would increase the total mass of the space station to 303,500 pounds (138,000 kilograms).(Puttkamer, Space Flight 2001; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 575, 1 October 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx575.html (accessed 14 November 2008).)
The American geosynchronous relay satellite XM 1, often referred to as Roll, launched into space aboard a Russian Zenit rocket, from a floating launchpad in the Pacific Ocean. The launch of Roll followed on the heels of the March 2001 delivery to space of XM 2, known as Rock. With both Rock and Roll in orbit, XM Satellite Radio became available to subscribing listeners in the United States. The president of the company XM Satellite Radio, based in Washington, DC, called Rock and Roll the newest power couple in Washington, DC, declaring that his firm was ready to compete with Sirius Radio for subscribers. Boeing Satellite Systems had designed and built the satellites.(The Boeing Company, Sea Launch on a Mission To Launch XMs Roll Satellite, 1 May 2001, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2001/q2/news_release_010501s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 571, 1 June 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx571.html (accessed 28 July 2008); Jim Banke, Sea Launch Sends Roll Spacecraft into Orbit for XM Satellite Radio, Space.com, 8 May 2001, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/launches/zenit_launch_010508.html (accessed 28 July 2008).)
The Russian cargo craft Progress M1-6 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, Kazakhstan, carrying 2.5 tons (2.3 tonnes or 2,300 kilograms) of supplies for the ISS crew. Along with food, research materials, and a new computer system to replace the damaged control machines, the cargo carrier also hauled 1 ton (0.9 tonnes or 907 kilograms) of extra fuel to the space station, so that Progress M1-6 could push the ISS into a higher orbit. Russian Space Agency officials planned for the spacecraft to dock with the ISS two days after launch. The launch was the first using the newly improved Soyuz-FG rocket, a booster designed to use 5 percent less fuel than previous models.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 571; Mark Wade, Progress M1, Encyclopaedia Astronautica, http://www.astronautix.com/craft/proessm1.htm (accessed 29 July 2008).)
Russia launched the Coronas-F solar observatory satellite aboard a Tsiklon 3 rocket. The launch took place from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in northern Russia. Engineers had designed the satellite to monitor light intensity, solar bursts, and several solar radii. The satellite carried 13 separate instruments, to gather data as the spacecraft orbited while pointing toward the Sun. The Coronas-F satellite was Russias second attempt to place in orbit such a complicated research craft. The Coronas-I, launched in 1994, had operated for only a couple of months before a control failure had caused it to lose its functionality.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 573.)
Maxwell W. Hunter II, one of the worlds leading rocket designers and space engineers, died at the age of 79. Hunter had graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1944 and had worked for Douglas Aircraft. While at Douglas, he had designed several of the companys missiles, including the Nike and the Thor, as well as many of its space projects, including the Delta rocket and the Saturn S-IV stage of the Apollo Moon rocket program. Hunter had later worked for Lockheed Missiles and Space Company. Among his achievements with Lockheed was the design of the Space Shuttle. Hunter had also advised Presidents John F. Kennedy and President Lyndon B. Johnson on space programs and space policy and had been a noted proponent of nuclear-powered spacecraft and a space-based laser defense program. In addition, Hunter had authored nearly 60 technical papers and had received the National Space Societys Wernher von Braun Memorial Award in recognition of his contributions to the development of missiles, rockets, and spaceflight.(Dennis McLellan, Maxwell Hunter II, 79; Pioneer Rocket Scientist, Los Angeles Times, 17 November 2001. 146 Mark Carreau, International Crew Completes Cable Task on Final Spacewalk, Houston Chronicle, 13 November 2001.)
The Mars Odyssey spacecraft launched successfully aboard a Delta 2 rocket. The craft, built by Lockheed Martin Space Systems and controlled by scientists at NASAs JPL, had headed to orbit Mars in search of evidence of water on the Red Planet. NASA officials expected the trip to Mars to take more than six months and the data collection to continue for more than two years. NASA had designed Mars Odysseyequipping it with a thermal-emissions imaging system, a gamma- ray spectrometer, and a radiation monitorto investigate further the question of whether Mars might have once supported life. By collecting data about the climate and geology of Marss surface, scientists hoped to explore theories regarding the planets seemingly harsh climate change. NASA and members of the scientific community watched the US$300 million craft closely, hoping for success. In 1999 Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander had both failed to accomplish their missions. Upon the successful launch, NASAs chief Mars program scientist celebrated: Weve got a program! This is the next step . . . Its kind of like setting off on the Lewis and Clark voyage across North America. Were bound for a new frontier.(Lockheed Martin Space Systems, Lockheed Martin-Built 2001 Mars Odyssey Successfully Launched, Begins Journey to Mars, news release, 7 April 2001, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2001/ LockheedMartinBuilt2001MarsOdysseyS.html (accessed 28 January 2010); William Harwood, Mars Odyssey Takes Off for Red Planet; NASAs Stalled Exploration Program Resumes with $297 Million Mission, Washington Post, 8 April 2001; Mark Carreau, Flawless Odyssey Launch Fuels Hoe: Three-Year Mission to Mars Follows Pair of NASA Failures, Houston Chronicle, 8 April 2001; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, NASA Succeeds in Launching Craft To Survey Mars Anxious Time Ahead for Scientists, 8 April 2001.)
NASAs Helios aircraft set a world record for the highest altitude ever attained by an aircraft without rocket power. The solar-powered, propeller-driven aircraft reached an altitude of 96,500 feet (30,000 meters), eclipsing the previous record by more than 10,000 feet (3,000 meters). The remotely piloted aircraft took off from the U.S. Navys Pacific Missile Range Facility (PMRF) in Hawaii at 8:48 a.m. local time on 13 August, staying aloft for nearly 17 hours before landing at 1:43 a.m. on 14 August. Fuel cells on the aircrafts wings provided electrical power during the daylight hours, when the aircraft achieved the record altitude; at night, the planes propellers acted as generators, providing electrical power to control the aircraft. According to NASA, an aircraft operating at such an altitude would be able to monitor the environment, improve communications on Earth, and simulate the conditions of flight within the atmosphere of Mars.(NASA, NASA Solar Aircraft Sets Altitude Record; Communications, Environmental Breakthroughs Expected, news release 01-165, 14 August 2001.)
The Peoples Republic of China launched a robotic spacecraft from the Gobi desert, a significant step in the countrys long-term plan to join the United States and Russia as one of the only nations capable of sending humans into space. The Shenzhou 2 craft reached orbit about 10 minutes after launch. China had shrouded its 31-year-old space program in secrecy, releasing few details about funding or about Chinas future goals. Peoples Daily, however, called the launch an important step in realizing manned spaceflight. President Jiang Zemin urged Chinese space officials to further accomplishments, saying, I hope you will work persistently and unremittingly to achieve even greater victory. Space experts speculated that a successful Shenzhou 2 mission could mean that China would be ready to send a man or woman to space in the next two to five years. Chinese officials remained circumspect regarding their exact plans.(Associated Press, Rocket Launch Aids New Space Program, 11 January 2001; Associated Press, Second Unmanned Chinese Spacecraft Returns to Earth, 16 January 2001.)
NASA commemorated the 75th anniversary of the first successful launch of a liquid-fueled rocket. On 26 March 1926, Robert H. Goddard had launched a 10-foot-long (3-meter-long) rocket fueled by gasoline and liquid oxygen. The rocket flew just over 40 feet (12 meters) high using the same technology that would one day launch massive rockets carrying Space Shuttles and other research craft into space. NASA had named Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) after Robert H. Goddard. At the anniversary celebration, NASAs Chief Historian Roger D. Launius called Goddard the forefather of American space exploration: Dr. Goddard was a true visionary, having already visualized flight in outer space by the time he was 21. Goddard had turned 21 in 1903, some 50 years before space exploration began in earnest. Even 75 years after Goddards successful test, NASA continued to use liquid-propulsion systems to launch most of its spacecraft and satellites.(NASA, March 16 Marks 75th Anniversary of First Liquid-Fueled Rocket Launch, news release 01-35, 12 March 2001.)
NASA launched the Thermosphere Ionosphere Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics (TIMED) spacecraft on a Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The purpose of the mission was to study a region called the Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere/Ionosphere (MLTI), located 40 to 110 miles (60 to 180 kilometers) above Earth. The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory had designed the spacecraft to produce the first set of comprehensive, global measurements of the MLTI, a region that scientists had not yet thoroughly analyzed, in which electrical currents surge and auroras create a glow over the northern and southern hemispheres of Earth. TIMED, which launched on the same rocket as the Jason-1 oceanography satellite, was the first in a series of six spacecraft that NASA intended to send to observe the MLTI from a 388-mile (625-kilometer) orbit of Earth. NASAs GSFC would manage the TIMED spacecraft for the Office of Space Science in Washington, DC; the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory would operate the spacecraft for NASA during the mission.
NASA launched the Jason-1 oceanography satellite from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellite launched on the same rocket as the TIMED spacecraft, but the two spacecraft were part of separate missions. Jason-1 belonged to a joint U.S.-French mission to monitor global climate interactions between Earths atmosphere and seas, continuing the mission that the TOPEX/Poseidon spacecraft had begun in 1992. The 500-kilogram (1,100-pound) Jason- 1 weighed about 1/5th of the TOPEX/Poseidon and carried its predecessors main instrumentthe Poseidon 2 altimeteras well as other, more advanced instruments that would provide Jason-1 with improved operational utility.(NASA, NASA/French Ocean-Observing Satellite Set To Soar, news release 01-225, 19 November 2001; NASA JPL, Ocean Surface Topography from Space: MissionsJason-1 Launch,29 July 2008, http://topex- www.jpl.nasa.gov/mission/jason-1-launch.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
Abe Silverstein, the former Director of NASAs Lewis Research Center (LeRC), died at age 92. Silversteins work in the aerospace industry predated NASA itself; he had begun his research career in 1929, working for NASAs predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. After serving in World War II, Silverstein had played a leading role in constructing the United States first supersonic propulsion wind tunnel. He had contributed to the Mercury and Apollo missions before 1969, when he assumed the head position at LeRC, today known as Glenn Research Center (GRC). During his career, Silverstein had received the Guggenheim Medal for technical contributions and visionary leadership in advancing technology of aircraft and propulsion performance. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called Silverstein one of NASAs true founding members, who had made possible NASAs robotic and human space programs. NASA also remembered Silverstein for his naming of the Mercury and Apollo missions. In addition, Silverstein had successfully promoted the liquid propulsion techniques pioneered at LeRC for use in the Apollo missions. Two sons and five grandchildren survived him.(NASA, Dr. Abe Silverstein, Early Architect of the Apollo Moon Landing, Dies, news release 01-109, 1 June 2001; Wolfgang Saxon, Abe Silverstein, 92, Engineer Who Named Apollo Program, New York Times, 5 June 2001; Associated Press, Abe Silverstein, 92, Pioneer in Space Research at NASA, 4 June 2001.)
The Microwave Anisotropy Probe (MAP) launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. MAP carried two Gregorian telescopes, designed to record temperatures in selected locations throughout the sky. MAPs broad mission was to provide further insight into how the universe formed. The spacecraft cost US$95 million to build.(The Boeing Company, Boeing Delta II Helps Unlock Secrets of the Universe, news release, 30 June 2001, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2001/q2/news_release_010630h.html (accessed 28 January 2010); Peter N. Spotts, Latest NASA Launch Aims To Take Cosmic Baby Picture, Christian Science Monitor, 29 June 2001;)
The Russian Space Agency launched the Soyuz TM-33 to the ISS on a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 4 a.m. (CDT). The missions crew members consisted of Russian cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyez and Konstantin M. Kozeev and French astronaut Claudie Andre-Deshays Haignere; Afanasyez was also Mission Commander. The spacecraft carried supplies and equipment for the ISS. The crew members planned to conduct joint operations and scientific research with the crew of Expedition 3. In addition, one of the main purposes of the mission, designated Soyuz 3 Taxi Flight, was to deliver the Soyuz spacecraft to the ISS, so that the ISS crew could use it as an emergency escape vehicle. The new Soyuz would remain at the ISS, and the spacecrafts crew would return to Earth in the older Soyuz TM-32, which was already docked at the station.(NASA, Soyuz 3 Taxi Flight Crew, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/station/crew/exp3/taxi3/index.html (accessed 26 November 2008); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 576, 1 November 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx576.html (accessed 26 November 2008).)
The Russian Space Agency launched an automatic cargo carrier to the ISS from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:24 p.m. (UT). A Soyuz-FG booster lifted the Progress M1-7 cargo carrier. Progress M1-7 was to deliver 2.5 tonnes (2.8 tons or 5,511 pounds) of equipment, food, and fuel to the space station, as well as a microsatellite called Klibri, which the crew would release after the carrier had docked with the ISS.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 577, 1 December 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx577.html (accessed 12 December 2001).)
Japans National Space Development Agency (NASDA) launched the first of its HII-A vehicles at 4:00 p.m., Japan Standard Time (JST), from Tanegashima Space Center. The HII-A carried two payloads, the Doppler Ranging Equipment and the Laser Ranging Equipment, both instruments designed to monitor the rocket during and after launch. Observers regarded the launch as a major success for the Japanese space program, which had designed the rocket as the countrys primary large-scale launch vehicle.(Puttkamer, Space Flight 2001; Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), H-IIA Launch Vehicle, http://www.jaxa.jp/projects/rockets/h2a/index_e.html (accessed 10 November 2008); JAXA, LRE (Laser Ranging Equipment), http://god.tksc.jaxa.jp/lr/lre.html (accessed 10 November 2008).)
A Russian Kosmos-3M rocket launched the first Algerian spacecraft, AlSAT-1, from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in Russia. The Algerian Space Agency (Agence Spatiale Algerienne) had designed the 92-kilogram (202-pound), imaging microsatellite to provide multispectral, medium- resolution images for remote-sensing purposes, particularly the monitoring of natural disasters. The Algerian Space Agency intended AlSAT-1 as the first of five microsatellites for a program called the Disaster Monitoring Constellation.(Agence Spatiale Algerienne [Algerian Space Agency], Lancement AlSAT-1, http://www.asal-dz.org/ lancement.php (accessed 29 October 2008); Agence Spatiale Algerienne [Algerian Space Agency], Mission AlSAT-1, http://www.asal-dz.org/mission.php (accessed 29 October 2008).)
NASA successfully launched the third replenishment spacecraft for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) fleet. The TDRS-J satellite launched aboard an Atlas 2A rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 9:42 p.m. (EST). TDRS satellites comprised a communication-signal relay system providing tracking and data-acquisition services between low Earth-orbiting spacecraft and ground-based control and data-processing facilities. The TDRS satellite system served numerous NASA programs, including the HST, the ISS, and the Space Shuttle. NASA had launched the first TDRS satellite in 1983.(The Boeing Company, Boeing-Built NASA Tracking and Data Relay Satellite Successfully Launched, news release, 4 December 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021204s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); National Space Science Data Center, NASAs Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS), http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/multi/tdrs.html (accessed 31 October 2008).)
Two spacecraft comprising the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) launched on a single rocket vehicle from Russias Plesetsk Cosmodrome. The five-year missions main purpose was to map variations in Earths gravity field, using the GPS and a microwave ranging system to measure the distance between the missions two identical satellitesnicknamed Tom and Jerry. The two craft were to monitor each other while flying in a polar orbit 500 kilometers (311 miles) above Earth. This mission, to study measurements of gravity variations, could help scientists understand better the changes in the transport of mass around the planet. Changes in mass, such as ocean currents, ground-water storage, and mass within Earth, can affect climate and other aspects of the planets environment. The GRACE mission was a partnership between NASA and the Deutsche Zentrum fur Luft- und Raumfahrt (the German Aerospace Center).(University of Texas Center for Space Research, GRACE: Mission Overview, http://www.csr.utexas.edu/grace/overview.html (accessed 11 August 2002); Warren E. Leary, New Satellites To Map Gravity More Precisely, New York Times, 19 March 2002.)
The Earth observation satellite Aqua launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellite Aqua was a component of the Earth Observing System (EOS), which also included the Terra satellite launched in December 1999. Aquas primary purpose was to acquire information about the effects of climate change on the water cycle. The satellite would also collect data to help scientists examine biological systems dependent upon water and improve long-term forecasts of weather and climate. Brazil, Japan, and the United States planned for their joint project Aqua to continue for six years.(NASA JPL, Aqua Launched To Study Earths Water Cycle, news release, 4 May 2002; Warren E. Leary, NASA To View Interaction of Earths Water and Climate, New York Times, 30 April 2002.)
NASA appointed Michael U. Rudolphi as Deputy Director for NASAs SSC. NASA administrators stated that the selection was part of the One NASA initiative of enhancing partnerships among NASAs various centers. Rudolphi would assume the post after the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour on STS-113, scheduled for liftoff in November 2002. Since January 2000, Rudolphi had managed the Reusable Solid Rocket Motor Project at NASAs MSFC. He had begun his career with NASA in 1998 as Facility Manager for MSFCs Advanced Solid Rocket Motor Project. Before joining NASA, Rudolphi had been a manager of the contractor plant for the Solid Rocket Booster Project at NASAs KSC.(NASA, NASA Announces New Stennis Space Center Deputy Director, news release 02-201, 17 October 2002. 312 NASA, STS-112: Extending the Space Stations Backbone, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/ shuttle/archives/sts- 112/ (accessed 17 October 2008).)
NASA officials stated that NASA had used Web sites such as Yahoo! and eBay to find discontinued electronic equipment. NASA had continued to use electronic components such as 8-inch-floppy-disc drives, circuit boards, and computer chips, not in the Space Shuttles themselves, but in equipment used to service and support the Shuttles. For example, NASA had purchased outdated medical equipment to acquire the increasingly scarce Intel 8086 computer chip, a variant of the chip used in IBMs first personal computers in 1981. NASA had continued to use the Intel 8086 chip in diagnostic equipment for the Space Shuttle booster rockets, also developed in the early 1980s. Although NASA planned to develop various systems with new hardware, some crucial systems remained dependent on antiquated electronic parts.(William J. Broad, For Parts, NASA Boldly Goes . . . on Ebay, New York Times, 12 May 2002.)
The China National Space Administrations (CNSAs) Kaituozhe 1 rocket failed during launch, for reasons that remained unclear. Kaituozhe 1 was the first of the CNSAs new all-solid-fuel, four-stage launch vehicles. CNSA and other Chinese government agencies apparently provided no information to the public about the event or about the reason the launch had failed.(Puttkamer, Space Flight 2002.)
Boeing successfully launched its first Delta 4 rocket, which the U.S. Air Force would use in 2003 in the EELV program. The purpose of the EELV program was to develop reliable and cost- efficient launch capabilities for commercial and government payloads. The launch occurred at 5:39 p.m. (EST) at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The Delta 4, a Medium+ configuration of Boeings five-member Delta 4 family of rockets, deployed Eutelsats (European Telecommunications Satellite Organizations) commercial telecommunications satellite W5 into geosynchronous transfer orbit. During the next scheduled Delta 4 launchthe first mission for the EELV programthe Air Force planned to use a Delta 4 Medium rocket to deploy the DSCS III A3 satellite for the Defense Satellite Communication System.(The Boeing Company, Successful First Launch for Boeing Delta IV, news release, 20 November 2002, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2002/q4/nr_021120s.html (accessed 28 January 2010); U. S. Air Force, U.S. Air Force Fact Sheet: Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle, http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/space/factsheets/eelv.htm (accessed 28 October 2008).)
ESA launched the environmental satellite Envisat on an Ariane-5 rocket. The primary mission of Envisat, designed to provide continuous monitoring of Earths atmosphere, ice caps, and land, was to measure sea color in coastal areas and in oceans. To perform this monitoring, Envisat was equipped with 10 optical and radar instruments, including the Advanced Synthetic Aperture Radar and the Medium Resolution Imaging Spectrometer. ESA planned for the satellite to orbit Earth every 100 minutes, examining each region of Earth once every 35 days.
NOAAs Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES), NOAA-M, launched on a Titan 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. NOAA intended the satellite, which was renamed NOAA-17 upon reaching orbit, to collect meteorological data to improve weather forecasting. The satellite was the third in a series of five satellites collectively referred to as the POES system. NOAA planned to transmit the satellites data to its National Weather Service, as well as to organizations in other countries. Lockheed Martin Space Systems had built and launched the satellite for NOAA, with NASAs GSFC managing the project and providing technical guidance.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2002, p. 46; NOAA, NOAA-M Environmental Satellite Successfully Launched, 24 June 2002, http://www.noaanews.noaa.gov/stories/s929.htm (accessed 18 August 2008); NOAA, Polar Operation Environmental Satellite: Polar Orbiting Satellites, http://www.oso.noaa.gov/poes/ (accessed 18 August 2008).)
NASA launched Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) on a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. NASA scientists had created CONTOURscheduled to make close
The first Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV), the product of a long-term program designed to provide military and other satellites with enduring, reliable access to space, launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Lockheed Martin had developed the rocket, called the Atlas 5. The EELV placed the European television satellite Hot Bird 6 in its preliminary orbit 31 minutes after its launch, and the satellites thrusters later maneuvered it into its final orbit. The EELV program had resulted from the U.S. governments research into the 1986 Challenger disaster. The U.S. Air Force had reportedly paid Lockheed Martin and the Boeing Company more than US$500 million each to design an EELV. The U.S. Air Force had requested an EELV that was an advanced version of existing rockets, rather than an entirely new system, estimating that, through 2020, the EELV could reduce the cost of placing military satellites into orbit by approximately US$10 billion. France-based Eutelsat (European Telecommunications Satellite Organization) owned the Hot Bird 6 broadcast satellite, which Alcatel Space had built.(William Harwood, Into Space, A New Kind of Rocket, Washington Post, 22 August 2002; Lockheed Martin, Inaugural Atlas V Scores Success for ILS, Lockheed Martin, news release, 21 August 2002, http://www. lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2002/InauguralAtlasVScoresSucceslForILSL.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
Thomas J. Kelly, designated by NASA as father of the lunar module, died at the age of 72 in Cutchogue, New York. Kelly had led a team of engineers at Grumman Aircraft Corporation in designing and building the Lunar Excursion Module known as the Eagle. Apollo 11 astronauts had used the Eagle to land on the Moon and to return to the orbiting command module for the trip back to Earth. In 1972 NASA had awarded Kelly with its Distinguished Public Service Medal for his work on the Apollo program. Kellys wife, six children, and 10 grandchildren survived him.(Warren E. Leary, T. J. Kelly, 72, Dies; Father of Lunar Module, New York Times, 27 March 2002.)
A Russian Space Agency launch failed, when an uncrewed Soyuz-U rocket exploded after the rockets engine automatically shut down, 29 seconds after liftoff from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in Russia. The rocket was carrying a Foton-M1 spacecraft with 44 microgravity experiments that ESA, Japan, Russia, and the United States had intended for the ISS. ESA stated that it planned to rebuild the Foton-M1 spacecraft for a later launch.(ESA, Foton, http://www.spaceflight.esa.int/users/index.cfm?act=default.page&level=11&page=facfoton (accessed 6 January 2009); Puttkamer, Space Flight 2002.)
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) announced its first successful launch of a satellite into a geosynchronous transfer orbit. ISRO launched METSAT, a meteorological satellite, from Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India, using it own rocket, the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV). The new version of the PSLV reflected a significant enhancement of the rockets capabilities and a substantial improvement in ISROs overall launch capabilities. Previous versions of the PSLV had been capable of placing 900- kilogram (2,000-pound) satellites in a 900-kilometer (560-mile), polar Sunsynchronous orbit, whereas the PSLV-C4 had placed the 1,055-kilogram (2,325-pound) METSAT in a highly elliptical orbit with an apogee (the farthest point from Earth) of 34,700 kilometers (21,600 miles).(ISRO, PSLV-C4 Launch SuccessfulPlaces METSAT in Orbit, news release, 12 September 2002, http://www.isro.org/pressrelease/Sep13_2002.htm (accessed 3 October 2008); Puttkamer, Space Flight 2002.)
NASA announced that it had lost contact with the US$159 million comet-exploring spacecraft Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR), launched on 3 July 2002. Ground controllers had lost contact with CONTOUR after a scheduled ignition of its solid-propellant rocket engine, designed to propel the spacecraft out of Earth-orbiting space and into a heliocentric trajectory where it would eventually encounter comets Encke, Schwassmann-Wachmann, and dArrest. At the time of its scheduled ignition, the spacecraft was orbiting Earth approximately 140 miles (225 kilometers) above the Indian Ocean.(Warren E. Leary, Comet-Exploring Spacecraft Has Disappeared, NASA Says, New York Times, 16 August 2002; NASA National Space Science Data Center, CONTOUR, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ nmc/masterCatalog.do?sc=2002-034A (accessed 26 September 2008).)
NASAs KSC launched the Reuven Ramaty High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (HESSI) on a Pegasus XL rocket from a Lockheed L-1011 aircraft. The purpose of HESSIs two-year mission was to analyze particle acceleration and explosive energy released in solar flares, using imaging and spectroscopic instruments. Solar flares can release in a few minutes, or even just a few seconds, an amount of energy nearly equal to that released by the explosion of 1 billion megatons (907 trillion tonnes or 907 quintillion kilograms) of TNT, disrupting communications satellites and power grids. Scientists at the University of California at Berkeley, which would manage the US$85 million mission, had designed the 645-pound (290-kilogram) probe.(Houston Chronicle, New NASA Probe To Analyze High-Energy Flares from Sun, 5 February 2002; Puttkamer, Space Flight 2002.)
NASA announced the extension of its existing contract with ATK Thiokol Propulsion for the production and refurbishment of reusable solid rocket motors (RSRM) for the Space Shuttle program. Shuttle launches required two RSRMs and three main engines to provide sufficient thrust for the Shuttle to attain orbit. Under the modified agreement, ATK Thiokol would produce and refurbish 70 RSRMs and three flight-support motors. The US$429 million modification extended to May 2007 the original US$2.4 billion contract, which NASA and ATK Thiokol had agreed on in October 1998. The original contract had been the sixth agreement between ATK Thiokol Propulsion and NASAs MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama.(NASA, NASA Extends Reusable Solid Rocket Motor Contract with ATK Thiokol Through May 2007, news release c02-q, 1 July 2002.)
The newest Boeing Delta rocket, the Delta 4, launched the USA 167also known as the Defense Satellite Communications Systems Phase 3 (DSCSIII-A3), or Discus satelliteinto orbit, from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The American geostationary military communications satellite was the first U.S. Air Force craft launched atop Boeings newest Delta rocket, as well as the first mission for the U.S. Air Forces Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV) Program. The craft, a triaxially stabilized spacecraft with solar power of 1.24 kilowatts, operating at six superhigh frequencies between 40 and 85 megahertz, joined the DSCS III constellation of eight similar craft to provide very secure global links to the U.S. military. The launch of the Discus satellite featured the smallest of the Delta 4s several possible configurations, with two stages and no booster rocket.
A 66-foot-high (20-meter-high) VLS-1 O3 rocket exploded on its launchpad during tests at Alcantara Launch Center in Brazil, delivering a serious blow to Brazils nascent space program. Brazil had hoped to be the first Latin American nation to place a satellite in orbit. According to the Brazilian Ministry of Defence, the accident, which occurred three days before a scheduled launch, killed 21 people, mostly civilian technicians, injured 20 others, and destroyed two research satellites. The rocket had successfully completed two days of tests before the explosion. Brazils Minister of Defence Jose Veigas Filho stated that, for unknown reasons, one of the four main motors of the US$2.2 million rocket had ignited, leading to the explosion that destroyed the launchpad. The accident was Brazils third failed attempt to launch a rocket with a research satellite.(Brazils Rocket Test Kills 21, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 23 August 2003; Stan Lehman, Brazil Mourns Dead, Vows to Reinforce Space Program, Houston Chronicle, 25 August 2003.)
The U.S. Air Force launched a Titan 4B rocket with a Centaur upper stage carrying USA 171, an Orion classified satellite serving the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO). The Air Force provided no comment on the payloads destination or its whereabouts following the separation of the second stage of the Centaur. The Air Force had delayed the launch of USA 171 since April 2002 because of a series of technical problems and issues with the payload. The launch was likely the last of the Titan-Centaur launches, with only three Lockheed Martinbuilt Titan 4 rockets and one Titan 2 remaining to launch. The Air Force had contracted with Boeing and Lockheed Martin to replace the Titan 4 family with the Boeing Delta 2 and the Lockheed Martin Atlas 5, to provide the Air Force with cheaper, more reliable access to space for military payloads.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 599, 1 October 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx599.html (accessed 3 February 2009); Associated Press, Air Force Launches Titan 4B Rocket Carrying Secret Military Payload, 9 September 2003; Chris Kridler, Titan Carries Spy Satellite into Orbit, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 September 2003.)
A Russian Cosmos-3M rocket launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in Russia carrying three 100-kilogram (0.1-tonne or 0.11-ton) satellites into orbit for Nigeria (NigeriaSat-1), Turkey (BILSAT-1), and the United Kingdom (UK-DMC). The satellites joined a similar satellite from Algeria, launched in November 2002, to form the Disaster Monitoring Constellation (DMC). The DMCs purpose was to provide environmental information regarding floods, earthquakes, and fires. Surrey Satellite Technology Ltd. of Guildford, United Kingdom, which specialized in small satellites, had initiated the DMC project. The four craft had ground resolution of 32 meters (105 feet), and each image produced by the satellites showed 600 square kilometers (231.7 square miles). The Cosmos-3M also carried two military satellites for Russia. One of the satellites, Rubin-4 DSI, was a Russian communications experiment in transmitting telemetry data via standard e-mail, using Orbcomm communications satellites. Another, Mozheyets-4, built by students at the Mozhaisk Military Space Academy, tested hardware for future use on Russias GLONASS (Global Satellite Navigation System). The third was South Koreas KAITSAT-4 scientific-research microsatellite, a demonstration platform to test new satellite systems, hosting five science experiments from an international team of researchers.(Peter B. de Selding, Disaster Monitoring Satellites Launched, Space News, 30 September 2003; Jim Banke, Kosmos 3M Booster Carries Six Satellites to Earth Orbit, Space News, 29 September 2003.)
The U.S. Air Force launched an Atlas 2-AS rocket carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), marking the final launch of the II-AS model from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch cleared the way for officials from the military and from Lockheed Martin to begin renovating Launch Complex 3 to accommodate the Atlas 5 rocket. Renovation plans included raising the mobile service tower 30 feet (9.14 meters) to accommodate the taller launch vehicles, building a fixed launch platform, modifying the umbilical tower, and enlarging the flame trench. The Lockheed Martin Atlas team planned to launch the first Atlas 5 from Vandenberg Air Force Base in 2005.(Associated Press, Air Force Sends Spy Satellite into Space, 2 December 2003; Justin Ray, Atlas Soars on Secret Mission Under Cover of Darkness, Spaceflight Now, 2 December 2003.)
In the CAIBs third public meeting, U.S. Air Force Lieutenant General Aloysius G. Casey, a retired three-star general and former Director of the Space Division of Air Force Systems Command, presented his opinions about the Columbia disaster, based on his decades of experience with missiles and rocket systems. Casey shared with the Board his knowledge of high-speed impacts, referring to the insulating foam that had fallen from the Shuttles external tank 81 seconds after the 16 January launch. He also shared his knowledge of the level of testing necessary to determine whether a system is qualified to fly. Casey stated that NASA needed to do a better job in quantifying the safety margins for all of the shuttles various systems and be more sensitive to clues the hardware may be offering when things dont work as designed. Board Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr., remarking that the subject of successful flights dont re-establish margins has come back again and again, called Caseys insight very helpful. However, Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASAs KSC, noted that he had never considered falling foam to be a safety issue and that it had never caused any significant damage in the program to date. Rather than a safety issue, Bridges had considered the foam a maintenance concern. Bridges commented that if he had been aware of the safety implications, he would have recommended a stop to flying.(Jim Banke, NASA Missed Trouble Signs, Expert Tells Columbia Board, Space.com, 25 March 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_caib_030325.html (accessed 29 August 2008).)
CBERS 2, a China-Brazil Earth Resources Satellite (CBERS) launched aboard a Long March 4B rocket from the Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center in the Peoples Republic of Chinas Shanxi province. The 1.6-tonne (1.76-ton or 1,600-kilogram) CBERS 2 remote-sensing satellite, designed to collect data related to the environment, agriculture, urban planning, and water pollution, would be under Chinese control for 18 months before transferring to Brazilian control for a minimum of six months.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Reuters, China Launches Satellite Developed with Brazil, 21 October 2003; Stephen Clark, Earth Monitoring Satellite Launched by China and Brazil, Spaceflight Now, 21 October 2003.)
In its first mission to the Moon, ESA launched its Small Mission for Advanced Research in Technology (SMART-1) spacecraft aboard an Ariane 5 rocket from Kourou, French Guiana. SMART-1 was the first spacecraft since NASAs 1998 Lunar Prospector to attempt the journey to the Moon. ESA planned for the 770-pound (349.2-kilogram) craft, powered by an ion- propulsion engine, to reach the Moon in early 2005. SMART-1 carried 33 pounds (15 kilograms) of miniature instruments, which researchers from Finland, Germany, Italy, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom had provided, including a color camera the size of a human eye, a 4.4- pound (2-kilogram) infrared spectrometer, and an 11-pound (5-kilogram) x-ray spectrometer. The purpose of the SMART-1 mission was to solve certain mysteries about the Moons formation, its mineralogical composition, and the amount of water it has, if any. The Ariane 5 also carried into orbit two telecommunications satellitesthe INSAT 3-E for India and the European e-BIRD. ESA had delayed the launch of e-BIRD since 28 August to allow the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) to make further checks on its satellite.(Frank D. Roylance, Europe Finally Ready for Mission to Moon, Baltimore Sun, 29 September 2003; Agence France-Presse, European Rocket Places Lunar Explorer, Two Satellites into Orbit, 29 September 2003.)
Soyuz TMA-2 launched aboard a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying one Russian cosmonaut and one American astronaut for a six-month stay at the ISS. American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko would replace the three-person crew that had lived at the space station since November 2002. An expert on solar flares, Lu had flown to Russias space station Mir in 1997 and to the fledgling ISS in 2000 on STS-106. Malenchenko and Lu had been fellow crew members aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis on STS-106. During that mission, Lu and Malenchenko had teamed up in a spacewalk to hook up exterior cables.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Chris Kindler, Soyuz Capsule Includes NASA-Required Features, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, Astronaut, Cosmonaut Named for Space Station Mission, 2 April 2003, NASA Mission Archives: STS-106, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
After numerous delays, NASA launched Mars Explorer Rover-B (MER-B) aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, in time to meet the 15 July deadline. If NASA had not met that deadline, it would have had to wait an additional four years to launch the craft. MER-B, nicknamed Opportunity, was an exact duplicate of MER-A, known as Spirit, which had launched on 10 June. Bad weather, a failed battery cell, and a problem with the cork insulation, which had failed to adhere to the aluminum rocket, had caused the launchs delay.
NASA announced the successful completion of a series of engine and parachute tests, clearing the way for NASA to carry out integrated Pad Abort Demonstration (PAD) test flights to support its Orbital Space Plane (OSP) program. In November and December 2003, engineers had conducted a series of 14 hot-fire tests of a 50,000-pound-thrust (22,680-kilogram-thrust) RS-88 rocket engine, resulting in a total of 55 seconds of successful engine operation. The Rocketdyne Propulsion Power unit of the Boeing Company had designed and built the engine. On 9 December 2003, engineers had tested the parachutes at the U.S. Armys Yuma Proving Grounds in Yuma, Arizona, verifying the function, performance, and stability of an 80-foot (24.38-meter) drogue parachute and of four 156-foot (47.55-meter) main parachutes. Testers had dropped a 12.5-ton (11.34-tonne or 11,340-kilogram) pallet from 10,000 feet (3,048 meters) to simulate the size and weight of a vehicle and crew. The pallet had descended to a soft landing under nearly two acres of parachutes.(NASA, Engine, Parachute Tests Pave Way for Launch Escape System, news release 03-417, 18 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03417_escape_system.html (accessed 23 March 2003). 573 Chris Kridler, Beagle 2 On Its Own, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 20 December 2003.)
An American GPS satellite, GPS 2R-9, launched atop a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The GPS 2R-9also known as NAVSTAR 52 and USA 168replaced the aging GPS 2-5, which had been in orbit since 1989. The fleet of GPS satellites consisted of 28 spacecraft.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593; Kelly Young, Delta 2 To Carry GPS Satellite into Space, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 March 2003.)
An Atlas 5 rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 11:45 p.m. (UT), carrying the Rainbow 1 satellite into orbit. The 4.3-tonne (4.7-ton or 4,300-kilogram) Cablevision Systems Corporation satellite would provide direct-to-home television services in the contiguous United States. The Atlas 5, on its third flight since its inaugural flight in August 2002, carried for the first time two 64-foot (19.5-meter), Aerojet-built solid rocket boosters, which enabled the rocket to clear the launchpad in just 7 secondsonly half of the time required in the two previous launches. The launch marked the completion of flight-testing of all major new systems in the Atlas line. The U.S. military had designed Atlas 5 under its Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV) Program.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 597; Associated Press, Most Powerful Atlas Rocket Carries Cablevision Satellite into Space, 18 July 2003.)
A team of engineers from academia and industry conducted the first known flight test of a powered, liquid-propellant, aerospike engine, which they had developed under the California Launch Vehicle Education Initiative (CALVEIN). The X-33/Venturestar single stagetoorbit rocket plane, which NASA and Lockheed Martin had shelved, had been a prototype for aerospike-motor technology. Students at California State University at Long Beach had designed and developed the research vehicle Prospector 2 to use a mixture of liquid oxygen and ethanol. The rocket pitched after several seconds of stable flight, crashing to the floor of the Mojave Desert in California and destroying student payloads on impact. However, the aft section of the vehicle, which contained the aerospike, remained mostly intact. The mission achieved its single objective: to lift the vehicle into the air using the liquid-propellant aerospike engine. The test revealed several areas of the aerospike-engine design that needed improvement.(Space News, Rocketeers Fly Aerospike Engine, 24 September 2003.)
ESA launched its Mars Express mission from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan aboard a Russian Soyuz-Fregat rocket. Mars Express consisted of ESAs Mars Orbiter and a 65-kilogram (143.3-pound) lander, Beagle 2, named in honor of the ship that Charles Darwin sailed on during his search for the origins of life. The orbiter, scheduled to reach Mars in December, carried multiple cameras, spectrometers, and radar equipment. Following the launch, ESA Director of Science David J. Southwood remarked that its success signified Europes official entry into the interplanetary travel club.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596, 1 July 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx596.html, (accessed 12 December 2008); Agence France-Presse, Europe Launches First Ever Mars Space Mission, 3 June 2003.)
A European Ariane 5 rocket launched two satellites into orbit from Kourou, French GuianaPanAmSats Galaxy 12 commercial telecommunications satellite and the Indian Space Research Organisations (ISROs) INSAT 3A satellite. The Ariane 5G standard version was the first launch of an Ariane rocket since the enhanced Ariane 5 ECA had failed in December 2002, a failure that had prompted a complete review of the Ariane 5 system, particularly its main-stage cryogenic engine. The 1.8-tonne (2-ton, 1,800-kilogram, or 3,968-pound) Galaxy satellite built by Orbital Sciences Corporation carried 24 C-band transponders to provide voice, video, and data transmissions to North America and South America from its position at longitude 72o west. The 3-tonne (3.3-ton, 3,000-kilogram, or 6,614-pound) INSAT 3A geostationary communications and weather-monitoring satellite carried 12 C-band, 6 extended C-band, and 6 Ku-band transponders, to provide voice, video and data transmission to western Asia, eastern Asia, and India from its position at longitude 93.5o east. The ISRO satellite carried the typical INSAT package of visual, infrared, and water-vapor band sensors to monitor clouds and storms, as well as a separate transponder for an international search-and-rescue program.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Peter B. de Selding, Ariane 5 Successfully Returns to Flight, Space News, 11 April 2003.)
A Delta 2 rocket launched, carrying a GPS-2R8 satellite and an Experimental Spacecraft System (XSS-10) microsatellite into orbit. The U.S. Air Force was launching the GPS-2R8 to replace the 22nd GPS satellite, which had launched 10 years earlier, joining a constellation of 26 operational GPS spacecraft. Although the military GPS created in the 1970s had generated a commercial industry with sales in excess of US$6 billion, the system had continued to exist primarily to serve the U.S. military. The U.S. Air Force was launching the 62-pound (28-kilogram) XSS-10 spacecraft to test new guidance and navigation software and to demonstrate new technologies, such as a miniature communications system, a lightweight propulsion system, and advanced lithium polymer batteries.(Jim Banke, Delta 2 Rolls, Launches GPS and Experimental Satellites, Space.com, 29 January 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/delta2_launch_030129.html (accessed 23 July 2008).)
Progress M-48 12P launched on a Soyuz FG rocket, carrying 2.6 tonnes (2.87 tons or 2,600 kilograms) of food, fuel, water, and equipment to the ISS. Among the supplies Progress M-48 carried were an Iridium satellite phone and GPS equipment for the use of the Expedition 7 crewRussian Commander Yuri Malenchenko and NASA Science Officer Edward T. Luwhen they returned to Earth in the Soyuz TMA-2 spacecraft in October. The Russian Space Agency had added the satellite phone and GPS equipment to the supplies because Soyuz TMA-1 had experienced an internal glitch while returning the Expedition 6 crew to Earth, resulting in a long, tense search for the craft and crew.
Four witnesses appeared before the CAIB at its first public hearing. Director of NASAs JSC Jefferson D. Howell Jr. and Space Shuttle Program Manager Ronald D. Dittemore spoke about workforce issues, particularly, about NASAs concern regarding the erosion of its skill base. Keith Chong, a senior scientist at the Boeing Company, discussed Boeings work on the foam insulation applied to large propellant tanks such as the Shuttles external tank and the Boeing Delta 4 booster. Henry McDonald, former Director of NASAs ARC, discussed the Space Shuttle Independent Assessment Team (SIAT), which he had led before leaving NASA. The SIAT report had identified problems within the Shuttle program. McDonald expressed disappointment that NASA had not implemented some of the SIATs recommendations. He said that he believed some of the recommended improvements, such as modernized records, could have significantly influenced decisions that NASA had based on risk assessments.(Leonard David, Columbia Accident Hearing Probes NASA Workforce Erosion, Shuttle Safety Issues, Space.com, 6 March 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/caib_hearing_030306.html (accessed 29 August 2008); Matthew L. Wald, NASA Records in Disarray, Study Leader Tells Board, New York Times, 7 March 2003. 385 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593, 1 April 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx593.html (accessed 28 August 2008); Reuters, Delta 4 Sends Up Its First U.S. Air Force Satellite, 10 March 2003.)
Progress M1-10 launched successfully from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying 2,400 kilograms (5,300 pounds) of fuel, canned food, water, oxygen, and equipment for scientific experiments to the ISS. Yuri P. Semyonov of RSC Energia (S.P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation), the company leading Russias participation in the ISS, remarked that Progress M1-10 carried a supply of extra water because NASA had canceled all Shuttle flights in the wake of the Columbia disaster. The ISS Expedition 7 would have a staff of two, rather than three crew membersRussian Flight Commander Yuri I. Malenchenko and U.S. Flight Engineer Edward T. Luto save fuel and water until Shuttle flights resumed.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Agence France-Presse, Russian Supply Vessel Docks with International Space Station, 11 June 2003; Reuters, Russian Rocket Sends Fuel, Food to Space Station, 9 June 2003.)
After a series of delays, a Titan 2 rocket carried into orbit the U.S. militarys Coriolis research satellite, launching from the Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The refurbished Titan 2 intercontinental ballistic missile placed the spacecraft in orbit 512 minutes after launch, and the rockets second stage deployed its payload approximately 1 hour later. The US$224 million Coriolis mission carried the Navys Windsat microwave polarimetric radiometer and the Air Forces Solar Mass Ejection Imager. The U.S. military had designed Windsat to measure wind speed and direction at or near the surface of Earths seas, providing improved weather forecasting to assist in planning naval operations. The Air Force intended the Solar Mass Ejection Imager to provide an early warning of coronal mass ejections from the Sun that impact Earth, disrupting communications and power grids.(Justin Ray, Coriolis Launched To Track Ocean Winds, Solar Storms, Spaceflight Now, 6 January 2003. 105)
The Japanese probe Muses-Crenamed Hayabusa (Falcon) after its deploymentlaunched from Kogoshima Space Center on the southern Japanese island of Kyushu, aboard an M-5 solid- fuel rocket. The probes mission was to rendezvous with the asteroid 1998 SF36, gather surface samples, and return to Earth. Japans Institute of Space and Astronautical Science expected the 510-kilogram (1,124-pound) spacecraft to arrive at the asteroid in June 2005. The craft would then skim the surface several times over three months, collecting 1 gram (0.04 ounces) of surface material from various sites. The Institute had designed the mission to return the samples to Earth in a capsule in June 2007. If the probe succeeded, the samples would be the first space rocks collected since the end of the U.S. Apollo Lunar Exploration Program 30 years before.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 595; Eric Talmadge for Associated Press, Japan Launches Rocket To Probe Asteroid, 9 May 2003.)
NASA released its Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) Mishap Investigation Board (MIB) report, which identified four possible causes for the failure of the comet-rendezvous mission. The CONTOUR Missionintended to encounter at least two comets and to perform investigations and analyses of comet materialhad launched on 3 July 2002. NASA had lost contact with the craft on 15 August 2002, following a propulsive maneuver involving the solid rocket motor (SRM), and had been unable to reestablish contact as of 20 December 2002. On that date, NASA and Johns Hopkins Universitys Applied Physics Laboratory had concluded that the spacecraft was lost. NASA had established the MIB on 22 August 2002. The CONTOUR MIBs task was to examine the processes, data, and actions surrounding the events of 15 August; to search for proximate and root causes of the loss of the craft; and to develop recommendations for future missions. In its report, the CONTOUR MIB concluded that the probable cause of the missions failure was the structural failure of the spacecraft resulting from plume heating during the embedded SRM burn on 15 August. However, the lack of telemetry and observational data, immediately before and during the burn, as well as the lack of recoverable debris, left open the possibility that one of several other problems might have contributed to the loss of the spacecraft. The MIB report identified as other possible causes the catastrophic failure of the SRM; collision with space debris or meteoroids; and the loss of dynamic control of the spacecraft.(NASA, Contour Mishap Board Completes Investigation, news release 03-324, 15 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03324_contour.html (accessed 27 January 2009); NASA, Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) Mishap Investigation Board Report, 31 May 2003; Associated Press, Heat from Rocket Likely Broke Up Unmanned SpacecraftNASA, 16 October 2003.)
Japan launched two reconnaissance satellitesInformation Gathering Satellites (IGSs), IGS 1A and IGS 1Batop an H-2 rocket from Tanegashima Space Center. The pair, the first of at least four such spacecraft that Japan intended to place in orbit as part of a US$2.05 billion program, were capable of monitoring global natural disasters and hurricanes, as well as observing nuclear explosions and missile launches in nearby countries. Because the craft were able to monitor weather events, the launch did not violate the terms of the Japan-North Korea Declaration of September 2002. However, Japanese space officials acknowledged that Japan had developed the program in reaction to the Taepodong shock, when a North Korean Taepodong ballistic missile flew over Japans main island in 1998. North Korea protested the IGS program as a hostile act that violates the spirit of the countries bilateral agreement. One of the IGS craft carried optical cameras with 1-meter (3.3-foot) resolution and the other carried synthetic-aperture radar to capture images with resolutions of several meters. Japanese space officials provided no information about which craft carried which instrument.(NASA, Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593; Eric Talmadge for Associated Press, Japans First Spy Satellites Reach Earth Orbit, 27 March 2003.)
NASA announced the appointment of James W. Kennedy as the new Director of NASAs KSC, effective 10 August, succeeding Roy D. Bridges Jr. On 13 June, NASA had appointed Bridges to lead NASAs LaRC. Kennedy had served as KSCs Deputy Director since November 2002 and, before that, he had served as Deputy Director of NASAs MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Kennedy had also served as Project Manager for the X-34 and DC-XA initiatives and had led KSCs OneNASA effort to coordinate teamwork across all field centers. He had managed MSFCs Space Shuttle Projects Resident Office at KSC in 1996, returning to MSFC later that year to manage the Solid Rocket Booster Project. In 1998 he had become Deputy Director of Science and Engineering and, one year later, Director of Engineering. In those positions, he had established and maintained a nationally recognized research and development capability in space research and technology.(NASA, James W. Kennedy Named Director, NASA KSC, news release 03-217, 26 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03217_Kennedy_KSC.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Kelly Young, Kennedy Takes Over KSC, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 June 2003.)
NASA announced that astronaut Franklin R. Chang-Diaz had won Discover Magazines Innovation Award for Space Science and Technology in the Space Explorer category. The annual awards, presented in the categories of Space Explorer, Communications, Space Scientists, Technology for Humanity, and Aerospace, honored scientists whose work had benefited the U.S. space program and all of humanity. A veteran of seven spaceflights, a record he shared with only one other astronaut, Chang-Diaz was Director of the Advanced Space Propulsion Laboratory at NASAs JSC in Houston, Texas, where he was leading a team to develop the Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR) Engine. The team was working on a conceptual engine that would eventually enable humans to explore distant regions of Earths solar system and, perhaps, regions beyond the solar system. A native of Costa Rica, Chang-Diaz had earned undergraduate and advanced degrees in mechanical engineering and applied plasma physics from the University of Connecticut and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology before becoming an astronaut in 1981. He had first traveled to space in 1986 and, most recently, had participated in the ISS assembly and crew-exchange mission in June 2002, during which he undertook three spacewalks.(NASA, Astronaut Chang-Diaz Wins Discover Magazine Award, news release 03-335, 15 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03335_ChangDiaz_Award.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
Starchaser Industries Ltd., a British entry for the X Prize competition, successfully tested its Nova 2 rocket capsule, dropping it from a Fairfield C123K aircraft near Kingman, Arizona. Parachute expert Ted Strong piloted the capsule, which the aircraft had released at an altitude of 10,000 feet (3,048 meters). Traveling at 100 miles per hour (161 kilometers per hour), the craft deployed a 10-foot (3-meter) drogue parachute to stabilize its descent, and 5 seconds later, the pilot oriented the capsule into a horizontal position before deploying the main steerable canopy. The pilot flew the capsule like a glider to a precision landing.(Space.com, X Prize Entry Starchaser Successfully Test Drops Piloted Capsule, 24 July 2003, http://www.space.com/businesstechnology/technology/starchaser_test_030424.html (accessed 12 January 2009). 486 NASA, Atlas V Chosen To Launch New Horizons Mission, contract release C03-y, Space.com (accessed 23 December 2008).)
A Delta 2 rocket carried NASAs Ice Cloud and Land Elevation Satellite (ICESat) into orbit, launching from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. ICESat was one in a series of Earth Observing System (EOS) spacecraft to follow the Terra satellite, launched in December 1999, and the Aqua satellite, launched in May 2002. NASA had designed the 661-pound (299.8- kilogram) craft to measure the ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica, so that scientists could determine whether global sea levels were rising or falling. The crafts only instrument, the Geoscience Laser Altimeter System, would beam rapid pulses of laser light to the icy surface, and the ice sheets would reflect the light back to the satellite, acting like radar. The GPS would determine the ICESats location as it fired its laser, enabling program scientists to measure the ice sheets topography. The rocket also carried a second, smaller craft into orbitCHIPSat, NASAs 131-pound (59-kilogram), University Explorer Class probe, the Cosmic Hot Interstellar Plasma Spectrometer. CHIPSat would gather data on the origin, physical processes, and properties of the hot gas between stars. The CHIPSat mission was the first U.S. mission to use end-to-end satellite operations over the Internet, treating the craft something like a node on the Internet.(NASA, NASA Successfully Launches ICE and CHIPS Satellites, news release 03-011, 13 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-011.txt (accessed 22 July 2008); Associated Press, Rocket Carrying NASA Satellites Launched, 12 January 2003; Jim Banke, Boeing Launches Pair of Science Research Satellites for NASA, Space.com, 12 January 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/delta2_launch_030112.html (accessed 22 July 2008).)
NASA announced the results of its own mishap investigation boards review of the loss of the X- 43A Hyper-X research vehicle during its launch on 2 June 2001. The experimental plane was the first of three that NASA had developed and produced in a US$185 million program. The board concluded that the flight had failed because the vehicles control system design was deficient in several analytical modeling areas, which overestimated the systems margins. For the test flight, the X-43A had launched aboard the nose of a modified Pegasus launch vehicle carried by NASAs modified B-52 bomber. The bomber had released the Pegasus at an altitude of 24,000 feet (7,315.2 meters), igniting its solid rocket motor (SRM) and sending the research-vehicle payload on its test flight. After beginning its planned pitch-up maneuver, the X-43A had experienced a control anomaly leading to a structural overload of the starboard elevon. The vehicle had then deviated significantly from its planned trajectory, and NASA had destroyed it 48.6 seconds after its release. The mishap investigation board, which had found a number of modeling inaccuracies, had been able to reproduce the flight mishap only after incorporating all of the inaccuracies into its analysis, leading the board to conclude that no single factor or potential contributing factor had caused the mishap. The board also found that preflight analyses, including wind tunnel tests, had failed to predict how the rocket would perform in flight.(NASA, NASA Mishap Board Identifies Cause of X-43a Failure, news release 03-246, 23 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03246_X43A_Mishap.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Associated Press, Rocket Failure Doomed Hypersonic NASA Jet, Investigation Finds, 23 July 2003.)
In its first launch since the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster in February, NASA launched its Galaxy Evolution Explorer (GALEX) research satellite aboard a Pegasus XL rocket released from an L-1011 cargo plane that had flown out of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. GALEX carried a telescope measuring 19.7 inches (50 centimeters) in diameter, designed to provide a wide-angle view of the ultraviolet light that distant galaxies emit. NASA had planned the mission, which would survey the light emitted by a million galaxies over 28 months, to learn more about galaxies dominated by hot, short-lived stars that give off a great deal of energy as ultraviolet light. The mission cost US$103.7 million.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Associated Press, NASA in 1st Launch Since Columbia Breakup, 28 April 2003. 427 Andrew Bridges for Associated Press, BeppoSAX Satellite Falls Harmlessly into Ocean, 30 April 2003.)
The Russian military launched the geostationary Cosmos 2397 aboard a Proton-K rocket. According to rumor, Cosmos 2397, a classified spacecraft reportedly built by NPO Lavochkin, was an early warning satellite.(NASA, Space Shuttle Program Manager Decides To Leave Post; Stephen Clark, Proton Lifts Military Satellite, Spaceflight Now, 24 April 2003.)
ESA launched aboard an Ariane 5G rocket Optus-1, a Japanese-built, hybrid communications/military satellite jointly owned by Australia and Singapore, and B-Sat 2C, a Japanese geostationary communications satellite from Kourou, French Guiana. The Australian Defence Force and Optus, the Australian telecommunications firm and subsidiary of Singapore Telecommunications, had jointly funded the Optus-1 craft. To avoid mixing up data between defense and commercial applications, the two portions of the Optus-1 payload operated independently, one devoted to military use and the other to television broadcasts, high-speed Internet services, and voice and data communications across Australia and parts of Asia. B-Sat 2C would provide direct digital broadcasts to Japan and neighboring countries using Ku-band transponders.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Agence France-Presse, Europe Launches Japanese-Built Australian Military Satellite Half Owned by Singapore Government, 12 June 2003.)
NASA successfully launched its Space Infrared Telescope Facility (SIRTF) aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The Lockheed Martinbuilt SIRTF was the fourth and final of NASAs Great Observatories, following the HST, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, and the Chandra X-ray Observatory. NASA had designed the 110-pound (50-kilogram), 33.5-inch (85-centimeter) telescope to measure heat from celestial objects. SIRTF would study some of the same deep space objects as the other Great Observatories, as well as studying other parts of the cosmos. Michael Jura, SIRTF interdisciplinary scientist for planetary science at the University of California at Los Angeles, remarked that one of SIRTFs main scientific goals was to develop a better understanding of star and planet formation. The project, originally proposed in the mid- 1970s, had faced repeated budgetary cutbacks and delays. NASA planned for SIRTFs mission to last a minimum of 30 months, at an anticipated cost of US$1.19 billion.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598; Associated Press, NASA Launches Rocket with Infrared Scope, 25 August 2003. 154)
Missile Defense Agency (MDA) officials announced that the flight test in December 2002 of the Ground-based Midcourse Defense (GMD) system had been unsuccessful, because a faulty computer-chip connection in the Raytheon exoatmospheric kill vehicle (EKV) had prevented the EKV from separating from its booster during flight. Although the MDA had not recovered the EKV, engineers had determined the problem with the chips connection using laboratory simulations, concluding that no significant underlying problem with the EKV technology had caused the failure. The December test, the third unsuccessful GMD intercept attempt, had been the second attempt in which the EKV had failed to separate from the booster. U.S. Air Force Lieutenant General Ronald T. Kadish, Director of the MDA, remarked that quality-control problems had likely caused the test failure and announced the formation of an office to improve the MDAs performance.(Marc Selinger, Test Failure of GMD System Blamed on Problem with Computer Chip, Aerospace Daily, 5 March 2003.)
Japans Unmanned Space Experiment Recovery System (USERS) capsule splashed down 620 miles (1,000 kilometers) south of Tokyo, Japan, near the Ogasawara Islands, while the USERS Service Module continued to orbit Earth. Japans NASDA had launched the system aboard an H- 2A booster from the Tanegashima Space Center in September 2002, along with a Japanese Data Relay Test Satellite. The capsule contained a superconductive product, created within the capsule during its 10 months in space, using an electrically heated furnace. Japanese researchers were investigating contamination-free, high-quality crystals, created in a microgravity environment, for their potential use in the superconductive magnets needed in flywheel-type, electric-energy storage systems and magnetically levitated train transportation. Scientists planned to collect data from the USERS Service Module to use in the design and production of future satellite hardware. The Institute for Unmanned Space Experiment Free Flyer, a group established in 1986 to promote the industrialization of space, had initiated the USERS project.
The U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin launched the Milstar II military communications satellite into orbit aboard a Titan 4B launch vehicle with a Centaur upper stage. The satellite joined four other Milstar satellites already in orbit, completing the constellation. The Milstar constellation provided secure, global communication links for U.S. military joint forces, transmitting voice, data, and imagery, as well as providing video-teleconferencing capabilities. Milstar II was the third satellite to carry the Boeing Satellite Systemsbuilt, medium-data-rate payload, which had 32 channels, each capable of processing data at speeds of 1.5 megabits per second. The craft carried a low-data-rate payload as well, built by Northrop Grumman Space Technology.(Lockheed Martin, U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin Team up to Successfully Launch Final Milstar II Satellite on a Titan IV B Rocket, news release, 8 April 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/ press_releases/2003/USAirForceLockheedMartinTeamUpSucce.html (accessed 19 September 2008).)
The Russian military successfully launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome a military communications satellite aboard a Molniya-M booster. The purpose of the satellite Molniya 1-92 was to orbit above the far northern regions of Russia relaying commands and communications among military forces. At the lower end of its orbit, the craft would sweep quickly over the Southern Hemisphere, returning to orbit above northern Russia. From this position, the craft would serve users who were out of range of most communications satellites, which, traditionally, orbit at geostationary positions above the equator.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594, 1 May 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx594.html (accessed 14 October 2008); Stephen Clark, Military Spacecraft Launched by Russian Forces, Spaceflight Now, 2 April 2003.)
Hellas-Sat, a geostationary communications satellite jointly owned by Greece and Cyprus, launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida aboard an Atlas 5 rocket with a Russian RD-180 motor. The 3.45-tonne (3.8-ton or 3,450-kilogram) Astrium Eurostar 2000+ model carried 30 Ku-band transponders to provide voice, video, data, and broadcast services to Europe, North Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia. The launch, the second for the Atlas 5 series, was the 65th consecutive successful flight for the Lockheed Martinbuilt Atlas rocket and for mission provider International Launch Services (ILS).(Lockheed Martin, ILS Launches Hellas-Sat on Atlas V65 Successes in a Row for Atlas, news release, 13 May 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2003/ILSLaunchesHellasSat)
Russia successfully conducted its first test of a modified Soviet RS-18 Stiletto missile, launching the missile from an underground silo at Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The Stiletto, renamed Strela, or Arrow, carried a dummy satellite into low Earth orbit. Originally designed to carry six individually guided nuclear warheads, Russia planned for the modified Stiletto to become the worlds cheapest booster rocket for commercial satellite launches. Spokesperson for the Russian military Lieutenant-Colonel Igor Zatula stated that Russia would need to conduct several more test launches before the rocket would become available for commercial use.(Reuters, Russia Tests New Role for Cold War Nukes, 8 December 2003.)
The Peoples Republic of China launched Shenzhou 5 on a Long March 2F rocket, becoming the third nation after Russia and the United States to send a human into orbit. Veteran fighter pilot Yang Liwei expected to orbit Earth 14 times before landing. The launch was the culmination of the decade-long effort of Chinas secretive, military-linked space program, undertaken with the hope of improving the communist nations image abroad, as well as among its own citizens. Chinese officials described the Shenzhou program as homegrown, but western analysts stated that Russia had provided China with important technology and training for its taikonaut (astronaut) corps. Western analysts described the Shenzhou craft as an improvement over the Russian Soyuz design, with new solar arrays enabling the front-end orbital module to remain in space after the taikonaut compartment had returned to Earth. In addition, the crafts improved collision-avoidance systems provided Shenzhou with enhanced capacity to avoid dangerous space debris.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; David Lynch, China Blasts Off into Space, USA Today, 15 October 2003; Christopher Bodeen for Associated Press, China Launches First Manned Space Mission, 15 October 2003.)
Nikolai I. Zelenschikov, who had led the investigation into the off-target landing of Soyuz TMA- 1, announced that a technical malfunction, rather than crew error, had caused the crafts unexpectedly steep and off-course landing on 4 May, when the craft returned two astronauts and a cosmonaut to Earth. Zelenschikov, Deputy Chief Designer of RSC Energia (S.P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation), stated that specialists had found no problems with the new software on Soyuz TMA-1 and had discovered no errors attributable to the crew. Instead, investigators had found that a 25-year-old instrument had failed to control the spacecrafts descent. Soviet engineers had a plan for modifying the instrument to ensure its reliability. Investigators had also recommended that the Russian Space Agency position more airplanes and helicopters along the trajectory of landing Soyuz craft, but cosmonaut Pavel V. Vinogradov, a member of the commission investigating the accident, noted that chronic underfunding had led to a shortage of aircraft available for this purpose. The commission further recommended equipping Soyuz craft with satellite communication technology. Because several of the crafts antennas had failed, the Soyuz TMA-1 crew had lost radio contact with Mission Control Center in Moscow during landing and had not regained it. Zelenschikov stated that the Russian space industry would make all necessary modifications to the Soyuz TMA-3 craft but could make no repairs to Soyuz TMA-2, which had already docked at the ISS. However, the Russian Space Agency planned to ferry a satellite phone to the ISS aboard a cargo mission, for use on the return flight of to TMA-2.(Mara D. Bellaby for Associated Press, Rough Soyuz Landing Blamed on Malfunction, 26 May 2003; Agence France-Presse, Officials Promise To Fix Fault in Russias Soyuz Craft Before Next Space Mission, 26 May 2003. 446 NASA, Chief of Staff Courtney Stadd Announces Plans To Leave Agency, news release 03-177, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03177_stadd.html (accessed 20 November 2008); NASA, NASA Names New Chief of Staff, news release 03-178, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03178_schumacher_chiefofstaff.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
Russias Space Forces launched a Molniya 3-53 military communications satellite aboard a four- stage Molniya-M rocket from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in the Arkhangelsk region of Russia. Molniya 3-53 was the second Molniya communications satellite launched in 2003.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Associated Press, Russia Lofts Military Payload from Plesetsk, Makes Plans for Commercial South American Shots, 20 June 2003; Stephen Clark, Molniya Satellite Deployed from Plesetsk Spaceport, Spaceflight Now, 20 June 2003.)
From its floating platform Odyssey, Sea Launch launched a telecommunications satellite Thuraya-2 aboard a Zenit 3-SL rocket. The satellite belonged to Thuraya Satellite Telecommunications Company based in Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates, a company providing mobile telephone services to more than 100 countries in the Middle East, Europe, Africa, and Asia. Sea Launch had launched Thuraya-1 in October 2000.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Associated Press, Communications Satellite Launched, 10 June 2003; Jim Banke, Sea Launch Soars Again Carrying Thuraya-2 to Orbit, Space.com, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/zenit_launch_030610.html (accessed 15 December 2008).)
Alain Bensoussan, president of the French space agency, announced that he was resigning from his post because he no longer had the support he needed to continue his job. Bensoussan had been the target of increasingly bitter attacks lodged by frustrated employees who no longer perceived a clear direction in the agencys mission. Bensoussan had also faced the failure of a new Ariane 5 rocket and an agency budget that had decreased steadily since 1997, despite the addition of new programs. Moreover, the French government had commissioned a report evaluating the space agencys current status and future direction, and the report had been lukewarm in its assessment of Bensoussan. Following the publication of the report, Frances space minister Claudie Haignere had stated that the agency had not yet made a decision about its future management. The commissions findings and the space ministers statement had not provided a strong message of support for Bensoussans leadership.(Peter B. de Selding, French Space Agency Chief To Resign, Space News, 29 January 2003.)
JAXA launched an H2-A rocket carrying two classified satellites intended to monitor North Korea, but aborted the launch when one of the vehicles two boosters failed to separate. Because the malfunction meant that the rocket would be unable to attain sufficient height and speed to achieve orbit, JAXA destroyed the rocket 10 minutes after launch. In March 2003, Japan had launched its first two spy satellites to monitor North Koreas missile and nuclear programs.(Audrey McAvoy for the Associated Press, Failed Launch Blamed on Rocket Booster Malfunction, 30 November 2003.)
The U.S. Air Force launched its Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) F16 craft aboard a Titan 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, marking the final launch of the Lockheed Martin launch vehicles. In keeping with its 1986 agreement with the U.S. Air Force, Martin Marietta had converted 14 Titan 2 intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) into space launch vehicles. The Air Force had used the converted missiles to launch weather and spy satellites into low Earth orbit; the first such converted missile launched in September 1988. The Titan 2 that launched the DMSP F16 satellite was the 13th of the 14 converted ICBMs to launch; the Air Force had no plans for the 14th converted ICBM except to hold it as a spare. The successful launch of the satellite marked the end of the 33 months of postponements of the US$450 million mission that had resulted from technical problems. The Air Force intended for the craft to track clouds, storm systems, and hurricanes, planning to use the data that the satellite collected to forecast weather and to monitor ice and snow coverage, pollution, and fires. The constellation of two primary DSMP satellites and older backups provided meteorologists with information for generating forecasts, which commanders and troops relied upon for strategic and tactical planning. DSMP F16 replaced DSMP F15, which had launched in December 1999, as the lead craft in the constellations mid-morning orbit.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Justin Ray, US Weather Satellite Finally Escapes Grasp of Hard Luck, Spaceflight Now, 14 October 2003; Roger Fillion, Titan II Rocket Soars into Retirement, Rocky Mountain News (Denver, CO), 21 October 2003.)
NASA launched the first of two Mars Exploration Rovers from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida aboard a Delta 2 rocket. The destination of the 384-pound (174-kilogram) rover Spirit was the Gustev Crater, a site that scientists believed had been a crater lake. NASA intended the second of the identical rovers, called Opportunity, to launch later in June and to land on the opposite side of Mars from the Gustev Crater at a site called Meridiani Planum, which had a large deposit of a type of mineral (gray hematite) that usually forms in wet environments. NASA had designed the rolling rovers to capture sharper images, explore wider regions, and examine rocks better than any previous craft that had landed on Mars, searching for evidence of wet environments on the planet.(NASA, NASA Prepares Two Robot Rovers for Mars Exploration, news release 03-189, 4 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03189_ROVERS.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Andrew Bridges for Associated Press, First of NASA Rovers En Route to Mars, 11 June 2003.)
GenCorp Inc.s company Aerojet, a member of the Rocket Based Combined Cycle Consortium (RBC3), announced that NASA and RBC3 had successfully completed the first in a series of tests of a full-scale rocket thrust. Conducted at Aerojet facilities in Sacramento, California, the test demonstrated the first successful hot fire of a thruster using a mix of decomposed peroxide, liquid peroxide, and JP-7 jet fuel to generate combustiona key milestone in NASAs Integrated System Test of an Air-breathing Rocket (ISTAR) program. The ISTAR program sought to flight- test a self-powered hypersonic flight vehicle at more than six times the speed of sound by the end of the decade. The program was part of NASAs effort to develop hypersonic technologies by 2025, to create flight vehicles that could provide safe, routine, and affordable space access and air transportation to anywhere on the globe in less than 2 hours.(Aerojet, NASA, Industry Consortium Successfully Test Full-Scale Hypersonic Engine Thruster, news release, 7 January 2003, http://www.aerojet.com/program/news/nr_010703_nasa_industry_consortium_ successfully_tests_thruster.htm?program_ID=45 (accessed 30 July 2008); NASA, NASA Tests Environmentally Friendly Rocket Fuel, news release 03-010, 13 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/ pao/pressrel/2003/03-010.txt (accessed 9 July 2008).)
Beidou 1C, a Peoples Republic of China geostationary navigational satellite, launched from Xichang Satellite Launching Center in Sichuan province aboard a Long March 3A rocket, joining two other Beidou craft launched in 2000 to complete the satellite constellation. Xinhua, the Chinese national media outlet, reported that the transportation industry, telecommunications industry, weather forecasters, environmental planners, emergency personnel would be able to use the global positioning and navigational satellites. However, western analysts speculated that China was more likely to use the Beidou satellites capabilities to make its own military and weapons systems more precise.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 595; Stephen Clark, China Lofts Navigation Craft on Long March Booster, Spaceflight Now, 25 May 2003.)
A telecommunications satellite jointly owned by the United States and Japanknown as Horizons 1 or Galaxy 13launched aboard a Sea Launch Zenit 3-SL rocket from a platform in the equatorial Pacific Ocean. Connecticut-based PanAmSat and Tokyo-based JSAT corporations launched the craft to provide digital video, Internet, and data transmission services to Hawaii and to Central America and North America. PanAmSat owned the satellites C-band payload Galaxy 13 and planned to use it as part of the companys Galaxy cable constellation. President and CEO of PanAmSat Joseph R. Wright Jr. remarked that the addition of Galaxy 13 to the companys fleet would create the first high-definition neighborhood and would help to meet the growing demand for high-resolution television. The two companies would jointly operate the satellites Ku-band payload Horizons 1, which would offer a variety of digital video, Internet, and data services, as well as creating new IP-based content-distribution networks.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600, 1 November 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx600.html (accessed 27 January 2009); Justin Ray, Communications Satellite Launched from Pacific Ocean, Spaceflight Now, 2 October 2003.)
From its Odyssey Platform in the Pacific Ocean, Sea Launch lifted off its 10th commercial mission, launching the shared commercial communications satellite Echostar 9also known as Telstar 13atop a Ukrainian Zenit 3-SL rocket. Space Systems/Loral had built the 10,443- pound (4,737-kilogram) satellite, which two companies shared. Echo Star Communications Corporation operated the Ku-band and Ka-band transponders to provide additional direct- broadcast television service, via the corporations DISH network. Loral Skynet operated the 24 C-band transponders to provide cable television service to North America, Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, Mexico, and Central America.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598, 1 September 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx598.html (accessed 21 January 2009); Jim Banke, Shared Communications Satellite Lofted into Orbit by Sea Launch, Space News, 8 August 2003.)
NASA announced that a two-year collaboration between researchers at Stanford University and NASAs ARC had resulted in a successful test of an alternative paraffin-based rocket fuel intended to increase operational safety, reduce costs as compared to solid fuels, and, eventually, to provide the fuel in Space Shuttle booster rockets. The researchers had developed a nontoxic, easily handled fuel, producing as by-products carbon dioxide and water, rather than the aluminum oxide and acidic gases that conventional rocket fuel produces. Arif Karabeyoglu had led Stanford Universitys contribution to the fuel research, developing the theory of a fast- burning, low-cost, paraffin-based fuel in his doctoral thesis, which Stanford and NASA had partially funded. The testing series had begun on 24 September 2001 at ARCs Hybrid Combustion Facility, a heavy-duty test chamber capable of accommodating pressures of up to 60 atmospheres. The first phase of the testing program had consisted of approximately 40 runs.(NASA, NASA Tests Environmentally Friendly Rocket Fuel, news release 03-010, 13 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-010.txt (accessed 9 July 2008).)
SpaceShipOne broke the sound barrier during its first powered flight, but a partial landing gear collapse caused the privately built supersonic aircraft to veer off its desert runway. Test pilot Brian Binnie was not injured during the landing. Scaled Composites LLC, which built the craft, stated that engineers could easily repair the damage the craft had sustained. The test flight represented a milestonethe first piloted supersonic flight of an aircraft developed by a small private company. SpaceShipOnes specially designed jet aircraft, the White Knight, carried SpaceShipOne to an altitude of 48,000 feet (14.63 kilometers) before releasing it. Traveling near Mach 1.2, the rocket shut down after firing for 15 seconds. Binnie then placed the craft into a vertical climb to reach 68,000 feet (20.72 kilometers). Nine seconds into the climb, the craft broke the sound barrier. Binnie then reconfigured the craft to its conventional shape, and glided to touchdown, at which time the landing gear collapsed.(Associated Press, Private Rocket Plane Breaks Sound Barrier, 18 December 2003; Leonard David, Privately Funded SpaceShipOne Breaks Sound Barrier, Space.com, 18 December 2003, http://www.space.com/businesstechnology/technology/rutan_update_031217.html (accessed 30 March 2009).)
John E. Riley, a 33-year member of NASAs Public Affairs Department, broadcast voice of NASAs Mission Control for the Apollo program, and NASA spokesperson, died of cancer at the age of 78. He had begun working for NASA in 1959 and, as a member of the Apollo program team, had provided commentary during the first moonwalk. Riley had also initiated the practice of encouraging astronauts interviews with media and had traveled with astronauts internationally.(Matt Schwartz, Obituary: Riley, 78, Longtime Spokesman for NASA, Houston Chronicle, 21 April 2003.)
The Canadian Space Agency successfully launched its scientific satellite SciSat 1 aboard a Pegasus XL rocket dropped from an L-1011 jet flying out of Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The 330-pound (150-kilogram) atmospheric-research satellite carried two instrumentsthe Fourier Transform Spectrometer and the Measurements of Aerosol Extinction in the Stratosphere and Troposphere Retrieved by Occultation (MAESTRO)intended to monitor atmospheric ozone and dust composition in an altitude range of 4 to 100 kilometers (2.(Associated Press, Rocket Launch Aids New Space Program, 11 January 2001; Associated Press, Second Unmanned Chinese Spacecraft Returns to Earth, 16 January 2001.)
The German-Russian Eurockot Launch Services Rockot launch vehicle, a modified Russian ballistic missile, lifted off from Russias Plesetsk Cosmodrome carrying nine satellites and nanosatellites. The Rockot booster fired its Breeze upper stage twice, the first time releasing the 145-pound (66-kilogram) Czech Micromeasurements of Satellite Acceleration (MIMOSA) satellite into orbit and, the second time, leaving the Canadian Microvariability and Oscillation of Stars (MOST) scientific satellite and six Japanese, Danish, and U.S. nanosatellites in a Sun- synchronous orbit. A mock-up of a Russian Earth observation satellite that remained attached to the upper stage would gather mission data before de-orbiting. The Czech Astronomical Institute had launched MIMOSA to gather data on the density of Earths upper atmosphere, using a sensitive accelerometer designed to detect slight drag forces. President of the Canadian Space Agency Marc Garneau described the 113-pound (51.3-kilogram) MOST as the worlds smallest space telescope, with an aperture of just 15 centimeters (6 inches), about the size of Galileos telescope. Using an ultra-high-precision attitude-control system, the craft would very finely point toward targets, such as neighboring stars, studying how stars eject gas into the interstellar medium and seeking data to answer fundamental questions about the universe. Students had designed the two Japanese nanosatellitesCubeSat XI-IV and CUTE-1to test various space technologies in flight. Three more student-built nanosatellites deployed via a launch tubethe Canadian CANX-1and the Danish AAU CubeSat and DTUSATwould image stars. Quakesat, an American photo-imaging nanosatellite, would conduct an earthquake detection experiment.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 597, 1 August 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx597.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Stephen Clark, Rockot Booster Successfully Launches 9 Payloads, Spaceflight Now, 30 June 2003; Peter B. de Selding, Rockot Delivers Multiple Satellites to Earth Orbit from Russia, Space.com, 30 June 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/rockot_ launch_)
NASA launched SORCEits Solar Radiation and Climate Experiment satellitefrom a Pegasus XL rocket dropped from a jet plane 140 miles offshore over the Atlantic Ocean. On board the satellite were five instruments designed to help scientists better understand how the Sun affects Earths climate. SORCEs high-precision instruments could measure total radiation from the Sun, and its spectrometers could analyze light in all its various wavelengths, capturing information that scientists hoped would help them build a long-term data set that future generations would use.(NASA, NASAs SORCE Satellite Soars into Space To Catch Some Rays, news release 03-022, 27 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-022.txt (accessed 9 July 2008); Associated Press, NASA Launches Satellite To Measure Suns Radiation, 25 January 2003.)
Having received a very weak signal from the Pioneer 10 spacecraft on 22 January 2003, NASA announced that it would make no further attempts to contact the craft. On 2 March 1972, NASA had launched Pioneer 10, built by TRW Inc., on a three-stage Atlas-Centaur rocket. In just 12 weeks, Pioneer 10 had traveled beyond Mars, had become the first spacecraft to pass through the asteroid belt, and had continued to travel beyond Jupiter into deep space, venturing into places where nothing built by humanity had ever gone before. Pioneer 10 had last returned telemetry data on 27 April 2002. In the previous three attempts of JPLs Deep Space Network to contact it, Pioneer 10 had emitted very weak response signals, and in the last attempt at contact on 7 February, the Deep Space Network had detected no signal from the spacecraft. Engineers reported that Pioneer 10s radioisotope power source had decayed. Originally, NASA had designed Pioneer 10 for a 21-month mission, but the spacecraft had lasted more than 30 years.(NASA, Pioneer 10 Spacecraft Sends Last Signal, news release 03-082, 25 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03082.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
NASA announced that the Demonstration for Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) spacecraft had completed the lengthy design-certification review for the Orbital Space Plane (OSP) program, verifying the crafts safety, performance, and functional requirements. The DART team, based at NASAs MSFC, planned to demonstrate the vehicle without a human pilot in 2004, launching it on a Pegasus rocket dropped from an L-1011 jet. At 40,000 feet (12,192 meters) over the Pacific Ocean, the Pegasus rocket and the DART craft would separate, and DART would travel from a parking orbit to maneuver close to a target satellite or to rendezvous with it. The demonstration would require 24 hours. DART was the first of three flight-testing demonstrators: Boeing Expendable Launch Systems was developing the X-37 flight demonstrator, and Lockheed Martin Corporation was developing the launchpad-abort demonstrator. DART was NASAs first completely computer-controlled, rendezvous-capable spacecraft.(NASA, Space Flight Demonstrator Completes Design Certification, news release 03-274, 21 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03274_dart_design.html (accessed 29 December 2008).)
International Launch Services (ILS) successfully launched the Boeing-built AsiaSat 4 satellite aboard a Lockheed Martinbuilt Atlas 3 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, marking 64 consecutive successful launches for the Atlas rocket over 10 years. The mission was ILSs third launch for AsiaSat, the dominant satellite operator in its region. Boeing Satellite Systems had designed the AsiaSat 4 craft, a high-power 601HP spacecraft, to provide 15 years of direct-to-home communications and broadband services to customers in Asia and Australia.(Lockheed Martin, Atlas III Launch of Asiasat 4 Successful in 1st ILS Mission of 2003, news release, 11 April 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2003/AtlasIIILaunch OfAsiaSat4)
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) successfully launched the Geostationary Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV)D2 rocket from Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India. The main payload was the GSAT-2, a geostationary communications and space-monitoring satellite, which carried four C-band and two Ku-band transponders that would provide voice and video transmissions to India and neighboring countries. The GSLV-D2 also carried into orbit experimental payloads: a Coherent Radio Beacon Experiment, a Solar X-ray Spectrometer, an external Total Radiation Dose Monitor, a Radiation Sensitive Field Effect Transistor, and a Surface Change Monitor. However, its main mission was to test the GSLV-D2, an improved version of the GSLV first launched in April 2001.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 595, 1 June 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx595.html (accessed 20 November 2008); K. S. Jayaraman, India Launches Second GSLV Rocket with GSAT, Space.com, 8 May 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/gslv_launch_030508.html (accessed 1 December 2008).)
NASAs Galileo mission ended when the Galileo spacecraft disintegrated in Jupiters atmosphere. NASA had managed the course of the crafts demise to prevent its becoming uncontrollable once it had depleted its propellant. Galileo had launched from Space Shuttle Atlantis in 1989, following multiyear delaysoriginally, NASA had planned for the craft to launch in 1982 aboard a Centaur rocket. The probe had made significant contributions to scientists knowledge of Jupiter and its moons, including collecting evidence of the possibility of life on Europa. Galileo had outlasted its prime mission by six years, despite enduring numerous technical problems and more than four times the amount of radiation that engineers had designed the spacecraft to withstand.(NASA JPL, Galileo End of Mission Status, news release, 21 September 2003, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=129 (accessed 2 February 2009); Usha Lee McFarling, Stalwart Galileo Is Vaporized near Jupiter, Los Angeles Times, 22 September 2003.)
NASA launched its Gravity Probe B (GP-B) on a Boeing Delta 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 12:57 p.m. (EDT). NASA had designed the satellite to test two fundamental aspects of Albert Einsteins theory of relativity. According to Einsteins theory, time and space create a veritable fabric in space. When massive objects, such as Earth and other planets, distort the fabric of space, causing relatively smaller objects to move towards them, they create gravity. Einsteins theory of relativity also states that large objects twist the fabric of space around them as those objects spin on their axes. Gravity Probe A, which NASA had launched in 1975, had tested the former part of the theory, and GP-B would test both aspects. GP-B contained some of the most accurate scientific instruments ever constructed, including the most precise gyroscopes ever built.
A privately funded rocket called SpaceShipOne became the first vehicle to complete a flight for the commercial spaceflight competition known as the Ansari X Prize. The X Prize competition would award US$10 million to the first private organization to create a spacecraft transporting a pilot and payload, with the equivalent weight of two passengers, to an altitude of 100 kilometers (62.1 miles) above Earths surface, twice in two weeks. California-based Scaled Composites had built SpaceShipOne, and the companys founder Burt Rutan had designed the vehicle. The spacecraft left Californias Mojave Airport at 7:11 a.m. (PST), affixed to another aircraft. The aircraft released SpaceShipOne after attaining an altitude of 48,000 feet (9.1 miles or 14.6 kilometers). Although SpaceShipOne had some difficulty during its ascent, the vehicles pilot Michael W. Melvill was able to guide the vehicle to a peak altitude of 337,500 feet (63.9 miles or 102.9 kilometers). However, Scaled Composites would have to repeat the feat within the subsequent two weeks to win the Ansari X Prize.(Scaled Composites, SpaceShipOne Surpasses 100 Km Altitude on First X-Prize Flight, news release, 29 September 2004; Peter Pae, Craft Rolls On into Space in Bid for Prize, Los Angeles Times, 30 September 2004. 690 X PRIZE Foundation, Ansari X PRIZE, http://space.xprize.org/ansari-x-prize (accessed 12 May 2009); Scaled Composites, SpaceShipOne Captures X-Prize, 4 October 2004, http://www.scaled.com/projects/tierone/041004_spaceshipone_x-prize_flight_2.html (accessed 12 May 2009); John Schwartz, Private Rocket Ship Earns $10 Million in New Space Race, New York Times, 5 October 2004.)
A piloted rocket called SpaceShipOne reached the highest altitude ever attained by a privately funded vehicle. After its release from a plane flying over the Mojave Desert in California, the winged rocket flew to an altitude of 211,400 feet (40 miles or 64 kilometers). The vehicles pilot Michael W. Melvill landed SpaceShipOne at Mojave Airport. The event was a test flight in preparation for the planned official launch of SpaceShipOne on 2 June 2004. Scaled Composites, the company that had built the rocket, intended SpaceShipOne to become the first privately funded, piloted vehicle to achieve suborbital flight. Scaled Composites had built SpaceShipOne for use in commercial spaceflightsspaceflights in which customers pay a fee for a brief trip to outer space.(Peter Pae, In Capital Venture, Rocket Reaches the Edge of Space, Los Angeles Times, 14 May 2004; Scaled Composites, Historic Space Launch Attempt Scheduled for June 21, news release, 2 June 2004, http://www.scaled.com/projects/tierone/062104.htm (accessed 27 March 2009).)
Engineers at NASAs SSC successfully completed the first test of the redesigned Space Shuttle Main Engine (SSME). NASA planned to use the redesigned SSME in the first Shuttle mission after the Columbia tragedythe mission that NASA often called the Return to Flight Mission. The test of the SSME lasted for 520 seconds, the amount of time a Space Shuttle requires to reach orbit. Each Space Shuttle has three SSMEsreusable rocket engines capable of generating 400,000 pounds (181,000 kilograms) of thrust.(NASA, Engineers Test the First Engine for NASAs Return to Flight Mission, news release 04-231, 19 July 2004.)
Japans Mobile Broadcast Corporation and South Koreas Sun Kyung Telecom launched the Loral Mobile Broadcasting Satellite (MBSAT), which the two companies had designed to provide the worlds first digital multimedia broadband broadcasting system. The MBSAT, launched on a Lockheed Martin Atlas 3 rocket, carried a 40-foot-diameter (12.2-meter-diameter) antenna designed to provide audio, video, and data services to users of portable audio and visual devices in Japan and South Korea. International Launch Services (ILS), a U.S.-Russian private company, provided the launch services for the Japanese-South Korean joint venture.(Craig Covault, Mobile Milestone, Aviation Week and Space Technology 160, no. 12 (22 March 2004): 35; International Launch Services, About Us, http://www.ilslaunch.com/about-us/ (accessed 18 March 2009).)
NASAs X-43A research vehicle established an unofficial world speed record for aircraft of nearly 7,000 miles per hour (11,265 kilometers per hour) or Mach 1010 times the speed of sound. The X-43A contained an experimental enginecalled a supersonic combustion ramjet or scramjet. The scramjet engine had no moving parts and did not use fuel from an on-board tank, as is the case with rockets. Instead, the engine used oxygen from the atmosphere, passing through the vehicle, to ignite fuel. NASA had explored the use of scramjets as an alternative to rocket power for space-access vehicles, with the hope that scramjet vehicles would operate more like an airplane than a rocket. The mission lifted off from NASAs DFRC at Edwards Air Force Base in California at 2:30 p.m. (PST). A NASA B-52 carried the unpiloted X-43A to an altitude of 40,000 feet (7.6 miles or 12.2 kilometers). Before the X-43A had attained at an altitude of 111,000 feet (21 miles or 33.8 kilometers), a Pegasus rocket booster launched from the B-52, providing an initial acceleration that enabled the X-43A to attain an altitude of 111,000 feet (21 miles or 33.8 kilometers). The experimental aircraft flew for nearly 10 seconds at that altitude before descending into the Pacific Ocean as planned, nearly 800 miles (1,287 kilometers) off the coast of California.(John Johnson, X-43A Aircraft Sets Speed Record at 6,500 MPH, Los Angeles Times, 17 November 2004; NASA, NASAs X-43A Scramjet Breaks Speed Record, news release 04-373, 16 November 2004.)
Brazil successfully launched its first rocket from the Alcantara launch site in the state of Maranhao. The two-stage rocket called the Veiculo de Sondagem Booster-30 (VSB- 30)Spanish for Sounding Booster Vehiclewas 12.6 meters (41.3 feet) long, had a total mass of 2,570 kilograms (5,666 pounds), and was capable of carrying a payload of up to 400 kilograms (882 pounds). According to Brazilian officials, the government expected to sell up to 15 of the rockets to ESA.(Los Angeles Times, Brazil Succeeds in Sending First Rocket to Space, 24 October 2004; Agenica Espacial Brasileira [Brazilian Space Agency], Foguetes de Sondagem [Survey of Rockets], http://www.aeb.gov.br/indexx.php?secao=lancadores (accessed 14 November 2009).)
NASAs X-43A Hyper X plane set a new record for flight speed, traveling at Mach 7, which is nearly 5,000 miles (8,050 kilometers) per hour and seven times the speed of sound. The flight was also the first free flight of an aircraft powered by a supersonic combustion ramjet enginea scramjeta type of engine that provides thrust by funneling air and fuel into a hollow chamber at extremely high speed. The 12-foot-long (3.7-meter-long) unpiloted, experimental aircraft flew for approximately 11 seconds over the Pacific Ocean, at an altitude of 95,000 feet (approximately 29,000 meters), before NASA deliberately landed the aircraft in the ocean. NASA used a modified B-52 aircraft to carry the X-43A into the sky, launching the X-43A into flight using a Pegasus rocket mounted to the B-52. The test flight, which took place near San Nicolas Island off the California coast, originated from NASAs DFRC at Edwards Air Force Base in California.(Peter Pae, Fast Times at 12 OClock High: 5,000 MPH, Los Angeles Times, 28 March 2004; NASA, X-43A Soars on Scramjet Power, 27 March 2004.)
ESA launched the Rosetta comet probe on an Ariane 5 rocket at 7:17 a.m. (UT) from the Guiana Space Centre in French Guiana. ESA had created Rosettathe first spacecraft designed to enter
Donald R. Puddy, longtime NASA Flight Director who had supervised numerous human spaceflight missions, died at the age of 67 in Houston, Texas. Born in Oklahoma, Puddy had joined NASAs JSC in 1964 and had spent 22 years at JSCs Mission Control Center. Puddy was only the 10th person to become a NASA flight director. He had later served in many other positions at NASAs JSC, ARC, and Headquarters. As JSC Flight Director, Puddy had led flight- control teams during the Apollo Program, the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and the Skylab missions, as well as serving as Flight Director for the first Space Shuttle mission. He had also created and managed projects related to aircraft-safety procedures and had played a significant role in early cooperative efforts between the space programs of the United States and the U.S.S.R. Among the numerous awards Puddy had received for his achievements were the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal.(Mark Carreau, Donald Puddy, Veteran NASA Flight Director, Houston Chronicle, 24 November 2004; NASA JSC, NASA Honors Memory of Mission Control Veteran Don Puddy, news release J04-054, 23 November 2004.)
The Russian Space Agency launched Progress-M 51/ISS-16P, an automatic cargo vehicle, on a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 10:19 p.m. (GMT). Progress-M 51, bound for the ISS, carried 2.75 tons (2,500 kilograms or 2.5 tonnes) of equipment, fuel, food, and water.
The China National Space Administration (CNSA) launched its second piloted spacecraft, the Shenzhou 6, on a Long March 2F rocket from Jiuquan, China, at 1:00 a.m. (GMT). The Shenzhou 6 carried taikonauts Fei Junlong and Nie Haisheng. The CNSA planned for them to remain in low Earth orbit for five days. The CNSA provided few details about the mission and declined to publicize information, such as the taikonauts names and the spacecrafts scheduled return date, until hours before the launch. According to a CNSA spokesperson, Junlong and Haisheng would conduct scientific experiments while in orbit.(Howard W. French, On Live Television, 2 Chinese Astronauts Begin 5 Days in Low Orbit of Earth, New York Times, 12 October 2005; China National Space Administration, Shenzhou-6 To Take Off Wednesday Morning, news release, 11 October 2005.)
JAXA successfully tested an experimental aircraft capable of flying at Mach 2, which is twice the speed of sound. JAXA launched the aircraft, formally known as the Scaled Experimental Supersonic Transport (SST), on a rocket from Australias Woomera Test Range at 7:06 a.m. (local time). After its release from the rocket, the SST flew for nearly 15 minutes at speeds of Mach 1.9 to 2 (1,446 to 1,522 miles per hour or 2,327 to 2,449 kilometers per hour) and at altitudes ranging from 12 to 19 kilometers (7.5 to 11.8 miles). Mitsubishi Heavy Industries had developed the SST as part of a US$10 million program to create an aircraft capable of transporting 300 passengers between Los Angeles and Tokyo in approximately 4 hours.(Meraiah Foley, Flying High: Speedy Japanese Jet Passes Test, Houston Chronicle, 11 October 2005; JAXA, Flight Trial Result of Scaled Experimental Supersonic Transport, news release, 10 October 2005, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2005/10/20051010_sst_e.html (accessed 15 July 2009).)
The Boeing Company announced that it had reached an agreement to sell its Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power business to Pratt & Whitney, a United Technologies Corporation unit, for about US$700 million in cash. Rocketdyne, primarily a rocket engine developer and builder that provided booster engines for the Space Shuttle and the Delta series of expendable launch vehicles, had helped pioneer space exploration in the 1950s and1960s. The sale reflected Boeings struggle to make a profit in the space-launch business and marked the companys latest move toward focusing on large-scale weapons and aerospace systems. United Technologies intended the acquisition to broaden the product line at Pratt & Whitney, which, in recent years, had lost market share in its core business of providing jet engines.(The Boeing Company, Boeing To Sell Rocketdyne Propulsion Unit to Pratt & Whitney; news release, 22 February 2005, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2005/q1/nr_050222o.html (accessed 19 August 2009); Los Angeles Times, Maker of Rocket Engines Is Sold, 23 February 2005.)
NASA returned Discovery to the Vehicle Assembly Building from its launchpad, to attach a newer fuel tank and booster set to the Space Shuttle. While Discovery was sitting on the launchpad, NASA had determined that ice could break off the outside of its external fuel tank and could prove as lethal as the falling foam insulation that had led to the demise of Columbia. To minimize the risk of such debris striking the orbiters fragile heat shield, NASA had decided to install an additional heater on the fuel tank. Ice forms on the external tank when the fuel is extremely cold, and a heater would reduce the amount of ice build-up on the tank.(Irene Mona Klotz, Shuttle Heads Back to Workshop, BBC News, 27 May 2005; Shuttle Rolls Back to Hangar, Washington Post, 27 May 2005.)
Russian space officials and officials from the French rocket company Arianespace signed an agreement in Moscow allowing Russia to launch medium-weight satellite payloads from ESAs spaceport in Kourou, French Guiana. Under the agreement, Europe would provide 344 million euros to build a launchpad for Russian Soyuz rockets, and Russia would erect a tower for the launchpad, ship the rockets from Russia, and make any changes to the rockets necessary for them to operate in the equatorial climate. Locating launches at the equator would allow Russia to increase the weight of its payloads from 1.6 tonnes (1,600 kilograms or 1.7 tons) to about 3 tonnes (3,000 kilograms or 3.3 tons). The arrangement also filled a niche that Arianespaces two rocket fleets did not. Arianespace Vega rockets launched small scientific satellites weighing no more than 1.5 tonnes (1,500 kilograms or 1.65 tons) into a low orbit. The two models of Ariane 5 rockets could launch payloads weighing 6.6 tonnes (6,600 kilograms or 7.3 tons) or 10 tonnes (10,000 kilograms or 11 tons), respectively, into geostationary transfer orbit. Expecting to launch three or four Soyuz rockets per year, beginning in 2008, Arianespace had already booked three launches from Kourou using the Russian Soyuz rocketlaunches of one Australian telecommunications satellite and two French scientific satellites.(Maggie McKee, Russian Rockets To Launch from South American Base, New Scientist, 13 April 2005. 772 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618, 1 May 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx618.html (accessed 8 September 2009); Peter B. de Selding, Apstar 6 Launched from China, Space News, 13 April 2005.)
President of Canadian Arrow Geoff Sheerin and Indian-American entrepreneur Chirinjeev Kathuria joined forces to create a new corporation called PlanetSpace. The companys goal was to make spaceflight available to the public within two years. Canadian Arrow was creating a rocket based on the German World War II V-2 rocket. Although the company had not completed its rocket in time to compete for the US$10 million X Prize in 2004, it had successfully completed a drop test of the vehicle in August 2005 and expected to complete the rocket within one year. PlanetSpace planned to charge US$250,000 per person for a suborbital flight that would include 14 days of training and 15 minutes of flight time. The rocket would launch from a Canadian site with a pilot and two passengers and would reach a maximum velocity of four times the speed of sound. The rocket would coast to a maximum height of 70 miles (112 kilometers), providing a few minutes of weightlessness and a view of the curving Earth with a black sky above. Finally, a crew capsule would separate from the rocket during its descent and would parachute down to a water landing.(PlanetSpace, Canadian Arrow Partners with Leading American Entrepreneur To Launch First Commercial Passengers to Space, news release, 17 May 2005, http://www.planetspace.org/pdf/ps-press-rel-001.pdf (accessed 17 September 2009); Alan Boyle, Space Partners Plan Flights in 2007, MSNBC.com, 18 May 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7879142/ (accessed 17 September 2009).)
ESA successfully launched from its base in Kourou, French Guiana, an Ariane 5 ECA rocket, the worlds most powerful commercial launcher, more than two years after its inaugural flight in December 2002 had ended in disaster. Capable of carrying up to 10 tons (9,071 kilograms or 9.07 tonnes) into space, the rocket lifted a 7.3-ton (6,623-kilogram or 6.62-tonne) payload consisting of two satellitesthe U.S.-Spanish XTAR-EUR satellite and the Dutch experimental SLOSHSAT-FLEVO microsatellite. Fitted with 12 wideband, X-band transponders, the XTAREUR geostationary satellite would provide military communications for the United States and Spain. For 10 days, the Netherlands microsatellite SLOSHSAT-FLEVO, weighing just 127 kilograms (0.127 tonnes or 0.139 tons), would test the dynamics of de-ionized water in orbit. FLEVO was the acronym for Facility for Liquid Experimentation and Verification in Orbit, as well as the name of the latest Dutch province that the Netherlands had reclaimed from the sea. ESA also sent aloft a monitor, MAQSAT, which remained attached to the rocket to gather data about the rockets dynamic behavior, from launch through the release of the two satellites. In its inaugural launch, the rocket had veered off course, prompting Mission Control to destroy it. An inquiry board had determined that the cooling system of the rockets Vulcain engine had malfunctioned.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 616, 1 March 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx616.html (accessed 26 August 2009); Associated Press, European Rocket Delivers Payload, 14 February 2005; Laurent Marot for Reuters, Upgraded Ariane-5 Rocket Orbits Satellites, 13 February 2005.)
A California Launch Vehicle Education Initiative (CALVEIN) research team successfully launched and recovered the Prospector 6 (P6) test vehicle at the Mojave Test Area owned and operated by the Reaction Research Society. The test was part of a joint industry/academic effort to develop a low-cost Nanosat Launch Vehicle, a booster capable of delivering 22-pound (10- kilogram) payloads to low Earth orbit. Researchers at Garvey Spacecraft Corporation of Long Beach, California, and California State University at Long Beach had designed and built the partially reusable 27-foot (8-meter) P6 test vehicle, which had flown to just under 3,000 feet (914 meters), a milestone toward the teams goal. P6 had also carried student payloads from across the country: a mini-DV camera to capture on-board video of the entire flight sequence; a real-time telemetry system that adapted off-the-shelf Wi-Fi technology to relay key propulsion- system parameters; and a measurement-logging package to record acceleration, pressure, and temperature data that the research team would use to assess the vehicles performance.(Leonard David, High Hopes for Low-Cost Rocket After Successful Launch Test, Space.com, 27 May 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/050526_prospector6_test.html (accessed 16 September 2009).)
The U.S. Air Force launched the most technologically advanced GPS satellite ever developed, the GPS IIR-14, on a Delta-2 rocket at 11:37 p.m. (EDT) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The GPS IIR-14 was the first of eight satellites planned for the new GPS, which the Air Force had created to provide improved encryption and GPS antijamming capabilities for the U.S. military, as well as an improved GPS signal for civilian users. At the time of the launch, the GPS constellation consisted of 28 satellites, which the Air Force was operating for both civilian and military users.(Lockheed Martin, First Modernized GPS Satellite Built by Lockheed Martin Launched Successfully by the U.S. Air Force, news release, 26 September 2005, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2005/ FIRSTMODERNIZEDGPSSATELLITEBUILTBYL.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
JAXA launched its Suzaku astronomy satellite at 3:30 a.m. (GMT) from Uchinoura Space Center (formerly called the Kagoshima Space Center) on an M-5 rocket. Suzaku, known as Astro-E2 before the launch, was JAXAs replacement for its first Astro-E satellite, which had been lost during launch in 2000. JAXA and the Japanese Institute of Space and Astronautical Science had built the satellite to monitor space in conjunction with NASAs Chandra X-ray Observatory and ESAs XMM-Newton. The Suzaku satellite was equipped with three telescopes: a Hard X-ray Detector, an X-ray Spectrometer, and an X-ray Imaging Spectrometer.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 621, 1 August 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx621.html (accessed 12 June 2009); NASA, Suzaku: Mission Overview, 3 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ mission_pages/astro-e2/ main/index.html (accessed 12 June 2009).)
The Planetary Society and Cosmos Studios launched Cosmos 1, the first solar-powered spacecraft, at 3:46 p.m. (EDT), on a Volna rocket from a Russian submarine in the Barents Sea. Russian Space Agency officials, however, were not certain that the spacecraft had attained orbit. The spacecrafts sponsors, the Planetary Society and Cosmos Studios, are U.S. nonprofit organizations that seek to increase the publics knowledge of and involvement in space exploration. The late American scientist Carl Sagan had helped found the Planetary Society, and Ann DruyanSagans widowhad founded Cosmos Studios. The two organizations had designed the craft and launched the mission to demonstrate the feasibility of solar power technology as an effective means of space travel. The pressure of solar light particlesphotonson the spacecrafts large, triangular, mirror-like solar sails were to propel the engineless, fuel-free Cosmos 1.(John Antczak for Associated Press, Solar Sail Spacecraft Launched from Russian Submarine, 21 June 2005; The Planetary Society, Projects: Solar Sailing, http://planetary.org/programs/projects/ solar_sailing/ (accessed 10 August 2009).)
The U.S. Air Force announced the findings of its investigation into the December 2004 inaugural launch of Boeings Delta 4 Heavy Rocket, which had failed when engines shut down prematurely. The Air Force and Boeing had intended the launch of the rocket, which was transporting a dummy payload, as a full dress rehearsal. The plan had been to test the newest and largest member of Boeings next-generation rocket series before critical national security satellites began using it. Boeing had designed the rocket with three Common Booster Cores, each with a cryogenic main engine. The three cores, secured together, formed a craft capable of launching large cargo into space. The investigation had determined that each boosters engines had undergone premature shutdown during the launch, after internal sensors incorrectly determined that the engines had exhausted their liquid-oxygen fuel supply. Investigators had concluded that cavitationbubbles in the liquid oxygen plumbinghad caused the glitch. Major Rodney Houser, the lead investigator for the Air Force, stated that the investigating team would focus on determining the cause of the cavitation within the liquid-oxygen feed system and on implementing corrective measures to prevent the problems repetition.(Justin Ray, Delta 4-Heavy Investigation Identifies Rockets Problem, Spaceflight Now, 17 March 2005. 235)
Japan successfully launched a geostationary weather satellite MTSAT-1R aboard an H-2A rocket from Tanegashima Space Center in Kagoshima prefecture, after a glitch in communications between the rocket and ground systems had caused a 76-minute delay. The launch was Japans first launch of a heavy-lift vehicle since November 2003, when one of the H-2As solid boosters had failed to jettison as expected after completing its burn, causing the launch to fail. In the failed launch, Japan had lost the second pair of the four spy satellites that it had built after North Korea had fired a missile into Japanese territory in 1998. The other pair of the four satellitesone optical and one radar-sounding satellitewere all Japan had left to monitor its threatening neighbor. Furthermore, the launch failure had dashed Japans plans to enter the commercial satellite-launch business and had caused Japan to lose its international credibility. The successful launch of the MTSAT-1R restored morale to Japans rocketry program. A second mission of the MTSAT-1R was to replace a satellite lost in November 1999 when the final H-2 rocket, the predecessor of H-2A, had failed to reach orbit. Japan had designed the MTSAT-1R to service the Japan Civil Aviation Bureau and the Japan Meteorological Agency, fulfilling the two missions of facilitating air-traffic management and obtaining satellite imagery for meteorologists.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 616; James Brooke, After Failures, Space Effort in Japan Gets a Lift, New York Times, 28 February 2005; Justin Ray, Beleaguered H-2A Rocket Roars Into Orbit, Spaceflight Now, 26 February 2005.)
Spaceway 1, a DirecTV satellite, launched from Sea Launchs Odyssey floating platform at the equator aboard a Zenit-3SL rocket. Sea Launch used a self-propelled launch platform and a command ship that had sailed from Long Beach, California, to the equator. At the equator, the physics of Earths rotation make it possible to launch heavier payloads than elsewhere. Sea Launch announced that the 13,376-pound (6,067.3-kilogram or 6.1-tonne) satellite was the heaviest commercial satellite ever launched.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Associated Press, DirecTV Satellite Launched from Sea Launch Ocean Platform, 27 April 2005.)
Khrunichev Center announced that it had signed a contract with Russias defense ministry, valid through 2010, to research, develop, and flight-test the Angara launch vehicle. The Angara project included a series of liquid oxygen/kerosene expendable launch vehicles. The Khrunichev Center intended for Angara 5 to have greater capabilities than the companys existing Proton rocket and to be far more environmentally friendly. In addition, the Angara 5 would launch exclusively from Plesetsk, rather than from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. According to the contract, near the end of 2006, the Khrunichev Center would launch the first vehicle carrying a Russian government payload.(Dmitry Pieson, Khrunichev, Defense Ministry To Build Angara Jointly, Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, 27 May 2005.)
Soyuz TMA-6 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying the Expedition 11 crew of three to the ISS. Russian Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American Flight Engineer John L. Phillips would replace Leroy Chiao and Salizhan S. Sharipov. Italys Roberto Vittori, also aboard, would conduct scientific experiments at the ISS before returning to Earth with Chiao and Sharipov.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Chris Kridler, Soyuz Rocket Blasts Off to Station, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 April 2005.)
The U.S. Air Force successfully launched two military satellites aboard an Atlas 3B, the last of Lockheed Martins Atlas 3 rockets. The launch marked the 145th and final launch from Complex 36 at Cape Canaveral, Florida, after 43 years of operation. NASA had built the complex in the early 1960s, specifically for its Atlas-Centaur program, which included the launches of NASAs historic Surveyor, Mariner, and Pioneer missions. Launches from the site had proved highly successful; the launch of the last Atlas 3B marked the 75th consecutive successful Atlas rocket launch, including all six Atlas 3 flights. Launch Complex 36 was one of the United States oldest continuously operating launch sites and the last of the U.S. launch sites to use a traditional blockhouse to control the launch. The final Atlas 3B carried a pair of formation-flying, classified satellites, which analysts believed were part of the Naval Ocean Surveillance System (NOSS) of the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO). Satellites in the NOSS, a network for monitoring ships around the globe, were reportedly capable of detecting radio transmissions from ships to pinpoint their locations precisely.(Justin Ray, Last Atlas 3 Rocket Launches a Pair of Spy Satellites and Atlas Rocket Workers Say Goodbye to Complex 36, Spaceflight Now, 4 February 2005; Todd Halvorson, Atlas 3 Climbs Through Fog to Final Successful Mission, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 February 2005.)
ESA launched the satellite Giove A on a Soyuz-Fregat rocket at 5:19 a.m. (UT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The satellite was the first component of a satellite navigation system called Galileo. According to ESAs plan, the Galileo system would consist of 30 satellites and would commence operations by 2008. ESA had created Galileo to reduce European dependence on the United States for satellite navigation services and to provide more accurate civilian services than the GPS, a system that the U.S. military had created. According to ESA, users who had mobile phones with integrated chips would be able to use Galileo to find directions to particular destinations, such as parks and restaurants. Galileo would be capable of providing civilian users with real-time positioning accuracy to within 1 meter (3.28 feet). Civilian services from the GPS were accurate to nearly 5 meters (16 feet).(Molly Moore, With Satellite Launch, E.U. Positions Itself to Compete, Washington Post, 29 December 2005; ESA, First Galileo Satellite on Orbit to Demonstrate Key Technologies, ESA news release 61-2005, 28 December 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_61_2005_p_EN.html (accessed 31 July 2009).)
The NASA probe known as Deep Impact launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral in Florida, on its mission to Comet Tempel One. The craft carried an impactor, intended to collide with the comet to create a crater about 100 meters (328 feet) wide and 28 meters (92 feet) deep, as well as two instruments designed to observe the impact and its aftermath in visible and infrared wavelengths. NASA planned for the craft to launch the impactor into the comet on 4 July 2005. Mission scientists hoped the data collected from the impact would reveal information about the birth of the solar system.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 615, 1 February 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx615.html (accessed 13 August 2009).)
ESA successfully launched the Venus Express on a Soyuz-Fregat rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 4:33 a.m. (CET). ESA had created the spacecraft to analyze Venuss atmosphere, chemistry, and structure, while the craft was orbiting the planet. ESA planned to use the analysis of Venuss surface and its hot, stormy atmosphere to study climate change on Earth, as well as to help determine why Venus had evolved so differently from Earth, despite numerous structural similarities between the two planets. The spacecraft was ESAs second probe designed to orbit a specific planet, the first being Mars Express, which ESA had launched in 2003.(ESA, Venus Express En Route To Probe the Planets Hidden Mysteries, ESA news release 50-2005, 9 November 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEM56Q638FE_index_0.html (accessed 19 July 2009); Melissa Eddy for Associated Press, European Space Agency Launches Venus Probe, 9 November 2005.)
USA 182, a National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) classified military satellite, launched atop a Titan 4B rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. The rocket was the last Titan to launch from the Florida coast, signaling the end of the historic program after five decades and 168 launches. Only one Titan remained, scheduled for a July launch from Edwards Air Force Base in California. The United States was retiring the Titan, which had begun as a two-stage intercontinental ballistic missile in the 1950s and had made its first launch from Cape Canaveral in 1959, in favor of the less-expensive and more modular Atlas 5 and Delta 4 rocket series, which could fulfill the need for heavy-lifting to space. Titan 2 missiles had served as the boosters for NASAs Gemini missions, and various Titan 3 and Titan 34D rockets had launched satellites, as had Titan 4, the largest and most powerful version in the program. Titan rockets had also launched space probesViking to Mars, Voyager to the outer planets, and Cassini to Saturn.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Justin Ray, Reality Realized: Titan Has Left Cape Canaveral, Spaceflight Now, 30 April 2005.)
The Demonstration of Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) spacecraft, a NASA technology demonstrator, launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, aboard a Pegasus-XL HAPS rocket released from an L-1011 cargo aircraft. NASA intended the launch to test the 360-kilogram (793.76-pound or 0.4-ton or 0.36-tonne) satellites video-guidance-system technology, which would enable DART to rendezvous with an experimental military communications satellite and maneuver around it. The technology would allow future spacecraft to approach and dock with another craft automatically.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Chris Kridler, Failed DART Spacecraft Bumped Its Satellite Target, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 April 2005.)
The Apstar 6 satellite launched aboard a Chinese Long March 3B rocket from Xichang Satellite Launch Center in Chinas Sichuan Province. The 4.8-tonne (4,800-kilogram or 5.3-ton) satellite carried 38 C-band and 12 Ku-band transponders. Replacing the ageing Apstar 1A, the craft would provide digital, multimedia transmissions to Australia, India, and countries in eastern Asia. The satellite was the first Western-built, commercial telecommunications spacecraft to carry almost no U.S.-made components, as well as the first commercial Chinese satellite with an antijamming payload. Hong Kongbased APT Satellite Company had requested that Alcatel Space include the antijamming technology in response to the threat of satellite-signal piracy, which had occurred several times over the previous two years. The new Alcatel Spacebus 4000 C1 satellite platform selected for Apstar 6 included no U.S. parts subject to the export controls of the U.S. Department of State. Because the U.S. government had refused to grant export licenses for U.S. satellite parts destined for launch in China, Alcatel Space had substituted European, Russian, and other non-U.S. components.
The Russian Space Agency announced that the launch of Cosmos 1 had failed. According to the agency, the rocket that had launched the spacecraft had experienced failure 83 seconds after ignition. Consequently, the experimental solar-powered spacecraft had crashed soon after its launch.(David Holley and Alex Raksin, Solar Craft Falls Short of Cosmos, Los Angeles Times, 23 June 2005. 808 ESA, German Chair for ESA Council, ESA news release 35-2005, 22 June 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_35_2005_p_EN.html (accessed 11 August 2009); ESA, What is ESA? http://www.esa.int/SPECIALS/About_ESA/ SEMW16ARR1F_0.html (accessed 11 August 2009).)
The GAO published a report warning that the lack of a detailed, long-term strategy regarding NASAs workforce could threaten the safety of Space Shuttle operations and delay implementation of the Bush administrations 2004 directive to return astronauts to the Moon. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation had tasked GAO with tracking NASAs efforts to develop a strategy for sustaining the Space Shuttle workforce until the Shuttles retirement and identifying factors that impeded those efforts. GAO reported that NASA had made limited progress toward this goal. GAO found that NASA had taken preliminary steps: identifying lessons learned from the retirement of programs comparable to the Space Shuttle, such as the Air Force Titan 4 Rocket Program; enlisting the assistance of human capital experts; and revising its acquisition strategy for updating specific prime contracts. However, GAO concluded that NASAs failure to make decisions regarding contractor requirements during the remainder of the Shuttle program would hinder its progress. Moreover, GAO stated that NASA must develop a detailed strategy for retiring the Shuttle program, to enable it to protect agency-wide goals from the potential impact of workforce problems. GAO cited several factors hampering NASAs ability to accomplish this, such as NASAs near-term focus on returning the Shuttle to flight, a focus that had caused a delay in assessing hardware and facility needs. Furthermore, program officials remained uncertain about how to implement future aspects of the Presidents Vision for Space Exploration.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, Space Shuttle: Actions Needed To Better Position NASA To Sustain Its Workforce Through Retirement (report no. GAO-05-230, Washington, DC, March 2005), 119, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d05230.pdf (accessed 3 September 2009).)
International Launch Services (ILS) successfully launched the European satellite Inmarsat 4-F1 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a stretched version of the Atlas 5 rocket. Weighing 13,138 pounds (5,959 kilograms or 5.96 tonnes), the EADS Astrium-built Inmarsat 4 was the largest commercial satellite ever to launch. As part of a three-satellite constellation comprising the new Broadband Global Area Network, the spacecraft would provide wireless, broadband connections to ships, planes, and remote areas that had not previously had reliable access to ground-based, high-speed networks.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 617, 1 April 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx617.html (accessed 31 August 2009); Associated Press, Atlas 5 Rocket Hauls Satellite into Space, 12 March 2005.)
Russia launched the Resurs DK1 satellite aboard a Soyuz-U rocket at 4:00 a.m. (EDT) from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The civilian Earth-observation satellite would operate for three years, the first in an upgraded series of spacecraft with improved capabilities in imaging resolution and communications. Navigating with a system based on Russias global navigation system Glonass, Resurs would be capable of surveying up to 700,000 square kilometers daily. Unlike previous Russian civilian remote-sensing craft, Resurs DK1 would carry an advanced communications system enabling it to quickly download recent images of natural resources, natural disasters, sea-ice conditions, and polar weather to Russian ground stations. Russian government agencies would use the images, making them available to national and international organizations, as well as private commercial customers. The satellites would have two attached instrumentsItalys Payload for Anti-Matter Exploration and Light-Nuclei Astrophysics (PAMELA), which would monitor cosmic rays, and a Russian particle detector, which would identify probable electromagnetic precursors of earthquakes.(NASA, Spacewarn Bulletin no. 632, July 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx632.html (accessed 6 August 2010); Stephen Clark, Civil Remote Sensing Craft Launched by Russia, Spaceflight Now, 16 June 2006; RIA Novosti, Survey Satellite Launched from Baikonur, 16 June 2006.)
The first successful launch at a commercial spaceport in the United States took place when the Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport launched a rocket called the Minotaur, carrying two satellites. The state governments of Virginia and Maryland had funded the spaceport to serve the commercial space launch market. Other institutions contributing to the venture included Old Dominion University and several aerospace companies. The facility was located on land leased from NASAs Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) near Chincoteague, Virginia. Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Virginia, had built the rocket. One of the satellites it carried was a U.S. Air Force tactical surveillance satellite called TacSat-2. The other was a 10-kilogram (22-pound) NASA satellite called GeneSat 1, designed for experiments on E. coli bacteria.(Michael E. Ruane, At Va. Spaceport, Rocket Launches 1,000 Dreams, Washington Post, 17 December 2006; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 638, 1 January 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx638.html (accessed 1 July 2010).)
ISROs launch of a Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) failed when the GSLV malfunctioned, taking with it an INSAT-4C communications satellite. ISRO had created the GSLV series of rockets to put heavy satellites weighing 2.02.5 tonnes (2,0002,500 kilograms or 2.22.8 tons) into geosynchronous orbit. The Indian National Satellite system, INSAT, is a series of domestic communications satellites. ISRO launched the rocket (formally designated GSLV-F02) from the Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, an island off the coast of the southern state of Andhra Pradesh in India. Soon after liftoff, the GSLVs first stage failed to separate, causing the rocket to veer from its trajectory, falling into the Bay of Bengal. The 85 unsuccessful launch, ISROs fourth launch of a GSLV, was the first GSLV launch ever to fail.
Russian space scientist Vladimir Sergevich Syromyatnikov died of leukemia in Moscow, Russia, at the age of 73. Syromyatnikov had begun working for Russias S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia) in 1956. He had later developed several important space technologies, including the first piloted spacecraft, Vostok, which Yuri Gagarin had flown in 1961. Syromyatnikov had also worked on the Voskhod spacecraft, the Venera probe to Venus, and the docking system that had linked the Soviet Soyuz and the U.S. Apollo space vehicles in the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project of July 1975. Syromyatnikov had later developed the Androgynous Peripheral Assembly Systemthe docking system that connected NASAs Space Shuttles with Russias orbital facility Mir and with the ISS.(Patricia Sullivan, Vladimir Syromyatnikov; Designing Docking System for Space Capsules, Washington Post, 1 October 2006.)
James A. Van Allen, a major figure in physics and space exploration, died at the age of 91. Born in 1914, Van Allen had played a prominent role in early American rocket research, including the development of the radiation detectors contained in the United States first successful satellite, Explorer 1. Launched January 1958, Explorer 1 had captured data revealing two belts of charged particles above Earths magnetic fieldphenomena later known as the Van Allen radiation belts. The finding was among the first major scientific discoveries of the early space age. In 1958 Van Allen had chaired a group of scientists who recommended that the United States create an independent national space agency by 1960 and launch a human mission to the Moon by 1968. Van Allen later became involved in several NASA projects, including the development of Galileo, Pioneers 10 and 11, and several Mariner spacecraft. During his lifetime, Van Allen had received numerous awards, including the National Medal of Science and NASAs Medal of Exceptional Achievement.(Walter Sullivan, James A. Van Allen, Discoverer of Earth-Circling Radiation Belts, Is Dead at 91, New York Times, 10 August 2006; NASA, James A. Van Allen (19142006), http://history.nasa.gov/sputnik/vanallen.html (accessed 5 March 2010).)
Japan launched into space the Advanced Landing Observing Satellite (ALOS), known as Daichi, on an H-IIA rocket, from Tanegashima Space Center in Kagoshima in southern Japan, at 10:33 a.m. (JST). ALOS had the capability to produce maps of a scale of 25,000 to 1, without using reference points on Earths surface. Japan would also use the satellite for precise regional land- coverage observation, disaster monitoring, and resource surveying. Three instruments aboard ALOS would accomplish these tasks: the Panchromatic Remote-Sensing Instrument for Stereo Mapping (PRISM), an optical camera measuring land elevation; the Advanced Visible and Near Infrared Radiometer type 2 (AVNIR-2), observing the material that covers land surfaces; and the Phased Array type Lband Synthetic Aperture Radar (PALSAR), enabling day-and-night and all- weather land observation. Japan had designed ALOS to operate for at least three years, with a program objective for a mission lasting up to five years.(Stephen Clark, New Earth Observer Launched into Orbit, Spaceflight Now, 24 January 2006; Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), Satellites and Spacecraft: Advanced Land Observing Satellite DAICHI (ALOS), 25 February 2009, http://www.jaxa.jp/projects/sat/alos/index_e.html (accessed 12 November 2009); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 627, 1 February 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/ spx627.html (accessed 14 September 2009).)
NASA launched the US$700 million New Horizons spacecraft aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas 5 rocket, on a 3-billion mile (4.83-kilometer), 9-year journey to Pluto, at 2:00 p.m. (EST) from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The spacecraft left Earths orbit at a speed of 36,000 miles per hour (57,936 kilometers per hour). After the spacecrafts planned February 2007 flyby of Jupiter, to receive a gravity-assisted velocity boost, NASA projected that it would reach a top speed of 47,000 miles per hour (75,639 kilometers per hour), thereby reducing the flights duration by three to five years. NASA expected that the New Horizons spacecraft would have its closest approach to Pluto and its moons in July 2015. Powered by 24 pounds (10.9 kilograms) of plutonium, New Horizons carried seven scientific instruments. Three of these were cameras, which would capture visible-light, infrared, and ultraviolet images of the surfaces of Pluto and its moon Charon. Also on board were three spectrometers, to study the composition and temperatures of Plutos thin atmosphere and surface features. After flying past Pluto, the spacecraft would penetrate deeper into the Kuiper Belt, an outer zone of the solar system 9 comprising thousands of icy, rocky objects, including comets and small planets, such as Pluto.
An Ariane 5-ECA rocket launched from the space center in Kourou, French Guiana, at 21:09 (GMT), placing two telecommunications satellites into geostationary transfer orbit at 36,000 kilometers (22,400 miles) above Earths equator. The two satellites, Mexicos Satmex 6 and Thailands Thaicom 5, had a combined mass of 8.2 tonnes (8,200 kilograms or 9.04 tons), the largest payload ever carried by a European rocket. Satmex 6 would provide telecommunications and television services to North America and South America, and Thaicom 5 would provide those services throughout the Asia-Pacific region.(Space Daily, Ariane 5 Rocket Launches Two Satellites into Orbit, 30 May 2006; ESA, Ariane 5 ECA Carries Record Payload Mass to GTO, news release, 28 May 2006, http://www.esa.int/easCP/SEMXIO9ATME_index_). html (accessed 26 March 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 631.)
A Soyuz-U rocket launched from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome in northern Russia at 17:38 (UT), carrying Kosmos 2420, a Russian military satellite. The Russian federal space agency Roskosmos stated that the launch took place in the interests of the Defense Ministry. Observers in the United States speculated that Kosmos 2420 might be a spy satellite intended to bolster Russias declining military-intelligence presence in space.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 631, 1 June 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx631.html (accessed 17 March 2010); Stephen Clark, Russian Soyuz Rocket Launches New Spy Satellite, Spaceflight Now, 3 May 2006; RIA Novosti, Russia Launches Kosmos Military Satellite from Plesetsk Base, 3 May 2006.)
NASAs KSC selected Lockheed Martin Commercial Launch Services to build the Atlas V rocket that would launch the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) mission. The mission, scheduled for launch in fall 2009 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, would carry to Mars a six-wheeled rover, equipped with cameras mounted on a mast. Twice as long and three times as heavy as the Mars Exploration rovers Spirit and Opportunity, MSL would explore Mars for two years, collecting Martian soil samples and rock cores and analyzing them for organic compounds and for environmental conditions capable of supporting microbial life, now or in the past. Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO), which had entered Marss orbit in March 2006, had transmitted to Earth images that NASA scientists would use to select a landing site for MSL. MRO would serve as a communications relay for MSL after the rover landed on the Martian surface.(Chris Bergin, Another Mars RoverAtlas V Chosen, NASASpaceflight.com, 2 June 2006, http://www. nasaspaceflight.com/2006/06/another-mars-rover-atlas-v-chosen (accessed 9 August 2010); Lockheed Martin, Lockheed Martins Atlas V Selected To Launch Mars Science Laboratory in 2009, news release, 6 June 2006, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2006/LOCKHEEDMARTINSATLASVSELECTEDLAUNCH. html (accessed 9 August 2010).)
International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin and Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center in Moscow, announced that a rocket carrying an Arabsat 4A telecommunications satellite had failed to reach its proper orbit. The Russian Proton Breeze M rocket, which launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 3:10 p.m. (EST), failed to burn its upper-stage engine for as long as its designers had planned, leaving the satellite stranded in low orbit. EADS Astrium engineers had designed Arabsat to expand and optimize capacity for direct-to-home TV broadcasting, telephony, and data transmission over a coverage zone encompassing North Africa, the Middle East, and part of Western Europe. If the launch had been successful, it would have placed Arabsat in a geostationary transfer orbit with an apogee of 36,000 kilometers (22,369 miles). ILS announced that it would form a failure-review oversight board to review reasons for the anomaly and define a corrective action plan. An investigatory Russian state commission would conduct a similar review.(Sergi Manstov, Proton FailureArian Re-sets, NASASpaceFlight.com, 1 March 2006; Jefferson Morris, Proton Launch Failure Leaves Arabsat 4A Stranded, Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, 2 March 2006.)
NASA launched two meteorological satellites, CloudSat and CALIPSO (Cloud-Aerosol Lidar and Infrared Pathfinder Satellite Observations), aboard a Boeing Delta 2 rocket, at 11:02 (UT) from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The satellites would eventually circle 438 miles (705 kilometers) above Earth in a Sun-synchronous polar orbit. CloudSat, an experimental mission designed to study the effects of clouds on climate and weather, was 1,000 times more sensitive than typical weather radar, using millimeter-wavelength radar to measure the altitude and properties of clouds. CALIPSO carried three instruments to study the role that clouds and atmospheric aerosols (airborne particles) play in regulating Earths weather, climate, and air quality. The two satellites would become part of a constellation of Earth-observing satellites known as the A-train, joining the satellites Aqua, Aura, and PARASOL.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 630; NASA, NASA Launches Satellites for Weather, Climate, Air-Quality Studies, news release 06-190, 28 April 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/apr/HQ_06190_Cloudsat_ CALIPSO_launch.html (accessed 25 September 2009); Jesco von Puttkamer, Space Flight 2006The Year in Review, July 20, 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/directorates/somd/reports/2006/us.html (accessed 3 March 2010).)
At the National Space Societys International Space Development Conference, NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale announced NASAs sponsorship of the Lunar Lander Challenge competition, with prizes totaling US$2.5 million, to develop rockets capable of landing on the Moon. The X Prize Foundation would manage the competition and award the Lunar Lander Challenge prizes at the presentation of the X Prize Cup in October 2006. The challenge would have two levels of difficulty, with prizes awarded at each level. Level 1 would require a vehicle to take off from a designated launch area, rocket to an altitude of 150 feet (50 meters), hover for 90 seconds, and land on a pad 100 meters (320.08 feet) from the launch point. Level 2 would require the same launch altitude and the same distance between launch and landing pad, but the rocket would have to hover for 180 seconds and to land on a rocky site simulating the lunar surface. California entrepreneur Peter H. Diamandis, founder of the X Prize competition, stated that entrepreneurial companies can build the lunar space ships [necessary for achieving NASAs goal of returning people to the Moon in the next decade], and a Lunar Lander Challenge can stimulate the required technology in an efficient and rapid fashion.(Maggie McKee, Lunar Lander Is NASAs Biggest Challenge, New Scientist, 5 May 2006; X Prize Foundation, X Prize Foundation and NASA Offer $2.5 Million Lunar Lander Challenge Competition To Take Place at 06 X Prize Cup in Las Cruces, 4 May 2006, http://www.xprize.org/llc/press-release/x-prize-foundation-and-nasa-offer- 2-5-million-lunar-challenge-competition-t (accessed 23 March 2010).)
GAO released a report criticizing NASAs plans to acquire rockets and spacecraft for the Vision for Space Exploration program and recommending that the U. S. Congress restrict some of its funding until NASA had completed its review of the program. NASA expected to finish the review during the following year. The report addressed NASAs plans to sign long-term agreements with the contractors for the project in late 2006. NASA planned for the contractors to design, develop, and produce both the CEVthe the crew exploration vehicle, which would replace the Space Shuttleand the rocket that would launch it. The report stated that NASA had not completed the first phase of its ongoing design and cost estimates for these projects, and that signing the contracts would place the projects at risk for cost, performance, and schedule problems. GAO recommended postponing the contracts until after NASA had completed its preliminary design reviews for those projects. NASA expected to complete the final phase of the ongoing review by March 2008. The report specifically recommended that Congress restrict NASAs appropriations and obligations for the CEV, providing only the funds needed to complete the preliminary review.(Mark Carreau, GAO Warns NASA of Problems with Moon, Mars Strategy, Houston Chronicle, 27 July 2006; U.S. Government Accountability Office, NASA: Long-Term Commitment To and Investment in Space Exploration Program Requires More Knowledge (report no. GAO-06-817R, Washington, DC, 17 July 2006): 19, http://www. gao.gov/new.items/d06817r.pdf (accessed 22 January 2010).)
NASA launched the first three microsatellites in the Space Technology 5 (ST 5) mission, aboard a Pegasus XL rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, at 9:04 a.m. (EST). The ST 5 mission was part of NASAs New Millennium Program, created to identify, develop, build, and test innovative technologies and concepts for use in future missions. NASA launched the three satellites to a near-Earth polar elliptical orbit that would enable them to travel from approximately 300 kilometers (190 miles) to approximately 4,500 kilometers (2,800 miles) above Earth. Once in orbit, the satellites would form a row, with each satellite approximately 40 to 200 kilometers (25 to 125 miles) away from the others. Miniature boom-mounted magnetometers on each satellite would collect data enabling coordinated multi-point measurements of Earths magnetic field. This type of measurement would be useful in future missions studying the effect of solar activity on Earths magnetosphere, the bubble that protects Earth from harmful space radiation. The satellites would remain operational for approximately 90 days.(NASA, NASAs Space Technology 5 Satellites Soar into Space, news release 06-104, 22 March 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/mar/HQ_06104_ST5_Successful_Launch.html (accessed 14 September 2009); NASA, Space Technology 5: Mission Overview, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/st-5/main/index. html (accessed 4 January 2010).)
An Atlas 5 rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 4:27 p.m. (EDT), carrying the 4.3- tonne (4,300-kilogram or 4.74-ton) geostationary Astra 1KR telecommunications satellite. Lockheed Martin had designed and built the satellite for Luxembourg-based SES ASTRA. International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture between Lockheed Martin and Khrunichev State Research and Production Center in Moscow, had marketed the mission. Once the satellite had achieved its final orbital slot over the equator at 19.2 east longitude, its 32 Ku-band transponders would transmit analog, radio, and digital television signals, as well as Internet and multimedia services throughout Europe.(United Press International, ASTRA Satellite Ready for Thursday Launch, 20 April 2006; Justin Ray, Atlas 5 Rocket Launches TV Broadcasting Craft for Europe, Spaceflight Now, 20 April 2006; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 630, 1 May 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx630.html (accessed 1 March 2010).)
An Orbital Sciences Corporation Minotaur rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 9:40 p.m. (EDT), carrying six Taiwanese-American weather microsatellites. The launch of the weather satellites was part of a US$100 million mission known in the United States as COSMIC (Constellation Observing System for Meteorology, and Climate) and as FORMOSAT 3 in Taiwan. Taiwans National Science Council and National Space Organization had provided primary funding for the project, with contributions from the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) and its partners, including NASA. After an initial orbit approximately 300 miles (500 kilometers) above Earth, the satellites would achieve their final circular orbits 13 months later, orbiting between 435 and 500 miles (700 and 800 kilometers) above Earth. The principal instrument on each of the 155-pound (62-kilogram) satellites would be a GPS receiver, originally developed by NASAs JPL. Working together with other on-board instruments, GPS antennas would track the extent to which the GPS signals bend when they pass through (are occulted by) the Earths atmosphere. Measuring the degree to which the signals bend would enable scientists to evaluate atmospheric conditions, such as air density, temperature, moisture, and electron density. According to Jay S. Fein, Program Director in the NSFs Division of Atmospheric Sciences, the satellites would obtain new information that would have a tremendous impact on geosciences research and weather prediction, and would be an important contribution to global Earth observations.(Leonard David, COSMIC Constellation To Study Atmosphere, MSNBC.com, 14 April 2006; Tariq Malik, Minotaur Rocket Orbits COSMIC Constellation To Scan Earths Atmosphere, Space.com, 14 April 2006, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/060414_ cosmic_mino_ launch.html (accessed 24 June 2010); Justin Ray, Mission Status Center, Spaceflight Now, 15 April 2006.)
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) and Rocket System Corporation (RSC) launched the Multi-Functional Transport Satellite 2 (MTSAT-2) from the Tanegashima Space Center at 06:55 (UT) aboard an H2-A rocket. The Civil Aviation Bureau and the Japan Meteorological Agency jointly owned the 1,250-kilogram (2,756-pound) geostationary weather satellite, which carried an imaging telescope with detectors for five wavelength channels: visible band, micron infrared (IR1), micron (IR2), micron water vapor (IR3), and micron near infrared. After coming to rest over 145o east longitude, the satellite would commence its mission to capture data and images that scientists could use to determine weather patterns, and to relay that information to the Japanese Meteorological Agency.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 628, 1 March 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx628.html (accessed 17 August 2010); JAXA, Launch Result of the Multi-functional Transport Satellite 2 (MTSAT-2) by the H-IIA Launch Vehicle No. 9 (H-IIA F9), press release, 18 February 2006, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2006/02/20060218_ h2a-f9_e.html (accessed 17 August 2010).)
The French-Russian company Starsem launched COROT on a Soyuz-2 rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 14:23 (UT). CNES had designed the satellite to conduct seismological analyses of stars, gathering data that would enable scientists to determine their age, composition, and internal structure. In addition, CNES had designed COROT to detect
ESA and the European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT) launched the Meteorological Operational Satellite A (MetOP-A), Europes first polar-orbiting weather satellite. MetOP-A, which represented a major advance in meteorological capabilities, launched on a Soyuz-Fregat rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 16:28 (UT). Engineers had designed MetOP-A to quickly provide data of unprecedented accuracy and resolution, covering weather and climate variables ranging from temperature to concentrations of ozone gas. The satellite was the first of three scheduled for launch over the next 14 years. Collectively, the three satellites would ultimately form the space-based portion of EUMETSATs Polar System (EPS). Polar-orbiting satellites were capable of highly detailed Earth observation, because they orbited at relatively low altitudesoften at altitudes of 800 kilometers (nearly 500 miles), as opposed to the 36,000-kilometer-altitude (approximately 22,400-mile-altitude) orbits of many geostationary satellites. The EPS was Europes contribution to a cooperative venture with NOAA, which had provided users worldwide with meteorological data from polar orbit for nearly four decades. In addition, NOAA and Frances CNES had provided five of MetOP-As 10 instruments.(ESA, MetOP at a Glance: Overview, 16 November 2006, http://www.esa.int/esaLP/ SEMN1FAATME_ LPmetop_0.html (accessed 2 April 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 636, 1 November 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa. gov/spacewarn/spx636.html (accessed 2 April 2010).)
After months of delays due to various technical difficulties, the Geostationary Operational Environmental SatelliteN (GOES-N) launched successfully aboard a Boeing Delta-4 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 6:11 p.m. (EDT). GOES-N, which would be renamed GOES- 13 after completing its destination orbit, was the latest in a series of Earth-monitoring satellites that provided the kind of continuous monitoring necessary for intensive data analysis. GOES satellites circled the Earth in a geosynchronous orbitthey orbited the equatorial plane of the Earth at a speed equal to the Earths rotationallowing GOES satellites to hover continuously over one position on the Earths surface and to appear stationary. GOES satellites remained constantly vigilant for atmospheric triggers of severe weather conditions, such as tornadoes, flash floods, hailstorms, and hurricanes. GOES-N would carry enhanced imaging and sounding instruments, enabling meteorologists to pinpoint the location of severe weather within 1.5 kilometers (0.9 miles), as well as a solar imager designed to detect and precisely to locate solar flares and coronal mass ejections (CMEs) soon after their occurrence. After reaching its geosynchronous orbit of 22,300 miles (35,888 kilometers), GOES-N would enter on-orbit 65 storage mode, so that it could rapidly replace any existing GOES satellite, in case of failure.
CNSA launched the Sino Satellite Communications Companys (SinoSats) satellite on a Long March 3B rocket from Xichang Satellite Launch Center at 16:20 (UT). The communications satellite, SinoSat-2, represented a major technological advance for the Chinese space program. The domestically developed satellite, capable of providing both analog and digital television broadcasts, was Chinas first satellite based on the Direct-From-Home-4 system, or DFH-4 bus. The DFU-4 bus enables individual households to receive television signals using their own satellite-dish antennas. SinoSat hoped that the satellite would improve the capacity and reliability of Chinese television broadcasting and help China serve the international spaceflight market. In addition, CNSA officials stated that the satellites technology could prompt the Chinese government to eliminate regulations prohibiting Chinese citizens from installing their own satellite-dish antennas.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 636; Xinhua News Agency, 5th Ld-Writethru-China Exclusive: China Launches High- Power Communications, Broadcast Satellite, 29 October 2006.)
JAXA announced that it had successfully launched its ASTRO-F infrared astronomical satellite after a one-day weather delay. The 952-kilogram (2,099-pound) satellite blasted off from Uchinoura Space Center on an M-5 booster at 21:28 (UT). ASTRO-F carried a 67-centimeter- aperture (26-inch-aperture) infrared telescope, a Far-Infrared Surveyor, and the Infrared Camera. Its mission was to survey all the galaxies for infrared luminance indicating newly forming planets, stars, and protogalaxies, and to collect data on the structure, mass, and composition of new stars. This information would help scientists understand the formation process of stars, planetary systems, and galaxies. Part of a joint mission of JAXA, ESA, and Korean researchers, ASTRO-F was built to survey the cosmos at higher resolutions and with higher sensitivity than the worlds first infrared satellite, the Infrared Astronomy Satellite, which had launched in 1983.(JAXA, Infrared Imaging Satellite AKARI (ASTRO-F), http://www.jaxa.jp/projects/sat/astro_f/index_e.html (accessed 14 September 2010); Tariq Malik, Japan Launches New Observatory for Infrared Sky Survey, Space.com, 21 February 2006, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/060221_jaxa_astrof_lnch.html (accessed 14 September 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 628, 1 March 2006, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx628.html (accessed 22 September 2010).)
Four years behind its original schedule, JAXA successfully launched Kaguya, also called the Selenological and Engineering Explorer (SELENE), aboard an H-2A solid-fuel rocket from Tanegashima Island at 1:31 (UT). The 2.9-tonne (2,900-kilogram or 3.2-ton) lunar orbiter carried various instruments that would enable it to obtain detailed data about the lunar topography and surface-mineral composition. JAXA had promoted the mission as the most significant lunar expedition since Americas Apollo program of the 1960s and early 1970s, in terms of its scope and ambition. JAXA claimed that the mission would outpace the former Soviet Unions Luna program, NASAs Clementine mission of 1994, and NASAs Lunar Prospector mission of 1998 1999. Kaguyas launch occurred at a critical time for the Japanese space agency, which was facing accusations that it lacked a vision capable of challenging the ambition of the Peoples Republic of China to lead East Asia in space exploration. At the time of the launch, JAXA also lacked popular and political support. Japans citizens had such poor regard for the civilian space program that JAXA had to negotiate with the local fishermen of Tanegashima for acceptable launch times. Because September was one of two launch windows that Tanegashima fishermens unions had offered JAXA, Kaguyas launch took place during typhoon season. Kazuto Suzuki, a specialist in global space issues at Tsukuba University in Tokyo, explained that JAXA was only beginning to realize that, to enhance the political importance of Japans space initiatives, it would need to market Japans space program to appeal to the Japanese public.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 647, 1 October 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx647.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Bruce Wallace, After Long Delay, Japan Launches Lunar Orbiter, Los Angeles Times, 14 September 2007; Associated Press, Japans Space Agency Launches Lunar Probe, 14 September 2007.)
The U.S. Missile Defense Agency successfully launched a Minotaur-1 rocket from the Mid- Atlantic Regional Spaceport launchpad on Wallops Island, Virginia, at 2:47 a.m. (EST). The rocket carried the Near Field Infrared Experiment (NFIRE), which was part of a study to improve the interception of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) and to assess the viability of a laser communication system for missile-defense applications. During the mission, an infrared tracking sensor on board NFIRE would collect exhaust-plume data from two disarmed Minutemen ICBMs, which the agency would launch later in 2007 from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch of Minotaur 1 was the second launch from the Mid-Atlantic Regional Spaceport. Operated by a consortium including Old Dominion University and the states of Maryland and Virginia, the spaceport was one of six federally licensed spaceports in the United States.(Stephen Furness, Wallops Spaceports 2:47 a.m. Launch a Success, Chincoteague Beacon (VA), 24 April 2007; Jon W. Glass, Rocket Launched Successfully from Eastern Shore Spaceport, Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 25 April 2007.)
NASA announced the assignments to NASAs field centers of specific tasks related to lunar exploration, as part of the Constellation Program. NASA assigned lead responsibility for designing the lunar lander and other lunar-surface systems, such as rovers and astronaut habitats, to JSC in Houston. MFSC would lead the development of the lunar landers descent stage and the development of the Earth-departure stage of the Ares-5 rocket. NASA gave ARC lead responsibility for the integrated health-management systems of Ares 5, the lunar lander, and for other lunar-surface systems, as well as a supporting role in developing Ares 5s payload shroud. DFRC would assist ARC in developing mission-operation simulations capabilities and supporting ground- and flight-test operations for lunar projects. NASA assigned GRC lead responsibility for developing the lunar landers ascent stage and Ares 5s power system, thrust- vector control system, and payload shroud, as well as for testing the Earth-departure stage at Plum Brook Station in Ohio. GSFC would take the lead in developing an unpressurized cargo carrier for Orion and avionics for lunar landers. GSFC would also develop equipment and tools for lunar EVAs. JPL would have a variety of supporting roles in the lunar-lander project and lead responsibility for a particular robotic lunar-surface mobility systemthe All-Terrain Hex- Legged Extra-Terrestrial Explorer (ATHLETE), a six-legged robot. KSC would have lead responsibility for final assembly of the human lunar lander, help integrate lunar-habitat modules, and prepare Ares 1 and Ares 5 for launch. NASA assigned LaRC a variety of supporting roles in the lunar-lander project, in addition to lead roles in developing the aerodynamics of Ares 5 and structures and mechanisms for lunar-surface systems. As NASAs primary rocket-engine testing facility, SSC would continue that role for the Ares 1 and Ares 5 and would support the testing of the lunar-lander descent engine.(NASA, NASA Announces New Center Assignments for Moon Exploration, news release 07-234, 30 October 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/oct/HQ_07234_ESMD_Work_Assignments.html (accessed 8 September 2010); Brian Berger, NASA Assigns Field Center Roles for Ares 5, Lunar Lander, Space.com, 30 October 2007, http://www.space.com/news/071030-sn-ares-fieldassign.html (accessed 28 September 2010).)
The government of Sweden announced that it had signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the suborbital-space tourism company Virgin Galactic. The agreement established plans for Virgins SpaceShipTwo vehicle to launch from a site in Kiruna, Sweden, during the midsummer and midwinter, so that the craft could fly through the aurora borealis. In preparation for future flights, Swedish Space Corporation authorities planned a March 2008 demonstration launch of a small sounding rocket equipped with cameras. SpaceShipTwo designer Burt Rutan would collect data to determine the possible effect of the aurora borealis on passengers or on electronics aboard the spacecraft. The MOU did not call for any exchange of funds, because the Kiruna facility was the site of suborbital sounding rocket and atmospheric balloon launches. Swedish officials stated that the site had sufficient infrastructure to accommodate Virgin Galactic craft without new investment.(Peter B. de Selding, Virgin Galactic Strikes Deal with Swedish Government, Space.com, 28 January 2007, http://www.space.com/news/070128_sweden_virgin.html (accessed 9 November 2009).)
An Ariane-5ECA rocket launched the British Defense Ministrys 4.7-tonne (5.2-ton) Skynet-5A satellite and ISROs 3.1-tonne (3.4-ton) Insat-4B civil-communications satellite from Kourou, French Guiana. The Skynet 5A was part of a system designed to deliver secure, high-bandwidth communications for British armed forces, NATO, and other allied forces. Skynet had ultrahighfrequency and super-high-frequency communications instruments, a secure payload-control system, antijamming capabilities, and multiple spot beams. Insat 4B carried 12 Ku-band transponders to reach homes and businesses throughout India, as well as 12 C-band transponders to serve users living in an area stretching from the Middle East to Southeast Asia. Insat 4B was the second Insat-4 craft to reach orbit successfully. Insat 4A had successfully launched in 2005, but Insat 4Cs launch vehicle had exploded in July 2006, destroying the satellite.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 641; Stephen Clark, British and Indian Satellites Fly to Space on Ariane 5, Spaceflight Now, 11 March 2007, http://spaceflightnow.com/ariane/v175/ (accessed 9 June 2010 ); Jonathan Amos, British Skynet Satellite Launched, BBC News, 12 March 2007, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/6434773.stm (accessed 9 June 2010).)
A Dnepr rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 7:02 (UT), carrying a variety of small satellites, many of them student-built. Four American-built picosatellites, dubbed Objects T, S, R, and Qall CubeSats with masses of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds)were technology demonstrators, including twoCalPoly 3 (CP 3) and CalPoly 4 (CP 4)that students at California Polytechnic University and Stanford University had built. Students at the University of Louisiana, Lafayette, had built another CubeSatCAPE 1with a mass of 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds), to collect and store data on the ambient ionosphere and to relay the data to the students. Students at Sergio Arboleda University had constructed Libertad 1, a Colombian 1-kilogram (2.2-pound) CubeSat, for an unspecified purpose. The Dnepr rocket also carried five Saudi Arabian communications nanosatellites. Students and faculty of King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology had built the 12-kilogram (26.5-pound) CubeSats, which were the first five of a planned fleet of 24 nanosatellites that would store and forward communications. Also aboard was EgyptSat 1, a 100-kilogram (220.5-pound) Egyptian minisatellite carrying a multispectral imager for Earth observation.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642.)
Yuzhnoye, the Ukrainian rocket-construction bureau and a member of the Sea Launch consortium, released its findings on the failed 30 January 2007 launch of the Zenit-3SL rocket. Yuzhnoye stated that a stray metal fragment had entered a pump in the rockets engine, causing the Zenit-3SL to explode during its attempt to launch a Boeing-built commercial communications satellite for the Netherlands-based SES New Skies. Representatives of the Ukrainian and Russian developers of the Zenit-3SL rocket had comprised the commission that investigated the launch failure.(Associated Press, Company: Metal Fragment Doomed Rocket, 14 March 2007; RIA Novosti, Sea Launch Explosion Due To Engine Failure, 14 March 2007.)
ESA launched the sixth Ariane-5 rocket of 2007 from Kourou, French Guiana, setting a record for the agency. The Ariane 5 lifted into orbit the Horizons-2 telecommunications satellite, a joint U.S.-Japanese venture. The rocket also carried the RASCOM-QAF1 satellite, which would offer telephone and Internet service throughout Africa. Horizons 2, the second satellite for the U.S.- based Intelsat and the Japan-based JSAT, would replace Intelsats SBS-6 spacecraft, which had been in orbit for 17 years. With 20 Ku-band transponders, the 2,304-kilogram (5079.5-pound) Horizons 2 would provide telecommunications services for 1517 years to the continental United States, the Caribbean, and parts of Canada. After 10 years struggle to organize an ownership structure, Regional African Satellite Communications Organization (RASCOM) had secured US$370 million in funding from a consortium, comprising a Libyan investment fund, the Libyan General Post and Telecommunications Company, and three African development banks. The consortium intended for its satellite, the Rascom-QAF1, to provide a first step toward 188 establishing the space infrastructure necessary to link poor rural Africans with urban areas.
The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) launched two ocean-surveillance spacecraft from Cape Canaveral aboard an Atlas-5 Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV), marking the rockets first NRO secret mission. The NRO had designed the two craft to track ships that might be concealing al-Qaeda operatives and to monitor Iranian and Chinese sea-based military operations. However, the rocket had stopped firing prematurely, causing the craft to launch into the wrong orbit. Although the satellites separated safely from the malfunctioning booster, they did not have enough rocket propellant to reach the correct orbit. Lockheed Martin had built the Atlas 5 using a Lockheed Martin Centaur upper stage, with a Pratt & Whitney RL10 rocket engine powered with liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen. United Launch Alliance, which operated the Atlas program, managed the launch in conjunction with NRO and the U.S. Air Forces 45th Space Wing.(Craig Covault, NRO Spacecraft in Wrong Orbit, Aviation Week, 16 June 2007, http://www.aviationweek.com/ aw/generic/story_channel.jsp?channel=space&id=news/mission06157.xml (accessed 20 June 2010).)
NASA announced an agreement with the U.S. Air Force to support abort-flight-test requirements for the Orion Project. Under a contract with Orbital Sciences Corporation of Chandler, Arizona, the U.S. Air Force Space Development and Test Wing at Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico, had scheduled flight tests of abort-test boosters. The purpose of the tests, which would begin in 2009 at White Sands Missile Range (WSMR) in New Mexico and would last through 2011, was to support certification of the Orion CEVs launch-abort system. The system included a small escape rocket designed to ensure the safety of the crew in the event of a launch-vehicle malfunction while on the launchpad or during ascent to orbit. Of the six tests planned, two would simulate a situation involving an abort from the launchpad and would require no booster; the remainder would use abort-test boosters to simulate aborts at three stressing conditions along the Ares launch-vehicle trajectory.(NASA, NASA Buys Abort Test Boosters for Orion Flight Tests, news release 07-86, 16 April 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_07086_Orion_ATB_purchase.html (accessed 16 February 2010).)
NASA launched its Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms (THEMIS) mission from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 6:01 p.m. (EST), marking the first time NASA had launched a five-satellite constellation aboard a single rocket. NASA had designed the mission to uncover the catalyst of geomagnetic substorms, the atmospheric events visible in the Northern Hemisphere as a sudden brightening of the aurora borealis. Scientists hoped that the missions findings would help protect humans and commercial satellites in space from the effects of particle radiation. NASA had planned the mission to last two years, during which time the five identical satellites would collect data, attempting to achieve what no previous single-satellite mission had been able to doto pinpoint when and where substorms begin.(NASA, NASAs THEMIS Mission Launches To Study Geomagnetic Substorms, news release 07-47, 17 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_0747_THEMIS_Postlaunch.html (accessed 14 October 2007).)
The Peoples Republic of China launched NIGCOMSAT-1a communications satellite that China had manufactured for Nigeriaaboard a Long March-3B rocket from Xichang Launch Center in Sichuan Province. The launch marked the first time that China had built and launched a satellite under a contract with another country. China had reportedly secured the US$311 million contract in 2004, in a bidding process that had included 21 companies, in addition to China. The 5.2-tonne (5.7-ton) craft carried four C-band, eighteen Ku-band, four Ka-band, and two L-band transponders, for providing voice, video, and data links to all of Africa, southern Europe, and parts of the Middle East. News reports described the launch as a symbol of Chinas broad network of economic relations with African nations, suggesting that the launch signaled Chinas wish to cooperate with developing countries in the peaceful use of outer space. Nigerian officials hailed the launch as a breakthrough that signaled the end of the nations exclusive reliance on oil. Hammed Rufai, Managing Director of the NIGCOMSAT-1 project for Nigeria, remarked that the satellite would help Nigeria develop knowledge-based industries.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 643; Edward Cody, China Builds and Launches a Satellite for Nigeria, Washington Post, 14 May 2007.)
A UP Aerospacebuilt SpaceLoft SL-2 rocket launched from Spaceport America in New Mexico, carrying small amounts of the cremated remains of approximately 200 people, including Star Trek creator Eugene W. Roddenberry and Star Trek actor James M. Doohan. The event was the first successful launch into space from the commercial spaceport; the companys first attempt in December 2006 had failed when the SpaceLoft XL rocket corkscrewed out of control seconds after the launch, never reaching space. The SL-2 rocket reached an altitude of almost 73 miles (117 kilometers) before returning to Earth. The payload landed by parachute at WSMR, 33 miles (53 kilometers) east of the launch site. UP Aerospace President Jerry Larson remarked that the launchs only malfunction was a signal beacon, an equipment failure that prevented WSMR from tracking the launch vehicle during the opening moments of the 13-minute flight.(Jose L. Medina, Spaceport Launch a Success, Las Cruces Sun News (NM), 30 April 2007.)
Soyuz TMA-11 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome at 13:22 (UT) carrying three astronautsa Russian, an American, and a Malaysianto the ISS. Upon their arrival at the ISS, American astronaut Peggy A. Whitson, as Commander of Expedition 16, would become the first woman to command the space station. Veteran Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko would join Whitson as a member of Expedition 16, each of the two replacing crew members of Expedition 15. Russian cosmonauts Fyodor N. Yurchikhin, Expedition 15 Commander, and Flight Engineer Oleg V. Kotov, who had been aboard the ISS since 9 April 2007, would accompany Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor on the return flight to Earth. Shukor, an orthopedic surgeon from Malaysia, would conduct experiments on board the ISS, studying diseases and the effects of microgravity and space radiation on cells and genes. Shukor was Malaysias first astronaut.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 648, 1 November 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx648.html (accessed 13 September 2010); Mansur Mirovalev for Associated Press, Rocket Lifts Off for International Space Station, 11 October 2007.)
NASA announced its selection of four universities to conduct suborbital scientific research. NASA intended the projects to reinvigorate its Sounding Rocket Program. The four projects had a combined value of US$4.2 million. NASAs Science Mission Directorates Heliophysics Division had selected two of the programs, and the Directorates Astrophysics Division had selected the other two. The University of Wisconsin proposed to design a payload to make astronomical polarization measurements in the far-ultraviolet spectrum and to explore new diagnostics of the geometry and magnetic fields in stellar envelopes and interstellar medium. Dartmouth College in Hanover, New Hampshire, planned to launch a payload to investigate substorm auroras and their variations. The team from the University of Colorado, Boulder, proposed to investigate the ratio of molecular hydrogen to carbon monoxide in gas clouds of other galaxies, to help determine accurately the masses of those galaxies. The team from the University of Southern California at Los Angeles proposed to test a new photoelectron focusing system, which scientists could use in future solar observations to calibrate space research. A panel comprising external reviewers and representatives from NASAs scientific staff had selected the proposals, based on each projects scientific and technical merits, costs, and relevance to NASA programs.(NASA, NASA Funds Universities New Experiments for Suborbital Flights, news release 07-121, 23 May 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/may/HQ_07121_Suborbital_Grants.html (accessed 24 March 2010).)
A Zenit-3SL rocket carrying a commercial communications satellite exploded during launch from the Sea Launch consortiums floating platform Odyssey. The Netherlandsbased SES New Skies NSS-8 satellite would have provided audio, video, data, and Internet services to countries in Africa, Asia, Europe, the Indian subcontinent, and the Middle East. Sea Launch spokesperson Paula Korn stated that the consortium was forming a failure-review oversight board to investigate the cause of the accident. A Sea Launch helicopter dispatched to the launch platform would assess the damage.(Associated Press, Sea Launch Rocket with Satellite Explodes on Lift-off, 31 January 2007; Lon Rains, Sea Launch Rocket Explodes During Launch, Space.com, 30 January 2007, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/ 070130_sealaunch_explosion.html (accessed 4 November 2009).)
XCOR Aerospace announced that it had successfully completed six short-duration test fires of the prototype engine 5M15, the new 7,500-pound-thrust (3.75-ton-thrust or 3.4-tonne-thrust) rocket engine, using liquid methane and liquid oxygen as propellants. Spokesperson Aleta Jackson explained that XCOR had designed the test fires to determine the appropriate length of the chamber for a flight-weight version of the engine. XCOR had developed the engine as part of a subcontract with Alliant Techsystems (ATK), which was developing liquid-methane rocket engine technology for NASAs future space applications.(XCOR Aerospace, XCOR Aerospace Begins Test Firing of Methane Rocket Engine: Successful Test Completed for NASA, press release, 16 January 2007, http://www.xcor.com/press-releases/2007/07-01-16_XCOR_begins_ methane_engine_testing.html (accessed 9 November 2009).)
NASA successfully launched its Dawn spacecraft aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 7:34 a.m. (EDT). Mission Controllers at NASAs JPL in Pasadena, California, received telemetry data on schedule at 9:44 a.m. (EDT). The data indicated that Dawn had achieved proper orientation in space and that its solar array had succeeded in generating power from the Sun. Dawns mission was to travel 1.7 billion miles (2.7 billion kilometers) to explore two asteroids located in orbit between Mars and JupiterVesta in 2011 and Ceres in 2015. The International Astronomical Union had reclassified Ceres as a dwarf planet in 2006. In their search for new information about the collection of rocky materials remaining from the formation of the planets, NASA scientists hoped that the US$474 million mission would provide insight into how size, water, and gravity had influenced the development of Earth and its planetary neighbors. NASA scientists intended to use Dawns instrument suite to measure the asteroids elemental and mineral composition, shape, surface topography, and tectonic history, as well as to search for water-bearing minerals. While studying how Dawn orbits the asteroids, scientists also planned to measure the masses and gravity fields of Vesta and Ceres. Engineers had designed Dawn to use ion propulsion, a unique hyperefficient system using solar power to ionize xenon, generating thrust. Although this method provided less power than conventional engines, ion propulsion could maintain thrust for months at a time.(NASA, NASAs Dawn Spacecraft Enroute To Shed Light on Asteroid Belt, news release 07-213, 27 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07213_Dawn_Final_Release.html (accessed 4 August 2010); NASA, Dawn Spacecraft Successfully Launched, news release 07-212, 27 September 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/sep/HQ_07212_Dawn_launched.html (accessed 4 August 2010); Mark K. Matthews, NASAs Dawn To Cast Light on Asteroids Frozen in Time, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 September 2007; Mark Carreau, NASAs Launch Starts 3-Billion-Mile Trip to Asteroids, Houston Chronicle, 28 September 2007.)
Europes Ariane-5ECA rocket launched a two-satellite payload, weighing 9.4 tonnes (10.4 tons), from Europes launch center in Kourou, French Guiana, at 22:29 (GMT), setting a new benchmark for a commercial launch. The heavy-lift rocket carried Galaxy 17, an American geostationary communications satellite, and Astra 1L, a European geostationary communications satellite. Galaxy 1 would provide telephone and television services for South America, North America, and Europe; Astra 1L would provide direct-to-home video and voice links throughout Europe. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin attended the launch to observe the Ariane- 5ECA rocket, which would begin launching payloads to the ISS later in 2007.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 643, 1 June 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx643.html (accessed 26 March 2010); BBC News, European Rocket Powers To Record, 4 May 2007, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/ 6621297.stm (accessed 10 June 2010).)
NASAs Ames Research Center (ARC) and Virgin Galactic signed a MOU, providing a framework to explore potential collaborations, such as developing spacesuits, heat shields for spacecraft, hybrid rocket motors, and hypersonic vehicles. The press also reported that the MOU included provisions for training NASA astronauts, for NASA to buy seats on a Virgin Galactic flight, and for NASA to provide technical advice to Virgin Galactic; however; these provisions were not, in fact, part of the agreement. A newly formed organization in the NASA Research Park at AmesNASAs Space Portalhad enabled the negotiation with Virgin Galactic to help NASA promote the development of the commercial space economy.(NASA, NASA, Virgin Galactic To Explore Future Cooperation, news release 07-49, 21 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_07049_Virgin_Galactic.html (accessed 14 October 2009); NASA, NASA Provides Additional Information on Agreement with Virgin Galactic, news release 07-50, 21 February 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/feb/HQ_07050_Virgin_Galactic_info.html (accessed 14 October 2009); Associated Press, NASA, Virgin Galactic Sign Agreement, 22 February 2007; Matthew Moore, Virgin Galactic To Train NASA Astronauts, Daily Telegraph (London), 22 February 2007.)
NASA announced that, after a full and open competition, it had selected the Boeing Company as the prime contractor for the production, delivery, and installation of avionics systems for the Ares-1 rocket, a key component of the Constellation Program. NASA planned for Ares 1 to launch the Orion CEV into orbit. Under the terms of the US$799.5 million contract, Boeing was responsible for developing and acquiring the avionics hardware, and for assembling, inspecting, and integrating the systems components on the upper stage of the rocket. During the performance period, which would last through 16 December 2016, NASA required Boeing to provide one instrument-unit avionics-ground-test article, three flight-test units, and six production-flight units to support integrated flight tests and missions. The selection was the final major contract award for the Constellation Program, wrapping up a five-month period in which NASA had awarded nearly US$5 billion in contracts. The award was the second to go to Boeing, which had also won the US$1.1 billion contract to build the upper stage of the Ares rocket.(NASA, NASA Selects Prime Contractor for Ares 1 Rocket Avionics, news release C07-060, 12 December 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/dec/HQ_C07060_Ares_1_Avionics.html (accessed 20 October 2007); Associated Press, Boeing Wins Final NASA Rocket Deal, 13 December 2007; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), Boeing Wins Final Ares 1 Contract, 13 December 2007.)
Satellite Association of Argentina, and the Argentina Association for Space Technology had built PehuenSat-1 to provide a platform for Argentinean university students to perform amateur radio experiments.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 639, 31 January 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx639.html (accessed 4 November 2009); Chris Bergen, Indias PSLV Launches Successfully, NASASpaceflight.com, 9 January 2007, http://www.nasaspaceflight.com/2007/01/indias-pslv-launches-successfully/ (accessed 4 March 2010); K. N. Arun for Associated Press, India Launches Rocket To Test Re-entry, 10 January 2007.)
NASA announced that it had signed a US$46 million fixed-price basic contract with S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation (RSC Energia) to provide various hardware items and to integrate them into the structure of the ISS. The contract included the purchase of a spare depress air pump, enabling air conservation when the crew exited the Quest airlock for spacewalks; technical and engineering support for the mechanism enabling Shuttles to dock with the station; software updates for the ISSs inventory-management system; certification of additional computer hardware for use on the station; and a Russian-designed toilet system that would automatically transfer urine to a U.S. device that generated potable water. Adding the toilet system to the structure was necessary to enable the ISS partners to increase the station crew from three to six members in 2009.(NASA, NASA Awards Contract for Space Station Hardware, news release C07-028, 3 July 2007, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jul/HQ_C07028_station_hardware.html (accessed 11 June 2010).)
An Atlas-5 rocket launched six satellites from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Two of the satellites were part of the Orbital Express Experiment and four would measure the chemical makeup of the atmosphere and the signal turbulence of satellites. The primary goal of Orbital Express, a joint effort of NASA, the U.S. Air Force, and the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), was to develop a system allowing spacecraft to act independently and smarter. Fred G. Kennedy of the U.S. Air Force, DARPA Program Manager for Orbital Express, explained that the Orbital Express missions goal was to enable satellites autonomously to refuel, repair, and upgradea feat that would radically change satellite design. In April 2005, NASA had launched two satellites that were supposed to rendezvous autonomously, but a collision of the two craft during the docking attempt had destroyed them. Because the satellites were preprogrammed, ground controllers had been unable to transmit commands to the satellites computers. To avoid such an event in the future, DARPA had designed the Orbital Express satellites to accept guidance from ground controllers.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 641, 1 April 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx641.html (accessed 25 January 2010); Todd Halvorson, Atlas 5 Launches Satellites, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 March 2007; Shelby G. Spires, 2 Satellites To Test Auto Docking Technology, Huntsville Times (AL), 9 March 2007.)
ESA and Russia successfully launched Foton M-3 aboard a Russian Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome at 11:00 (UT). The 6.4-tonne (6,400-kilogram or 7-ton) satellite carried a payload of approximately 40 European experiments, including a 35-kilogram (77-pound) student-built module called the Young Engineers Satellite 2 (YES2), which the Foton craft would deploy to orbit Earth for 12 days. When the orbiting period had ended, the YES2 mission would use an experimental tether to return the picosatellite and reentry vehicle Fotino to Earth on 25 September. ESA and Russia had planned the tether-technology demonstration to test and produce data related to space mail, a concept developed to enable the return of material from space without the use of conventional chemical propulsion.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 647; European Space Agency (ESA), Young Engineers Satellite 2; Mission Facts, 5 September 2007, http://www.esa.int/SPECIALS/YES/SEMLRV8OY2F_0.html (accessed 5 August 2010); ESA, Focus On; Foton-M3 Mission To Launch European Experiments, 11 September 2007, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ SEMN5ZMPQ5F_FeatureWeek_0.html (accessed 5 August 2010).)
NASAs Phoenix Mars Lander launched aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 9:36 (UT). The 350-kilogram (772-pound) Lander carried scientific instruments and a robotic arm that would vertically penetrate the icy soil of the Vastitas Borealis, an arctic plain bearing similarities to central Greenland or northern Alaska. Phoenixs instruments included eight on- board ovens designed to analyze vapors from soil samples to identify the presence of organic compounds, which would indicate whether biological processes had occurred. To avoid contamination, Phoenix would use each oven just once. Phoenix also carried multi-spectral instruments that would collect data revealing the composition of Marss surface minerals and of its atmosphere, to an altitude of 20 kilometers (12.4 miles).(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 646, 1 September 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx646.html (accessed 14 June 2010); John Johnson Jr., Phoenix Spacecraft Launches to Mars, Los Angeles Times, 6 August 2007.)
The Peoples Republic of China launched its lunar orbiter Change 1 aboard a Long March-3A rocket at 10:05 (UT) from Xichang Satellite Launch Center. China named the 5,070-pound (2,230-kilogram) craft for a Chinese goddess who, according to myth, had flown to the Moon. Change 1 carried several scientific instruments, including a stereo camera and spectrometer imager, laser altimeter, gamma-ray and x-ray spectrometer, microwave radiometer, high-energy particle detector, and solar-wind detectors. The Chinese Academy of Sciences and CNSA planned to use the instruments to identify 14 atomic elements, helping scientists determine the mineral content of the lunar surface. The goal of the mission was to analyze the chemical and mineral composition of the lunar surface.
NASA announced that its SSC in Mississippi had broken ground for the construction of a new rocket-engine test stand, which would provide altitude testing for the J-2X engine. The J-2X would power the upper stages of the Ares-1 and Ares-5 rockets. NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale spoke at the groundbreaking ceremony for the new test stand, recalling that the first stand erected at NASAs SSC had tested the Saturn-5 rocket for the Apollo program. NASA had first tested the Space Shuttle engines at SSC in the 1970s. The new test stand for the new spacecraft signaled the beginning of a new era of exploration. The 19-acre site in SSCs A Complex would contain the 300-foot-tall (91-meter-tall), open-steel-frame A-3 test stand; a test- control center; propellant-barge docks; and access roadways. Engineers would generate steam to reduce pressure in the test cell, using the test stand to simulate conditions at different altitudes.(NASA, NASAs Stennis Space Center Marks New Chapter in Space Exploration, news release 07-180, 23 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07180_Stennis_groundbreaking.html (accessed 14 June 2010).)
Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX), a private company based in El Segundo, California, launched its Falcon-1 rocket from Omelek Island in the Kwajawlein Atoll in the Pacific Ocean. The 70-foot-long (21.3-meter-long), two-stage rocket, powered by liquid oxygen and kerosene, successfully reached space, accomplishing stage separation and second-stage ignition before reentering the atmosphere. Although the rocket failed to reach its desired orbit of 425 miles (684 kilometers), SpaceXs founder Elon Musk, also the cofounder of PayPal, considered the launch a success because the rocket had successfully achieved many of the riskiest milestones of launching and entering space. The companys first attempt at launching a Falcon-1 rocket in 2006 had failed when leaking fuel caught fire just after liftoff. SpaceX had designed the most recent missionDemo 2to gather flight data for the companys main customer, DARPA, which was seeking more economical means of reaching space. The typical commercial launch service cost US$30 million, but Musk had pledged to launch satellites for US$7 million.(John Antczak for Associated Press, SpaceX Launches New Rocket Into Space, 21 March 2007; John Schwartz, Private Rocket Lost Shortly After Launch, New York Times, 21 March 2007.)
Russia and India signed an agreement in Moscow for India to participate in Russias 2011 Moon- Globe Program to design a spacecraft for lunar exploration. Under the terms of the agreement, Russia and India would jointly build a robotic laboratory, with India supplying the rocket and flight module and Russia developing and producing the landing module of a Moon rover and a scientific complex. The agreement allowed for joint lunar exploration through 2017.
Russia marked the 50th anniversary of the launch of Sputnik with veterans of the Soviet space program laying flowers at the grave of Sergei P. Korolev, the man who had created Sputnik, the tiny satellite that launched the space race between the United States and the U.S.S.R. Korolevs name had remained a secret while he was alive. Ceremonies also included the unveiling of a monument to Sputnik near Moscow, a tour of S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia for schoolchildren, and Roskosmoss announcement of a special film about the 1957 launch. President Vladimir V. Putin congratulated Russias space scientists, reminding them, the launch of the Earths first satellite was a truly historic event, which started a space age. The RIA Novosti news agency quoted First Deputy Prime Minister Sergei B. Ivanov as stating, Fifty years in cosmic terms is a mere instant, and yet it fundamentally changed the nature of all humanity.(Agence France-Presse, Russia Marks Sputnik Anniversary, 5 October 2007.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis launched from NASAs KSC on an 11-day mission, designated STS-117, to continue construction of the ISS. The crew consisted of Commander Frederick W. Sturckow; Pilot Lee J. Archambault; Mission Specialists James F. Reilly II, Patrick G. Forrester, Steven R. Swanson, and John D. Olivas; and Flight Engineer Clayton C. Anderson, who would replace Sunita L. Williams on board the ISS as a member of ISS Expeditions 15 and 16. The launch was nearly flawless. Only one potential problem occurred several minutes into the flight, when on- board cameras captured an image that appeared to show foam flaking off the Shuttles external fuel tank, just after the solid rocket boosters (SRBs) had separated from the orbiter. According to Shuttle Program Manager N. Wayne Hale Jr., NASAs preliminary analysis of the incident indicated that the foam had not struck the craft. NASA planned further analysis.(NASA, NASAs Shuttle Atlantis Begins Mission to the Space Station, news release 07-136, 8 June 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/jun/HQ_07136_Atlantis_launch.html (accessed 13 April 2010); NASA, STS-117 (21st Space Station Flight), NASAfacts, http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/177714main_STS-117.pdf (accessed 21 May 2010), John Johnson Jr., Flawless Launch, At Last, For Atlantis, Los Angeles Times, 9 June 2007.)
NASA launched its Aeronomy of Ice in Mesosphere (AIM) satellite aboard a Pegasus-XL rocket dropped from a Stargazer-L-1011 aircraft. The Stargazer launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 21:26 (UT). NASA had designed AIM to study noctilucent clouds (NLCs) in the polar mesosphere. Observers can only see NLCs at night. Shortly before the mission, these clouds had appeared more often and had grown brighter. Observers had first seen NLCs in the 1880s, soon after the massive volcanic eruption on the Indonesian island of Krakatoa. Space- based satellites had periodically observed the clouds since the 1980s. AIM was the first spacecraft devoted to the study of NLCs. Scientists hoped to answer basic questions about why the clouds form and whether human-caused global warming was responsible for the recent changes. AIM carried three instruments: the Solar Occultation for Ice Experiment (SOFIE) would remotely sense the gases that condense to NLCs; the Cosmic Dust Experiment (CDE) would serve as an in situ sampler of the cosmic dust over the NLCs; and the Cloud Imaging and Particle Size (CIPS) experiment, a panoramic ultraviolet (UV) imager of the NLCs operating in the 265-nanometer-wavelength band, would provide the morphology of the clouds in both hemispheres.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 642; NASA, NASAs AIM Mission Soars to the Edge of Space, news release 07-92, 25 April 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/apr/HQ_07092_AIM_launch.html (accessed 16 February 2010); Associated Press, NASA Launches Satellite To Study Clouds, 26 April 2007.)
New Mexico Spaceport Authority announced the successful launch of a UP Aerospace flight vehicle. The company had launched the flight vehicle to test proprietary advanced launch technologies. At the request of UP Aerospace, the New Mexico Spaceport Authority had not publicized the launch, which was the Connecticut-based companys third launch attempt. In the companys first launch attempt in September 2006, the vehicle had failed to reach space. Although the April 2007 second attempt had succeeded, locating the rocket after launch had required weeks of searching. In this third attempt, the launch vehicle had reached its planned altitude of 2,500 feet (762 meters).(New Mexico Spaceport Authority, UP Aerospace Reports Successful Launch at Spaceport America, news release, 19 December 2007, http://www.spaceportamerica.com/news/press-releases/104-up-areo-reports-success- launch.html (accessed 19 November 2010); Las Cruces Sun-News (NM), Unannounced Launch Lifts Off from Spaceport, 20 December 2007.)
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) successfully launched a spy satellite aboard an H- 2A rocket from Japans southern island, Tanegashima, at 1:41 p.m. (JST). The spy satellite, the fourth of a four-craft constellation, enabled Japan to monitor any point on Earth once each day. Japan had previously relied on the United States for intelligence, but, following North Koreas 1998 launch of a ballistic missile over Japan, the Japanese government had decided to develop an independent intelligence-gathering capacity and had launched the four spy satellites. The H-2A launch vehicle also carried into orbit an experimental optical satellite, which would carry out tests for future espionage operations.(New York Times, Japan Launches Its 4th Spy Satellite, 25 February 2007; Agence France-Presse, Japan Launches Spy Satellite, 26 February 2007.)
China National Space Administration (CNSA) and Roskosmos signed an agreement to launch a joint mission to Mars in 2009, marking a milestone in space cooperation between the Peoples Republic of China and Russia. The agreement stipulated that a Russian rocket would launch a Chinese satellite to Mars, along with Russias Phobos Explorer. The Chinese satellite would explore the Martian atmosphere and the Phobos Explorer would land on the Martian moon Phobos, to collect soil samples to return to Earth.(Agence France-Presse, China and Russian Plan Joint Mission to Mars, 28 March 2007.)
A Dnepr rocket carrying Bigelow Aerospace Corporations Genesis-2 inflatable spacecraft launched from ISC Kosmotras Yasny Cosmodrome in Russias Orenburg region at 15:02 (UT). Bigelow Aerospace had designed and built the 15-foot-long (4.6-meter-long) technology demonstrator, which was part of the vision for an affordable space tourism market. Genesis 2 would deploy eight solar arrays and expand to a diameter of 8 feet (2.44 meters) from its launch width of 6.2 feet (1.9 meters). The crafts designinvolving the use of flexible material,
A Dnepr rocket launched a German satellite called TerraSAR-X from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 2:14 (UT). The 3,000-pound (1,361-kilogram) TerraSAR-X was a night-vision radar system designed to create the most precise maps and imagery that a civilian space-radar system had produced to date. The crafts mission was to map Earth and its oceans at a rate of 1 million square kilometers per day (almost 400,000 square miles per day), to capture scientific data such as sea-ice coverage, vegetation and crop estimates, and to acquire military reconnaissance information at a 1.0-meter (3.3-foot) resolution.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 644, 1 July 2007, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx644.html (accessed 13 April 2010); Stephen Clark, German Radar Imaging Satellite Launched into Space, Spaceflight Now, 16 June 2007.)
NASA successfully launched its Gamma-Ray Large Area Telescope (GLAST) aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station at 16:05 (UT). GLAST could survey the entire sky every 3 hours, searching for gamma-ray bursts (GRBs). Scientists hoped to study GRBs to further their understanding of black holes, dark matter, and the laws of physics. GLAST consisted of two elements: the Gamma-Ray Burst Monitor (GBM) and the Large Area Telescope (LAT). The GBM was able to detect gamma-ray bursts and to orient the LAT to observe them more closely. NASA, the U.S. Department of Energy, and 37 other research institutions worldwide were collaborating on the US$690 million spacecraft.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 656, 1 July 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx656.html (accessed 24 April 2011); NASA, NASAs GLAST Launch Successful, news release 08-141, 11 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08141_GLAST_Launch.html (accessed 21 April 2011); Dennis Overbye, NASA Launches an Orbiting Mystery-Solver, New York Times, 12 June 2008.)
NASAs KSC announced that it had awarded a contract for the construction of the Ares-I mobile launcher to Hensel Phelps of Orlando, Florida. The Ares-I rocket, as part of the Constellation Program, would transport the Orion CEV (crew exploration vehicle), with its crew and cargo, into low Earth orbit. The contractor had agreed to construct a mobile launcher that would transport the Ares I to the launchpad and to provide ground support for the launches. The mobile launcher would comprise a main support structure, which would include a base, a tower, and ground-support systems for the facility. Handel Phelps would supply all of the equipment, labor, and materials for the project; separate contracts would provide for ground-support equipment. The firm fixed-price contract, which included an option for an additional Ares-I mobile launcher, could be worth up to US$263,735,000, if NASA exercised all the options.(NASA, NASA Awards Contract for Ares I Mobile Launcher, news release C08-025, 8 May 2008, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/may/HQ_C08025_Ares_MLP_contract.html (accessed 16 March 2011).)
Engineers at NASAs MSFC completed a series of tests on a main component of the J-2X engine, which powered the upper stage of the Ares-I rocket. This series of 20 tests was the second set of four planned series to test the J-2Xs workhorse gas generator, which drives the turbopumps that start the engine. The testing programs determined the gas generators combustion environment, durability, and performance, as well as reducing risk in the design, fabrication, and operation of flight hardware. The achieved objectives of this test series were to address stability issues in the gas chamber and to regulate ignition timing. Pratt and Whitney Rocketdyne had fabricated the gas generator.(NASA, NASA Engineers Complete Engine Test Series for Ares I Rocket, news release 08-208, 18 August 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_08-208_Ares_engine_test.html (accessed 7 July 2011).)
A SpaceX Falcon 1 rocket failed, at approximately 2 minutes and 20 seconds after its launch at 03:34 (UT) from the U.S. Armys Reagan Missile Test Site on Omelek Island in the Kwajalein Atoll. SpaceX executives explained that unanticipated residual thrust from the Merlin engine had caused the first stage of the rocket to collide with the second stage, as the second stage began to fire. The rockets two stages and its payload were destroyed in the Pacific Ocean. The Falcon 1s cargo included a Department of Defense Trailblazer demonstration satellite; NASAs NanoSail- D, a solar propulsion experiment; and NASAs small automated laboratory PRESat. Additionally, the rocket carried the ashes of 208 people who had paid the company Celestis to launch their remains into space. The ashes of astronaut L. Gordon Cooper Jr. were on board. SpaceX officials stated that they would be able to prevent a similar launch failure from happening in the future by adding 1.5 seconds to the Falcon 1s separation sequence.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 658, 1 September 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx658.html (accessed 8 July 2011); John Schwartz, Launch of Private Rocket Fails; Three Satellites Were Onboard, New York Times, 4 August 2008; Tariq Malik, SpaceX Traces Third Rocket Failure to Timing Error, Space.com, 7 August 2008, http://www.space.com/5707-spacex-traces-rocket-failure-timing-error.html (accessed 21 July 2011).)
The Ocean Surface Topography Mission/Jason-2 satellite launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base aboard a Delta-2 rocket at 07:46 (UT). The 510-kilogram (1,124.36-pound) craft was a joint mission of the European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT); the French space agency (Centre National dEtudes SpatialesCNES); the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA); and NASA. EUMETSATs aim was to continue the data-collection mission that NASA and CNES had begun in 1992 with their ocean topography experiment, the TOPEX/Poseidon mission, and had continued with the 2001 launch of Jason 1. Jason 2 had five instrumentsimproved versions of those aboard Jason 1 that could chart the topography of the oceans surface, the speed and direction of the oceans current, and the amount of solar energy the ocean stores. Scientists hoped to use these measurements to track global climate change, to hone their predictions of hurricane intensity, and to improve their understanding of currents, eddies, and tides. The project partners had scheduled Jason 2 to fly in tandem with Jason 1 for approximately six months, while engineers calibrated Jason 2s instruments. Afterwards, the two spacecraft would travel in separate orbits, doubling the global satellite coverage.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 656, 1 July 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx656.html (accessed 24 April 2011); NASA, NASA Launches Ocean Satellite To Keep a Weather, Climate Eye Open, news release 08-154, 20 June 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jun/HQ_08154_OSTM-Jason-2_Launch.html (accessed 21 April 2011).)
The Russian automatic cargo carrier Progress-M 65 (Progress 30) successfully docked with the ISS at 2:43 a.m. (EDT), after a delay caused by the weather-related evacuation of NASAs JSC. The ISS partners had rescheduled the docking, originally planned for 12 September 2008, because of Hurricane Ike. When NASA evacuated the centers ISS control room in response to the hurricanes approach, flight controllers had not yet made the adjustments necessary to prevent the ISSs solar arrays sustaining damage during the cargo carriers docking. Russia had launched Progress aboard a Soyuz rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on 10 September 2008 at 19:50 (UT). The carrier was transporting a total of 2.5 tons (2,267.96 kilograms) of supplies for the crew on the ISS, including 110 pounds (49.90 kilograms) of oxygen, 1,918 pounds (869.99 kilograms) of propellant, 463 pounds (210.01 kilograms) of water, and 2,866 pounds (1,300.00 kilograms) of food, clothing, equipment, and other dry cargo. News agencies also reported that Progress was carrying a new Russian Orlan spacesuit. In advance of Progress-M 65s arrival, the crew had filled the previous cargo carrier Progress 29 with trash and had undocked from the ISS on 1 September 2008.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 659, 1 October 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx659.html (accessed 25 July 2011); Tarik Malik, New Cargo Ship Arrives at Space Station, Space.com, 17 September 2008, http://www. space.com/5852-cargo-ship-arrives-space-station.html (accessed 28 July 2011); Todd Halvorson, Russian Freighter Rockets Toward Station, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 September 2008.)
A Russian Soyuz rocket lifted off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 07:01 (UT), ferrying an American space tourist and two Expedition 18 crew members to the ISS. Tourist Richard A. Garriott was the son of former astronaut Owen K. Garriott, who had been a crew member of Skylab 3 in 1973. Garriott had reached a commercial agreement with the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos to spend nine days aboard the ISS and to return to Earth with the Expedition 17 crew on 23 October 2008. The Expedition 18 crew, consisting of Commander E. Michael Fincke of NASA and Russian cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov, would replace two members of the Expedition 17 crew, Russian cosmonauts Sergei A. Volkov and Oleg D. Kononenko. The third crew member, Russian cosmonaut Gregory E. Chamitoff, had arrived at the ISS in June 2008 and planned to stay until November 2008. The main goal of Expedition 17 was to prepare the ISS to accommodate six crew members on long-duration missions.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 660, 1 November 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx660.html (accessed 4 August 2011); NASA, New Crew Blasts Off for International Space Station, news release 08-257, 12 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08-257_X18_Launch.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
A Russian Proton-M rocket launched an American AMC-14 communications satellite at 02:18 (MST), from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, but failed to bring it into correct orbit. The Breeze-M booster on the rocket failed 10 minutes after launch, leaving the satellite 8,000 kilometers (4,971 miles) below geostationary orbit. SES Americom owned the satellite, and Lockheed Martin had built it. The failed satellite had featured a new telecommunications technology that allowed changes in coverage while the satellite was in orbit. The satellites design would have enabled it to achieve a higher altitude using its own engine, although this would use up the satellites fuel supply and significantly shorten its lifespan.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 653, 1 April 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx653.html (accessed 13 January 2011); Agence France-Presse, Russian Rocket Fails To Take US Satellite into Planned Orbit, 14 March 2008.)
ESAs first Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV), known as Jules Verne or ATV 1, launched aboard an Ariane-5 rocket from Guiana Space Center in Kourou, French Guiana, at 04:03 (UT). The ATV was carrying 4.6 tonnes (4,600 kilograms or 10,141 pounds) of supplies to the ISS, including 150 kilograms (331 pounds) of dry cargo, 856 kilograms (1,887 pounds) of propellant, 270 kilograms (595 pounds) of drinking water and 21 kilograms (46 pounds) of oxygen. The ATV Jules Verne, which measured 10.3 meters (34 feet) high and 4.5 meters (15 feet) wide, was the first spacecraft in the world to have an optical laserbased automated docking system. On 29 March and 31 March 2008, ESA intended to put the ATV through two orbital testing demonstrations. If the tests proved successful, ISS managers planned to allow it to dock with the ISS on 3 April 2008.(ESA, Europe Launches Its First Re-Supply ShipJules Verne ATVto the ISS, press release no. 15-2008, 9 March 2008, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_15_2008_p_EN.html (accessed 13 January 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 653, 1 April 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx653.html (accessed 13 January 2011); Tariq Malik, European Cargo Ship Begins Maiden Voyage, Space.com, 9 March 2008, http://www.space.com/5079-european- cargo-ship-begins-maiden-space-voyage.html (accessed 13 January 2011).)
An uncrewed Russian cargo ship, known as Progress-M 64 or Progress 29, launched at 20:23 (UT) aboard a Soyuz-U rocket from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. It carried 3.1 tonnes (3,100 kilograms or 6,834.33 pounds) of supplies to the crew of the ISS, including 568 pounds (257.64 kilograms) of food; 282 pounds (127.91 kilograms) of hygiene products; 277 pounds (125.65 kilograms) of medicine; 770 pounds (349.27 kilograms) of propellant; over 100 pounds (45.36 kilograms) of oxygen and air; and 925 pounds (419.57 kilograms) of water. Also traveling to the ISS aboard the cargo craft were 90 snails that would be part of a scientific experiment studying the effects of weightlessness on live organisms. The ISS crew expected Progress to dock automatically with the ISS on 17 May 2008.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 655, 1 June 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx655.html (accessed 16 March 2011); Tariq Malik, Russian Cargo Ship Launches Toward Space Station, Space.com, 15 May 2008, http://www. space.com/5344-russian-cargo-ship-launches-space-station.html (accessed 16 March 2011).)
NASA range-safety officials destroyed an ATK suborbital rocket that had swerved off course shortly after lifting off from NASAs Wallops Flight Facility (WFF). Officials were not sure what had caused the ALV X-1 launch vehicle to fail 27 seconds after its 5:10 (EDT) launch. The rocket carried US$11 million worth of NASA experiments, including a hypersonic flight experiment called HYBOLT (Hypersonic Boundary Layer Transition) and the Sub-Orbital Aerodynamic Re-entry Experiments (SOAREX), which would have tested new reentry design elements for spaceflight vehicles. In addition to NASAs experiments, the rockets payload included a U.S. Naval Research Laboratory experiment to test GPS systems. NASA officials stated that they believed that the majority of the debris had fallen into the Atlantic Ocean.(NASA, NASA and ATK Investigate Failed Launch of Hypersonic Experiments, news release 08-213, 22 August 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/aug/HQ_08_213_Hybolt_failure.html (accessed 7 July 2011); Carol Vaughn, Wallops Rocket Launch Fails, Salisbury Daily Times (MD), 25 August 2008.)
The Socialist Republic of Vietnam launched its first communications satellite aboard an Ariane-5 ECA rocket at 22:17 (UT) from Kourou spaceport in French Guiana. Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems had built the 2,600-kilogram (5,732-pound) VINASAT-1 satellite for Vietnams Post and Telecommunications Group. The Vietnamese intended for VINASAT 1 to come to rest at 132E longitude, above the border between Indonesia and Papua New Guinea. From that position, the satellite would deliver communications to remote Vietnamese communities. Previously, Vietnam had leased satellite capacity from other countries, but with the launch of VINASAT 1, some Vietnamese officials hoped that they would be able to sell their own satellites extra capacity to their neighbors. The Ariane-5 ECA rocket also carried into orbit the Brazilian satellite Star One C2.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 654; BBC News, Dedicated Satellite for Vietnam, 19 April 2008.)
NASA and ATK successfully test-fired a launch-abort motor for the Orion CEV at ATKs facility in Promontory, Utah. The 5.50-second test was the first of its kind since the beginning of the Apollo Program and the first test ever of a motor with reverse-flow propulsion technology at such a scale. NASA had designed the launch-abort motor for use in case of an emergency on the launchpad or in the first 300,000 feet (91,440 meters) of ascent. If necessary, the motor could lift the crew module off the Ares-I rocket, using 500,000 pounds ( s) of thrust. The motor, which was more than 17 feet (5.18 meters) tall and 3 feet ( ) in diameter, featured a composite case and an exhaust turn-flow technology instead of a tower, a configuration that improved the motors weight and performance.(NASA, NASA, ATK Successfully Test First Orion Launch Abort Motor, news release 08-306, 20 November 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/nov/HQ_08-306_OrionLASmotor_Success.html (accessed 22 August 2011).)
Franklin R. Chang-Diaz, President and CEO of Ad Astra Rocket Company, and NASA Associate Administrator for Space Operations William H. Gerstenmaier signed a Space Act Agreement to test the new Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR) engine. NASA had originally studied the VASIMR engine, and Ad Astra was developing the engine for commercial use. The engine would heat plasma to very high temperatures, for maximum fuel efficiency, generating 4 newtons of thrust, with a specific impulse of approximately 6,000 seconds. Congress had designed the Space Act Agreement as a series of gates, allowing NASA and Ad Astra to assess the progress of VASIMRs development. Ad Astra would develop the engine, which could cost as much as US$150 million, and would place it on the ISS for performance testing in space. This agreement was the first that NASA had signed for a payload on the ISSs exterior. Officials hoped that the VASIMR project represented an expansion of the role of the ISS as a national laboratory.(NASA, NASA Administrator Hails Agreement with Ad Astra, news release 08-332, 17 December 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/dec/HQ_08-332_VASMIR_engine.html (accessed 22 August 2011); Frank Morring Jr., NASA Inks Agreement To Test Engine on ISS, Aviation Week, 17 December 2008.)
After three failed attempts, SpaceX successfully launched a Falcon-1 rocket for the first time. Falcon 1 was the first privately developed and funded rocket to achieve orbit. Liftoff occurred at 23:15 (UT) from the U.S. Armys Ronald Reagan Ballistic Defense Test Site on the Kwajalein Atoll. SpaceX had designed the 70-foot (21.34-meter), two-stage, liquid-fueled rocket to provide cost-effective access to space. The company hoped that Falcon 1 would provide an affordable research option for universities and small aerospace companies and would serve as the first installment in a family of rockets that NASA would eventually use to resupply the ISS. SpaceX officials stated that each flight of Falcon 1 cost approximately US$8 million.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 659, 1 October 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx659.html (accessed 25 July 2011); Mike Swift, Silicon Valley Businessman Launches Rocket into Orbit, San Jose Mercury News (San Jose, CA), 29 September 2008; Tariq Malik, SpaceX Successfully Launches Falcon 1 Rocket into Orbit, Space.com, 28 September 2008, http://www.space.com/5905-spacex-successfully-launches-falcon-1-rocket- orbit.html (accessed 27 July 2011).)
The Peoples Republic of Chinas Shenzhou 7 successfully returned to Earth, landing in Mongolia at 09:38 (UT), in Chinas third crewed mission to space. Shenzhou 7 had launched from Jiquan in Gansu Province on 25 September 2008 at 13:10 (UT), on a Long March2F rocket, with astronauts Zhai Zhigang, Liu Boming, and Jing Haipeng on board. On 27 September 2008, Zhai had performed Chinas first spacewalk, leaving the spacecraft for 20 minutes to collect a test sample of solid lubricant that engineers had attached to the outside of the craft. The spacewalk also tested Zhais US$4.4 million Chinese-made spacesuit. After the spacewalk, the astronauts had released an 88-pound (39.92-kilogram) satellite, which would take photographs and transmit them back to Earth. The mission marked China as the third nation, along with the United States and Russia, capable of independently launching crewed spaceflights and conducting spacewalks.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 659, 1 October 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx659.html (accessed 25 July 2011); Clara Moskowitz, Chinas Third Manned Spaceflight Returns Safely to Earth, Space.com, 28 September 2008, http://www.space.com/5904-china-manned-spaceflight-returns-safely-earth.html (accessed 27 July 2011); Chistopher Bodeen, Chinese Cheer as Astronauts Makes [sic] First Spacewalk, Associated Press, 28 September 2008.)
NASA announced that LRO had successfully completed its first round of environmental testing. Engineers had performed the tests, which included a spin test and a vibration test, at NASAs GSFC. The spin test ascertained the crafts center of gravity and measured its rotation. The vibration test determined the structural integrity of LRO by simulating the shaking the craft would experience during launch. Before the launch, NASA planned for LRO to undergo acoustics testing, thermal-vacuum testing, and a simulation of separation from the rocket during launch. LROs launch window would open on 27 February 2009.
Irans state-run media announced that the country had successfully launched a rocket called Kavoshgar 2 into space. A follow-up to the 4 February 2008 launch of the first Kavoshgar rocket, Kavoshgar 2 had reportedly performed its functions, landing 40 minutes later. Iranian media stated that the rocket had consisted of three parts, including a space laboratory. Kavoshgar 2s mission had been to conduct space experiments on the atmosphere, to test its payloads retrieval system, and to facilitate academic coordination among scientists.(Agence France-Presse, Iran Says It Has Sent Another Rocket into Space, 26 November 2008.)
Thuraya Satellite Telecommunications, based in Abu Dhabi, successfully launched its Thuraya-3 satellite aboard Sea Launchs Zenit-3SL rocket, after a November 2007 delay caused by rough seas surrounding the launch site. The launch occurred at 11:49 (UT) from Sea Launchs platform in the Pacific Ocean. Boeing Satellite Systems had built the 11,381-pound (5,162-kilogram) satellite. Thurayas owner planned for the satellite to come to rest at 98.5 east longitude, allowing the company to expand mobile-communication coverage into East Asia. The launch was the first for the California-based international consortium Sea Launch since a January 2007 disaster had disabled its launch vehicle.(Associated Press, Satellite Launched from Ocean Platform, 16 January 2008; Peter B. de Selding, Sea Launch Rocket Successfully Returns to Flight, Space.com, 15 January 2008, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/ 080115-sealaunch-thuraya3-liftoff.html (accessed 14 December 2010); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 651, 1 February 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx651.html (accessed 6 December 2010).)
NASAs Lunar Science Institute, along with nine other international space agencies, signed a statement of intent to consider participating in the International Lunar Network (ILN), a cooperative effort to install mobile science stations on the Moon. The stations would replace the technology that NASA astronauts had placed on the lunar surface during the Apollo program. The signing of the statement took place in the course of a four-day NASA Lunar Science Conference at NASAs ARC. The conference had gathered approximately 500 scientists, from Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States, to discuss the future of lunar exploration. Although scientists from the participating agencies planned to refine the ILN concept, the agencies expected to make initial decisions regarding communications standards and potential landing sites, and to select a set of scientifically equivalent core instruments to perform specific measurements.(NASA, NASA Hosts International Meeting for Lunar Science Discussions, new release 08-190, 29 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/jul/HQ_08190_NASA_hosts_ILN.html (accessed 18 May 2011); David Perlman, Scientists Swap Moon, Mars Exploration Plans, San Francisco Chronicle, 22 July 2008.)
Warner K. Dahm, the last of Wernher von Brauns German rocket team to retire from NASA, died at age 90 in Huntsville, Alabama. A German aerodynamics expert, Dahm had joined von Brauns program during World War II and had later come to the United States with his colleagues to assist in developing American rocketry. He had worked at NASA first as a member of the team for Operation Paperclip in Texas and later at NASAs Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Over the years, Dahm had lent his expertise to the design of the V-2 and Wasserfall anti-aircraft rockets, the Redstone rocket, the Jupiter ballistic missile, Saturn 1, Saturn 1B, the Saturn-5 rocket that flew Americas first astronauts to the Moon, Skylab, and the Space Shuttle Transportation System. In 2006, at the age of 89, he had retired from his position as Chief 5 Aerodynamicist at Marshall. Dahm had received NASAs Exceptional Service Medal in 2003.
ISS crew member Yuri V. Lonchakov manually docked the Russian Progress-M-01M (Progress- 31) cargo vehicle after the vehicles automatic docking system experienced some last-minute problems, such as a loss of frequency information and an unusual toggling of the tracking displays. The vehicle had launched at 7:38 a.m. (EST) aboard a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Shortly after reaching orbit, it had failed to deploy an antenna for the Kurs automatic docking system. Eventually, engineers had been able to extend the antenna;
Russia announced the launch of the uncrewed cargo ship Progress 28, also known as Progress M 63, aboard a Soyez rocket at 13:02 (UT) from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Central Asia. Progress 28 carried 2.5 tons (2,268 kilograms or 5,000 pounds) of supplies to the ISS, including 100 pounds (45 kilograms) of oxygen, 925 pounds (420 kilograms) of water, 1,165 pounds (528 kilograms) of rocket propellant, and approximately 2,925 pounds (1,327 kilograms) of food, clothing, and equipment. The previous cargo ship, Progress 27, had undocked from the ISS on 4 February 2008 in preparation for the arrival of Progress 28. Russia had planned to allow Progress 27 to fall to Earth and to burn up in the atmosphere.
NASA announced that it had successfully completed the preliminary design review for the Ares- I rocket, thereby clearing the components of the rocket to enter the detailed design phase. The review had examined Ares to determine whether it met NASAs standards and whether all of the rockets disparate elements would work together. More than 1,100 reviewers from seven NASA field centers and from NASAs industry partners had contributed to the design review. Conducted at NASAs MSFC, it was the first preliminary design review of a crewed rocket that NASA had conducted since 1973. NASA officials stated that 10 percent of the issues raised during the design review lacked resolutions, including questions pertaining to the stage separation, booster noise, and the type of weather protection that the rocket would need during ascent. NASA had scheduled a final integrated review of the whole rocket for March 2011.(NASA, NASAs Ares I Rocket Passes Review To Reach Critical Milestone, news release 08-228, 10 September 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/sep/HQ_08228_Ares_PDR.html (accessed 26 July 2011); Tariq Malik, NASAs New Rocket Passes Early Design Review, Space.com, 10 September 2011, http://www. space.com/5831-nasa-rocket-passes-early-design-review.html (accessed 27 July 2011).)
NASAs Interstellar Boundary Explorer (IBEX) launched from the Kwajalein Atoll at 17:47 (UT) aboard a Pegasus-XL rocket. The probe was embarking on a two-year mission to create an image of the interstellar boundary region. IBEX carried two large-aperture, single-pixel cameras to create an image of the outer solar system. Instead of capturing light, the cameras detected energetic neutral atoms. Energetic neutral atoms are created in the outer solar system when the hot solar wind, moving at 1 million miles per hour (1,609,344 kilometers per hour), collides with the cold gases of interstellar space. The interstellar boundary region shelters Earth from dangerous cosmic rays that otherwise would enter Earths orbit and affect human health and spaceflight. NASAs GSFC was managing IBEX, which was part of the Small Explorers program.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 660, 1 November 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx660.html (accessed 4 August 2011); NASA, NASA Launches IBEX Mission to Outer Solar System, news release 08-262, 19 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08262_IBEX_Launch.html (accessed 8 August 2011); Agence France-Presse, NASA Launches Probe To Study Edge of Solar System, 20 October 2008.)
Chandrayaan 1, Indias first lunar satellite, launched at 00:52 (UT), aboard a PSLV-C11 rocket from Sriharikota, India. The 1.4-tonne (1,400-kilogram or 3,086.47-pound) spacecraft was on a two-year mission to map the lunar surface. It carried 11 scientific instruments: five instruments from India, three from ESA, two from NASA, and one from Bulgaria. NASAs instruments were the Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3) and Mini Synthetic Aperture Radar (Mini-SAR). M3 was an imaging spectrometer that would create the first map of the Moons entire surface at high spatial and spectral resolution. Because the map would show the mineral content of the lunar surface, scientists could use it to understand the geological origin and development of the Moon and the terrestrial planets. Additionally, lunar astronauts could use the map to locate water or other resources. Mini-SAR, an imaging radar, would map the permanently shadowed polar regions, helping scientists learn about possible locations of water ice and the nature of objects that hit the Moon. NASAs ground tracking station at the Johns Hopkins University APL would provide space-communications support to Chandrayaan 1.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 660, 1 November 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx660.html (accessed 4 August 2011); NASA, NASA Returns to the Moon with Instruments on Indian Spacecraft, news release 08-263, 20 October 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2008/oct/HQ_08-263_NASA_on_Chandrayaan-1.html (accessed 8 August 2011).)
The X Prize Foundation announced that two new teams had entered the Google Lunar X Prize. Euroluna was a European team primarily made up of members from Denmark, Italy, and Switzerland. Led by Palle Haastrup, the team planned to launch a small rover, which would have no redundant systems, so that it could maintain a low weight. Markus Bindhammer led the team Selene, based in China. The team planned to launch its Selena-1 lander in its Lunar Rocket Car 1 (LuRoCa-1) rover. Fourteen other teams had signed up for the competition, which featured a US$20 million grand prize, a US$5 million second prize, and US$5 million in bonus prizes. The grand prize would go to the team that could land a spacecraft on the Moon, move it 500 meters (1,640.42 feet), and transmit images back to Earth.(Tariq Malik, New Teams Join $30 Million Moon Rover Contest, Space.com, 16 December 2008, http://www. space.com/6232-teams-join-30-million-moon-rover-contest.html (accessed 25 August 2011).)
The Islamic Republic of Iran announced that it had launched a research rocket to celebrate the opening of its new space center in Semnan Province. The quasi-official Fars News Agency reported that Iran had launched the research rocket Kavoshgar 1 in advance of the anticipated launch of Irans first domestically manufactured satellite. Although Iran did not announce the altitude that the rocket had reached, media reports stated that Iran had fired Kavoshgar 1 into space. Scientists generally consider that space begins at an altitude of approximately 60 miles (97 kilometers).(Nazila Fathi, Iran Launches Rocket To Commemorate New Space Center, New York Times, 5 February 2008. 16 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 652, 1 March 2008, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx652.html (accessed 28 December 2008); Tariq Malik, New Cargo Ship Launches Toward Space Station, Space.com, 5 February 2008, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/080205-expedition16-progress28-launch.html (accessed 30 December 2010).)
Ernst Stuhlinger, one of the original members of Werner von Brauns rocket team, died at his home in Huntsville, Alabama, at the age of 94. The U.S. government had brought the team to the United States after World War II. Stuhlinger, Associate Director of Science on von Brauns team, was an expert in spacecraft guidance and navigation instruments. Stuhlinger had also made important contributions in the field of propulsion. He had developed an innovative second-stage firing device for Explorer 1 in his garage, becoming renowned for having pressed the button that triggered that device at exactly the right moment during the satellites 1958 launch. Before his retirement in 1975, Stuhlinger had served as Director of Science at NASAs MSFC. He was author of the 1964 book, Ion Propulsion for Space Flight and co-author of the 1993 biography Werner von Braun: Crusader for Space.(John Noble Wilford, Ernst Stuhlinger, Rocket Scientist Crucial in Space Race, Is Dead at 94, New York Times, 28 May 2008; Martin Weil, Ernst Stuhlinger, 94; Space Program Pioneer, Washington Post, 27 May 2008.)
Commander Frederick W. Rick Sturckow docked Discovery with the ISS, relying solely on the Shuttles powerful primary jet thrusters, marking the first occurrence of this type of docking. All six of the Shuttles small nose-and-tail steering thrusters were incapacited when a single forward jet failed, prompting NASA to shut down both of Discoverys small forward jets, as well as the four small thrusters in the orbiters tail. NASA had taken these measures because of concern that toxic rocket propellant could spray onto the ISS solar wings, reducing the wings ability to produce power. LeRoy E. Cain, Chair of NASAs Mission Management Team, explained that, although flying the Shuttle with only the primary jets presented a challenge, NASA had fully certified the alternative docking mode and had trained all crews headed for the ISS for that possibility. NASA commentator Rob Navias described Sturckows approach and docking as textbook, saying that the entire rendezvous and docking was smooth as silk.(Todd Halvorson, Skipper Nails Tricky Move, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 August 2009. 48)
NASA launched the latest Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES) weather satellite, GOES O, from Space Launch Complex 37 at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, at 6:51 p.m. (EDT), aboard a Delta-4 rocket. The crafts schedule would place GOES O in its final orbit on 7 July 2009, at which time NASA would rename it GOES 14. Twenty-four hours after launch, Boeing Space and Intelligence Systems would hand engineering control over to NASA; five months later, NASA would transfer operational control of GOES 14 to NOAA. NOAA would perform check-out operations of the craft, store it in orbit, and make it available for activation when one of two operational GOES satellites degraded or exhausted its fuel. GOES O was the second of three of the newest generation of GOES satellites launched. In addition to providing continuous weather monitoring for 60 percent of the planet, these GOES satellites monitored solar flares and tracked climate change.(NASA, NASA and NOAAs GOES-O Satellite Successfully Launched, news release 09-148, 27 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09148_GOES_O_Launch.html (accessed 22 July 2011); Marcia Dunn, Sophisticated Weather Satellite Rockets into Orbit, Associated Press, 29 June 2009; Todd Halvorson, Rocket Launches Weather Satellite, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 June 2009.)
2011); John Johnson Jr. NASA Moon Crash Did Kick Up Debris Plume as Hoped, Los Angeles Times, 17 October 2009. NASAs ongoing, planned development activities; to consider potential alternative activities; and to formulate options for a safe, innovative, affordable, and sustainable human spaceflight program, once the Space Shuttle Program came to an end. The committee found that NASA had selected the wrong type of rocket and the wrong destination for this program. In the committees opinion, NASA should have concentrated on building larger rockets and exploring new places, such as a nearby asteroid or one of Marss moons. Augustine explained that NASA could have accomplished either of those goals more quickly than the goals NASA had chosen insteadfirst, to return to the Moon, within 15 years, and, second, to explore Marsplans that had appeared sound when NASA developed them in 2005. Because of subsequent budgetary diversions, NASA now lacked sufficient funding for these ventures, and, by September 2014, NASA would need an additional US$3 billion per year for astronauts to travel beyond Earths orbit. The commission recommended that NASA extend the life of the Space Shuttle Program until 2011, to complete deliveries to the ISS, and extend the life of the ISS from 2015 to 2020, to allow for more scientific experiments. The reports main recommendations involved options for the United States path forward in space exploration. Three of the committees eight members suggested alternative options involving a so-called flexible path, with no Moon or Mars landings. Augustine pointed out that landing on a near-Earth object could occur as soon as the early 2020s. Because of the Moons gravity, landing on and returning from an asteroid would require much less fuel than traveling to the Moon. Augustine suggested that NASA might return to the Moon later, not as a major destination, but for training. The committee determined that, if Congress did not make additional funding available, NASA would need to adopt a modest program, involving little or no exploration.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, Panel Says NASA Should Skip Moon, Fly Elsewhere, 23 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, For NASA, Possible Shifts in Direction, New York Times, 23 October 2009; see also Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, Seeking a Human Spaceflight Program Worthy of a Great Nation (report, NASA, Washington, DC, October 2009), http://www.nasa.gov/pdf/396093main_HSF_Cmte_FinalReport.pdf (accessed 4 November 2011); Review of Human Space Flight Plans Committee, See What the Committee is Doing, http://www.nasa.gov/offices/hsf/related_documents/what-the-committee-is-doing.html (accessed 8 November 2011); U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Options and Issues for NASAs Human Space Flight Program: Report of Review of U.S. Human Space Flight Plans Committee, 111th Cong., 1st sess., 15 September 2009, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname= 111_house_hearings&docid=f:51928.pdf (accessed 18 January 2012).)
NASA announced that it had successfully demonstrated the Max Launch Abort System (MLAS), an alternative system enabling astronauts to escape their launch vehicle in an emergency. In a simulated launch at 6:26 a.m. (EDT), staged at NASAs WFF in Virginia, NASA had tested the concepta system that could safely propel a crew away from a launch vehicle during an emergency on the launchpad or during ascent. For the Orion spacecraft, NASA had selected an LAS that used a single solid launch-abort motor. By contrast, the MLAS used four solid rocket- abort motors. The motors were inside a bullet-shaped composite fairing attached to a full-scale mockup of a crew module. For the test, NASA launched the 33-foot-high (10-meter-high) MLAS vehicle to an altitude of 1 mile (1.6 kilometers), with the demonstration beginning after the four solid-rocket motors had burned out. The mock crew module separated from the launch vehicle approximately 7 seconds into flight and parachuted into the Atlantic Ocean. The test demonstrated the unpowered flight of the MLAS along a stable trajectory; the MLASs reorientation and stabilization; the separation of the crew module from the abort motors; and the stabilization and parachute recovery of the crew module. The test represented NASAs first demonstration of a passively stabilized LAS using a vehicle of this size and weight class. This was also NASAs first attempt to acquire full-scale aero-acoustic data from a faired capsule in flight. NASA planned to use data from the parachute element to help validate the simulation tools and the techniques for developing Orions parachute system. The test also provided staff of NASAs Engineering and Safety Center (NESC) with experience flight-testing a spacecraft concept.(NASA, NASA Tests Alternate Launch Abort System for Astronaut Escape, news release 09-156, 8 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jul/HQ09_156_MLAS_launch_successful.html (accessed 10 August 2011). 98 Michael Schwirtz, Going to Mars, But Staying Close to Home, New York Times, 15 July 2009; Agence France- Presse, Crew Back on Earth After Mars Mission, 15 July 2009.)
NASA launched its Orbiting Carbon Observatory (OCO) aboard a four-stage Taurus XL rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 1:55 am (PST). However, approximately 3 minutes later7 seconds after the ignition of the third stage, the payload fairingthe nose cone protecting the satellite as it rises through the atmospherefailed to separate, dooming the craft. The satellite fell back to Earth, landing in the ocean near Antarctica. Had the launch succeeded, the Observatory would have joined Japans GoSat, in precisely measuring carbon-dioxide levels in the air. GoSat had reached orbit on 23 January. (NASA, NASAs Launch of Carbon-Seeking Satellite Is Unsuccessful, news release 09-039, 24 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-039_OCO_failure.html (accessed 28 February 2011); Kenneth Chang, NASA Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit, New York Times, 25 February 2009.)
NASA announced that, together with industry engineers, it had successfully tested the three main parachutes of the Ares-I rocket, which NASA was designing to serve as the booster rocket for the Orion CEV. Engineers had designed the parachutes as the primary element of the rockets deceleration system, which included a pilot parachute and a drogue parachute. The main parachutes would deploy in a cluster, open simultaneously, and provide the necessary drag to slow the descent of the solid-rocket first-stage motor to a soft landing in the ocean, allowing their recovery for use on future flights. NASAs MSFC engineers had conducted the first cluster test at the U.S. Armys Yuma Proving Ground near Yuma, Arizona. The flight test was the eighth in an ongoing series supporting the development of the Ares-I recovery system. The research team had dropped the 41,500-pound (18,824-kilogram, or 18.8-tonne) load from a U.S. Air Force C- 17 aircraft flying at an altitude of 10,000 feet (3,058-meters). All parachutes and test hardware had functioned properly and landed safely. The parachutes measured 150 feet (45.72 meters) in diameter and weighed 2,000 pounds (907 kilograms, or 0.9 tonnes), making them the largest rocket parachutes manufactured to date.(NASA, NASA Tests Largest Rocket Parachutes Ever for Ares I, news release 09-113, 20 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-113_AresI_Parachutes_Test.html (accessed 20 June 2011);)
NASA announced the successful completion of a test firing of the igniter designed to start the Ares-I rockets first-stage motor. The firing took place at ATK Launch Systems test facilities near Promontory, Utah. The successful test of the igniter, which was an enhanced version of the flight-proven igniter used in Space Shuttle solid rocket boosters, marked a milestone in the continuing development of the Ares-I first stage and paved the way for the first ground test, scheduled to occur later in 2009. Engineers had designed the Ares-I igniter to take advantage of upgraded liner and insulation materials with improved thermal properties. The materials would protect the igniters case from the burning solid propellant. The new igniter, approximately 18 inches (45.7 centimeters) in diameter and 36 inches (91.4 centimeters) long, was a small, high- burn-rate solid rocket motor designed to be secured in the forward segment of the five-segment booster. An ignition command would send a flame down the core of the 142-foot (43.3-meter) solid rocket motor, generating more than 3.5 million pounds (1.59 million kilograms) of thrust to trigger liftoff of the rocket.(NASA, NASAs Ares I Rocket First Stage Igniter Successfully Tested, news release 09-055, 10 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09055_ARES_igniter_test.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
NASA announced the successful test of a critical piece of the Ares-I rocket, marking a key milestone in the next-generation crew launch vehicles (CLVs) development. ATK had conducted the flight test at its facility in Promontory, Utah. Simulating the separation event that should occur following the first-stage flight of Ares I-X, the test had demonstrated that the linear-shaped charge intended to separate the forward skirt extension would sever cleanly. The test had also measured the shock that the charge created. Built as a single, solid aluminum cylinder, 6 feet long (1.8 meters long) by 12 feet in diameter (3.7 meters in diameter), the forward skirt extensions design enabled it to withstand the loads of the first stage and to support the weight of the upper stage. Michael A. Kahn, Executive Vice President of ATK Space Systems, remarked that the successful test represented an important milestone for the program, validating key parameters to support the upcoming Ares-I-X flight test.(NASA, Test in Development of NASAs New Crew Rocket Is Successful, news release 09-022, 30 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-022_Ares_1-X_Sep_test.html (accessed 14 January 2010); ATK, ATK Successfully Conducts NASA Ares 1-X Separation Test, press release, 30 January 2009, http://atk.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=118&item=892 (accessed 7 March 2011); Todd Halvorson, NASA Stages Key Test in Advance of Ares 1X, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 February 2009.)
South Koreas rocket Naro 1, which had launched 25 August, failed to deliver its payload to orbit. South Korean Vice Minister of Education, Science, and Technology Kim Jung Hyun explained to the media that the fairing had failed to separate properly when the satellite reached its target altitude, causing the satellite to overshoot its mark and, probably, to burn up in the atmosphere after falling back toward Earth.(Heejin Koo, South Korean Satellite Burned Up After Orbit Failure, Bloomberg News, 26 August 2009.)
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) launched Ibuki, the worlds first greenhouse gasmonitoring satellite, from Tanegashima, aboard an H2A rocket. In addition to Ibuki, the rocket carried seven small satellites, which JAXA, university research centers, and private industry had developed. Ibuki, also known as the Greenhouse Gases Observing Satellite (GOSAT), would help scientists calculate the density of carbon dioxide and methane at the surface of the Earth, collecting data from 56,000 locations around the world, including locations in developing countries. Two sensors on board GOSAT would track solar, infrared rays that the Earths surface or atmosphere reflects and would monitor clouds and aerosols. The seven smaller satellites were Prism, an expandable refracting telescope designed to observe Earth as a technology demonstrator; Small Demonstration Satellite 1 (SDS 1) designed to carry out on-orbit verification of a space-wire demonstration module, a cutting-edge microprocessor, and a thin- film solar cell; Kagayaki, designed to measure orbital debris and observe auroral electrical currents; the Space Oriented Higashi-Osaka Leading Association (SOHLA 1), an exploratory satellite that would observe lightning; Sprite-Sat, a cube satellite that would observe sprites and gamma-rays generated during thunderstorms; and KKS 1, a cube satellite designed to demonstrate a micropropulsion system and three-axis attitude-control functions.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 663, 1 February 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx663.html (accessed 3 February 2011); Agence France-Presse, Japan Launches Satellite To Track Greenhouse Gases, 23 January 2009.)
NASA launched its Wide-Field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 9:09 a.m. (EST). Approximately 52 minutes into the flight, the rocket placed the 1,485-pound (673-kilogram) WISE craft into polar orbit 326 miles (525 kilometers) above Earth. From that point, the craft would carry out its mission to map all objects in the sky in infrared lightnear-Earth asteroids, stars, planet-forming discs, and distant galaxies. Approximately 3 minutes after separating from the rocket, WISE reoriented itself toward the Sun, enabling it to use its solar panels to generate its own power. Approximately 17 minutes later, valves opened on the crafts cryostat, a chamber of super-cold hydrogen ice designed to maintain WISE at colder temperatures than the objects the craft would observe. WISEs primary mission would expire once the frozen hydrogen was depleted, approximately 10 months after launch. Scientists expected the resulting WISE atlas to contain hundreds of millions of objects, which would provide astronomers and space mission designers with a long-lasting infrared roadmap.(NASA, NASAs WISE Eye on the Universe Begins All-Sky Survey Mission, news release 09-286, 14 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/dec/HQ_09-286_WISE_launch.html (accessed 16 December 2011); John Johnson Jr., NASA Launches New Mapping Spacecraft, Los Angeles Times, 15 December 2009.)
NASA launched its National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) satellite, NOAA 19, or NOAA-N Prime, aboard a Delta-2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California at 2:22 a.m. (PST). The successful launch occurred following two scrubs resulting from technical problems. The Lockheed Martinbuilt NOAA-N Prime was the latest and final spacecraft in the Advanced TIROS-N (ATN) satellite series. Lockheed Martin had been designing and building for NASA and NOAA since the first Television and Infrared Observational Satellite (TIROS) weather satellite, which had launched in April 1960. Replacing NOAA 18, NOAA-N Prime would become the primary afternoon spacecraft, a designation based upon the time a spacecrafts orbit crosses the equator. NOAA-N Prime was carrying the same primary instruments that NOAA 18 had on board, with the addition of an Advanced Data Collection System (ADCS) and an improved Search and Rescue Processor. Frances national space agency, Centre National dEtudes Spatiales (CNES) had provided the ADCS, a system designed to measure environmental factors such as atmospheric temperature and pressure, as well as the velocity and direction of ocean and wind currents. CNES had also provided the Search and Rescue Processor, designed to detect distress calls from emergency beacons on board aircraft and boats, as well as to locate people carrying devices in remote areas.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 664; NASA Spaceflight, ULA Delta II Launches on Third Attempt with NASAs NOAA- N Prime, 6 February 2009.)
NASA successfully launched its PharmaSat nanosatellite at 7:55 p.m. (EDT) from its Wallops Flight Facility (WFF) aboard a four-stage U.S. Air Force Minotaur-1 rocket. The rocket also carried the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratorys TacSat-3 satellite, which was the primary payload, and other NASA CubeSat Technology Demonstration experimentsAerocube 3, CP 6, and Hawksat 1three 4-inch, cubed satellites developed by universities and industry to measure electron collection, radiation testing, and guidance and control systems. PharmaSats mission was to investigate the effects of antifungal agents on the growth of yeast in microgravity, to help scientists better understand how microbes might become resistant to drugs used to treat sick astronauts on long-duration flights. PharmaSat separated from the rocket approximately 20 minutes after launch and entered low Earth orbit at an altitude of 285 miles (458.7 kilometers). Following the checkout period, ground controllers planned to command PharmaSat to initiate its biological experiment, scheduled to last 96 hours. The satellite would transmit radio signals to Ground Control stations at two California locations and would send mission data to the NASA Mission Management Team at ARC. The satellite could continue to transmit this data for as long as six months.(NASA, NASA Flight Facility Successfully Launches Nanosatellite, news release 09-114, 20 May 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/may/HQ_09-114_PharmaSat_Launches.html (accessed 20 June 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 667; Matthew Jones, Rocket May Launch a Promising Future for Wallops Island, Virginian-Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 20 May 2009.)
NASA successfully launched its Lunar CRater Observation and Sensing Satellite (LCROSS) aboard an Atlas-V rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 5:32 p.m. (EDT). Also on board, with a companion mission, was LRO, which safely separated from LCROSS 45 minutes after launch. The mission planned for the 1,290-pound (585-kilogram) LCROSS and the 5,216-pound (2,366-kilogram) Centaur upper stage was to perform approximately three long, looping polar orbits around the Earth and the Moon, before colliding separately with the Moon on 9 October 2009. NASA had tentatively targeted an impact site at the Moons south pole near the Cabeus region, but refused to identify the exact target until 30 days before impact, when its scientists would have had time to study the information collected by LRO, other spacecraft orbiting the Moon, and observatories on Earth.(NASA, NASA Successfully Launches Lunar Impactor, news release 09-143, 18 June 2009, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-143_LCROSS_Launch_Success.html (accessed 22 July 2011).)
NASA announced the successful conclusion of the third round of testing of the Common Extensible Cryogenic Engine (CECE) technology, intended to return astronauts to the lunar surface safely. Pratt & Whitney Rocketdyne in West Palm Beach, Florida, had conducted the tests to gather data on the concept engine. Engineers had designed the CECE with the flexibility to reduce thrust from 100 percent to 10 percent, allowing a spacecraft to land gently on the lunar surface. The test set a record, with the engine successfully throttled to 104 percent of its potential and then reduced to 8 percent. A careful assessment of test results from the first two rounds of testing had shown pressure oscillations in the engine at lower throttle levels, known as chugging. The vibrations from the chugging could potentially resonate with the structure of the rocket, causing problems for the lander and the crew. However, in the third round of testing, engineers successfully eliminated engine chugging. To achieve this, they controlled the flow of liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen to the combustion chamber, using a new injector design and propellant feed system that carefully managed the pressure, temperature, and flow of propellants.(NASA, NASA Tests Engine Technology for Landing Astronauts on the Moon, news release 09-005, 14 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-005_Cryo_engine_test.html (accessed 14 January 2011).)
NASA announced that the Ares I-X booster rocket tested on 28 October 2009 had sustained damage when it fell into the Atlantic Ocean. A deflated parachute had caused a poor landing, resulting in the damage. NASA officials stated that the test launch itself had succeeded, but one of the three parachutes had failed. All three parachutes had opened, but only one had fully opened. One had deflated for unknown reasons, wrapping around a partially opened parachute, which had caused the booster to land in the ocean with extra force. The recovery crew had captured photographs showing what appeared to be a large crack in the casing on the first stage, in an area called the forward segment, as well as a fractured actuator bracket on the side of the rocket.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, NASA: Booster Rocket Damaged in Test Flight, 30 October 2009; Todd Halvorson, Live at KSC: Ares I-X Parachutes Fail During Flight, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 October 2009.)
NASA announced that its LCROSS Mission had successfully created dual impacts on the Moons surface, in search of water ice. NASA had launched the LCROSS spacecraft on 18 June 2009 as a companion mission to LRO. The LCROSS craft had traveled 5.6 million miles (9.01 million kilometers) over 113 days. To prepare for the mission finale, the LCROSS satellite had separated from its Centaur upper-stage rocket approximately 54,000 miles (86,905 kilometers) above the Moon on 8 October at 6:50 p.m. (PDT). The Centaur had traveled toward the lunar surface at a speed of 1.5 miles (2.41 kilometers) per second, crashing into the Cabeus crater, a permanently shadowed region near the Moons south pole, shortly after 4:31 a.m. (PDT). Instruments aboard LCROSS had observed the impact for approximately 4 minutes, while traveling through the dust created by Centaurs crash, before impacting the crater itself at 4:36 a.m. (PDT). NASA reported that other observatories, as well as the amateur astronomy community, had captured images and video of both impacts, commenting that NASA intended to share its data with the LCROSS science team. Jennifer L. Heldmann, ARC coordinator of the LCROSS observation campaign, explained that one of the missions goals was to encourage people to view the LCROSS impacts in as many ways as possible. She anticipated that the LCROSS campaign would provide an enormous amount of corroborated information, fascinating to many observers.
Amateur rocket enthusiast Steve Eves broke two world records when he successfully launched his 0.1-scale model of a Saturn-V rocket from the Maryland-Delaware Rocketry Associations home field on Marylands Eastern Shore. At 36 feet (10.97 meters) and 1,648 pounds (748 kilograms), the model rocket was the largest and heaviest amateur rocket launched and recovered to date. Eves had powered his Saturn-V model with nine motorseight of them were 13,000- Newton-second-N-Class motors and one was a 77,000-Newton-second-P-class motorthat lifted the rocket 4,440 feet (1,353.31 meters) straight up into the air. Eves, an auto-body repair specialist by trade, had begun working on his Saturn-V model two years before the launch, after tracking down schematics on the Internet and locating old NASA drawings. Eves had built the skeleton using seven-ply aircraft-grade plywood and the tubular skin using nearly 300 square feet (91.44 square meters) of Luan plywood, which he had coated with fiberglass made out of 14 gallons (53 liters) of resin. The project cost Eves US$25,000, including US$13,000 for the fuel alone. NASA contacted Eves about displaying the model at the U.S. Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville, Alabama, beneath an original Saturn V. Although Eves had considered launching the rocket a second time, he remarked that he would rather not risk a second launch, preferring instead to retire the model rocket and place it on display for people to enjoy.(Davin Coburn, Rocket Record: The Largest, Heaviest Amateur Rocket Ever Launched, Popular Mechanics, 28 April 2009.)
NASA announced that it had signed a contract with American Tank and Vessel of Mobile, Alabama, for the installation of a test-cell diffuser and associated systems in the A-3 test stand at NASAs Stennis Space Center (SSC) in Mississippi. NASA planned to test the J-2X engine for its Constellation Program at the A-3 test stand. Construction had begun in 2007, and NASA had scheduled the first test to take place in 2012. The contract with American Tank and Vessel had a maximum value of US$45 million.(NASA, NASA Awards Construction Contract for Rocket Engine Testing, news release C09-006, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_C09-006_SSC_A-3_Test_Stand.html (accessed 28 February 2011).)
NASA conducted its first test flight of the 327-foot-tall (99.67-meter-tall) Ares I-X rocket, which would launch the Shuttles successor craft. The Shuttles successor would carry humans to the ISS, the Moon, and beyond. NASAs Exploration Systems Mission Directorate in Washington, DC, and the Constellation Programs Ares I-X mission management office at NASAs JSC in Houston led the Ares I-X efforts. The prototype launched at 11:30 a.m. (EDT) from the newly modified Launch Complex 39B, a former Shuttle launchpad. The first launch of a new type of rocket from NASAs KSC since 1981, the launch occurred 48 years and 1 day after the inaugural launch of the Saturn rocket. The test vehicle produced 2.6 million pounds (1.18 million kilograms) of thrust, accelerating the rocket to nearly 3 Gs (G-forces) and Mach 4.76, just under hypersonic speed. The test flight lasted 2 minutes, the time needed for the first-stage solid-fuel booster to burn out and separate from the mock upper stage at a suborbital altitude of 150,000 feet (45,720 meters). Parachutes deployed, and recovery ships collected the booster from the Atlantic Ocean. The rocket carried more than 700 sensors designed to collect data in several areas, including assembly and launch operations, separation of the vehicles first and second stages, controllability and aerodynamics, the reentry and recovery of the first stage, and new techniques of vehicle design. Engineers would analyze the data to validate computer models used to design rockets and to test the safety of steering a tall rocket with a single solid-rocket motor. The mission lasted 6 minutes, from launch to splash down of the rockets booster stage, nearly 150 miles (241.4 kilometers) down range.(NASA, NASAs Ares I-X Rocket Completes Successful Flight Test, news release 09-252, 28 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-252_Ares_I-X_Success.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, NASAs New Moon Rocket Makes First Test Flight, 29 October 2009; Kenneth Chang, NASA Rocket Takes Off as Clouds Break, New York Times, 29 October 2009; Robert Block, Ares I-X FliesBut Will Program: Ares I-X Lifts Off from Kennedy Space Center on Short Test Flight, Orlando Sentinel (FL), 29 October 2009.)
ESA launched its far-infrared space telescope Herschel and its cosmic background mapper Planck on an Ariane-5 rocket from Europes Spaceport in French Guiana at 13:12 (UT). With a payload weighing 5.3 tons (4.8 tonnes, or 4,808 kilograms), the Ariane-5 rocket carried the largest telescope ever launched into space. The two spacecraft would carry out their scientific observations from separate orbits at approximately Lagrange point 2 (L2), a virtual point in space approximately 1.5 million kilometers (0.93 million miles) from Earth, in the opposite direction from the Sun, where the combined pull of Earth and Sun creates a gravitational stability point. Herschel would make infrared observations of stars, galaxies, and star-forming regions, using a 3.5-meter-diameter mirror, the largest yet carried into space. Herschel, weighing 3,400 kilograms (3.75 tons), carried three instrumentsthe Photodetector Array Camera and Spectrometer (PACS), the Spectral and Photometric Imaging Receiver (SPIRE), and the Heterofyne Instrument for the Far Infrared (HIFI). In addition, it carried 2,300 liters (607.6 gallons) of liquid helium, to cool the instruments to a few 10ths of a degree above 0 K. ESA had scheduled Herschels mission to continue three years, but the mission could continue until Herschel had depleted its helium. The 1,900-kilogram (2.09-ton) Planck carried an aperture mirror with a diameter of 1.5 meters (4.92 feet) and two cryogenically cooled instrumentsthe High Frequency Instrument (HFI), which would detect emissions in six frequency bands between 100 and 857 GHz (3 millimeters to 350 microns), and the Low Frequency Instrument (LFI), which would operate between 30 and 70 GHz (10 millimeters to 4.3 millimeters). Scientists expected that Planck would use these instruments to measure minute variations in the cosmic microwave background radiation, gathering detailed information about the age, size, mass, and geometry of the early universe. Planck would also produce two all-sky maps before the end of the planned 15-month mission.(European Space Agency, ESA En Route to the Origins of the Universe, ESA news release 10-2009, 14 May 2009, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_10_2009_p_EN.html (accessed 5 July 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 667, 1 June 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx667.html (accessed 5 July 2011).)
ESAs Ariane-5 rocket launched from Kourou, French Guiana, at 22:09 (UT), carrying a telecommunications satellite for JapanJCSAT 12and a broadcasting satellite for Australia Optus D3. Lockheed Martin had built the 8,900-pound (4,037-kilogram) JCSAT 12, equipping it with 30 active Ku-band and 12 C-band transponders, to provide communications services to Hawaii, Japan, and the Asia-Pacific region for 15 years. Orbital Sciences had built the Optus D3, a 5,400-pound (2,449-kilogram) craft that would use 24 Ku-band transponders to relay communications and direct-to-home television services across Australia and New Zealand. Orbital Sciences had designed the Optus D3 with a 15-year life span, like Lockheed Martins JCSAT 12.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 670, 1 September 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx670.html (accessed 8 September 2011); Agence France-Presse, Ariane 5 Places Japan, Australia Satellites in Orbit, 22 August 2009; Xinhua News Agency, Ariane Rocket Launches Satellites for Japan, Australia, 23 August 2009.)
NASA announced the successful demonstration of an inflatable heat shield slowing and protecting itself as it entered the atmosphere at hypersonic speedsthe first time that anyone had successfully flown an inflatable reentry capsule. NASA launched the Inflatable Re-entry Vehicle Experiment (IRVE) on a 50-foot (15.2-meter) Black Brant9 sounding rocket, from NASAs WFF on Wallops Island, Virginia, at 8:52 a.m. (EDT). Made of several layers of silicone-coated Kevlar, the heat shield inflated with nitrogen several minutes after launch, from a 15-inch- diameter (38-centimeter-diameter) payload to a 10-foot-diameter (3-meter-diameter) mushroom- shaped aeroshell. The inflation process, which occurred on schedule at an altitude of 124 miles (200 kilometers), required fewer than 90 seconds. Six-and-a-half minutes into flight, at an altitude of 50 miles (80.5 kilometers), the aeroshell entered the key phase of the demonstration, experiencing its peak heating and pressure measurements for approximately 30 seconds. An onboard telemetry system collected data from its instruments, broadcasting that information to engineers in real time. The entire mission lasted approximately 20 minutes, ending with splashdown in the Atlantic Ocean approximately 90 miles (145 kilometers) east of Wallops. NASA did not retrieve either the shield or the rocket. IRVE Project Manager Mary Beth Wusk, based at LaRC, remarked that, with the success of the small-scale demonstrator, NASAs next step would be to build a more advanced aeroshell, capable of handling higher heat ratesa promising development for future planetary missions.(NASA, NASA Launches New Technology: An Inflatable Heat Shield, news release 09-188, 17 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09-188_IRVE_launch.html (accessed 31 August 2011); Cory Nealon, The Newest from NASA: Inflatable Brakes, Newport News Daily Press (VA), 18 August 2009; Clara Moskowitz, Inflatable Spacecraft Shield Works, Space Test Shows, Space.com, 17 August 2009, http://www. space.com/7144-inflatable-spacecraft-shield-works-space-test-shows.html (accessed 12 September 2011).)
The Russian Coronas Photon solar observatory launched at 13:30 (UT) from Plesetsk Cosmodrome aboard a Tsyklon-3 rocket. Russia had dedicated the satellite to research in the fields of solar physics, solar-terrestrial connection physics, and astrophysics. Specifically, its mission was to study the connection between the Sun and Earth, using a suite of instruments designed to measure energetic particles produced by solar flares, the solar atmosphere, and solar activity in relation to magnetic storms around Earth. The Research Institute for Electromechanics in Moscow had manufactured the 4,200-pound (1,905-kilogram, or 1.9-tonne) satellite, and the Moscow Engineering Physics Institute had led the science team. The Photon observatory was the third satellite in the Coronos series; two previous craft had launched in 1994 and 2001 to study the Sun and had successfully concluded their missions.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 663; Stephen Clark, Solar Physics Spacecraft Launched by Russia, Spaceflight Now, 2 February 2009.)
South Korea launched its first rocket, the Korea Space Launch Vehicle 1 (KSLV 1), or Naro 1, from Oenaro Island at 4:00 a.m. (EDT), becoming the tenth nation to launch a locally developed scientific satellite in its own territory. South Korean space officials had delayed the launch twice since 30 July because of technical problems. The rocket carried into orbit a 219-pound (99- kilogram) payload, the STSAT 2, which carried a microwave radiometer to measure radiation energy in Earths atmosphere and a laser-reflector system to allow ground stations to track its orbit. Naro 1 was the result of a partnership dating to 2002 between the Korea Aerospace Research Institute (KARI) and the Moscow-based Khrunichev, the Russian aerospace firm responsible for the Proton booster rocket. Khrunichev had provided the hardware for Naro 1s first stage. North Korea criticized the international response to South Koreas launch plans; an international outcry had met the Democratic Peoples Republic of Koreas (North Koreas) failed launch in April 2009, and the United States had claimed that North Koreas launch was a disguised missile test. U.S. Department of State spokesperson Ian C. Kelly had responded to North Koreas complaints, explaining that South Korea had developed its program in an open and transparent manner, in keeping with the international agreements that South Korea had signed, unlike North Korea, which had not abided by its international agreements.(Jin-man Lee for Associated Press, South Korea Launches First Rocket into Space, 25 August 2009; Stephen Clark, South Korea Makes History with Satellite Launch, Spaceflight Now, 25 August 2009.)
Walter Jacobi, an original member of Wernher von Brauns rocket team, which had come to the United States at the end of World War II, died at the age of 91. Jacobi had worked with von Brauns team at Peenemuende during World War II, building V-2 rockets. After taking him prisoner, the U.S. Army had sent Jacobi, along with von Braun and 116 other German rocket engineers, to Fort Bliss, Texas, where they had worked for the Army. In 1950 Jacobi had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to work at MSFC, where he had handled the component work and design work of the massive valves that moved super-cold fuel and other fluids in the Saturn rockets. After retiring from MSFC, Jacobi had moved to the U.S. Space and Rocket Center, where he had spent several years during the 1970s in the centers archives, identifying and translating the von Braun teams German records and documents.(Shelby G. Spires, Original Von Braun Team Member Jacobi Dies at 91, Huntsville Times (AL), 20 August 2009.)
NASA announced that X-Prize Foundation and NASA would host the Northrop Grumman Lunar Lander X-Prize Challenge (NGLLXPC) awards at a ceremony in Washington, DC. Masten Space Systems, led by David Masten, had won a first prize of US$1 million for its Xoie rocket prototype, which had competed in the Level-1 contest. Masten Space Systems had also won a second place award of US$150,000 in the Level-2 contest for its Xombie rocket. Texas-based Armadillo Aerospaces Scorpius rocket had qualified for the Level-1 prize in September but had lost to Xoie in its flight on 30 October in the accuracy category, receiving US $500,000 for second place. Modeled after the US$10 million Ansari X-Prize competition for private-sector spaceflight, NGLLXPC was one of NASAs Centennial Challenges, intended to encourage the development of new rocket technologies for use in future spacecraft. NASA required contestants to build and fly a rocket-powered vehicle simulating the flight of a vehicle to the Moon. The lander had to take off vertically, travel horizontally, and fly a mission profile designed to demonstrate both power and control, before landing accurately at another spot. Then the craft must take off again, travel horizontally back to its original launch point, and land successfully. The lander must complete the entire exercise within 2 hours and 15 minutes. NASA provided the prize money for the Level-1 and Level-2 contests, and the X-Prize Foundation managed the competition, with commercial sponsorship from Northrop Grumman.
NASA announced the first successful full-scale, full-duration stationary test fire of the first-stage motor for the Ares-I rocket, the CLV in development for NASAs Constellation Program. NASA and its industry partner ATK Space Systems had successfully conducted the test, which consisted of shooting a giant flame through the 154-foot (46.94-meter) rocket as it stood on a horizontal test stand, to ignite the 1.5 million pounds (0.68 million kilograms) of solid propellant coating the boosters interior. The ignition shot flame at three times the speed of sound. The plumes temperature reached 4,500F, and the flame generated 3.6 million pounds (1.6 million kilograms) of thrust. During the firing of the five-segment solid development motor (DM 1), engineers gathered measurements from 650 sensors to evaluate acoustics, thrust, roll control, and motor vibrations. The event marked the second attempt to conduct the 2-minute test at ATK Space Systems test stand in Promontory, Utah. NASA had canceled the first test on 27 August, when it was already in progress, with 20 seconds remaining in the countdown. NASAs engineering team had made this decision when the ground controller unit had a problem with a 30-year-old component that helped to move nozzle controls. Nozzle controls steer a rocket in flight. The engineering team had conducted a detailed investigation and had replaced a faulty part.(NASA, NASA and ATK Successfully Test Ares First Stage Motor, news release 09-198, 10 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-198_Ares_DM-1_test.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Mark Stark for Associated Press, Rocket Test in Northern Utah Goes Off Problem-Free, 11 September 2009; Todd Halvorson, Ares I Scores a Victory: A Debut in Flame and Smoke, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 September 2009.)
NASA announced the successful completion of the second drop test of a drogue parachute for the Ares-I rocket. The drop test had taken place on 28 February 2009 at the U.S. Armys Yuma Proving Ground near Yuma, Arizona. The test was the seventh in a series of flight tests supporting the development of the Ares-I parachute-recovery system, which comprised a pilot chute, drogue, and three main parachutes. To test the 68-foot-diameter (20.7-meter-diameter) drogue parachute, researchers had dropped the parachute from a U.S. Air Force C-17 aircraft flying at an altitude of 25,000 feet (7.62 kilometers). The drogue had carried a 50,000-pound (22,680-kilogram, or 22.68-tonne) load, to simulate the rockets spent first-stage motor. The parachute and the test hardware had functioned as planned, landing the load safely. NASA engineers had designed the drogue to permit recovery of the rockets reusable first-stage motor. They planned to use the design in future Ares-I flights, including launches associated with NASAs Constellation Program.(NASA, NASA Successfully Tests Parachute for Ares Rocket, news release 09-045, 2 March 2009, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-045_Ares_Drogue_Test.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
On the thirtieth anniversary of the Islamic Revolution, Iran launched its first domestically built satellite aboard a Safir-2 rocket. Iranian scientists had designed the research and telecommunications spacecraft, named Omid, or Hope, to orbit Earth 15 times each 24-hour period. Omids mission was to determine orbital measurements.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 664, 1 March 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx664.html, 28 February 2011; Agence France-Presse, Iran Puts First Home-Built Satellite into Orbit, 3 February 2009.)
The Peoples Republic of China successfully launched Beidou 2, or Compass G2, into a geostationary orbit aboard a Long March3C rocket from Xichang Satellite Launch Center in southwest Chinas Sichuan Province at 16:16 (UT). Beidou, which means compass, was the second satellite in a navigation system that China was building as an alternative to the United States GPS. China had launched the first Beidou craft in 2007. Xinhua reported that China planned to launch 30 more satellites before 2015, to complete the system. China had designed the system to provide continuous, real-time passive three-dimensional geospatial positioning and speed measurement, with the first phase covering only Chinese territory. Eventually the system would cover the entire globe.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 666, 1 May 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx666.html (accessed 33 May 2011); Associated Press, China Launches 2d Satellite in GPS System, 15 April 2009; Rui C. Barbosa, China Open 2009 Schedule with BeiDou-2 (COMPASS-G2) Launch, NASA Spaceflight, 15 April 2009.)
