ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,
1980
urn..
PRECEDING PAGE
iNTTNTtON&tH	.
CO.
BLANK NOT FILMED
January
January 4: NASA announced that proposals for establishing a space telescope institute in the United States were due March 3 at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC).
The institute, at a sight to be chosen [see November 18, 1979], would be a national facility for receiving and evaluating data from the space telescope and should be fully operational in the early 1980s. It would be responsible for selecting and supporting users of the telescope; science planning and scheduling; routine console operations; and data archiving, calibration, and analysis. The winning contractor would staff and operate a science support center at GSFC and would staff the institute with personnel and facilities needed to house and support principal investigators and general observers.
The space telescope itself, scheduled for launch in 1983 or 1984, would observe about 350 times the volume of space visible from ground-based observatories. The data it acquired would go through a tracking and data-relay satellite to a control center at GSFC, then to the science institute for processing and analysis. The telescope should remain in orbit until the end of the century, visited at 30-month intervals by astronauts from the Space Shuttle to perform maintenance and replace instrumentation. If needed, the Shuttle could return it to Earth at five-year intervals for major repair, which would take about 1 year, then could launch it again.
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would be project manager for the space telescope; GSFC would manage the on-board instrumentation and the science institute; the Headquarters Office of Space would have overall responsibility for the program. (NASA Release 80-1)
• Today reported that Rockwell International, prime Space Shuttle contractor, had made “key management changes and major organizational realignments.. .similar to ones made within the space agency recently.” The paper said NASA now hoped to launch the Shuttle in September, two years behind schedule. {Today, Jan 4/80, 12A)
January 8: NASA announced that, contrary to recently published reports, it was not taking reservations for travel on Space Shuttle missions. Recent articles on NASA plans to carry small experimental payloads on the Shuttle had mentioned a deposit of $500 to reserve payload space; the reference to a reservation had been taken to imply passenger space. NASA said that it would not offer seats on Shuttle flights to paying passengers. (NASA Release 80-2)
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JANUARY 1980
• The Washington Star said that Boeing Company had awarded Fairchild Industries, Germantown, Md., a multimillion-dollar contract to build forward-fuselage parts for a new-generation 757 jetliner. The award by Boeing Military Aircraft Company as subcontractor for Boeing Commercial Aircraft Company was the third given to Fairchild, which received in October a contract for fuselage above the wing and in November a contract for leading-edge wing slats. The twin-engine 757 would fly in 1982. (W Star, Jan 8/80, B-4)
—The United States should develop a way to send nuclear wastes into outer space, Stanley G. Rosen told an American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in San Francisco. The Washington Star said Rosen, a test manager for the U.S. Air Force Defense Satellite Communications system, described the problem of ’’extremely toxic" residues from nuclear-power programs around the world. Extraterrestrial disposal of such wastes would have a “short-term risk” during launch and injection, but “zero risk” thereafter, he said. (W Star, Jan 8/80, A-5)
January 9: The New York Times reported from Beijing that the United States had agreed to sell the People’s Republic of China (PRC) a ground station for reception of Landsat Earth-resources data that might have military applications. Defense Secretary Harold Brown, on an eight-day tour, made the announcement after a two-hour meeting with PRC Deputy Prime Minister Deng Xiaoping. The PRC sought to buy such a station more than a year ago; Land-sat instruments collected data for agriculture, forestry, drought prevention, and oil and mineral exploration, and 20 nations (none Communist) had already bought Landsat ground stations.
Brown’s trip, the first by a senior Department of Defense (DOD) official to China since the Communists came to power in 1949, originally was for general broadening of contacts to inform the United States of Peking defense strategy in the post-Mao era. The Carter administration apparently decided last week to use the visit to give Moscow the impression of greater cooperation between Beijing and Washington, in view of the Soviet thrust into Afghanistan. (NY Times, Jan 9/80, A9)
January 10: Johnson Space Center (JSC) announced that it had extended for 18 months a cost-plus-award-fee contract with Boeing Company for safety, reliability, and quality-assurance engineering support. The extension, valued at $11,184,430, brought the total value of the JSC contract with Boeing to $36,712,703. The extension would cover current and future JSC programs for space vehicles and for ground-support equipment, facilities, and payloads. (JSC Release 80-001)
January 11: U.S. Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. Lew Allen, Jr., said in an interview that a current chill in U.S.-USSR relations would accelerate the development of weapons designed to wage war in outer space or knock down USSR satellites for spying, navigation, and communications.
104
JANUARY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Allen said that, although he still hoped for an agreement on continued noninterference with satellites maintained in space by both the United States and the Soviet Union, the U.S. Air Force was experiencing pressure to move quickly on antisatellite weapons. He indicated that extra money would go for weapons already in the works such as the “flying tomato can” (operating by collision with a target) rather than more distant possibilities such as lasers. (W Post, Jan 11/80, A-l)
January 12-14: The newspaper Wen Hui, published in Shanghai, reported that the People’s Republic of China was training astronauts for space travel and that the forthcoming first issue of a publication called Science Life would contain photographs of “pilots in space clothes in a simulated spacecraft, lying on a vibration platform or being thrown down from a height of 20 meters in a shock test,” as well as in a weightless environment, according to the Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FBIS).
This was the first time the Chinese press had mentioned training of space crews. FBIS said that the new publication would contain an article on space food and that the simulations of space life had already been made into a documentary film. The Wen Hui article did not say when or if China would send someone into space; however, during U.S. Defense Secretary Harold Brown’s visit, a deputy chief of staff for PRC armed forces said a manned space program was not one of China’s top priorities. FBIS also reported publication in a Shanghai paper of pictures of a dog that had returned from space; an editorial in that paper called China the third nation to master the technology of satellite retrieval. (FBIS, Beijing Xinhua, Jan 12/80; Hong Kong Wen Wei Po, Jan 14/80; W Post, Jan 13/80, 16)
January 14: Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that Rocketdyne officials had decided that widespread modification of Space Shuttle flight-engine welds made with welding rods from a suspect lot would not be necessary. Last month the company reported that it might have to straighten a large number of welds, but it had now decided to limit the modifications to an area of hydrogen line located near the base of the engine nozzles. The modified engines would be reinstalled on Orbiter 102 by mid-March, the magazine said. (AvWk, Jan 14/80, 21)
January 15: NASA reported that X-ray data from Heao 1, a high-energy astronomy observatory launched in August 1977 and terminated in 1979, had revealed a superhot superbubble of gas—a gigantic shell about 6,000 light years away from Earth and 1,200 light-years in diameter—in the constellation Cygnus, the Northern Cross. Dr. Webster Cash, of the University of Colorado’s Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics at Boulder, and coinvestigator, Dr. Philip Charles of the University of California at Berkeley, had analyzed the information from a cosmic X-ray instrument on the obser-
105
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
IANUARY 1980
vatory that had been devised by Dr. Elihu Boldt of GSFC and Dr. Gordon Garmire of CalTech.
In a speech for delivery to a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in San Francisco January 16, Cash explained that parts of the bubble had been seen before in brief X-ray glimpses, but no one realized what was being observed: one part was thought to be a supernova remnant, another part to be hot gas escaping from a galaxy. Because of its size, the bubble was not visible in its entirety until Heao 1 picked it up in an X-ray sweep.
Cash said the huge halo was never spotted before because “it flows so energetically that it cools through emission of x-rays” instead of more normal emissions visible in the optical or infrared regions of the spectrum. A cool gas cloud known as the Great Rift of Cygnus, measuring 800 to 1,300 light-years, could be seen obscuring the Milky Way in Cygnus on a dark night; this cloud, containing “enough material to make 5 million stars,” lay beside the bubble and served to hide its central area from Earth view. Supernova explosions impacting this cloud over millions of years could compress and heat its interior, forming a shell of superheated hydrogen materials that became the superheated bubble visible in X-ray data today. Cash said that these explosions were a major mechanism for making new stars: Earth’s Sun might have formed at the edge of a similar bubble, he said. (NASA Release 80-3)
•	The New York Times reported that Apollo 11 astronaut Michael Collins would resign effective January 28 as undersecretary of the Smithsonian Institute, an office held since 1976, to become vice president for field operations of Vought, Inc., in Washington, D.C. Collins had joined the Smithsonian in 1971 as director of the National Air and Space Museum. (NY Times, Jan 15/80, C-16)
•	Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp) announced that it had filed with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) a 5% reduction of its basic charges to U.S. common carriers for international communications satellite services. It claimed frequent price cuts, most recently by 15 % in May 1979, since it began commercial service with Early Bird in 1965. (ComSatCorp Release 80-3)
January 17: A military communications satellite fired into orbit from Cape Canaveral in an Atlas Centaur January 17 had “settled into temporary orbit” and was performing superbly, according to U.S. Air Force Col. George Breton, mission director. The 4,100-pound Fleet Satellite Communications spacecraft originally was scheduled for launch in December 1979. (WPost, Jan 19/80, A-9)
•	NASA announced that it would extend the mission of Heao 2, nicknamed Einstein, beyond its projected lifetime of 11 months. Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, NASA associate administrator for space science, said Einstein, second of the
106
JANUARY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
three high-energy astronomy observatories, had not only produced significant results [see December 11, 1979] but had also lent itself to a guest-investigator program that had garnered about 400 proposals from 80 groups in the United States and other nations, including Great Britain, France, West Germany, Italy, the Soviet Union, India, and Japan.
Heao 1, launched in 1977, had mapped about 1,500 X-ray sources and measured for the first time the uniform high-energy X-ray background of space. Heao 3, launched in September 1979, was making an all-sky survey of cosmic and gamma rays at higher energies and from a higher orbital inclination than the first observatory. (NASA Release 80-6)
January 18: Langley Research Center (LaRC) announced that it had awarded Computer Science Corporation a 3-year contract valued at $3 million for computational analysis and programming support services to basic and applied research at LaRC, including computer documentation, technical reports, program designs, training courses, and plans for follow-on work. (LaRC Release
80-3)
January 21: JSC reported that it would conduct a 30-hour mock mission of Space Shuttle Columbia beginning at 8 a.m. Wednesday, January 23, running through orbital operations to landing. Flight directors and their teams of controllers would monitor system performance, carry out navigation and targeting, and watch support-crew adherence to mission timelines. Simulation specialists would spring problems on the controllers and on the orbiter crews going through routine duties in the Shuttle simulator and another orbiter mockup.
About 500 persons would participate in the “flight,” including prime crew John Young and Robert Crippen and backup crew Joe Engle and Dick Truly. Flight directors would be Neil Hutchinson for the launch team, Chuck Lewis for the orbit team, and Don Puddy for the landing team. This simulation would check out operational procedures over an extended period; previous simulations had not lasted as long. More 30-hour practice flights would occur every six weeks to two months in preparation for the real thing. (JSC Release
80-003)
• The European Space Agency (ESA) reported that detailed evaluation of records from the Ariane’s first test flight December 24, 1979, confirmed that it was a complete success. Each of the three powered stages had performed better than predicted, and the results would allow integration of the second launcher to proceed without change except for a pogo-correction device not used on the first flight. The second flight was set for late May or early June 1980. (ESA Info Bltn 1)
January 22: NASA announced that, after five years of studying Earth resources and environment from an altitude of 920 kilometers (570 miles),
107
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JANUARY 1980
Landsat 2 ceased operation when its primary flight-control mechanism failed because of wear. A two-month effort to use other on-board devices to keep the craft pointed at Earth had failed, and NASA staff had put it into an engineering-test mode that would allow further study of the attitude-control problem.
Landsat 2, launched in 1975 with a one-year lifetime, was second of a remote sensing series that could also collect data from beacon platforms in remote areas. A major asset of the Landsat system was its repetitive observation, as often as every nine days with two satellites, which would permit immediate detection of short-term changes. Landsat L, launched in 1972, was retired early in 1978; Landsat 3, launched in March 1978, would continue to furnish data to more than 400 U.S. and foreign Earth-resources programs. NASA planned to launch a fourth and more advanced Landsat in 1981. (NASA Release 80-9)
•	JSC reported signing of a letter contract with Martin Marietta Aerospace for development and production of an in-orbit tile-repair kit to be used on the Space Shuttle. The letter preceded an official award of contract and authorized the firm to go ahead with design and development of the kit. Estimated value of the contract was $2.1 million. (JSC Release 80-004)
•	ESA reported from the Villafranca tracking station near Madrid that its international ultraviolet explorer (Lue) had detected comet Bradfield January 11. The comet, named for the Australian amateur astronomer who discovered it in 1979, made its closest approach to Earth January 22 and would be visible in the northern hemisphere by the end of January. (ESA Info Bltn 2)
—ESA noted the second anniversary January 26 of Lue, now in a synchronous orbit 18,000 miles above the Atlantic, far beyond Earth’s atmosphere and the cloud cover or interference from background light that hinder observations on Earth. The ultraviolet-sensitive television cameras and processors supplied by the Science Research Council (SRC) had garnered “a wealth of information” both physical and chemical on astronomical objects, because the strongest characteristic emissions of many of the most common atoms and ions lie in the ultraviolet.
More than 500 scientists from 20 nations were studying 12,000 ultraviolet spectra of planets, stars, the interstellar medium, and galaxies. ESA said that it expected the spacecraft to exceed its design life of three years, which was fortunate because observation time requested by astronomers was already more than double that available. The sponsoring agencies (ESA, SRC, and NASA) had decided to keep Lue operating as long as feasible. (ESA Info Bltn 4)
January 24: The Washington Star reported that the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) had declared the basic design and certification process of the McDonnell Douglas DC-10 satisfactory, but had fined the manufacturer
108
JANUARY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
$300,000 for poor control of quality during the manufacture of DC-10 enginemounting pylons. The National Transportation Safety Board blamed American Airlines maintenance procedures for allegedly cracking one such pylon on a DC-10 that failed over Chicago May 25, 1979, causing a crash in which 273 persons died. McDonnell Douglas agreed to pay the fine, denied any wrongdoing, and said it was accepting the fine “to avoid further expense and the disruption of business.”
After the Chicago crash, Transportation Secretary Neil Goldschmidt asked the National Academy of Sciences to investigate procedures used by the FAA to certify planes [see December 12, 1979], The academy named a committee of its National Research Council (NRC) to handle the investigation. Jack D. Howell of the Airline Pilots Association (APA) told investigators that a “protective relationship” between the FAA and the manufacturers had allowed the companies to “use their own employees as ‘FAA-designated representatives’” to oversee plane design and production. In discussing the FAA report, FAA Administrator Langhome Bond defended the procedure for certifying planes. (W Star, Jan 24/80, A-7)
January 25: NASA announced the first step to stimulate commercialization of space, signing a joint-endeavor agreement with McDonnell Douglas Company on a new technique for materials processing in space. McDonnell and a pharmaceutical firm would investigate separating biological materials by continuous-flow electrophoresis in space, thought to have high probability of producing substances useful against human or animal diseases. These substances were not produced in sufficient quantity or purity by ground-based facilities. The joint-endeavor concept would make NASA and the private firm responsible for specific parts of the effort, with no transfer of funds. (NASA Release 80-12)
January 26: NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch conducted a press briefing on the FY81 budget, assisted by Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, deputy administrator; C. Thomas Newman, deputy comptroller; and Dr. Anthony J. Calio, associate administrator for space and terrestrial applications. Warning the reporters that the information was “embargoed” until President Carter formally gave his budget address to Congress January 28, Robert J. Shafer, NASA deputy director of public affairs, cited the releases on Frosch’s recent trip to China as “not embargoed.” Frosch said that, although NASA’s budget was increasing at a slower rate (9.8% for research and development [R&D] and 11.5% for space science), he considered it a “good start” for the decade, compared to last year when extra costs of the Space Shuttle had precluded new space science program starts. The figures included an extra $300 million requested as a 1980 supplement for Shuttle development expenses, which Frosch said were increased by delays last summer that threatened mission schedules.
109
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JANUARY 1980
NASA’s 1981 request included new-start money for the National Oceanic Satellite System (NOSS), to be funded jointly with DOD and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), as well as a gamma-ray observatory to explore the most energetic form of radiation known, exploiting the discoveries of the small astronomy satellite Sas 2, ESA’s Cos B, and the first high-energy astronomy observatory Heao 1. Frosch replied to a question that NOSS would be the first scientific satellite shared with DOD and said its cost would be split among DOD ($13,9 million) and NOAA and NASA, which would pay about $6.4 million and $5.8 million, respectively.
NASA’s total budget request was $5,736 billion, including $4,569.5 billion for R&D, $120 million for facilities construction, and $1,047 billion for program management. (Briefing text, Jan 26/80; NASA Releases 80-7, 80-11,
80-13; W Star, Jan 28/80, A-7, B-2; Nature, Jan 31/80, 416)
• NASA announced the signing of a memorandum of understanding January 24 in Beijing with the PRC Academy of Sciences covering China’s participation in the Landsat program. Under a January 1979 understanding on cooperation in space technology, the People’s Republic of China would buy from U.S. industry a Landsat ground station to be installed near Beijing.
The Landsat memorandum, the first formal agreement on space since normalization of U.S.-PRC relations, provided that the People’s Republic of China, like other foreign ground-station operators, would make Landsat data available to others according to distribution policies of NASA and other U.S. agencies. The PRC academy would pay an annual fee of $200,000, starting six months after its station began to receive data. Landsat stations already operating outside the United States were two in Canada and one each in Brazil, Italy, Sweden, and Japan; new stations now receiving data in Australia and India would be operational soon, and one was under construction in Argentina. (NASA Release 80-14)
January 28: Rockwell International announced that GSFC had awarded it a $6.5 million contract to produce seven more RS-27 engine systems for NASA’s Delta launch vehicle, to be delivered beginning in October. Each of the liquid-fuel systems consisted of a main engine and two vernier engines combining to produce about 207,000 pounds of thrust; Rocketdyne-built hardware left over from the Saturn program would be used in the new system, reducing costs to the taxpayer. Rockwell would static-test the systems at its Santa Susana laboratory in California before delivering them to NASA; it had delivered 60 RS-27 systems since production began in 1973. In the 150-launch history of Delta, 101 launches had used the older Rocketdyne Thor MB-3 engines; the other 49 used the newer, more powerful RS-27s. (Rockwell Release RD-1)
January 29: Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, appeared before the House Committee on Science and Technology to present the agency’s budget request for 1981. After reviewing events of last year, Frosch said NASA would
uo
JANUARY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
need by July 1 the extra $300 million requested as a supplement to stay within Shuttle cost estimates and maintain development and production schedules.
Problem areas had been the Shuttle engines and the thermal protection system (TPS); recent tests had given NASA “increased confidence” in the main engines, but Frosch said that he was “not completely satisfied” with the tiles and their attachment to the Shuttle surface. He said the tiles might not be installed and fully tested before the end of summer, so that the first launch might not come until the end of 1980. The original date of launch was March 1979, and the last previous prediction was June of 1980. Frosch said he expected the first flight “between November and the end of March 1981. A year from now might be a more realistic date.” (Text, Jan 29/80; NY Times, Jan 30/80, A-17)
January 30: The Washington Post said the mystery explosion detected by a U.S. Vela satellite September 22, 1979, was still a mystery, although additional data had come to light since the State Department announced a suspected nuclear explosion.
The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) had told “a few select committees of the House and Senate” that the Union of South Africa was conducting a secret naval exercise in the area where Vela saw the explosion. A committee aide briefed by the CIA said the explosion might be “a rocket launched from one of those South African ships.” On the same night, scientists using the world’s largest radiotelescope had seen a ripple in the ionosphere over Puerto Rico a few hours after Vela saw a double flash 4,000 miles away; it had come “from the right direction and at the right velocity to have been caused by a nuclear explosion near South Africa.”
Ever since the State Department announcement, the Carter administration had tried to discount the possibility of a nuclear explosion, convening a panel of scientists who first said Vela saw a freak lightning strike that coincided with a meteor burnout, then suggested the sighting was either a malfunction or a mistake. However, the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory said that Vela had picked up the “unmistakable” signature of an atomic explosion, a “double flash” caused by a fireball blacked out momentarily by a shockwave surrounding the explosion, then showing 99 times more intense as the shockwave dissipated.
The Vela, it turned out, had carried not one but two optical detectors: one very sensitive instrument to spot fireballs from small nuclear explosions and a less sensitive one in case an atomic blast overloaded the first instrument. As both instruments saw the flash September 22, instrument mistake was unlikely. Also, the ripple arrived at the Arecibo observatory at the proper time to have been the shockwave of an explosion seen by Vela. No radioactive debris had appeared in southern-hemisphere rainwater to confirm an atomic explosion, but the United States had taken up to three weeks after last year’s explosion to sample rainwater in the area. (W Post, Jan 30/80, A-l)
in
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JANUARY 1980
•	MSFC announced that NASA had signed a $183,960,000 contract with ESA for a second Spacelab to be delivered in 1984. Like the first, the new Spacelab would be built by ERNO of West Germany, prime ESA contractor, with at least 26 subcontractors in ESA nations as well as the United States to make components and subassemblies. MSFC was responsible for technical support; JSC would handle operations; Kennedy Space Center (KSC) would be responsible for integrating Spacelab with the Space Shuttle and for launch. (MSFC Release 80-11)
•	Presidential science adviser Dr. Frank Press addressed a conference of the Department of Agriculture science and education administration at Reston, Va., on expanding horizons for agriculture, which he said was of prize importance to the world’s future. On the relationship of agriculture and space, Press cited climate and weather research by satellite as a useful guide in future policy; he also said a useful tool in immediate decisions would be the new AgRISTARS system (agricultural resources inventory surveys through aerospace remote sensing), used by five agencies—NASA, Commerce, Interior, and Agency for International Development (AID), plus the Department of Agriculture—to obtain early warnings and quantitative estimates of worldwide crop conditions. (Text, Jan 30/80)
January 31: MSFC reported that it had shipped two segments of a Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket motor, used during 1979 in mated vertical ground vibration tests, to Thiokol’s Wasatch division in Utah to be refurbished and loaded with propellant for use as a flight motor after being combined with other segments shipped earlier in January. (MSFC Release 80P-12)
•	Nature reported that the ESA council voted to transfer launch capability to the private firm of Ariane-Espace, which would handle production and launch of all future ESA satellites. (Nature, Jan 31/80, 422)
During January: The Washington Post reported the death January 13 of James J. Donegan, 63, “a pioneer in space technology” at NASA since 1958. An aeronautical engineer specializing in spacecraft tracking, data acquisition, and computing techniques at GSFC, Donegan was an original member of the ground instruments unit attached to the first Space Task Group (STG) formed in 1958 to meet the challenge of Sputnik. He was a designer of the original manned spaceflight network and directed GSFC’s manned spaceflight activity until 1973, when he became head of a new Operations Support Computing Division responsible for computer support to both manned and unmanned scientific spacecraft. He was operations director for Project Mercury and coordinated instantaneous computer services for Gemini and Apollo flights, receiving NASA’s exceptional service medal in 1969 for his work on Apollo. {W Post, Jan 18/80, C-10)
112
JANUARY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
•	Aviation Week & Space Technology reported the death of John A. (Shorty) Powers, 57, who joined NASA as a U.S. Air Force lieutenant colonel to help manage the original seven Mercury astronauts and became known as “the voice of Mercury control.” Powers, who retired from NASA in 1964, was found dead of natural causes January 1 at his home in Phoenix, Ariz. (AvWk, Jan 7/80, 21)
•	FBIS reported further comment on the joint flight of Soyuz T and Salyut 6, predicted to continue “for several months” so that experts could test systems and operations before proceeding to build the new spacecraft “in series.” The propellant tanks used by the engines for cruise and for docking now formed a single system; in the past, overuse of propellant in attitude control meant a Soyuz would have to return to Earth even if plenty of propellant was left in the cruise engine. This would not be so in the new engine. The on-board computer now carried out duties previously handled by the crew, such as data processing and flight or system control. Also, Soyuz T had a panel of solar batteries, which previous spacecraft did not have. The commentary said that previous Soyuz spacecraft would continue to be used for the immediate future, the present trial flight serving as dress rehearsal for the “many novel technical features.” (FBIS, Moscow Wrld Svc in Russian, Jan 8/80)
113
February
February 6: NASA announced that a joint government-industry team would design, fabricate, and test a solar-power 20-kilowatt generator for use by small communities, industries, farms, military bases, and similar users. Sponsored by the Department of Energy (DOE), the project would foster inexpensive ways to use solar energy to produce electric power and industrial heat. Under a $1.3 million Lewis Research Center (LeRC) contract, AiResearch Manufacturing Company would build the engine, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) would develop the solar power system including the solar mirror and receiver. (NASA Release 80-17)
February 7: NASA reported that it had selected Boeing and General Electric for contract negotiations to design, construct, install, and test multimegawatt advanced wind-turbine systems, in an LeRC-directed project sponsored by the DOE. The turbines, costing $15-$20 million each, would be used at sites with annual mean wind speed of 23 kilometers (14 miles), to be selected by DOE, and would supply electricity to conventional local utility systems for use by the general public. (NASA Release 80-18)
February 8: NASA held a press briefing on the solar maximum mission slated for launch February 14. Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, associate administrator for space science, said that exploration of Earth’s nearest star was significant both scientifically and technologically. Dr. Harold Glaser of NASA’s solar terrestrial division noted that the Sun, dominant energy source for the Earth, was a variable star in that its energy output varied in periods running from 10 minutes to 11 years (the so-called solar cycle) as well as over periods of centuries.
The solar variations causes variations on Earth; for instance, the solar flares known to have a periodicity of 11 years. In short time periods, a flare is the most energetic manifestation of solar changes, with significant effects: Earth suffers communications problems along with atmospheric heating and other phenomena, and the trillion kilotons spewed into the solar system would affect almost all the planets. The focus of the Solar Maximum Mission (SMM) would be to understand more about solar flares in order to predict their occurrence. The magnetic field of the Sun had also been found to vary with a 22-year periodicity, strongly correlated with drought in the U.S. western plains.
During the 17th century, solar activity apparently ceased for about 80 years, a period called the Maunder Minimum which featured a “mini-ice Age” documented in northern Europe. This seems to have happened more frequent-
BLANK NOT FILMED
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
FEBRUARY 1980
ly than previously realized. Space research during the last 20 years had produced these data, Glaser said, including evidence that the Sun might be changing sides, with a corresponding increase of luminosity or incident radiation. Also, the Sun appeared to oscillate rather like a fluid, probably because of interior activity whose nature was as yet unknown.
Joseph Purcell of GSFC, standing in for project manager Peter Burr who was ill, described the spacecraft and its planned retrieval by the Space Shuttle, and the modular design that would allow it to be serviced in orbit if necessary. The SMM would be the first NASA satellite designed for retrieval and first to include the tracking and data-relay satellite capability; at 5,000 pounds, it would also be the heaviest payload launched by a Delta. Purcell explained the 24-hour computer watch on the SMM, calling it an operation with “very intense man-machine relationships.”
Kenneth J. Frost, also of GSFC as SMM project scientist, described the payload as essentially one experiment to determine the nature of solar flares, using seven instruments and a “very detailed scientific game plan.” Investigators needed a 24-hour watch to evaluate the plan’s progress and to react to targets of opportunity on the Sun. For instance:, a flare on the Sun’s west limb would be observed on Earth and by a series of spacecraft in orbit around the Earth, so that the quality and completeness of the observations would “far outstrip anything we’ve ever had before.” The SMM spacecraft would have a productive lifetime of about two years, Frost said, and the scientific group at GSFC would consist of investigators prepared to spend that much time away from their home institutions. In response to a question, he pointed out that the broad range of the electromagnetic spectrum to be investigated by SMM could not penetrate Earth’s atmosphere. (Text, Feb 8/80; NASA Release
80-16)
•	The Washington Star quoted Defense Secretary Harold Brown’s statement before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation that NASA’s Space Shuttle program was “critical” to defense planning. The committee was considering the FY81 budget requests of NASA and DOD. (WStar, Feb 8/80, A-5)
•	The Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) reported that NASA’s Heao 1 had detected “surprisingly intense” X-ray emission from a pair of common Sunlike stars in the constellation Cepheus. The pair formed a tight binary revolving around each other with a period of only six hours, in a rotary motion like “the twin blades of an eggbeater.” The gas in the intervening space would be stirred violently and the magnetic-field lines twisted, stretched, and tom in a furious turbulence, the resulting X-ray emission being “millions of times that expected from either star alone.” The Heao 1 discovery was recently confirmed by the large telescope aboard Heao 2 (Einstein), and other stars of that sort would be checked for X-ray emissions; two other binaries had been detected as X-ray sources. (NRL Release 3-1-80F)
116
FEBRUARY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
•	LaRC reported award of a 3-year $4.6 million contract to Sperry Support Services for development, operation, and maintenance of flight simulators, including real-time digital programs for solving research problems and for aerodynamics and space flight. Sperry would design and operate flight simulators and would develop, integrate, and test electronic subsystems to use with existing data systems. (LaRC Release 80-9)
February 11: The Washington Star said that an Aeroflot jetliner carrying Soviet Olympic contenders had landed at Kennedy International Airport in New York February 10. This was the second time in two weeks that the airline had broken its agreement not to land in New York; union ground crews had refused to service Soviet planes as a protest of Soviet incursion into Afghanistan. New York airport officials had unloaded Aeroflot passengers’ baggage two weeks previously after the State Department intervened; the plane had sat on the ground for two days during arguments about servicing it. The February 10 flight went on after a two-hour delay to Dulles airport in Virginia, where 122 of the 145 passengers boarded buses for Lake Placid. (W Star, Feb 11/80, A-l)
February 12: On the basis of photographs from Mariner 9 and Viking Orbiter 2, Dr. Kevin D. Pang and a team of JPL scientists decided that the surface of the two small satellites of Mars (Deimos and Phobos) were like those of meteorites known as carbonaceous chondrites, strongly suggesting that the two originated elsewhere and were captured by the gravity of Mars in a close encounter with the planet, the New York Times reported. The surfaces differed superficially, Phobos marked by long grooves and Deimos with a covering of loose material, but reflected light identically. (NY Times, Feb 12/80, C-4)
•	NASA announced that it would join the California council of the American Institute of Architects (AIA) and the Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) in building an Advanced Technology Display House to open in 1982 at Ames Research Center (ARC), to demonstrate new materials and technology from aerospace and energy research. The sponsors signed on February 4 this first-of-a-kind partnership agreement under which AIA would contribute innovative architectural expertise; PG&E would share its research on energy conservation; and NASA in association with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) would translate aerospace technology into the “down-to-earth challenge” of home building.
The design would include self-contained water and sewage-treatment systems and energy-saving lighting, plumbing, ventilation, electrical wiring, and appliances, with extensive use of solar energy, all managed and monitored by a centralized computer. Using advanced systems and materials instead of those now available to the building industry, the AIA would design the house to allow addition or deletion of components (office space, physical fitness areas) and to be dismantled for exhibition across the United States. Wider use
117
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
FEBRUARY 1980
of the innovations would lead to economies in mass production and put the new ideas within reach of average customers. (ARC anno Feb 12/80)
February 13: NASA announced that it would maintain an expendable launch-vehicle capability at the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) in Florida as a backup to the Space Shuttle during transition to Space Transportation System (STS) operation. It would use the standard Delta launch vehicle, capable of putting spacecraft weighing up to 1,100 kilograms (2,400 pounds) into orbit. NASA would charge commercial Delta users $22 million per launch at the outset. (NASA Release 80-22)
•	NASA reported studies by Western Union and U.S. Telephone & Telegraph warning of a fivefold increase in satellite video and data traffic by the end of the century. By the year 2000, executive telecommunications would be a substitute for business travel; 90% of the messages would need real-time (instantaneous) service and only 10% (such as electronic mail delivery) would be non-real-time. The demand for telecommunications would saturate domestic communications satellite capacity in the 4-6 GHz (C-band) and 11-14 GHz (Ku-band) frequencies.
Having decided to resume advanced communications satellite research, NASA would work toward opening the frequency band at 20 -30 GHz for commercial use in the next two decades. This band had not yet been used in the United States. The 20-to 30-GHz (Ka-band) offered a far greater range than the C-or Ku-band; capacities of communications satellite systems using it would be 50 to 100 times greater than those working in C-band. (NASA Release 80-19)
•	NASA announced that it had deferred an experiment to use zero gravity in studying cloud-physics phenomena, formerly scheduled as a Spacelab payload in 1982. Technical problems in transition from ground laboratory to space environment had caused delays and increased design and construction costs of the Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory to the jioint of terminating the GE contact. NASA would use the equipment in its ground-based weather and climate research. (NASA Release 80-23)
•	NASA said that it would launch seven sounding rockets February 15 and 16 from the San Marco platform off the coast of Kenya to study a total solar eclipse visible in that area but not in North America, recording changes in the electrical structure of Earth’s middle atmosphere and temperature distribution in the solar corona during an eclipse. Two Astrobee D and three Super Areas rockets would carry payloads from Pennsylvania State University, and two Black Brant rockets would carry payloads from the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory in New Mexico. Piggyback on one of the Black Brants would be a Johns Hopkins University experiment to measure ultraviolet zodiacal light from the solar corona. Instrument packages carried to 330 kilometer
118
FEBRUARY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
(205-mile) altitude would make measurements during parachute descent.
GSFC would manage the eclipse study with support from Wallops Flight Center (WFC) in rocketry, instrumentation, and range support. The mobile launch platform in the Indian Ocean was operated by the University of Rome’s center for aerospace research. (NASA Release 80-24; WFC Release 80-1)
February 15: NASA launched at 10:57 a.m. February 14 the SMM observatory from Cape Canaveral on a Delta vehicle into a circular orbit 360 miles above the equator. The 5,200-pound spacecraft carried instruments to study solar flares [see February 8] over a period of 2 years; the 11-year cycle of solar activity was entering its most turbulent phase, with flares erupting on the Sun once or twice a day and superflares causing atmospheric disturbances on Earth once a month. The SMM launch cost the United States $99 million, including $20 million for the Delta. (W Post, Feb 15/80, A-7; NASA Release
80-16)
•	NASA reported that a final test firing of the Shuttle solid-fuel booster motor February 13 in the Utah desert was successful, and the motor would be ready for flight as soon as test-data results were available. Tests of this motor had begun in July 1977 with static firing of the first of four prototypes; three more development tests followed, the last February 17, 1979.
A series of test firings of flight-type motors began June 13, 1979, to qualify them for manned flight; the test just concluded was the third and final firing of that series. Robert E. Lindstrom, manager of the Shuttle projects office of
MSFC, said completion of the tests meant that the solid-fuel booster motors would perform successfully in flight. After propellant burnout, the boosters would separate and plunge into the ocean for retrieval and reuse.
Two of the solid-fuel boosters were already on the launcher at KSC awaiting integration with other components (external tank and the orbiter itself) in preparation for the first Shuttle flight later this year. The assembled motor, major component of the booster, was more than 35 meters (115 feet) long and 3.5 meters (12 feet) in diameter, largest rocket motor of its type developed for space flight and the first built for manned spacecraft; it would generate 3 million pounds of thrust. (MSFC Release 80-18; NASA Release 80-25)
•	NASA reported a major milestone for a Shuttle main engine February 8, with completion of a second series of flight certification tests at the National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL) near Bay St. Louis, Miss. In the two series of tests (mostly run for 520 seconds at 100% of rated power level), the engine accumulated more than 10,000 seconds of firing time, equivalent to that required for 19 Shuttle flights; in one test, the engine ran at 102% of rated power, and in another it ran for 823 seconds to simulate an aborted mission. The first series of tests last year began March 27 and ended June 27. (MSFC Release 80-19; NASA Release 80-26)
U9
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
FEBRUARY 1980
February 17: The General Accounting Office (GAO) warned that the United States was in danger of losing its space technology lead unless it invested more in the new area of space manufacturing. On Earth, gas bubbles rise in a liquid, heavy particles and dense metals settle at the bottom of a solution, and heated fluids swirl in random and unpredictable directions, all because of gravity. The weightlessness of space permits formation of composite materials and facilitates both separation and synthesis.
The NY Times reported a GAO statement that the United States should be spending two to three times the $20 million in NASA’s current budget, just to maintain parity with other nations such as the Soviet Union, Japan, and the 11 European members of ESA. GAO said that industrialists believed being “first to market” with new products would give a firm the best chance of remaining competitive. GAO predicted that by the end of the century orbiting factories would be producing new or better metals and alloys, perfect crystals, composite materials, glass, semiconductors, and high-purity chemicals, medicines, and vaccines that cannot be made on Earth. If the United States is to exploit this new field, the GAO said, its government must work out a plan with private industry, and both must be prepared for financial risks. (NY Times, Feb 17/80, 59)
February 18: ESA announced the inauguration March 6 in Geneva of the Stella experiment using the Ots satellite to transmit scientific data at high speeds between high-energy physics laboratories. Participating in the ceremony would be Roy Gibson, ESA director general; J.B. Adams, executive director of the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN); L. van Hove, research director for CERN; and F. Braun, director general for the European communities commission on internal market and industrial affairs.
Some 1,600 scientists from ESA member states used CERN’s accelerators and high-energy particle detectors for fundamental research into the structure of matter. Stella would transmit electronic data at speeds up to 1 megabit (1 million bits of data) per second from CERN to member-state laboratories at Hamburg, Germany; Saclay, France; Didcot, United Kingdom; Pisa, Italy; Dublin, Ireland; and Graz, Austria. The speed of transmission would be similar to the working speeds of computers in the participating laboratories, eliminating the delay of sending magnetic tapes through the mail. (ESA Info Bltn 6)
February 20: Eighteen years after he blasted away from a launch pad at Complex 14, Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, to become the first American to orbit the Earth, Sen. John Glenn (D-Ohio) returned to dedicate a marble memorial of his flight and those of Mercury astronauts Scott Carpenter, Walter Schirra, and Gordon Cooper, donated in 1978 by the American Monument Association but held back for dedication until gantries at the site were removed and sold for scrap.
The Washington Star said the site was now desolate, “surrounded by palmet-
120
FEBRUARY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
tos and visited only by an occasional alligator or rattlesnake.” About 600 persons at the ceremony heard Glenn describe the new U.S. goal of routine and economical access to space with the Space Shuttle. (W Star, Feb 21/80, A-2; Today, Feb. 12/80, 1QA; NASA Actv, May 80, 19)
•	NASA reported that Dr. Cyril Fonnamperuma, director of the University of Maryland laboratory of chemical evolution, and his researchers had recently discovered amino acids (basic building blocks of life) in Antarctic meteorites presented by NASA. The Antarctic program began three years ago as a cooperative venture of NASA and the National Science Foundation (NSF) to collect meteorites under extremely clean conditions like those under which Apollo astronauts obtained lunar samples, so free of contamination that they could offer evidence of any organic history before they impacted Earth. The agency had given the team Antarctic meteorite and lunar surface samples, as well as data obtained by deep-space probes on atmospheres of other planets. The laboratory examined the lunar and meteor samples for evidence of organic material and tried to create molecules similar to those present in Earth and the planetary atmospheres before life began.
Using gas-chromatograph techniques to identify right-and left-handed molecules of amino acids (the direction in which a beam of polarized light sent through a solution of the material would turn), the team had obtained strong evidence of both right- and left-handed amino acids in the Antarctic meteorites. Since all Earth life forms contain only left-handed molecules, the preorganic matter in the meteorites had to be formed somewhere else. The meteorites used by the team were about 4.5 billion years old; the oldest Earth material identified so far was 3.7 billion years old, and some of it contained evidence of organic matter. “The processes we postulated as taking place on the earth before life began seem to have taken place somewhere else also,” Fonnamperuma said. “What this implies is that all those events which led to life may be common in the universe, so what we said happened on the earth may be happening somewhere else.” (NASA Release 80-21)
•	The Washington Star reported on a campaign to raise $1 million for a Viking fund to collect and preserve data from Mars. The Viking landers “sitting on the red sands of Mars and sending back information” could keep doing so for the next 10 years, the story said, but NASA had decided that no life existed on Mars and stopped listening to the Viking transmissions. Among those supporting the fundraising campaign was Ben Bova, editor of Omni magazine, who said “the only people who have lost interest in space are here in Washington.” NASA had not officially endorsed the effort, but “at least one spokesman” said the agency would be delighted to accept the contribution. (W Star, Feb 20/80, C-l)
February 21: Radio Corporation of America (RCA) said it would lease capacity on an American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T) satellite to make up for
121
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
FEBRUARY 1980
its own satellite that disappeared after launch [see December 11, 1979]. Eleven cable television companies that were to use the lost satellite could now begin sending programs to cable systems as early as April 1. Loss of RCA Satcom 3 had threatened the cable television industry; twenty channels were in use on one RCA satellite, and eleven more had been scheduled for the lost satellite. Under the arrangement with AT&T, RCA would pay $70,000 a month for each channel which it would then lease at $40,000 a month; an 18-month lease would lose RCA about $5.9 million including expenses. (W Star, Feb 21/80, C-9)
February 22: NASA reported that the SMM launch February 14 was successful, the orbit close to prediction and no functional problems in spacecraft or experiment systems. The only anomaly during early orbits was inability to compute roll reference positions, a figure needed to conduct slew maneuvers. The cause was incorrect axis translation by ground processing of star-tracker output; the program was modified and all systems were now performing within specifications. (NASA MOR S-826-80-01 [postlaunch] Feb 22/80)
•	FBIS reported launch of Japan’s second commun ications satellite CS-B from Tanegashima Island at 5:35 p.m. local time. CS-B would replace Ayame (Iris), whose signal was lost when it collided with its apogee motor 12 seconds after ignition February 5, 1979. Ayame 2 would reach sta tionary orbit over northern New Guinea by March 1CT First stationary comsat designed to use millimeter-wave transmissions in communications experiments, Ayame 2 was 1.4 meters long and 1.6 meters tall, weighed about DO kilograms, and cost 6 billion yen; it would be Japan’s fifth stationary satellite.
[FBIS reported February 25 that, 8 seconds after firing an apogee motor to put the spacecraft into a circular orbit, Japan’s National Space Development Agency lost radio contact with Ayame 2 also. With 30 billion yen spent to build and launch the two experimental comsats, the successive failures were “a shock to the agency and the Science and Technology Agency.” Japan’s tracking stations continued to send radio signals in an effort to restore contact, officials said, but the two failures would cast a shadow on future satellite-launching plans.] (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 22, 25/80)
•	Today newspaper said NASA Associate Administrator John Yardley had “acknowledged for the first time” that NASA engineers were so concerned with the Shuttle tiles guarding against heat of reentry that they “virtually ignored whether the tiles would remain stuck to the spaceship.” Yardley said at a briefing that tiles still headed the list of Shutde problems; he said NASA was studying alternative heat protection systems using technology unavailable 10 years ago. He added that “NASA and Rockwell both have to take a share” of blame for not testing the insulating system sooner. NASA originally estimated the cost of each custom-built tile covering the Shuttle at $500 for fabrication and installation; Yardley said that the tiles would now cost three
122
FEBRUARY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
to four times that much. The actual price tag for the Shuttle was now about $8.7 billion; the cost projected in 1971 was $5.2 billion. {Today, Feb 22/80, 18-A)
February 25: The Washington Star reported that the Space Environment Services Center at Boulder, Colo., was predicting an 11-year peak in sunspots; solar outbursts in coming months could raise magnetic storms on Earth, foul up radio communications, and cause computers to go haywire. Gary Heckman, head of the center, said solar flares might have set off a civil-defense circuit in Canada that automatically put radio stations in an alert mode. The upcoming flare peak might be the second most active since the record of 1957. (W Star, Feb 25/80, A-9)
February 26: A United Press International (UPI) report from Moscow said the Soviet Union had unveiled its 350-passenger airbus with a timesaving baggage compartment where riders would load and unload their own luggage. The Ilyushin 86, 20 feet wide and 193 feet long, carried 70 more passengers than the A-300 French/German airbus; it had maximum range of 3,000 miles and a cruising speed of 600 mph. It had been test-flown to the Black Sea area and to Tashkent and would begin regular service June 1 to Sochi, a resort area; the new plane would eventually absorb a fifth of USSR domestic passenger service, officials said, especially on peak Black Sea routes. The prototype flew in 1976, and fulltime construction began in 1977.
The new baggage-handling feature had a short ladder by which boarding passengers could reach a lower compartment with bins numbered to match their seats. After putting their luggage in the proper bin, they would climb to the passenger sections on an upper deck. Officials said the system tested in a mockup could load or unload all 350 passengers within 20 to 25 minutes. (Western aviation experts said the 11-86 was a gas-guzzler, its four “fuel-inefficient” engines capable of generating only 28,000 pounds of thrust compared with 45,000 pounds for western widebody planes.) (UPI/IF Star, Feb 280, C-ll)
• The Washington Star reported that cable television operators awaiting a replacement for the lost RCA Satcom 3 had found that they would need big new dish receivers for signals from the Comstar satellite RCA planned to lease. {W Star, Feb 27/80, C-3)
February 28: ARC said that it would close the Pioneer project office effective February 29 after 16 years of sending spacecraft to various planets and to orbits around the Sun. The Space Missions Branch at ARC would handle the seven Pioneers still in interplanetary space: numbers 6 through 9 had formed a network of solar weather stations around the Sun, and Pioneer 10 and Pioneer Saturn was both headed out of the solar system after flights to Jupiter
123
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
FEBRUARY 1980
and Saturn. Pioneer Venus was in orbit about that planet photographing cloud circulation and sending back the first detailed maps of Venus’s surface.
ARC director C.A. Syvertson in a staff memo said that [project manager] “Charles Hall and all who have participated in the program deserve our congratulations and a hearty well done.” When NASA Headquarters recently presented a number of NASA medals and other recognition to Pioneer individuals and teams, Hall received NASA’s distinguished service medal, its highest award, before his retirement after 30 years with the agency. (ARC Release 80-4)
•	The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) reported that it had bookings for 260 hours of international satellite television when the winter Olympic games opened at Lake Placid, N.Y.; a tally after the games showed that 448 hours had been used, nearly double the original demand. Countries receiving direct broadcasts of the games included the United Kingdom, France, West Germany, Yugoslavia, Australia, Japan, Mexico, and Venezuela; these would have relayed many of the telecasts to a large number of other nations through Earth networks, INTELSAT said. (INTELSAT Release 80-02-1)
February 29: MSFC said that a second full-duration test of the Shuttle main-engine system February 28 was successful, and all objectives were met during the 555-second firing. For the first time, the three engines in the system were steered while being throttled back from 100% thrust, and the oxygen tank was allowed to run dry. (MSFC Release 80-27; NASA Release 80-31)
•	NASA announced selection of General Electric and TRW Systems, Inc., to negotiate contracts for $500,000 six-month design studies of the gamma-ray observatory mission. One of the contractors would be chosen to build and operate the satellite under a follow-on contract after Congress approved the mission.
If approved, the observatory would carry five large gamma-ray instruments into space to observe gamma-ray sources and obtain fundamentally new information about stars, the galaxy, and the universe. It would be a Shuttle payload in the mid-1980s designed for retrieval after a two-year mission lifetime; GSFC would manage the project. (NASA Release 80-30)
During February: Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, 59, the “legendary aerodynamicist” inventor of the area rule and the supercritical wing, retired February 29 after 37 years of service with NASA. Graduated in 1943 with honors in mechanical engineering from Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Whitcomb said an article in Fortune magazine impelled him to apply for a job at NACA’s Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory. His “brilliant career” there included three landmark ideas, all radical departures from conventional
124
FEBRUARY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
aerodynamic theory, all developed in Langley wind tunnels, and all successful.
His honors included the Collier Trophy for applying his “area rule” to design of supersonic aircraft, and the U.S. Air Force exceptional service medal (highest civilian award) in 1954; NACA’s first distinguished service medal in 1956; NASA’s medal for exceptional scientific achievement and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautic’s Sylvanus Albert Reed award, 1969; the National Medal of Science, highest honorary scientific award of the U.S. government, 1973; in 1974, the National Aeronautic Association’s Wright Brothers memorial trophy, the AIAA aircraft design award, and a $25,000 cash award (largest ever given by NASA to an individual) for invention of the supercritical wing; in 1978, the National Business Aircraft Association award. (NASA Release 74-148, 80-38)
•	NASA announced that Dr. William C. Schneider, associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, would retire from federal service February 29. He joined the Gemini program in 1963 after two years at International Telephone and Telegraph’s (ITT) federal Laboratories as director of space systems, having also worked for the U.S. Navy and for NACA. He received NASA’s exceptional service medal for his work as mission director for 7 of 10 Gemini missions. From July 1967 to December 1968 he directed Apollo missions beginning with Apollo 4 and won NASA’s distinguished service medal for the success of Apollo 8, first manned flight around the moon. He directed the Skylab program from December 1968 to July 1974, and with the three Skylab crews received the Collier Trophy in 1973. He would become a vice president of Computer Sciences Corporation. (NASA anno, Feb 22/80; NASA Release 80-27)
•	LaRC announced that four of its top managers left NASA February 29. They were deputy director Oran W. Nicks; associate director Dr. John E. Duberg; Richard R. Heldenfels, director for structures; and James E. Stitt, director for electronics. The latter three, who began their federal service in the 1940s with NACA (Dr. Duberg in 1943, Heldenfels and Stitt in 1947), would retire. Nicks, who since 1970 had been deputy director at LaRC, began at NASA Headquarters 1960 working on unmanned programs; he would become executive director of the research foundation at Texas A&M University. (LaRC Release 80-14)
•	The Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported that Air Force Secretary Dr. Hans M. Mark proposed establishment of a consolidated space operations center near Peterson Air Force Base, Colorado, combining two major mission elements of the U.S. Air Force: satellite control and direction of future DOD Shuttle operations. The Colorado location, prime candidate out of 13 potential sites, would offer proximity to the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) complex at Cheyenne Mountain; it would
125
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
FEBRUARY 1980
employ about 300 military, 100 U.S. Air Force civilian, and 1,400 contractor employees. (AFSC Newsreview, Feb/80, 1)
• FBIS reported the 11-18 airliner that carried a group of Soviet journalists and researchers to check the possibility of regular air service through Africa and the Middle East to the Antarctic, had returned safely to Moscow after establishing the flying time for the new route as 27 hours. Previously, the trip home by sea had taken 1 month. (FBIS, Moscow Wrld Svc, Feb 23/80)
126
March
March 3: NASA reported award of contracts to Martin Marietta and Aerojet worth $750,000 and $350,000, respectively, for a liquid-propellant boost module to increase the cargo-carrying capacity of the Shuttle’s external tank. The goal would be to provide additional thrust by adapting portions of the Titan, still used by the U.S. Air Force as its heaviest intercontinental ballistic missile. The companies, which had been building the Titan and its engines for the U.S. Air Force, were considered the logical choice for adapting the booster to the Shuttle. The studies, managed by MSFC would be completed by the end of September 1980. (NASA Released 80-32; MSFC Released
80-28)
•	LaRC, manager of the Scout program, announced that NASA had awarded Hampton Technical Center (a division of Kentron International, Inc., of Dallas) a $2.2 million,contract modification calling for ten Algol 111A Scout rocket motors by March 31, 1981. Prime contractor for Scout was formerly Vought Corporation, also of Dallas; the modification was made with the same parent firm, Ling Temco Vought. Name changes and other corporate restructurings would streamline the work done for NASA, with estimated savings of about $1 million to be gained by contracting with a subsidiary already qualified to build and load the motors. To be qualified, a firm must have fired two or three launch vehicles, a process costing about $1 million. Scout, NASA’s smallest vehicle, was a four-stage solid-propellant rocket that had launched payloads for NASA, DOD, and several foreign countries. (LaRC Release 80-15)
•	FBIS carried a Reuters dispatch quoting diplomatic sources in Beijing that the People’s Republic of China had launched a CCS-3 limited-range intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) February 9 from Jilin province in northeast China to an impact area in the far western Xinjiang region, a 2530-mile flight across a largely unpopulated, mainly desert region. The People’s Republic had conducted at least six missile tests in 1979 over distances much shorter than the February 9 test. Other sources said the Chinese were working on a full-scale ICBM with a range that would bring the United States, western Europe, and all of the Soviet Union within striking distance. Test of such a missile would need an ocean-impact area such as the southern Indian Ocean, but no such firings had occurred. (FBIS, Reuters in English, Mar 3/80)
March 5: Newspapers reported a consent agreement in a suit by Ted Turner’s Cable News Network (CNN) against RCA, for space on Satcom 1 to replace
127
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MARCH 1980
that lost when Satcom 3 disappeared, whereby CNN would use a Satcom 1 channel for six months and would drop a demand for $35 million in damages. RCA had said its clients could use transponders on the Comstar D2 leased by AT&T from Comsat General; however, cable operators whose antennas received Satcom signals would need additional expensive ground receivers to get signals from Comstar. Turner’s CNN clients around the United States could now continue to receive the 24-hour all-news service for six months without the additional expense. The lawsuit would continue in Atlanta’s U.S. district court. (W Star, Mar 5/80, C-5;JT Post, Mar 7/80, C-10)
March 6: Press reports said NASA faced a $760 million (14%) cut in its FY81 funding as President Carter announced a $20 billion cut in the entire federal budget. The Washington Post said Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, had protested the size of the cut to the Office of Management and Budget.
The White House had originally asked NASA to suggest reductions of $630 million. Defense/Space Business Daily said the cuts would eliminate two new NASA starts in FY81, the gamma-ray observatory and the national oceanic satellite system, as well as the Galileo mission to Jupiter. On March 5 the House subcommittee on space science and applications had unanimously passed NASA’s $300 million FY80 supplemental request for Shuttle-development funds; subcommittee chairman Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) said NASA should share the FY81 cuts, but 18% was too high. (D/SBD, Mar 6/80, 25; W Post, Mar 7/80, A-2)
• ESA announced it would undertake a new scientific project called Hippar-cos, an astrometric satellite to measure positions, proper motions, and parallaxes of celestial bodies and define the position and displacement velocity of about 100,000 stars. The data would help solve fundamental problems in astronomy. The 376-kilogram advanced-design satellite with a 2.5-year lifetime would be launched into a geostationary orbit by Ariane in mid-1986. (ESA Info Bltn 7)
March 7; Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) reported that test pilot John Manke had made test flights in the Gossamer Albatross, part of a joint DFRC-LaRC program using the humanpowered vehicle to collect data on large lightweight craft. Manke’s first flights were human powered, as he pedaled a bicycle-like arrangement to turn the propeller; for later flights, under the direction of veteran Albatross pilot Bryan Allen who had flown it over the English Channel, he used small battery-powered samarium cobalt motors providing about 0.7 horsepower.
Manke reached an altitude of 15 to 20 feet, more than he “ felt comfortable with,” and reported that the Albatross was nothing like anything he had flown before, requiring concentration to keep it going straight. Short flights did not require an extra amount of legpower to keep it gomg, but longer flights would be “an exercise in exercise.” (FRC X-Press, Mar 7/80, 3)
128
MARCH 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
• Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine reported the launch March 3 of a DOD ocean surveillance system from Vandenberg Air Force Base on an Atlas F into a 1,115-kilometer by 1,053-kilometer (715 by 654 mile) orbit with 107.1-minute period, and 63.5° inclination. The report said that, on the basis of earlier tests, the system would use three spacecraft carried into orbit on a mother satellite and dispersed into parallel orbits with latitude as well as time/distance separation. (Earlier clusters developed by the NRL under codename Whitecloud were launched April 30, 1976, and December 8, 1977, into orbits having parameters nearly identical to those of last week’s launch.)
The feasibility of using multiple satellites to eavesdrop on and direction-find USSR ships and submarines was first demonstrated by three NRL spacecraft launched December 14, 1971, and dispersed into separate orbits. The 1976 and 1977 missions that preceded the March 3 launch incorporated a 107-minute orbital period to allow about 1,666 miles between successive cluster passes. From a 700-mile altitude the spacecraft could receive signals from surface vessels more than 2,000 miles away, offering overlapping coverage on successive passes. Similarity of displacement distances perpendicular to the orbital planes of the 1976 and 1977 clusters indicated the use of interferometry to pinpoint the location of Soviet vessels. Deployment of the active satellites by the carrier normally occurred over a period of days; late last week, NORAD was still logging the mission as a single spacecraft. (AvWk, Mar 10/80, 18)
—Aviation Week <4 Space Technology reported that the U.S. Court of Appeals had upheld a FCC authorization of January 1977 that allowed Satellite Business Systems (SBS) to own and operate a specialized all-digital domestic communications satellite system. AT&T, Western Union, AmSatCorp, and the U.S. Justice Department had appealed the FCC ruling. SBS had proceeded to develop the system, its first satellite scheduled for launch in October 1980. {AvWk, Mar 10/80, 22)
March 12: MSFC reported that a major reclamation effort had recovered thousands of dollars worth of critical or valuable materials from center laboratories. Used for electrical contracts, or for plating to protect against corrosion, were gold, silver, platinum, iridium, osmium, rhodium, and ruthenium; other substances not necessarily “precious” but consisting of strategic materials were aluminum oxide, beryllium, cadmium, cobalt, chromite, industrial diamond, ruby and sapphire bearings, and other rarities. DOD and the General Services Administration operated a government-wide program to conserve such materials, recover them where feasible, and transfer them to a defense stockpile.
Before recycling materials at the center, MSFC property managers had to decide whether recovery was possible or profitable: for instance, some center groups had been “banking” silver recovered from X-ray films and developing solution. The photo lab and documentation repository had contributed much because of the amounts of film used; the medical center also turned in silver
129
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MARCH 1980
recovered from X-ray film developing as well as scrap X-ray film. Materials from MSFC were sent to a federal “bank” in New Jersey for recovery and credit to NASA’s account. Last year MSFC recovered and shipped to the bank 324 troy ounces of silver-bearing photoprocessing residue and 2,400 pounds of scrap film; assuming 90% recovery from the residue and 2%-by-weight recovery from scrap, MSFC’s yield would be worth $30,000 at current prices. (MSFC Release 80-34)
•	The National Aeronautic Association (NAA) announced that it would award the Collier Trophy, oldest U.S. aviation award, to Dr. Paul MacCready for his Gossamer Condor (first vehicle to make controlled sustained humanpowered flight) and Gossamer Albatross (first humanpowered aircraft to fly the English Channel). The NAA said the Albatross flight might result in more practical applications than Bleriot’s first engine-powered crossing in 1909. (NAA Release Mar 12/80)
•	ESA announced that its member nations participating in the Spacelab program had voted to fund it under a new scale that would ensure completion of the project by providing 120 to 140% of previously agreed amounts. West Germany would contribute 64.4%; France, 12.07%; the United Kingdom, 7.6%, and seven other countries, the remainder. (ESA Info Bltn 8)
March 13: INTELSAT said that it would reduce by 20% its charges for communications satellite capacity leased to nations for domestic use. The board of governors decided to charge $800,000 (U.S.) per year per transponder; the previous fee had been $1 million. Fifteen nations were currently leasing capacity on INTELSAT spacecraft for their own domestic use. (INTELSAT Release 80-03-1)
March 14: MSFC reported successful completion March 13 of the first full-power test (10% of rated power level) of the Space Shuttle main engine. The test consisted of a 125-second run on a single engine, 10 seconds at 109%; a total of 26 seconds ran above normal rated power. This major step toward certification of the engine for full-power abort capability envisioned possible malfunction of a single engine, requiring thrust in excess of rated power from the other two engines to ensure achievement of orbit or return for safe landing. Rockwell International, prime Shuttle contractor, conducted the tests at NSTL in Mississippi. (MSFC Release 80-36; NASA Release 80-36)
•	NASA announced the first use of a major new flight-simulation facility for Shuttle support. The vertical-motion simulator at ARC would start next week evaluating the effect of an adaptive gain device to be attached to orbiter controls because of oscillation experienced during approach and landing tests conducted at DFRC in 1977. (NASA Release 80-34)
130
MARCH 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
March 18: NASA reported that it and NSF had found a promising new meteorite source in the Antarctic, two fields known as Recking Peak and Elephant moraines, three or four times as large as the Allen Hills area covered by meteorite hunters during the past four years—also “more promising. . .and more dangerous,” said curator John Annexstad, one of the discoverers.
The finds had been handled like the lunar samples brought to Earth by Apollo astronauts; the unusual preservation aspects of the ice shelf kept the meteorites as they had been when entering Earth atmosphere hundreds of thousands of years ago, providing evidence of organic history predating their arrival on Earth. The search for meteorites on the ice shelf had begun with the Japanese, who found large amounts in the Yamato mountains of Queen Maud Land. Dr. William Cassady, University of Pittsburgh, theorized a transport system explaining the Antarctic icefield concentrations, and several seasons of hunting tended to confirm the theory. The total of Antarctic meteorites found topped 1,600, many of them rare or unique types. (NASA Release 80-28)
• The Washington Post reported that Dr. Robert A. Frosch had approved a NASA regulation covering the situation “when a barroom brawl breaks out in space.” The rule would permit a Shuttle commander to “use any reasonable and necessary means, including physical force,” to maintain order on board. The police power would include authority to arrest a person in space and charge him or her with a crime punishable by a $5,000 fine, a year in prison, or both.
Eugene Cernan, veteran of two trips to the Moon and one in Earth orbit, commented that “I never felt the need for a written regulation or the need for brute force to get things done.” NASA’s lawyers said that times had changed: the Shuttle would carry seven people compared to the three on Apollo and two on Gemini; up to four could be civilians, not professional astronauts, and up to three of them could be foreigners unfamiliar with NASA procedures.
NASA General Counsel Neil Hosenball said NASA “had to establish a chain of command with all those people on board.” Legal precedents were two assault cases where people were out of touch with the rest of the world: one occurred on a plane flying from Puerto Rico to New York, the other on an ice floe carrying civilian scientists in the Arctic. In 1956 two Puerto Ricans on their way to New York were toasting each other in rum while the plane was over the Atlantic; a fist fight ensued that drew most of the passengers to the rear of the plane to watch. The plane became tail-heavy the pilot interfered; and was bitten in the shoulder. A New York court released the accused, ruling that it was without jurisdiction over a plane in flight above the ocean. When one of a team of technicians doing research on an ice island off Alaska attacked three others before one of them killed him, a court of appeals in Alaska ruled that it had no jurisdiction in a crime committed on an island floating through the Arctic Ocean. (W Post, Mar 18/80, A-8; Nature, Mar 27/80, 296)
131
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MARCH 1980
March 20: MSFC reported successful firing of three Space Shuttle main engines mounted in a test article for 535 seconds in the eighth test of the main propulsion system. A similar firing for 555 seconds occurred 3 weeks ago. In the latest test, engineers for the first time gimbaled the engines while including a “pogo” effect (a phenomenon of cyclic pressures in the propellant system that had occurred in earlier launch vehicles) to demonstrate the engine accumulator’s ability to prevent pogo during flight. Another successful first was the simulation of failure in thrust-vector control to see whether redundant systems would perform properly. The test had been planned for early morning so that engineers could observe ice and frost conditions on the external tank when it was filled with supercold propellants during nighttime hours, in the absence of heat from the Sun. Rockwell International’s space systems group conducted the main propulsion-system testing for MSFC at NSTL. (MSFC Release 80-41)
•	JSC described a simulated Shuttle mission ending in a return-to-launch-site abort, as one of a series run in the Shuttle avionics integration laboratory (SAIL) in preparation for launch later this year. The SAIL resembled a full-size orb iter stripped of its skin, with wires and connectors bared, configured with the same flight-qualifiable hardware and electrical systems being used on the real orbiter at KSC. SAIL employees would run test sequences on a 24-hour basis to check' out the complex Shuttle avionics system; a typical test would begin with a nominal phase (all systems operating normally), then engineers would inject failures to see if the flight system could cope. The Shuttle dynamic simulator would feed equations for aerodynamics, environment, and motion of the orbiter, solid-fuel rocket booster, and external tank into the test system. More than 300 mock missions would fly in the JSC lab before the projected November launch. (JSC Release 80-016)
•JSC reported that the third group of 20 astronaut applicants from the 3,122 received in the fall of 1979 would report March 24 for interviews and physical exams. This group included 9 pilot and 11 mission-specialist applicants; 5 of them were women. (JSC Release 80-017)
•	NASA noted the 20th anniversary of the first research of the X-15 rocket plane that opened up the realm of hypersonic flight and contributed significantly to the U.S. space program. The X-15 made 199 flights in a joint NASA-U.S. Air Force-Navy research program between 1960 and 1968, during which it set the standing records for altitude and speed of winged aircraft: altitude of 1,796 kilometers (354,200 feet, more than 67 miles), and on another flight 7,274 kilometers per hour (4,520 miles per hour), or 6.7 times the speed of sound. X-15 pilots included Scott Crossfield, the first; astronaut Joe Engle; and Neil Armstrong, first man on the Moon.
In 1954, at the beginning of the X-15 program, hypersonic flight had many
132
MARCH 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
unknowns: effects of weightlessness, high heat rates, steep reentry angles, attitude control in space—questions that only actual flight could answer. The program would also explore capabilities and limitations of a human pilot in an aerospace vehicle; analysis of the first 44 flights showed that 13 would have failed without a human pilot. Positive result of the program was the finding that human capabilities of sensing, judging, coping with the unexpected, and using a variety of acquired skills remained undiminished in all key problems of aerospace flight. A significant X-15 contribution to the space program was to demonstrate that simulators could be used for crew training: no X-15s had two seats, so the pilots had to train in simulators. Success of this method led to all-out use of simulators for the space program. Total cost of the program, including construction of three X-15 aircraft, was about $300 million. (NASA Release 80-37; NASA Actv, May 80, 8)
March 24: The White House issued a statement on President Carter’s presenting the Goddard Trophy of the National Space Club to NASA’s Voyager team, for the “outstanding achievement in advanced spaceflight programs contributing to American leadership in space.” NASA Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch would accept the trophy on behalf of the Voyager team for its successful planetary mission to Jupiter. The award was established in 1958 to honor Dr. Robert Goddard (1882-1945), considered the father of modern rocketry; receipts in previous years included Wernher von Braun, John Glenn, the Apollo 11 crew, the Skylab astronauts, and the Viking project team. (WH Anno, Mar 24/80)
•	Defense Daily reported that DOD’s plans to let civilian aircraft and ships use its NavStar global-positioning systems to obtain navigation signals with 200-meter accuracy had met with difficulty. Tests showed that the “coarse” signal, considered insufficiently accurate to be militarily useful, was much more accurate than DOD thought. DOD was studying techniques to deny use of the “precise” NavStar signal to others and to degrade coarse-signal accuracy that “could provide improved capabilities to an adversary.” (D/SBD, Mar 24/80, 119)
•	Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that NASA scientists and engineers were “concerned that political maneuvering, as opposed to thoughtful planning, was playing too strong a part” in FY81 budget cuts affecting NASA science and applications programs.
Delay in bringing NASA’s program before a House appropriations subcommittee scheduled to meet March 25 could force the agency off the hearing schedule for weeks, further endangering approval of the $300 million Space Shuttle supplemental for FY80. NASA and congressional observers feared administration efforts to delay announcement of federal program cuts until after primary elections set for the coming week. {AvWk, Mar 24/80, 21)
133
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MARCH 1980
• FBIS carried a Tass report that Soyuz T separated from Salyut 6, which was continuing to fly “in the automatic regime” after completing a joint program. More trials of new Soyuz systems — power unit, orientation and position-control systems, and computer complex—would proceed during further flight of that spacecraft. Tass reported later that Soyuz '/' made a soft landing March 26 to end a 100-day flight. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 24, 26/80)
March 27: The Washington Post reported that the House Armed Services Committee had voted $50 million to expand production of Fairchild Industries, A-10 plane from a one-seat to a two-seat configuration. The aircraft was originally designed to accommodate two cockpits. Fairchild said DOD would save $10.5 million a year in fuel costs because it would not need a second plane to follow the first in training flights. Besides the added seat, the new model had the capability of flying in bad whether and at night. The company tested the two-seater for five months in 1979 and turned over the prototype to Eglin Air Force Base for testing; the U.S. Air Force had completed its tests and was assessing results. (W Post, Mar 27/80, B-l)
March 28: NRL announced that one of its scientists, James C. Ritter, had received a patent on a radioisotope photoelectric generator to produce energy for spacecraft on missions to distant planets that would last for years without dependence on thermal heat or solar radiation. The generator, built like a storage battery, used low-energy photons from a radioactive source interacting with high atomic number material to eject photoelectrons. (NRL Release
80-3-80C)
March 31: Aviation Week & Space Technology said that cuts in NASA’s FY81 budget would delay the international solar polar mission to 1985, although $135 million in contracts had already been awarded in the United States and Europe. Delay would force “major restructuring of the contracts’—$80 million to TRW for the U.S. spacecraft and $55.8 million to Dornier as prime contractor for the European spacecraft—and would give ESA additional problems with its budget, although NASA expressed hope last week that ESA would remain a part of the project. A split mission with the U.S. and European spacecraft on separate launches would increase costs substantially.
Aviation Week & Space Technology said that NASA was “unable to discuss this situation before Congress last week” because of an administration embargo on new budget projections. Although NASA could testify on the Space Shuttle need for a $300 million FY80 supplemental appropriation, the embargo had forced the House appropriations subcommittee to cancel two days of NASA hearings on FY81 space science and applications. NASA Administrator Robert A. Frosch said that, unless the supplement was passed, contractors would lay off up to 20,000 skilled workers, and the overall cost of the Shuttle program could increase by $600 to $900 million. The combined
134
MARCH 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
impact on NASA and DOD could go as high as $1.1 billion, according to subcommittee members. (AvWk, Mar 31/80, 27)
• Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that Southern Pacific Communications Company (SPC) had applied to the FCC for authority to build a domestic communications satellite system starting with two satellites in orbit and a third maintained as a spare. Capacity of the system would exceed that of any other domestic system now in orbit or in construction; each proposed satellite would have twice the capacity of the largest communications satellite now in domestic service (AT&T’s Comsat or RCA’s Satcom) and a voice or digital-data capacity 60% higher than Western Union’s Westar.
SPC predicted that the demand for transponders would triple between 1980 and 1985 and said that no existing or planned system would be adequate to provide SPC with the capacity it would need by mid-decade. It had petitioned earlier to deny requests of RCA for orbit slots at 132 °W and 83 °W, of Western Union for 83 °W, and Hughes for 79 °W and 75 °W. Given authority to orbits its satellites at 132° and 83 °W, with assignment of a third slot at 79 °W, the company said it would provide service to all 50 states, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. It would also build a control center in Maryland and launch its communications satellite in 1982-1983. (AvWk, Mar 31/80)
135
April
April 1: MSFC reported the first sustained operation of the Space Shuttle main engine at full power level, 109% of rated power for 6 minutes, in static firing tests March 31 at NSTL. The engine ran for 10 minutes, 10 seconds, reaching the objectives attempted in an aborted run the previous week. (MSFC Release
80-47; NASA Release 80-42)
•	NASA reported that LaRC would manage a nine-month $900,000 design study of alternative thermal protection for the Shuttle orbiter, aimed at reducing costs and determining whether the present system was the best now available. The ceramic covering originally chosen in the early 1970s was the best then available; no study of alternative systems had taken place since. The study would center on technological advances in reusable surface-insulating materials such as metallic or reinforced carbons; coping with various loading conditions as well as handling, inspection, and maintenance; and deficiencies in present technology needing further research. (NASA Release 80-40)
•	JSC reported that the Gossamer Albatross, a human powered aircraft that crossed the English Channel last June, would appear on display at JSC’s Building 9A during April as part of a nationwide tour. NASA had just completed a month of tests on a sister ship at DFRC to study its unique aerodynamic traits, especially its low-speed flight at low Reynolds numbers. The test flights used various power sources (motor power, cycle power, and towing) to demonstrate the craft’s maneuverability and to define performance under varying conditions. (JSC Release 80-020)
• MSFC announced the award to BDM Corporation, McLean, Va., of a $699,864 contract for engineering support of a Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) coal-gasification plant, first large-scale commercial operation of this type in the United States. Besides helping to ensure efficient operation, MSFC would work with TVA to define advanced technology that could be applied in areas where NASA had some expertise, such as materials, combustion dynamics, instrumentation, and control. (MSFC Release 80-49)
April 4: ARC said that it would test for the first time the ability of males aged 55 to 65 to withstand the physiological stress of weightlessness. Previous studies had tested males and females aged 35 to 45 and 45 to 55. Women aged 55 to 65 would be tested later in 1980 to complete the baseline data for use in establishing medical criteria for space flight.
For the first briefing early in February, 46 volunteers reported and 20 were chosen for orientation March 24. The preliminary orientation and testing
PRECEDING
INTFNTKWAlt’r
PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
137
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
APRIL 1980
would give researchers a chance to see how the subjects performed and allowed the subjects to decide whether they wanted to participate in the entire test. Two sets of four subjects would be selected: four would begin 9 days of controlled observation April 10 at ARC’s human research facility, followed by 10 days of bed rest and 5 days of recovery and tests of the cardiovascular system. Another group of four would begin the same series April 13. Dr. Harold Sandler, ARC project scientist, would supervise the tests. (ARC Release 80-7; NASA Release 80-43)
April 6: NOAA reported that it would submit to OMB by midyear a transition plan for NOAA to assume responsibility for operating a Landsat-type system to be launched in the late 1980s. Based on technology derived from NASA’s experimental Landsat program, the system would provide essential data from space for use in food production, mineral exploration, Earth resources inventory, management of rangeland, forests, and water resources, and environmental protection.
NOAA had operated meteorological satellites for 14 years, developing the ability to process, disseminate, and archive “enormous qualities” of satellitegenerated data for users who need it for decision making. NOAA would also have to determine not only the data requirements of various sectors of society but also how quickly the information was needed and in what format. NOAA would hold a series of regional meetings with users of satellite data to develop a system meeting their needs. (NOAA Release 80-48)
April 7 NASA reported a further development in its ongoing work with the St. Regis Paper Company in New York: an arrangement under which the initiating company would share the cost of satellite data gathering, but the technology developed would be available to all other timber companies. In 1977 St. Regis had begun a test program with NASA to see if Landsat data could improve the company’s data base on forest lands; it wanted to use the information to plan timber harvesting, leasing and buying new timber lands, and monitoring more than 2.3 million acres across the southern United States [see A&A77, Oct 25]. The success of the project led to the authorization by St. Regis Southern Timberland Division in Florida of more than $300,000 new capital investment for an information system using Landsat data to support its general operations.
St. Regis was the first private company to participate in NASA’s test program on resource-observation applications. The program began a unique relationship between NASA and the private sector, because St. Regis (not NASA) initiated the project and the company shared in the cost. NASA said that the entire forest industry would gain by the venture because technology from the St. Regis experiment would be in the public domain, available to other firms. NASA and St. Regis planned to conduct a symposium in 1981 to demonstrate Landsat data interpretation to timber industry management. The program was
138
APRIL 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
managed by JSC and Purdue University’s Laboratory for Applications of Remote Sensing, as well as by St. Regis. (NASA Release 80-44)
•	INTELSAT announced that its “assembly of parties” in Florida last week had agreed to technical and economic coordination of the proposed Arabsat communications satellite system, as Arabsat would lack significant economic impact on, and would be technically compatible with, the INTELSAT system. It would be the third regional system coordinated with INTELSAT; others were the European and Indonesian systems. (INTELSAT Release 80-06-1)
April 9: The Soviet Union launched Soyuz 35 [see During April; Appendix A],
•	Aerospace Daily carried a chart showing Carter administration cuts in federal R&D funding for FY80 and FY81. The DOD would absorb 21% of all cuts but would retain 46.6% of the remaining federal R&D funds. NASA would take 20.8% of the cuts and get 15.4% of the revised total. The cuts would have a bigger impact at NASA (3.9% of the agency’s budget) than at DOD (1.3%), the report pointed out. {A/D, Apr 9/80, 222)
•	INTELSAT announced that it had awarded Ohio State University a $150,000 contract for a rain measurement study that might improve satellite transmission quality in regions with heavy rain. Satellite signals above the 10-GHz frequency would be weakened when sent through rain; the study would help INTELSAT determine how much extra power a satellite would need to compensate for rain effects. Having two stations a few miles apart in heavy-rainfall areas would permit use of the station with better weather during stormy times. The study would send radar signals into rainclouds and measure the return signal to find the rain’s effect on signal strength. (INTELSAT Release 80-07-1)
April 14: NASA reported that it was studying options for restructuring the Landsat D project because of persistent engineering and management problems in manufacturing the spacecraft instruments and ground systems. Fourth and most advanced of NASA’s experimental Earth-resources monitoring spacecraft, Landsat D was designed to carry an advanced scanner called a thematic mapper, to provide Earth images in more spectral bands and with twice the resolution (30 meters) of earlier Landsats. Hughes Aircraft problems with the mapper resulted in increased cost estimates and delivery delays. Mission-system contractor General Electric was also having problems and had projected schedule delays that would increase costs of both the flight system and the ground system it was building for Landsat D. Both sets of problems would effect Landsat D’s launch schedule, increasing the risk of a gap in data for present users. Landsat 3, launched in March 1978, was still operating but had had problems with its sensor, a multispectral scanner that collected data for conversion to images of Earth’s natural resources.
139
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
APRIL 1980
NASA was considering three possibilities: launch Landsat D as soon as possible with a thematic mapper and a multispectral scanner like that carried on Landsat 3; launch Landsat D as soon as possible with only a multispectral scanner, following as soon as possible with another Landsat carrying the thematic mapper and a multispectral scanner; or launch Landsat D with Landsat D Prime (the backup) each carrying only a multispectral scanner. The decision weighing budget constraints against providing an ongoing Landsat data capability should take weeks, NASA said, including consultations with NOAA, which President Carter had designated to manage a follow-on remotesensing satellite system. (NASA Release 80-46)
•	JSC announced the award of a $63,640,000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Canadian Commercial Corporation, Hull, Quebec, for production of three remote-manipulator systems for the Shuttle. The system, a 50-foot jointed arm, would be operable from inside the crew compartment to deploy or retrieve payloads in space. Under a 1975 agreement between NASA and Canada’s National Research Council, Canada would develop the first flight unit of the remote manipulator and provide it free to NASA; NASA would buy additional systems from Canada as necessary. (JSC Release 80-023; NASA Release 80-47)
April 15: NASA reported successful testing April 14 of a Space Shuttle main engine at 109% of rated power for six minutes, in the second such test in two weeks conducted by Rockwell International at NSTL. The 10-minute, 10-second test met all objectives; NASA said that it planned at least one more firing in this series on this engine, which had accumulated 183 minutes of firing time in two series of preliminary flight-certification tests. (NASA Release
80-49; MSFC Release 80-55)
•	MSFC said several companies had proposed definition studies to demonstrate performance of a large space antenna in low Earth orbit. Wide use of such a system could revolutionize satellite communications and radar and radiometry. Large space antennas might solve problems preventing expansion of satellite communications, Earth-resources survey, weather research, and other services. Dozens of small satellites, each with its own antennas, were now providing such services, but their growing number had crowded the transmission frequencies and filled up the orbital slots. The MSFC study would define the structure of a large antenna as well as packaging, transportation, and orbital deployment. (MSFC Release 80-54; NASA Release 80-48)
•	INTELSAT announced that Niger on April 14 had become the 103rd nation to join the organization. Niger was already linked to the INTELSAT system through a ground station at Niamey that operated with an Intelsat IV-A satellite over the Indian Ocean. (INTELSAT Release 80-08-1)
140
APRIL 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
April 16: NASA reported shutdown of a planned 10-minute test of the Shuttle main-engine cluster after about six seconds; probable cause was overheating in a high-pressure fuel turbopump of engine no. 2 of the three-engine cluster, Test stand and engines were apparently undamaged. Had all gone well, each engine would have shut down at a different time: engine no. 1 was scheduled to fire for 8 minutes (480 seconds), no. 2 (which shut down after 4.71 seconds) for 565 seconds, and no. 3 for 591 seconds. Evaluation of test data was under way at NSTL to find the cause of the overheating. (NASA Release 80-50)
April 17: The Washington Post reported that a U.S. Air Force estimate of the cost of building a West Coast launch pad for the Shuttle was $82 million short. Less than 3 years ago, the estimate was $118 million for a Vandenberg Air Force Base pad to launch polar-orbiting (as opposed to equatorial-orbiting) satellites. Military satellites used a polar orbit to cover the globe as it rotates; spacecraft could not use the Florida facility for launches into polar orbit because of the danger of coming down on land in case of a mishap. First phase of the Vandenberg program (excavation of the area where the launch pad would be built) was complete, the U.S. Air Force said, but bids for the second phase ranged from $103.9 to $112 million instead of the $79.6 million U.S. Air Force had estimated. Bidders said inflation caused the higher bids, especially the price of assembled electrical equipment and copper cable. U.S. Air Force could ask permission of Congress to reprogram funds from other construction projects to the Vandenberg construction. (W Post, Apr 17/80, A-14)
April 18: LaRC said that NASA had awarded three major U.S. manufacturers contracts for 14.5-month studies of advanced supersonic transport aircraft. Boeing Company, Lockheed California, and McDonnell Douglas, each received a $1.15 million contract to work in the same discipline, but each on its own concept. Boeing’s was a 270-passenger delta-wing, cruise speed Mach 2.4; Douglas’s was an arrow-wing carrying 225-500 passengers, cruise speed Mach 2.2; Lockheed’s was an arrow-wing carrying 290 passengers, cruise speed Mach 2.5.
Each firm would broaden its research in aerodynamics, lightweight titanium and composite-material structures, and variable-cycle engines for subsonic and supersonic operation. Past studies by these contractors on reducing fuel consumption and noise and on economic considerations needed updating. LaRC would manage the work at the contractors’ facilities. (LaRC Release
80-29; NASA Release 80-51)
• WFC awarded a $1,239 million fixed-price noncompetitive contract to Automation Industries, Inc., a Vitro subsidiary, for a mobile C-band instrumentation radar system to replace an existing MPS-19 radar, updating WFC’s tracking capabilities. (WFC Release 80-3)
141
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
APRIL 1980
• LaRC said that it would close the Environmenul-Quality Projects Office (EQPO) set up in 1972 to lead NASA’s programs in that area and would turn over future work to the Office of Space and Terreslrial Applications at NASA Headquarters. LaRC was chosen for its experience in remote-sensing research and in developing advanced instrumentation. Other centers worked on particular problems: JSC, Earth-resources study; GSFC, meteorological research; and ARC, aircraft flight problems. EQPO head John Mugler said LaRC’s leadership had helped that center build a growing atmosphere and water-quality program. (LaRC Release 80-28)
April 19: The New York Times and Aerospace Daily said the Soviet Union
tested a “killer satellite” in space, ending a two-year gap in testing antisatellite weapons. (A killer satellite is an orbiting vehicle designed to wreck other satellites by hitting them in direct collision or exploding nearby, or by directing a force such as a laser beam against them.) Cosmos 1174, launched from Tyuratam April 18, apparently neared its target (Cosmos 1171, launched from Plesetsk April 3) on its first orbit and exploded. Sources said the test was a failure.
The Soviet Union first tested an antisatellite weapon (ASAT) in 1963 and apparently was successful in destroying targets at altitudes up to 150 miles. The Soviet tests aroused concern because of U.S. dependence on satellites for a number of military uses: reconnaissance, communications, and early warning of attack. Though many U.S. satellites orbit 20,000 miles or more from Earth’s surface, many systems for reconnaissance and electronic intelligence might be vulnerable. In 1978 Defense Secretary Harold Brown announced that the Soviet Union had an operational ASAT capability; after launching a killer satellite in May of that year, it had suspended tests when talks began on controlling such weapons. U.S. sources said Moscow stopped the tests as proof of its interest in a treaty to limit strategic bombers and missiles. A treaty was signed, but President Carter asked the U.S. Senate earlier this year to hold off action because of Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. Talks on limiting ASATs was also suspended.
A U.S. antisatellite system in preparation but not expected before 1982— the Vought miniature homing craft carrying a heat-seeking guidance unit—was a small rocket for launch from high-altitude aircraft. The DOD was also working on a laser-powered system for possible deployment in the 1990s. With talks on limiting ASATs now suspended, and the outlook for arms control increasingly bleak, officials said the Soviet Union might have decided to revive its space weapons program. Any agreement in the near future was said to be unlikely. (NY Times, Apr 19/80, 28; A/D, Apr 21/80, 280)
April 21: NASA reported “highly successful” completion of a third static test on a Space Shuttle main engine at NSTL April 19, last of a series simulating power levels necessary to abort at full power in a Shuttle launch. Previous tests were on March 31 and April 14. The engine used (2004) was fired for
142
APRIL 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
10 minutes, 10 seconds with 6 minutes at the 109% power level; this engine had a total firing time of 12,911 seconds (3.58 hours), equivalent to about 25 Shuttle flights. It would now undergo preliminary flight certification tests, 13 static firings at 102% of rated power level. (NASA Release 80-55; MSFC Release 80-58)
April 22: Aerospace Daily reported that malfunction of a portable life-support system caused a flash fire April 18 at JSC in which Robert Mayfield (employed by the contractor, Hamilton Standard Division, United Technologies) was hospitalized with second-degree burns. The system included two tanks of oxygen pressurized at 3,000 pounds per square inch. The fire started during a performance test when a regulator was switched to the extravehicular activity mode. Extensive damage occurred to a test spacesuit and the life-support system as well as the cleanroom at JSC’s crew systems laboratory. Mayfield was reported in stable condition April 20. JSC had appointed a board to investigate the accident. (A/D, Apr 22/80, 289)
—Aerospace Daily reported an Aerospace Corporation study for the U.S. Air Force on the risk that a large active satellite might collide with debris from inactive satellites or launchers. Probability of collision for a large satellite on a 1,000-day mission in low orbit (500 to 1,500 kilometers up) was high because of the great concentration of debris at those altitudes. As the objects were moving in different directions, velocity for any satellite would be at a maximum. Collision in synchronous orbit was less likely to the extent that the objects were all moving in the same direction; however, debris in those orbits tended to collect at certain points because of Earth’s gravity. (A/D, Apr 22/80, 294)
• The Washington Star said that the FCC would call for restructuring of Com-SatCorp to differentiate between its regulated and its competitive activities. ComSatCorp, now sole U.S. representative in two global satellite communications systems, would have to put all its competitive operations, including research and development, into a separate subsidiary.
Restructuring would answer complaints that ComSatCorp, a congressional creation, could use its unique monopoly status in global communications systems to is advantage in highly competitive ventures it is considering. With two other major companies, it was starting a long-distance telephone system to compete with AT&T; it also had considered a satellite-to-home subscription television service to compete with the three major television networks [see April 8].
ComSatCorp already had a subsidiary, Comsat General, that handled its competitive activities; the FCC said that a sharper separation was necessary between the two: Comsat Laboratories and other research and development, for instance, should be put into the subsidiary to avoid the possibility of cross subsidies. A newly purchased environmental monitoring firm, Environmental Research & Technologies Inc., would have to be in the subsidiary, FCC said.
143
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
APRIL 1980
The parent company would include only those activities relating to INTELSAT and INMARSAT (International Maritime Satellite Organization), international systems in which ComSatCorp acts as U.S. representative. (WStar, Apr 22/80, C-6; WPost, Apr 23/80, B-l; ComSatCorp Releases 80-22, 80-23,
80-24, 80-25)
April 23: NASA announced award of a $70,072 million contract to McDonnell Douglas for Delta expendable launch vehicle services. The company would continue for 2 years the launch services work it had done for the past 18 years, including mission-peculiar vehicle changes, checkout, and launch. KSC would supervise the work at ESMC and Vandenberg Air Force Base for GSFC, which had overall Delta management responsibility. (NASA Release 80-53)
April 24: The Department of Commerce (DOC) reported that more than 700 representatives of business firms, trade associations, educational institutions, and state and local government agencies had responded to NOAA’s request for assistance in developing a national civil operational land remote-sensing satellite system.
At March meetings in Seattle, Chicago, Tallahassee, Washington, D.C., and Albuquerque, NOAA satellite managers received many suggestions for using such a system in food production, mineral exploration, land-use planning, resource assessment and management, and environmental protection. Wilbur H. Eskite, Jr., of NOAA’s task force, who chaired the meetings, said that interest in an operational system offering a continuity of data within specific timeframes was “larger than we had believed” before the meetings [see April 6].
Questions raised at the meetings that would require policy decisions included what instruments to carry into orbit, their capabilities, how quickly and in what form users should receive the data, and whether education and government agencies should pay the same fees for data as profit-making companies. The White House made NOAA responsible last November for moving to an operational program of satellite remote sensing. (NOAA Release 80-55)
April 25: NASA announced selection of 26 scientific investigations for possible inclusion on upper-atmosphere research missions in the late 1980s. Congress had not approved the program, but early solicitation of participants and experiments would allow prompt start when approved. U.S. researchers had suggested 23 of the investigations, the United Kingdom, 2, and France, 1. The chosen ideas, selected from 75 proposals, included 16 experimental and 10 theoretical investigations. U.S. investigators were: from 8 universities, 6 government laboratories, and two private organizations. Cost to the United States of the initial study phase would be about $5 million over two years. (NASA Release 80-56)
144
APRIL 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
•	The last of six science workshops sponsored by NASA’s exobiology program on the origin of life was at Rockefeller University April 25. An extensive report on the series would be available before the end of 1980. A press conference with workshop cochairman Professors Philip Morrison (MIT) and Melvin Calvin (UCB) and workshop host Dr. Joshua Lederberg, president of Rockefeller University, was followed by a public symposium with lectures and presentation of findings by Lederberg. (NASA Actv Rpt, May 5/80, 2)
April 29: NASA reported that France and West Germany signed an intergovernmental agreement today for joint development of a direct-broadcast television satellite to be launched on Ariane late in 1983. The two nations would split the cost of the initial three-satellite system, estimated at $250-$300 million. The sponsors said major return on the investment would come from sales of 15 to 20 such television satellite systems over the next 10 years to third parties such as Scandinavia’s Nordsat, Radio Luxembourg’s Luxsat, and People’s Republic of China. ESA would continue definition work on LSat, a parallel television-satellite effort without French and German participation. (NASA Actv Rpt, May 1/80)
•	Aerospace Daily reported that the Soviet Union today launched Cosmos 1176, possibly the first nuclear-powered ocean-surveillance satellite since radioactive fragments of Cosmos 954 crashed into Canada in January 1978. Orbit parameters were 265-kilometer apogee, 260-kilometer perigee,
89.6-minute period, and 65° inclination. Until the 1978 incident, the Soviet Union had routinely used radar-carrying satellites powered by nuclear sources traveling in pairs in similar orbits to detect ships; at end of mission, the nuclear source would be propelled into higher orbit to decay in outer space, but Cosmos 954 had malfunctioned. (A/D, Apr 30/80, 338)
April 30: The Washington Post reported that AT&T would launch and operate its own satellites for use with its domestic satellite communications system. The firm filed with the FCC a plan to launch three satellites—one each in 1983, 1984, and 1986—to replace three Comsat satellites it had been leasing from Comsat General Corporation (a subsidiary of ComSatCorp). It would use its satellites to provide long-distance telephone service and specialized business services for 10 years in the continental United States, Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Each satellite would be able to handle up to 21,600 simultaneous telephone conversations. (W Post, Apr 30/80, B-4)
During April: NASA announced appointment of Robert E. Smylie, deputy director of GSFC since December 1976 and acting director from June 1979 to February 1980, as Headquarters associate administrator for space tracking and data systems. He had joined NASA in 1962 at JSC, where he worked in various positions until assigned to Headquarters in 1973 as deputy associate
145
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
APRIL 1980
administrator for aeronautics and space technology. He was previously employed by Douglas Aircraft Company. (NASA anno Apr 2/80; NASA Release 80-41)
•	The AFSC Newsreview reported on tests in Arnold Engineering Development Center wind tunnels of insulating materials for NASA to use on the Shuttle’s external tanks. One or more of these materials would cover the tanks carrying cryogenic propellants for the orbiter’s main engines, to protect against liquid-hydrogen temperatures of -420 °F and liquid-oxygen temperatures of -295°F, and to prevent ice buildup on the tanks before launch.
Although insulation would minimize the icing problem, NASA’s concern was that at launch chunks of material might break off where it protected attachment brackets. Lumps the size of a sugar cube could damage the thousands of fragile heat-shield tiles designed to protect the orbiter from overheating. Tests showed that the material would not fragment if streamlined shapes were used ahead of the brackets. (AFSC Newsreview, Apr 80, 7)
•	The Washington Star reported that the American Newspaper Publishers Association (ANPA) approved a proposed system of satellite communications between wire services and newspapers. A joint task force representing ANPA, UPI, and Associated Press (AP) conducted a two-year study of economic, technical, legal, and regulatory aspects of such a system. (W Star, Apr 22/80, C-6)
•	The NAA newsletter paid tribute to former Senator A.S. Mike Monroney (D-Okla.), who died February 13 at the age of 77. Known as “Mr. Aviation” during his 30-year tenure in Congress, he was president of NAA 1970-1972. Longtime chairman of the Senate subcommittee on aviation, he introduced the 1955 Federal Airport Act promoting civil aviation, which led to establishment of the FA A. He received in 1961 the Wright Brothers; memorial trophy for service to aviation, and the first Collier award for distinguished congressional service. (NAA newsletter Mar-Apr 80, 4)
•	The British Interplanetary Society’s Spaceflight announced that Skylark 12, a rocket launched from Natal, Brazil, by British Aerospace, reached a record altitude of 834 kilometers (SF, Apr 4/80, 177)
Spaceflight reported a discovery by USSR scientists that the lunar regolith (the dust covering the Moon’s surface) contained nonoxidized iron. Lunar samples proved to be corrosion resistant when exposed to terrestrial atmosphere. The finding, registered at the USSR Committee for Inventions and Discoveries, was confirmed at other USSR and U.S. laboratories. This unusual form of element resulted from the action of the solar wind on the Moon’s surface, said Dr. Valery Barsukov, director of the Institute of Geochemistry. Particles from the solar wind “seize the oxygen of the lunar matter and carry it away into space,” leaving pure metal on the lunar surface.
146
APRIL 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
The iron had not oxidized during the eight years since the Luna 16 expedition. (SF, Apr 4/80, 164)
• The Soviet Union launched Soyuz 35 at 1638 hours Moscow time April 9 from the Baykonur site into an orbit with 346-kilometer apogee, 336-kilometer perigee, 91.3-minute period, and 51.6° inclination. Headed for a linkup with the obiting station Salyut 6 were two cosmonauts, engineer Valery Ryumin, 40, who spent 175 days there last year, and rookie Lt. Col. Leonid Popov, 34, a former jet fighter pilot.
The cargo carrier Progress 8 launched March 27 had automatically docked March 29 with Salyut 6, which used the Progress engine to adjust its orbit. The supply ship was still docked to Salyut, waiting for the new arrivals to unload it, Salyut 6, launched September 29, 1977, had been in orbit for more than 30 months; when the Soyuz 35 crew docked with it at 6:16 p.m. Moscow time April 10, Ryumin said in a telecast “Look, the station is absolutely in the same condition as we left it.” Tass said the crew would clean, repair, and restock the station and resume research on medical and biological effects of long-term spaceflight. The Soviet television program said that Ryumin was a last-minute choice for this flight, apparently taken from a backup crew to replace an unidentified flight engineer who “had trouble during his physical exercises.”
First task was to turn on station systems: lights, air and water regeneration, communications, and control desk, all of which had been off for seven months while Salyut 6 was unmanned. The crew began April 11 to unload Progress 8 and activate systems and instruments including plant-life installations Oaziz, Vazon, and Malakhit, the latter an orchid-growing greenhouse the crew had brought with them on Soyuz 35. Ground control said that observing growth of the orchids would encourage “good spirits” in the crew.
By April 15 the crew had dismantled and replaced apparatus that had worn out, putting the used equipment into the freight compartment of Progress 8. They had installed new storage batteries and replaced solar batteries in the attitude-control system and parts in the water-regeneration system. They had also prepared to refuel the propulsion unit. At the end of their first week, Dr. Anatoly Yegorov said that the cosmonauts were adapting “more quickly than expected” and were working ahead of schedule, “the most convincing proof of their physical wellbeing.”
[Nature magazine reported speculation that Ryumin’s return flight meant the Soviet Union might be preparing for a manned mission to Mars. “Classical” Soviet projects for space exploration, following the lead of Tsiolkovsky, assumed the establishment of a permanent orbital station staffed by “several tens” of male and female crew and scientists for several months at a time; lunar and planetary exploration, for this century at least, would be left to automatic vehicles. However, Soviet experts had shown considerable interest in biological effects of long-term spaceflight; they had found “no significant organic changes” that might limit the duration of future flights. Sending
147
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
APRIL 1980
Ryumin aloft again after his record 175-day flight (which Nature called “serendipitous”) should have especially interesting results. Nature quoted a Tass report that Ryumin was included at the last minute when “Flight Engineer Lebedev” hurt his leg.]
By April 22 the crew had almost finished unloading the freighter and had refueled the joint propulsion plant, preparatory to filling the station with oxidizer. Dr. Konstantin Feoktistov said that the most productive period of cosmonauts in space would begin one month to six weeks after a mission started; the Soyuz 35 crew had been doing repair and fault-prevention work so far, but had also begun to resume experiments. They used Progress S’s propulsion unit for another orbit adjustment April 24. On April 25 they separated the freighter from the Salyut-Soyuz complex; on April 26 they ignited the propulsion unit at 9:54 Moscow time to put it into a descent trajectory over the Pacific Ocean, where it “ceased to exist.” On April 27 the Soviet Union launched Progress 9 at 9:24 p.m. Moscow time; it docked with the Soyuz-Salyut complex at 11:09 a.m. April 29, bringing more apparatus and equipment, materials for the life-support systems, additional fuel, and mail for the cosmonauts. As usual, the report ended with the statement that the cosmonauts were “feeling fine.” (Tass in English, Apr 3-29/80; Moscow Dom Svc in Russian, Apr 3-29/80; W Post, Apr 10/80, A-18; W Star, Apr 10/80, A-15; Apr 12/80, A-10; NY Times, Apr 11/80, D-15; Nature, Apr 17/80, 585)
148
May
May 1: Changes made during the past year to the three main engines designated for the first flight of Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia had led NASA to set up further tests, the agency announced. Modifications included high-piessure turbopumps, valves, and nozzles. Acceptance-tested between April and July 1979, the engines would be shipped from KSC to NSTL in Mississippi for reacceptance firing and return to KSC. The two- to three-month testing would not affect the timing of the first flight, now scheduled for a date between November 1980 and March 1981. About 6 weeks before the planned launch, the engines would be fired again for 20 seconds on the launch pad. (NASA Release 80-60; JSC Release 80-030)
• JSC reported signing a noncompetitive $12,931 million contract with the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory for development of Shuttle avionics software. Draper would perform most of the work under the 21-month contract at Cambridge, Mass. (JSC Release 80-029)
May 2: Further press comment on the USSR launch April 29 of Cosmos 1176 included a Washington Post speculation that the United States might deplore the nuclear-powered vehicle for more reasons than its deterrent effect on United Nations negotiations.
Recalling the aborted attempt April 24-25 to rescue U.S. hostages in the Tehran embassy, the Washington Post noted that the Cosmos 1176 launch came only four days later. Just before it began the rescue attempt, the U.S. aircraft carrier Nimitz “sped away from a Soviet spy ship that had been trailing it, and apparently was able to launch the rescue helicopters on their secret mission without notice.” Satellites spying with radar needed nuclear sources for the necessary power; solar cells, e.g., could not produce enough electricity. The new satellite “passing daily over the Indian Ocean and Middle East.. .may well be meant to keep the Kremlin from being surprised again by providing radar surveillance of the U.S. fleet,” the Washington Post said.
The Washington Star cited the January 1978 breakup of Cosmos 954 that scattered radioactive debris across a remote region of Canada; one expert suggested that the Soviet Union might have solved the problem causing the Canada crash or might have developed a new nonnuclear power source for the new satellite’s radar. However, U.S. officials were “virtually certain” that the new satellite was, like those in the Cosmos 954 series, powered by radioactive thermal generators creating heat that turned turbines to produce electricity. The United States had already detected radar emissions from Cosmos 1176, indicating that it was looking for U.S. and other ships. Its radar was 90% able
149
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MAY 1980
to detect objects the size of aircraft carriers, 50% cruisers, and 30% frigates. Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev had revealed that such satellites carried about 1001 pounds of uranium; after about 75 days, they were supposed to be rocketed to 500-mile-altitude orbits where they would remain for about 100 years, or until the materials were no longer dangerous. (W Post, May 2/80, A-6; W Star, May 2/80, A-l)
May 4: The U.S. Coast Guard signed an agreement with NASA April 29 for work leading to an operational lighter-than-air machine that might constitute a fleet of blimps by the early 1990s, according to the New York Times. Coordinating the two agencies’ research would reduce costs: NASA scientists had been studying use of lighter-than-air craft to lift heavy equipment and would now work on developing stronger synthetics and better adhesives for the blimp bag, more sophisticated electronics, and more automated procedures for ground handling to do away with the need for large ground crews.
Lt. Cdr. Kenneth Williams, chief of the Coast Guard technology branch, said that they sought a vehicle for use in “search and rescue, law enforcement, and other patrol functions.’’ The Navy had abandoned its airship program in the early 1960s because fuel was cheap; it “costs a heck of a lot more today,” Williams said, and a Coast Guard-Navy study had found fuel-efficient airships operationally and technically feasible for maritime patrol work in combination with cutters and conventional aircraft. (NY Times, May 4/80, 56)
May 6: NASA announced that a JPL scientist, Dr. Stephen P. Synnott of the Voyager optical navigation team, had discovered a 15th moon of Jupiter from Voyager 1 photos taken in March 1979. Checking March photos to confirm the discovery of another satellite (1979 Jl) in October 1979 photos taken by Voyager 2, Synnott detected an unexplained shadow on the planet that, once recognized, was evident on seven earlier images. The new satellite, labeled 1979 J2, had a 16-hour orbit around Jupiter between moons Amalthea and Io; 1979 Jl had a 7-hour orbit. (NASA Release 80-61; JPL Release 930)
• INTELSAT announced that Honduras had become its 104th member. In a ceremony at the U.S. State Department Roberto Nunez Montes, general manager of HONDUTEL (Empresa Hondurena de Telecomunicaciones) signed the operating agreement. Honduras already was a user of the INTELSAT system through ground stations in neighboring countries. (INTELSAT Release 80-09-1)
May 7: NASA announced selection of two firms, McDonnell Douglas and TRW, to receive parallel $1 million one-year contracts for design-definition studies of 25-kilowatt power systems for the STS. The power systems, using solar energy to support large payloads left in orbit, would be placed in a fixed orbit by the Space Shuttle to provide electric power, heat rejection, attitude control, communications, and data handling for a variety of payloads freeing
150
MAY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
the Shuttle from extended time in orbit and reducing payload cost per day in orbit. MSFC would manage the study contracts and any follow-on development flight system. (NASA Release 80-63)
May 8: NASA announced that it and the ESA had selected 37 scientific experiments for the first flight of Spacelab, scheduled for launch on the Space Shuttle late in 1982. The experiments were in five categories: atmospheric physics and Earth observation; space plasma physics; material sciences and technology; astronomy and solar physics; and life science. NASA would sponsor 13 of the 37; ESA (a consortium of 11 nations), the others.
Deferred for assignment to later flights were three NASA experiments and a major ESA facility; the factor preventing selection of all the experiments was mass. Each agency would be allowed to fly 1,392 kilograms (3,062 pounds) of equipment on the mission. Unlike Skylab, Spacelab would not be left unattended in space; it would remain in the Shuttle and be returned to Earth for use in another mission. (NASA Release 80-62; MSFC Release 80-66; ESA Info 9)
May 9: JSC announced NASA selection of two California aerospace firms to negotiate contracts for production of solar cells as a supplemental power source for the Space Shuttle orbiter. Applied Solar Energy Corporation and Spectrolab would each receive a $300,000 contract to develop a large-area low-cost solar cell for NASA’s proposed power-extension package, to be produced at the rate of 144,000 space-qualified solar cells per year, reducing the cost to $30 per watt. (Solar cells now cost from $80 to $120 per watt.) The power-extension item would be a 2,000-pound package folded into the orbiter cargo bay; in orbit, the item would be moved out by a remote mechanical arm, the 177-foot wings unfolding to supply the Shuttle with 26 kilowatts of electric power. (JSC Release 80-032)
• The Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) reported that a team of its scientists was working on a solar-ultraviolet (UV) spectral irradiance monitor (SUSIM) for use on the Space Shuttle to study long-term variations in solar flux for more accurate monitoring of UV radiation from the solar chromosphere and corona. Solar radiation in the wavelengths under study control many photochemical processes in Earth’s atmosphere at altitudes below 100 kilometers; variations in the radiation may alter the composition of the lower atmosphere, affecting the lifetime of pollutants and ion density in the D region. The Navy also considered the D region of the atmosphere important because of its direct effect on communications systems.
The principal investigator, Dr. Guenter E. Brueckner, said that measurements by conventional methods in the 120- to 400-nanometer wavelength range were not accurate enough for scientists to define values for solar-flux variations over time. The monitor would travel as a solar sensor on an early orbiter flight; the spacecraft pilot would use its real-time data to point
151
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MAY 1980
directly at the Sun in order to monitor the entire solar disk and measure variation of its intensity with solar activity. Brueckneir’s team consisted of three scientists—Michael E. VanHoosier, Dr. Dianne K. Prinz, and Dr. John-David F. Bartoe—developing and testing the SUSIM for Shuttle flight. Both Prinz and Bartoe had passed mental and physical tests for astronaut-scientists and had been chosen to make a Shuttle flight; one of them might obtain firsthand data on solar activity by actually using monitor on a Shuttle flight. (NRL Release 20-5-80C)
May 12: NASA reported that the National Archives had formally accepted its records of the 1967 Apollo 204 spacecraft fire, to be retained permanently for use by scholars studying the space program in general and the failure and
subsequent redesign of the spacecraft. (NASA Actv Rpt May 12/80)
•	JSC reported that parts of the remote-manipulator system (the robot crane that would handle inflight transfer of Space Shuttle cargo) were being tested in its Shuttle avionics integration laboratory. The system would be used on the Shuttle beginning with the second flight to place or retrieve satellites in space, to assemble structures or components, or if necessary to rescue crews by transferring them to another vehicle.
The manipulator was a 50-foot arm with movable joints at the shoulder, elbow, and wrist; associated motors, gears,and sensors; and an end-effector serving as an ingenious hand. The test parts were a display and control panel, rotational and translational hand controllers, and an interface unit for manipulator control belonging to the electrical subsystem. The arm and its movement would be simulated by computers in the lab.
In the tests, engineers and technicians from NASA and the contractor Space Aerospace, astronauts, and representatives of the Canadian Research Council would try to duplicate events to be encountered while operating the space crane in orbit. Astronauts Drs. Sally Ride, Judy Resnick, Norm Thagard, and Story Musgrave would controls arm movement by using the hand controllers in a mockup of the orbiter’s aft station. System operators would watch a computer-generated television scene duplicating the view the crew would have out of the cockpit aft window.
The difficulty would come in operating the arm with the dynamics induced by arm movement: in the weightlessness of space, once a mass (the arm and its load) were moved, it would keep going until stopped by an equal and opposite force. When a command moved the arm, the control system had to be ready to command a counteracting move. Also, the orbiter would move in response to the arm, and vice versa. Interaction between arm and orbiter controls must be explored before flight; the simulations in this investigation were among the most sophisticated ever attempted at JSC. (JSC Release 80-034)
•	In the first transcontinental balloon trip, a father-son team landed the 75-foot-tall helium-filled Kitty Hawk on Canada’s Gaspe peninsula at 7:27
152
MAY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
EDT after a May 8 liftoff in San Francisco, Calif. Maxie Anderson, 48, and his son Kris, 23, of Albuquerque, N.M., had planned to land in Kitty Hawk,
N.C., but were blown by brisk winds toward Maine and Canada. They had met with bad weather beginning with strong winds, rain, and snowstorms over Wyoming. Despite their failure to land at Kitty Hawk, the team set distance records: a previous balloon record was set last year by a 2,002-mile flight that ended in a snowstorm in Ohio. The Andersons on May 11 had gone 2,417 miles.
In August 1978 Maxie Anderson and two companions had crossed the Atlantic in 137 hours in the balloon Double Eagle II from Presque Isle, Maine, to Paris. The Washington Star said in a May 21 editorial: “Mr. Anderson says he has no plans for further record-breaking trips, but refuse to believe it. There’s the Pacific Ocean just waiting to yield to helium and human dexterity.” During a visit to North Carolina the week after the flight, Anderson was inducted into the Man Will Never Fly society, a group with the motto “Birds Fly; Men Drink.” The society’s Dr. Ed North said it had awarded Anderson and his son memberships without knowing whether they were drinkers. “They missed their landing site by over a thousand miles,” North said, “so I just assumed that they were.” (W Star, May 12/80, A-l; May 20/80, A-2; May 21/80, A-12)
May 13: NASA’declared the mission of Heao 3 successful in its prelaunch objectives. Launched September 29, 1979, the satellite had in its first six months of operation made a full gamma-ray sky survey and detected a wide range of cosmic-ray elements. Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, associate administrator for space science, said Heao 3 should “continue to provide excellent scientific data.” (NASA MOR S-382-79-03 [postlaunch] May 13/80)
•	NASA announced plans to launch NOAA-B on or about May 21 from WTR on an Atlas F. A third-generation environmental-monitoring spacecraft operated by NOAA for the National Operational Environmental Satellite System (NOESS), NOAA-B would join NOAA-A (Noaa 6) in acquiring quantitative data as input for GARP (the Global Atmospheric Research Program). Known as the “TIROS twins,” the NOAA satellites would be the only civilian operational spacecraft whose orbits cover the polar regions. (NASA MOR E-615-80-02 [prelaunch] May 13/80; DOC Release NOAA 80-67)
•	NASA reported that it would negotiate with the National Science Teachers Association (NSTA) to run the student involvement project, a nationwide yearly competition among secondary-school students for scientific and engineering experiments to fly on the Shuttle on a space-available basis. The NSTA would manage the competition to the point of selecting 10 finalists from 20 semifinalists in each of 10 regions; NASA would decide whether to fly a particular experiment.
Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, noting “The vitality of NASA
153
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MAY 1980
depends heavily on an infusion of fresh ideas,” said the student connection would be important to the agency program. NASA held a similar competition before the Skylab mission in 1973; it was also considering a program to involve college students. (NASA Release 80-65)
•	MSFC announced that the second round of acceptance tests declared necessary for Columbia’s main engines because of modifications on them since acceptance [see May 1] would consist of a single 520-second static firing of each engine. No. 2007 was mounted in test stand A-2 for firing late in May; no. 2006 would be tested on stand A-l in mid-June; and no. 2005, on stand A-2 in late June. (MSFC Release 80-67; JSC Release 80-036; NASA Release 80-68)
•	JSC said that it had selected Barrios and Associates for negotiations leading to award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract for flight-design support services to operational flights of the Shuttle. Cost of the first two years of a planned five-year program (June 80 through May 82) would be $1.9 million. (JSC Release 80-035)
•	The Washington Post said that Pratt & Whitney division, United Technologies, had signed a pact with Rolls Royce of England to jointly develop and produce engines for AV-8B aircraft. The company said that the Pegasus engine could be worth up to $1.5 billion, $350 million of it for Pratt & Whitney. (W Post, May 13/80, D8)
•	ESA reported that representatives from Canada, France, India, Japan, and the United States, as well as ESA, met in Ottawa May 8-9 to discuss international cooperation in remote-sensing satellite systems. ESA would host a follow-up meeting in 1981. A series of regional meetings with nations planning to use remote-sensing data would bring the needs of user states to the attention of satellite operators and would help in preparing for a 1982 United Nations conference on exploration and peaceful uses of outer space. (ESA Info 11)
May ]5: NASA reported that astronomers using data from the international UV explorer were continuing to study the halo discovered around the Milky Way in early observations by the satellite. The halo material was found to be hot (about 100,000°), to extend 50,000 light-years from the galaxy, and to contain oxygen, sulfur, iron, silicon, and carbon. lue launched January 26, 1978, was a joint mission of the United States, the United Kingdom, and ESA.
For most of history, visible light was the only medium for studying celestial objects, but many types of electromagnetic radiation were now available for observation: radio waves, infrared, X-ray, gammEi rays, and ultraviolet rays. Earth’s atmosphere blocked most of these types of energy, which must be studied through spacecraft above the atmosphere. lue, in a synchronous orbit keeping it in continuous touch with either the United States or the European
154
MAY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
ground station, could be used by astronomers located either at GSFC or the Villafranca station in Spain (Vilspa) much like a ground-based telescope but observing in the ultraviolet instead of visible-light spectrum. A scientific colloquium at GSFC during May heard 92 papers on lue, findings; Prof. Robert Wilson, University College London, said “there is hardly an area of modem astronomy that hasn’t been affected.” Scientists from 25 countries were participating, and 478 astronomers had been assigned observing time on the satellite. (NASA Release 80-67)
• NASA might decide to remove and strengthen every heat-protection tile on Columbia not already removed and treated, Today newspaper reported. As many as 10,000 tiles could be affected, delaying Shuttle launch by months.
Recent tests had shown weaknesses in tile faces that were glued to the Shuttle surface; NASA had removed thousands for “densification,” painting the bonding surfaces to increase their sticking power. NASA was now testing
16,000	of the 30,922 tiles at points of greatest stress to see if they needed to be densified. Tiles failing the test had been removed and densified; those passing were left intact. However, NASA was now thinking of doing all the tiles as a safety measure. Installation was about 80% complete, but a decision to density all would leave only a few thousand tiles on the ship.
Officials would not give an exact count of the number of tiles already densified; technicians gluing the tiles in the processing facility at KSC had been averaging about 700 a week. JSC structural design chief Tom Moser said that he could not predict whether all the tiles would be densified or how long it would take. (Today, May 15/80, 1A)
May 16: Aviation leaders from across the United States attended a banquet at the Washington Hilton, Washington, D.C., to honor Dr. Paul B. MacCready, designer of the Gossamer Condor and Gossamer Albatross, who won the Robert J. Collier trophy for the first human powered flight across the 22-milewide English Channel. Master of ceremonies was NBC news correspondent Peter Hackes, a fellow enthusiast of sail planing. The audience saw the film of the Channel flight and applauded the touchdown of the Albatross on the beach at Cap Gris Nez, France. MacCready accepted the trophy for himself and for the “engine” of the Albatross, cyclist Bryan Allen, who was unable to attend.
MacCready reported that NASA was negotiating to use his backup aircraft Gossamer Albatross II in tests aimed at design and operation of a remotely powered vehicle at 100,000 feet altitude. The Albatross’s extremely light weight “exaggerates the apparent mass effects in stability and control, and also the effect of turbulence on wing efficiency.” “These are areas heretofore unexamined and deal with phenomena never before encountered,” he added. (NAA newsletter May/June 80; NAA Release May 19/80)
155
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MAY 1980
May 18: The People’s Republic of China launched a long-range missile May 18 capable of delivering a nuclear warhead as far as Moscow or the west coast of the United States, Xinhua press agency announced. Australian navy ships reported the rocket’s splashdown in the ocean about 750 miles northwest of Fiji. Diplomatic sources in Beijing said the rocket may have been fired from a complex about 1,000 miles west of there, or from the Lop Nor nuclear-arms test area in northwest China. If so, the rocket made a flight of 5,000 miles or more. (W Star, May 19/80, A-6; FBIS, Xinhua in English, May 23/80; Hong Kong AFP in English, May 18/80; Moscow World Svc in English; Tass in English, May 16-25/80)
May 19: AP said that NASA and DOE had awarded Boeing Aerospace a $296,000 contract to study disposal of nuclear waste (long-lived radionuclides radioactive for thousands of years) in space: whether to launch the “nuclear trash” on an unmanned rocket, or by a manned Shuttle whose crew would eject it in orbit and propel it further out; where in space to put it; how to protect it during launch and in space; and how to retrieve it in case of an abort at liftoff. (NASA Release 80-69; MSFC Release 80-69; AP in W Post, May 21/80, A-5)
• NASA announced that it had renewed a cost-plus-management-fee contract with the Universities Space Research Association for management and operation of the Lunar and Planetary Institute. The fee through March 31, 1982, would be $4,292,700. Work would be done at the institute, adjoining JSC in Houston.
The institute, a focal point for the lunar and planetary science community to pursue solid-body geosciences such as mineralogy, petrology, and geochemistry, was created in October 1968 in response to NASA’s quest for a university consortium to work with. The association was incorporated the following March as a means for universities and other research organizations to work with each other and with NASA in space research. (NASA Release 80-73)
May 20: ESA reported that European and U.S. astronauts scheduled to fly with the first Spacelab on the ninth Shuttle flight would attend a training session May 27-30 on using an infrared-grill spectrometer to check the composition of the stratosphere to monitor the effect of human activity on its evolution.
Besides a commander and copilot of the Shuttle, the Spacelab crew would include two payload specialists (one each from ESA. and the United States) and two mission specialists in charge of the interface between the Shuttle and Spacelab. Two of the five payload specialists attending the training session would be selected six months before flight: physicist Ulf Merbold of West Germany; astronomer Claude Nicollier of Switzerland; physicist Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands; physicist Michael Lampton, University of California at Berkeley; and biomedical engineer Byron Lichtenberg, Massachusetts
156
MAY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Institute of Technology. NASA mission specialists attending the training session would be atmospheric physicist Owen Garriott and astronomer Robert Parker. (ESA Info 13)
May 21: Jack Anderson wrote in the Washington Post that the controversial B-l bomber, “like the wondrous Phoenix of Egyptian mythology, seems about to rise from the ashes” 3 years after the President “shot it down in flames”: the House Armed Services Committee had voted $600 million for B-l research and procurement.
The committee had asked Rockwell International, “which still hopes to build the big bird,” to prepare a brochure comparing the B-l with the FB-111 preferred by the U.S. Air Force to carry cruise missiles. The Post said an internal Air Force report prepared for Rep. Robert Carr (D-Mich.) indicated that Rockwell had “drastically” oversold B-l capabilities. The brochure “grossly understated the range of the FB-111” by almost 900 nautical miles, comparing it on a low-level mission with a B-l flying at a higher, fuel-saving altitude, the U.S. Air Force noted. Rockwell also “fudged on the delivery dates it promised in the brochure” by three to four months in one case, almost a year in another. The U.S. Air Force report said that there were “many other areas that are inaccurate.” (W Post, May 21/80, B-16)
• NASA reported that a team using Voyager data found that Saturn’s period of rotation (the length of a day on that planet) was 24 minutes longer than was thought earlier. Astronomers using Earth-based observations had calculated the length of a Saturn day as 10 hours, 15 minutes but admitted that their figures lacked accuracy. The inaccuracy of the earlier measurements arose from Saturn’s lack of a solid surface; viewers could see only the cloud tops of the planet, with no sharply defined features to permit accurate determination of rotation.
The two Voyager spacecraft had recorded bursts of radio noise from Saturn and other sources in the sky during January 1980. By isolating Saturn signals from those recorded from the Sun, Jupiter, and other sources, the Voyager planetary radioastronomy team found that Saturn’s originated at the planet’s north pole and were precisely controlled by its rotating magnetic field. (NASA Release 80-72)
May 22: NASA announced a change of date to April 1982 for completing orbital flight tests of the Shuttle. “Several factors” such as continuing engineering assessment and improvement of the thermal-protection system led to the decision. First operational flight of Columbia, now slipped from March to September 1982, would carry the tracking and data-relay satellite TDRS-A into a geosynchronous orbit. Other schedule adjustments would be discussed with users at KSC May 29-30. Changes in the manifests had been coordinated with DOD, NASA said; it would make use of Deltas during the transition to
157
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MAY 1980
full Shuttle operations. Others set to use the Delta included Telesat of Canada, Hughes Aircraft, and Indonesia. (NASA Release 80-74; JSC Release 80-037)
May 23: The Washington Post reported that Summa Corporation, holding company for the late billionaire Howard Hughes’s estate, would “immediately” disassemble the Spruce Goose, Hughes’s 140-ton flying boat, since a last-minute public appeal for $750,000 to preserve it had failed. The Port of Long Beach, Calif., had wanted the 220-foot boat, 80-feet high with a 320-foot wingspan, to display with another transportation mammoth, the ocean liner Queen Mary. Designed to be a World War II troop carrier, the eight-engine Spruce Goose (actually made mostly of birch) had flown only once in 1947. Parts of it would go to nine museums, including the Smithsonian. (W Post, May 23/80, F3)
•	ESA reported that the Ariane L02 launched from Guyana at 14:29 GMT had fallen into the sea. Liftoff was normal, but 7 seconds later, telemetry showed pressure fluctuations in a first-stage motor that caused the other motors to fail. The launcher self-destructed at 108 seconds. Teams evaluating the telemetry data later reported events during launch in detail; further study would be needed to find the cause of the malfunction. (ESA Release May 23, Info 15)
•	LaRC said that NASA had sent an airborne-particle measurement team from WFC as far west as Missouri May 21-22 to measure dust layers resulting from the eruption of Mt. St. Helens, which had caused dense concentrations of particles in five distinct clouds in the stratosphere over the United States and Canada. The leading edge of the volcano plume (a tropospheric cloud containing the largest amount of particles) had already passed over the United States and was out to sea.
NASA had detected concentrations of from 200 to 800 particles per cubic centimeter (typical readings were only half a particle per cubic centimeter) May 21 and 22 in a stratospheric dust layer over Pennsylvania, Ohio, Illinois, and Indiana at an altitude of 13-14 kilometers (43,000-46,000 feet). Four other stratospheric dust clouds had been detected over eastern Canada, the Ohio Valley, the Great Plains, and the far west, with particle concentrations far above normal. Besides airplane and high-altitude balloon observations the week of May 19-23, scientists were waiting for a NASA satellite carrying the SAGE (stratospheric aerosol and gas experiment) to come to a point in its orbit over the United States and Canada where it could provide more detailed measurements of atmospheric profile in latitudes from 55° to 30 °N before it went out of range May 28. (LaRC Release 80-42)
May 26: The Soviet Union launched Soyuz 36 May 26 at 9:21 p.m. Moscow time (2:21 p.m. EDT) carrying a Russian commander (Valery Kubasov, 45, veteran of three space missions) and Hungarian engineer (Bertalan Farkas, 30)
158
MAY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
to the orbiting Salyut 6 station already occupied by Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin. (W Star, May 27/80, A-8)
May 27: LaRC announced that NASA had selected Rockwell International to study alternate thermal-protection systems for the Shuttle orbiter [see April 1]. The nine-month study beginning in late June would cost about $900,000. Boeing Aerospace also bid on the study. (LaRC Release 80-43; NASA Release 80-77)
May 28: The Wall Street Journal said that the Ariane rocket failure in its second test flight was a blow to western European development of a competitor for the U.S. Shuttle. ESA experts had not solved the mysterious engine shutdown that dropped the Ariane into the ocean after launch from Guyana [see May 23]. The difficulty seemed to be with the Ariane feature they valued most, the first-stage engine that had been fired 200 times on the ground and had worked flawlessly during test flights. The same engine had been highly reliable in the French rocket Diamant, now being phased out after years of successful use.
ESA and France (which paid 64% of Ariane expenses and had done much of the development) hoped to put Ariane into service in mid-1981, ahead of the Shuttle, which was able to orbit six times the weight of an Ariane payload and return to Earth for reuse. Shuttle problems had put NASA behind, but the Wall Street Journal said prolonged delay in Ariane development would have “serious consequences” for ESA. The Europeans had bid vigorously for launching assignments for Ariane because it would be available earlier as well as less expensive, but engine problems could undermine the claim. (WSJ, May 28/80,20)
• NASA reported that scientists were beginning to identify major features on the surface of cloud-shrouded Venus on the basis of data returned by Pioneer and had met with the working group on planetary nomenclature of the International Astronomical Union (IAU) on a.policy of naming the major features for goddesses from various cultures, with minor features named for other mythical females and smaller features for famous women no longer alive. The Washington Post said that women’s groups such as the National Organization for Women (NOW) had immediately protested “a typically male response” of naming planetary features for myths instead of real women. Dr. Harold Masursky said the IAU at its Budapest meeting next week would consider names for Venus sites, most of the 30 submitted being those of actual women. (NASA Release 80-70; ARC Release 80-47; W Post, May 29/80, A-2)
May 29: NASA launched NOAA-B from the Western Space and Missile Center (WSMC) into an elliptical orbit of 1,453-kilometer apogee, 273-kilometer perigee, 72.9° inclination, and 90.4 minute period, instead of the planned circular orbit at 470-540-kilometer altitude. Malfunction of the
159
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MAY 1980
Atlas F launch vehicle put the $15 million payload where it could not carry out its planned mission, and NASA expected it to remain in orbit only about six months. Attempts by NASA and NOAA to coiTect the orbit were unsuccessful. A replacement called NOAA-C would be sent up in about five months. (NY Times, May 30/80, B-6; W Star, May 30/80, A-7; W Post, May 30/80, A-9; NASA Release 80-82; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, June 2/80)
•	NASA announced selection of Ford Aerospace to negotiate a contract for overall system-design engineering on preliminary operations requirements and test-support system for the Space Telescope. Work under the $9.2 million contract should be done by December 1983, to support the space-telescope mission. Ford Aerospace would run the system for six months before turning it over to NASA.
The system located at GSFC would control telescope attitude, point it, and monitor the on-board systems 24 hours a day, 7 days per week. Besides engineering design, hardware and software, and support for facility construction, the contract covered design of the project operations-control center plus required software and hardware. Ford Aerospace would provide testing, integration, installation, maintenance, documentation, training, and operating services for the system, including launch on the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 80-80)
•	KSC reported on steps taken by NASA to ensure survival of an endangered species, the manatee or sea cow, whose entire U.S. population estimated at about 1,000 lived in Florida waters. Brevard County, site of KSC, had the highest incidence of manatee deaths in the state. KSC included the site of the Merritt Island National Wildlife Refuge containing hundreds of species of plants, birds, mammals, and reptiles; 12 of the latter were endangered, more than in any other single site in the 48 states. About 20% of the nation’s manatees spent part of the year on the Space Center, and KSC activities had been arranged for minimum interference with the indigenous wildlife.
Aerial surveys over KSC furnished information about group migratory habits, feeding grounds, and times for scheduling work in areas when the manatees would be elsewhere. Space technology provided tracking devices to monitor the routes traveled by individual animals. Ships that recovered spent Shuttle boosters docked in the Banana River, a prime manatee feeding ground. NASA had fitted its ships with a propulsion unit to maneuver them without use of large propellers found to be highly dangerous to the slow-moving and air-breathing manatee; the unit proved to be better at retrieving booster parachutes without tangling the lines. (KSC Release 95-80)
•	NASA said MSFC’s Spacelab program office had ordered a second Spacelab instrument-pointing system from ESA and Dornier Systems of West Germany for delivery by the end of 1983. The major Spacelab subsystem was valued at about $20 million. The number of experiments currently planned for Spacelab
160
MAY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
that needed highly accurate pointing required NASA to buy a second unit to supplement the one NASA would receive as basic Spacelab equipment provided by ESA. Earlier this year ESA had signed a contract with NASA for a second Spacelab unit; each basic unit would now have its own pointing system.
Mounted on a Spacelab pallet in the Shuttle cargo bay, the instrumentpointing system (IPS) gimbaled in three directions offered highly accurate pointing to scientific instruments weighing from 200 to 2,000 kilograms, belonging to disciplines such as astronomy, solar physics, high-energy astrophysics, or Earth observation, and needing more stability than the Shuttle provided. It could lock on and track targets such as stars, solar flares, or specific items of interest on the Earth’s surface without being affected by slight changes in Shuttle attitude. (NASA Release 80-79; MSFC Release 80-75; ESA Info 14)
May 30: Newspapers reported NASA’s selection of 19 astronaut candidates for Space Shuttle training, the second group of pilots and scientists specifically picked for that purpose. Those chosen in the 1978 group of 35, including the first women and blacks among civilian astronauts, received astronaut wings at JSC in August 1979. In the new group was Dr. William F. Fisher, husband of Dr. Anna Fisher, who was selected two years ago; the Seabrook, Tex., physicians were the first married couple chosen by the United States. The 8 new pilot candidates (one black) and 11 mission specialists (two women and one Hispanic) would, if successful, join the 62 astronauts now on duty with NASA. The Shuttle was scheduled to fly 30 or 40 missions a year with up to seven astronauts on a mission.
Pilot selections were Lt. Col. John E. Blaha, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Charles F. Bolden, Jr., U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Col. Roy D. Bridges, Jr., U.S. Air Force; Maj. Guy S. Gardner, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Ronald J. Grabe, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Brian D. O’Connor, U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Cdr. Richard N. Richards, U.S. Navy; and Lt. Cdr. Michael J. Smith, U.S. Navy.
Mission-specialist selections besides Dr. William Fisher were Dr. James P. Baglan, anesthesiologist; Dr. Franklin R. Chang, physicist; Dr. Mary L. Cleave, research engineer; Bonnie J. Dunbar, JSC flight controller; Capt. David C. Hilmers, U.S. Marine Corps; Lt. Cdr. David C. Leestma, U.S. Navy; John M. Lounge, JSC flight controller; Capt. Jerry L. Ross, U.S. Air Force; Maj. Sherwood C. Spring, U.S. Army; and Maj. Robert C. Springer, U.S. Marine Corps. (NY Times, May 30/80, A-ll; W Post, May 30/80, A-8; NASA Release 80-78; JSC Release 80-038)
• MSFC reported successful test firing of the Shuttle main propulsion system May 30 at NSTL. Firing time, 9 minutes 38 seconds, exceeded the duration required to place a Shuttle in orbit. Total test time on the main propulsion system (three engines, external tank, and associated parts of the orbiter) was now 41.3 minutes, in addition to 19 hours of single-engine tests conducted in a separate program. The Shuttle engines were gimbaled (steered) during the
161
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MAY 1980
test firing, throttled in stages from 100% of rated thrust down to 65%. The Shuttle would have the first human-rated engines capable of throttle control during flight. (MSFC Release 80-79)
During May: GSFC reported discovery by a team of its scientists of the largest gamma-ray burst ever recorded and the first tracing of such a burst to a known astronomical object, providing for the first time evidence of the vibration of a neutron star. The burst, trillions of miles away, occurred March 5, 1979, and was recorded by a network of nine satellites. The uniqueness of the event and the time needed to coordinate data from the Soviet Union, France, and West Germany delayed completion of analysis until recently; a GSFC colloquium April 24 heard a report on the theoretical developments. The GSFC team was headed by Dr. Thomas L. Cline and Dr. Reuven Ramaty.
Gamma rays, the most energetic form of electromagnetic radiation, exhibit energy from tens of thousands to tens of billions of volts. The amounts of energy required to produce gamma rays had to come from extremely high-energy processes such as explosion of an atomic bomb or a star. Until the explosion of March 5, 1979, astronomers could only speculate that neutron stars went through giant vibration episodes explosively propelling their substance outward, then being pushed just as explosively by external forces back to their original shape. The theory of relativity says that these vibrations should emit gravitational waves. The March 5 burst, said to radiate more energy than the Sun could produce in 1,000 years, was measured by devices on nine spacecraft including five launched by the United States (three Velas, the Pioneer Venus orbiter, and the international Sun-Earth explorer Isee 3; three by the Soviet Union (Prognoz 7, Venera 11, and Venera 12, carrying French instrumentation); and one launched jointly by the United States and the Federal Republic of Germany (Helios 2). The satellites were widely separated in space or in Earth orbit when they detected the burst.
By timing and triangulation, scientists could trace the source of the March 5 event to a decaying star (supernova) in the Large Magellanic Cloud (one of two galaxies nearest the Milky Way) and specifically to a supernova remnant identified as N-49. A supernova would have blown its contents all over surrounding space, leaving a large compact body called a neutron star so dense that a spoonful of material from its center would weigh a billion tons. The unusually large output of energy and the fact that its release was very rapid led to the vibrating-source conclusion. Celestial gamma rays are detected only by aircraft above the atmosphere, or by spacecraft; detection of future bursts would require highly sensitive devices like the gamma-ray observatory scheduled for Shuttle launch in 1985. (GSFC Release G-80-23)
• Control of motion sickness might be learned as one learns to balance or to ride a bicycle, according to ARC’s Dr. Patricia Cov/ings. Half of all astronauts exposed to the weightless environment of space had symptoms of motion sickness; young athletes were often the persons most sensitive to motion.
162
MAY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Cowings and her team had taught about 50 volunteers to suppress illness when subjected to a chair spinning ever faster; another 60 subjects were studied without the training. Of the trained subjects, 85% improved their ability to withstand effects of motion, 65% being able to suppress their symptoms completely. The other 20% took significant increase in rpms before becoming ill. In the control group of 60 subjects who received no training, no one showed any significant improvement with time.
The trained subjects monitored their own respiration and heartbeat during the tests, biological feedback long used by researchers and known to produce positive results. After the subjects were trained to detect the onset of sickness, 65 % were able to suppress the symptoms by using the feedback. Biofeedback was preferred to conventional treatment, which is use of drugs, because it had no side effects, such as sleepiness.
The success of the theory led Cowings to propose a life-science experiment tentatively accepted for a Spacelab flight on which two trained crew persons would wear a harness feeding eight channels of a small data recorder collecting information on heart rate and other factors and providing the subjects with a feedback display. A subject feeling ill would consciously use the feedback training for a maximum 30 minutes. When subjects succumbed to motion sickness, they would mark the point where they became ill so the researchers could learn which responses led to the sickness. So far Cowings had found no sex differences in susceptibility to motion sickness; also, of a group aged 18 to 45, older subjects appeared less likely to suffer. (NASA Release 80-57; ARC Release 80-32)
• FBIS carried Tass and other Soviet news reports on the flight of Salyut 6 and Soyuz 35 with cargo ship Progress 9. On May 2, cosmonauts Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin, in their fourth week of flight, used “bilateral television communication” to visit with their families who had come to the mission control center. A May 6 report said that for the first time in manned space flight the crew had pumped water from the freight ship to containers on the station, using a system called Rodnik. The crew had completed unloading the food, regenerators, and fresh equipment from Progress 9 and refueled the joint propulsion unit; they would use the cargo ship to dispose of used material.
On May 8, the chief of the aerogeology organization said Ryumin and Popov before the launch of Soyuz 35 had flown over certain linear and ring geological structures to acquire data for comparison with satellite observations; the Soyuz 26 crew (Romanenko and Grechko) had identified 25 such structures in the Soviet Union that proved to contain mineral deposits.
By May 13 the crew repaired the on-board videotape recorder and replaced a motor in the biogravistat and a filter in the gas analyzer; some items would be returned to Earth for study. On May 16 they were putting plant sprouts in various stages of development into a special solution for study on Earth; they also used the Progress 9 propulsion unit for another orbit adjustment. The
163
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MAY 1980
cargo ship separated from the orbital complex May 20 at 21:15 hours Moscow time; on May 22 ground command switched on its engine, and it “ceased to exist” upon entering the atmosphere. The next big event was launch at 21:21 hours Moscow time May 26 of Soyuz 36 carrying veteran Valery Kubasov and Bertalan Farkas, first Hungarian cosmonaut, to join Popov and Ryumin who had occupied Salyut 6 since April 9. Docking occurred at 22:56 hours Moscow time, and the visitors went aboard Salyut for a 7-day program of international research. Kubasov and Farkas would return to Earth in Soyuz 35, leaving Soyuz 36 for later use. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 2-27/80)
164
June
June 3: The Washington Post quoted a White House source as saying that “We’re running out of patience on the Space Shuttle.. .There’s a feeling here that we can’t tolerate any more delays in the Shuttle program.” Noting the six postponements that had done “serious harm to the space agency’s credibility,” the Washington Post said that “in fairness.. .the delays caused by engine and tile troubles are not all its fault.” When Pratt & Whitney lost the engine contract to Rocketdyne, it sued NASA, delaying engine tests for a year; lack of money also caused delay.
JSC Director Christopher Kraft pointed out that money cutbacks in 1978 meant that “we delayed building the tiles, and that naturally delayed our test procedures, which naturally delayed us from getting at the answers we now have.” The custom-built tiles, each shaped to fit a specific place on the fuselage, took 25 hours apiece to install. After many were attached, NASA found that half had lost their strength in the bonding process; technicians had to remove and coat the tiles before replacing them.
When NASA shipped the Shuttle orbiter piggyback on its Boeing carrier from Palmdale, Calif., to Cape Canaveral in 1979, only 10% of its 30,922 tiles were in place, and some of those fell off during the trip. NASA enlisted a force of 1,200 workers to install the tiles, working two 10-hour shifts six days a week at the Cape. When the coating problem developed, the crews were attaching 750 tiles a week but removing 100. About 5,000 cavities on the frame remained to be filled, and NASA forecast August as the finishing date for the task.
The other technological challenge was the Shuttle’s engine cluster, three liquid-hydrogen engines, each 10 times as powerful as the largest jet engine and burning 1,000 degrees hotter than any engine before it. These were the first liquid-fuel rockets designed for reuse; said Shuttle program manager Robert Thompson: “We had to expect that in heating it and stressing it with repeated use we were going to run into problems.” During tests, engines had caught fire and even blown up; 6 of the last 12 tests of the three engines firing together had to be stopped because of overheating. By summer’s end the tests would have cost $1 billion more than the $500 million NASA estimated.
NASA’s costs by the time the first Shuttle flew would be $264 million for solid-fuel rocket engines; $381 million for tiles; $442 million for the external fuel tank; $1.5 billion for development of the main liquid-rocket engine, amounting to an overrun of almost $1.6 billion.
Money was a lesser concern, however, than the slips in schedule. The Shuttle was the first civilian vehicle designed to carry surveillance satellites for the DOD; those due to fly in 1983 were the biggest and most sophisticated ever built, weighing up to 25 tons each, too big to be carried by any other
165
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JUNE 1980
rocket including DOD’s Titan. Former astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.), ranking Republican on the Senate subcommittee on space, said that DOD would have to alter its craft to fit on the Titan if they could not fly on the Shuttle in 1983. (W Post, June 3/80, A-2)
June 4: U.S. newspapers carried Tass reports that two cosmonauts launched May 27 in Soyuz 36 to join Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin on Salyut 6 had returned safely to Kazakhstan the night of June 2-3 in the Soyuz 35 that took Popov and Ryumin to Salyut 6 on April 9. Soyuz 36 remained with Salyut 6. Veteran cosmonaut Valery Kubasov and rookie Bertalan Farkas, first Hungarian in space, performed the fifth Soviet-bloc Intercosmos mission, photographing land and ocean surfaces and testing the effects of spaceflight on the human body. (NY Times, June 3/80, A-14; W Post, June 4/80, A-25; W Star, June 4/80, A-18)
June 5: The Soviet Union launched Lt. Col. Yuri V. Malyshev and Vladimir
V.	Aksyonov toward the orbiting station Salyut 6 in Soyuz T2, an “improved model” of its manned capsule. An uncrewed Soyuz T1 tested in December 1979 docked automatically with Salyut 6 and remained for 99 days. A U.S. expert on USSR space activity said that T2 was “a new ship” except in appearance: the main change was an on-board computer that for the first time let cosmonauts navigate independently of ground control. Launched from Tyuratam, the T2 arrived June 6 to join Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin. (WStar, June 5/80, A-12; June 6/80, A-10; June 7/80, A-12; WPost, June 6/80, A-22; NY Times, June 6/80, B-6)
•	NASA announced award by LeRC of parallel 1-year $1 million contracts to TRW’s Defense and Space Systems Group and to Hughes Aircraft Company for designing an advanced commercial communications satellite system.
Operating in a high-frequency 30- to 20-GHz band not used in the United States commercially, the system would help handle: the increased communications expected in the next 20 years which would saturate existing domestic communications satellite capacity. The new system, a network of ground stations using two shuttle-launched spacecraft, would lower costs of services such as videoconferencing, teletext, and electronic mail delivery. (NASA Release 80-84)
•	The House Committee on Science and Technology said that on June 11-12 its subcommittee on space science and applications would hold hearings on the Space Industrialization Act of 1980 (H.R. 7412) for private commercialization of space. Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), committee and subcommittee chairman, said that the bill he sponsored would create a space industrialization corporation to develop new products, services, and industries using space technology and the properties of the space environment. NASA would continue to advance national capabilities in space, Fuqua said, but the corporation
166
JUNE 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
would be responsible for encouraging private development. (Committee Release 96-196)
•	NASA announced that the Shuttle main engine had reached a milestone June 5 when two of the three main engines that would fly on Columbia’s first mission demonstrated flight readiness in test firings at NSTL that sent total test time over the 80,000-second mark. This was the minimum needed to assure reliability of the liquid-fuel main engines. A third engine would undergo an identical test in two weeks. (NASA Release 80-85)
•	NASA reported that GSFC had chosen Canadian Astronautics, Ltd., to negotiate a $3,042,500 contract for local-user terminals to process signals from search-and-rescue instruments aboard the NOAA-E, NOAA-F, and NOAA-G satellites in the early 1980s. The instruments would relay signals from distressed ships and aircraft to the terminals, which would use them to locate the distressed craft and aid rescue operations. The first terminal would be at Kodiak, Alaska, with others at Scott Air Force Base, 111., and the Coast Guard station at San Francisco. The Soviet Union, Canada, and France would demonstrate the search-and-rescue capability. (NASA Release 80-87)
June 9: The Earth 34 million years ago might have had a ring like those that circle Saturn today, said Dr. John A. O’Keefe of GSFC’s Laboratory for Astronomy and Solar Physics. A sudden event 34 million years ago, known to geologists as the terminal Eocene event, caused dramatic climate changes in Earth’s temperate zones, dropping northern-hemisphere winter temperatures about 35 °F (20 °C). Botanical studies revealed that the temperature change, the most profound climatic event between 65 million and 2 million years ago, occurred at the end of the Eocene, but it had no acceptable explanation as yet.
O’Keefe noted that the changes coincided with a massive fall from outer space of tektites (glass meteorites) possibly from an eruption on Earth’s Moon; studies of these tektites showed similarities to rocks brought from the Moon. Whatever the source, the tektites that hit Earth made a path around the globe from the eastern United States across the Pacific to the Philippines.
Tektites that missed the Earth would have formed a ring like the rings around Saturn; such a ring in the winter would block the Sun’s rays in the northern hemisphere when the Sun was below the equator, and the shadow cast by the ring would lower winter temperatures. The ring disappeared when forces (such as pressure of sunlight or drag of the atmosphere) pulled it either into the atmosphere, where some particles burned and others fell to Earth, or upward into space away from the Earth. (NASA Release 80-86)
June 10: JSC said that a NASA board investigating the April 18 flash fire in a space suit backpack [see April 22] had found where the fire started and had recommended 11 changes to improve system safety. Apparently, when a
167
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JUNE 1980
technician during a test in the crew systems laboratory switched the secondary oxygen pack to the “spacewalk” position, ignition occurred in a V-shaped passage restricting oxygen flow between a shutoff valve and a chamber in the pack’s regulator module. In the accident, which destroyed an unoccupied Shuttle space suit and life-support backpack, Hamilton Standard technician Robert A. Mayfield was severely burned but was recovering.
After five weeks of engineering detective work ( including more than 2,000 unsuccessful attempts to reproduce the fire), the board had not found the exact cause, but reported to JSC Director Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., the four most probable causes of the fire: heating by compression or shock of a thin section of aluminum between the flow-restrictor passage and the adjacent cavity; heating by compression or shock of contaminants in the flow restrictor; heating of internal surfaces through mechanical shock from incoming high-pressure oxygen, or heating of particles; similar heating of shutoff valve O rings. The regulator module had undergone 19 cycles with high-pressure oxygen before the accident. The board found that all procedures followed during the April 18 test were proper.
Technicians at JSC’s White Sands Test Facility could not duplicate the failure, although they cycled four regulator modules from the same factory batch 2,228'times. Disassembly after the tests revealed contamination inside the modules. The board recommended redesign, design reviews, inspections, and collection of high-pressure oxygen data to establish standards for equipment design and use. (JSC Release 80-039; NASA Release 80-91)
• NASA reported award to United Space Boosters, Inc., subsidiary of United Technologies Corporation, of a contract for a two-ship recovery force to retrieve used Space Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters from the Atlantic Ocean. This supplemented a contract under which the firm assembled and processed solid-fuel rocket boosters for flight. The ships would locate and retrieve expended booster casings, parachutes, and other equipment from the Atlantic and deliver them to a disassembly facility at Cape: Canaveral Air Force Station. The disassembly facility was on the eastern shore of the Banana River, a shallow area where an endangered species, the sea cow or manatee, made its home. The ships would use a 425-HP waterjet stern thruster instead of propellers that could maim or kill the manatees [see May 29].
The ships, UTC Liberty and UTC Freedom, were being built and would be delivered in October 1980 and January 1981; both would be used on each Shuttle mission, each retrieving one booster and its components. At liftoff, the boosters would bum simultaneously with the three-engine cluster on the Shuttle. After about two minutes they would be jettisoned and land in the Atlantic about 257 kilometers (160 miles) downrange from KSC, their descent being slowed by three parachutes on each casing. Each vessel would carry four parachute-rollers to handle the three main and single drogue parachutes on each booster and cranes to hoist aboard the collateral flight equipment. The ships would carry equipment to plug the nozzles, pump water out of the cas-
168
JUNE 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
ings, and ready them for towing to the disassembly facility, where they would be cleaned and taken apart for shipment to Utah and reloading with solid-fuel propellant. Each casing could be used for up to 20 missions, reducing the cost of flight operations. The ships would also have sophisticated electronic communications and navigation gear such as radars, sonars, loran, direction finders, fathometers, and gyrocompasses. (NASA Release 80-89)
•	DFRC reported that it and the FAA had resumed wake vortex flight tests using an L-1011 widebody jet transport. The wake produced by a widebody aircraft could be severe enough to delay takeoffs and landings at airports; planned time separations were in effect because the wake could upset other aircraft landing or taking off. Diminishing the wake vortex could reduce traffic congestion, with significant savings in fuel and time.
Previous tests using a Boeing 747 [see October 29, 1979] showed that selected use of ailerons and spoilers on the aircraft could break up the vortex, an invisible flow of turbulent air streaming from flaps and wingtips in a tornado shape. Spoilers, normally used as speed brakes and to decrease aerodynamic lift after landing, would serve in flight to break up the vortex trailing from the flaps; ailerons, normally used for turning, would serve to break up the wing vortex. The L-1011 being tested was the Lockheed prototype with a direct-lift flight-control system using spoilers deflected upward at 8°; the proposed vortex alleviation system would not differ much from the system already in use on the L-1011. The tests would use a small highly instrumented NASA test aircraft for high-altitude recording of the L-1011 vortex, marked by smoke generators. (DFRC Release 80-7; NASA Release 80-92)
•	The Wfashington Star carried a Tass report that cosmonauts Vladimir Aksyonov and Yuri Malyshev had soft-landed in Central Asia after a visit to orbiting space station Salyut 6. The two were launched June 5 in a new transport vehicle called Soyuz T-2. Salyut 6 had been occupied since April 9 by Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin, who would probably remain in orbit to greet visitors to the Moscow Olympics, the dispatch said. (WStar, June 10/80, A-8)
June 11: UPI reported that the 500-pound Magsat that gathered data indicating that Earth’s magnetic poles would reverse in 1,200 years had fallen into the Norwegian Sea between Greenland and Norway at 3:30 a.m. EDT. NASA said that no debris survived the plunge. NORAD said earlier that the reentry occurred northwest of Spain but later moved the location north.
The Magsat program cost $19.7 million; project scientist Dr. Robert A. Langel said the findings predicting a magnetic reversal were only the first in a series expected as scientists from nine nations studied Magsat data. The magnetic-field reversal should have no bad effects, Langel said; reversals had occurred more than 130 times in Earth’s history. Besides the United States, nations participating in the project were Australia, Brazil, Canada, France,
169
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JUNE 1980
India, Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdom. (UPI-045, June 11/80; NASA Release 80-90)
•	DFRC announced that the HiMAT (highly maneuverable aircraft technology) plane would fly again in mid-June after four months of modifications, scheduled during the rainy season when flooding would prevent landing the plane on a dry lakebed. Modifications included airframe, flight-control and instrumentation systems, and data link. The 3,400-pound craft had reached speeds up to 595 mph at altitudes to 40,000 feet and a maximum load factor of 4.5 grams. (DFRC Release 80-8)
June 12: DFRC reported that an unmanned remotely piloted vehicle crashed during a research flight, impacting a dry lakebed north of the center. Air-launched from a B-52 mother ship at 7:10 a.m. PDT, the small plane called DAST (drones for aerodynamic and structural testing) exhibited wing-structure problems about 10 minutes later. NASA was investigating. The DAST program, to demonstrate the control of wing flutter by advanced flight-control systems, used a remotely piloted vehicle that could be launched from a mother ship and flown through the maneuvers using telemetry from a pilot in a ground cockpit. The likelihood of structural damage during flight called for a safer and more economical way of testing advanced high-risk concepts. (DFRC Release 80-9)
•	NASA announced that WFC would begin testing this month at the Manassas, Va., municipal airport an experimental computer-advisory system that would increase data available to pilots using small airports without control arrangements. Designed as an extension of the procedural system now in use at uncontrolled airports, the system would keep track of aircraft in the vicinity and supply pilots with air-traffic information.
Computer-generated voice, radar, and weather-sensing information would automatically broadcast an airport advisory every 2 minutes and a traffic advisory every 20 seconds: the airport advisory would offer an airport identifier, broadcast time, windspeed and direction, favored or active runway, altimeter setting, and ambient and dew-point temperature. The traffic data would include the number of aircraft on each pattern, and position and heading of arriving or departing aircraft. Manassas was estimated to handle about 200,000 operations (landings and takeoffs) yearly; the demonstration would allow pilots using the system in an uncontrolled high-density environment to evaluate its effectiveness. (NASA Release 80-88; WFC Release 80-7)
•	FBIS carried a Tokyo Kyodo story that Japan’s Space Development Council had decided that the failure last February of its Ayame 2 communications satellite was caused by malfunction of the apogee motor. The ground station lost contact with Ayame 2 three days after launch when engineers tried to fire the motor to put it into proper orbit. The council report called for domestic
170
JUNE 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
production of the apogee rocket and other major satellite components in future; the apogee motor had been made in the United States. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, June 12/80)
June 13: The House Committee on Science and Technology said that its subcommittees on space science and applications and on natural resources and environment would hold hearings June 24-25 on administration plans to develop a Landsat remote-sensing system with private-sector participation. (House anno 96-204)
•	The Washington Post reported that Rep. Bruce Vento (D-Minn.) had called for congressional investigation of the Navy’s new F-18 jet fighter, claiming the multibillion-dollar project was in “deep financial and technical trouble.” The F-18 was the biggest single item in the military budget now before Congress; despite critical reports, Vento said the project had “eluded congressional scrutiny.”
The GAO, Congress’s investigative arm, in February reported that the F-18’s planned performance had been reduced and various problems remained uncorrected. GAO said that during its investigation at Navy, DOD, and contractor facilities “we were not granted access to information we felt critical to our evaluation.” Vento pointed out that the GAO report received little official notice and said that he had “startling information” as a result of his own investigation. In the past 15 months alone, he said, F-18 costs increased $10.9 billion, and the Pentagon was talking a $32.8 billion total cost for the project previously estimated at $24 billion. (W Post, June 13/80, A-16)
June 16: MSFC reported that the last of the three main engines scheduled for flight on the Columbia had successfully completed its second flight-acceptance test with an 8-minute 40-second test run that exceeded the time required to put a Shuttle into orbit. Engine no. 2007 underwent throttling and gimbaling during the test to show its ability to change speed and direction after liftoff. The other two engines (2005 and 2006) had completed their second acceptance tests June 2 and 5, respectively. Although the engines had undergone acceptance test firings last year, modifications made since that time had led NASA to retest them. Successful retest also demonstrated the on-line component replacement that would be required in repeated reuse. Testing of associated main propulsion equipment would continue at NSTL. (MSFC Release 80-86)
•	The Washington Post reported that heat-resistant tiles on Columbia had survived without damage a critical test June 14 simulating separation of the giant fuel tank. Engineers scanned the tiles for 10 hours and were “all pretty ecstatic,” said a NASA spokesman, adding that they would spend the next few days evaluating results of the “pyrotechnic shock test” before pronouncing it a complete success. Dr. Robert Gray, project office manager, said previous
171
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JUNE 1980
simulations had damaged Shuttle tiles; “if there are no major problems, we could launch our first flight in February,” he added. (WPost, June 16/80, A-ll)
• NASA reported that its five-year-old Landsat 2 spacecraft, after nearly six months of inaction, was restored to service through “intensive efforts” by engineers at GSFC. Problems had developed November 5, 1979, when the yaw-attitude flywheel in the Landsat’s Earth-pointing system stopped functioning, probably because of a lubrication breakdown. The attitude-control system could not keep the spacecraft sufficiently stabilized to acquire pictures of Earth, or keep the solar panels facing the Sun to collect enough energy for operation.
The spacecraft was “retired” on its fifth birthday, January 22, 1980, but GSFC engineers began trying to use magnetic compensation operating without either the flywheel or the control-system gas, which had been depleted. Magnetic control required defining the spacecraft’s magnetic characteristics in order to plot interaction with Earth’s magnetic field. As the spacecraft had no system for direct measurement of yaw attitude, engineers had to find a way to use the solar-array output, which varied with the spacecraft’s attitude and its latitude position relative to Earth.
On May 5, 1980, apparently as a result of redistribution of the lubricant, the flywheel responded to an ON command and started running again, and the attitude-control system was once more able to keep the spacecraft pointed properly toward the Earth and Sun. However, lack of gas required use of the magnetic system to keep roll and yaw flywheels in a safe range.
Experience gained in magnetic control of attitude was applied to controlling wheel speeds without delays in development. The GSFC engineers believed that this new procedure would let Landsat 2 operate almost at previous capacity, although this would be limited to readout since the tape recorders were not functioning. The return to operational status was important because the multispectral scanner, principal Earth-imaging device, would again provide data to three U.S. and nine foreign sites, supplementing operations of Landsat 3. (NASA Release 80-94)
June 17: ESA reported the complete engine D that malfunctioned May 23 during the launch of Ariane L02 had been located the morning of June 16 about 5 kilometers south of the lies du Salut off French Guiana, and brought to the surface early in the afternoon. It was in good condition, capable of being subjected to a thorough inspection. Engineers from CNES (Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales) and SEP (Societe Europeenne de Propulsion) dismantled it at the Ariane launch site and would send it to SEP’s facility at Vernon, France, with propulsion elements of the other engines that had been recovered, B entirely and A and C partially (servomotors and turbopumps). Working groups studying launch data would report their results at the end of June; a schedule of further test flights would not be set up until then. (ESA Info 16)
172
JUNE 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
•	The Washington Post reported that demonstrators trying to keep Howard Hughes’s Spruce Goose from being carved up rallied at its hanger Saturday, June 14, to voice concern about sending parts of the plane to museums. Sum-ma Corporation, the Hughes holding company, said that it would go ahead with plans to dismantle the plane in two weeks. A spokesman for the Committee to Save the Hughes Flying Boat said the group had received no replies from corporations it asked to donate the $750,000 needed to keep the plane in one piece. (W Post, June 17/80, B-3)
•	MSFC reported selection of two firms, Grumman Aerospace and the Harris Corporation, to negotiate parallel contracts for concept-definition studies of a deployable space antenna [see April 15]. MSFC would demonstrate use of such an antenna flown in low Earth orbit until completion of definition studies by the two firms. (MSFC Release 80-87)
•	The Washington Post reported that Great Britain’s postal service June 17 became the first international public service to send letters by satellite. In-telpost, the new system, used a satellite 25,000 miles above Earth to send documents and letters by facsimile, an electronic means of transmitting the written word from one place to another. The first letter using the new system took just over 1 minute to get from Great Britain’s Post Office chairman-designate Ron Dearing to a receiving center in Toronto. (WPost, June 18/80, C-2)
June 23: INTELSAT announced election of Irving Goldstein, previously vice chairman of its board of directors, to be chairman succeeding Randolph Payne of Australia. Goldstein, U.S. signatory in the organization, had been working with the board since its formation in 1973. He was vice president and general manager for international communications of ComSatCorp, responsible for activities including planning, installation, and operation of ground stations using the INTELSAT system. (INTELSAT Release 80-10-1)
June 24: INTELSAT said that its board meeting in Bogota approved use of time-division multiple-access equipment with its global communications satellite system; the new devices, to be installed in the 1980s, would offer three times more telephone channels on INTELSAT satellites than available from frequency-modulation (FM) equipment now in use. (INTELSAT Release 80-11-1)
• ESA said that the six groups investigating the malfunction at the Ariane L02 launch ended four weeks of study on one of the four first-stage engines. They reported that the suspect engine recovered from the sea [see June 17] had a foreign body at the injector level: an identification plate was found near the injection orifices, and they were trying to determine if it was there at launch or got there during the engine’s immersion in the sea.
173
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JUNE 1980
Analysis of engine noise showed differences from results recorded at ground tests in Europe; also, engine start-up parameters (combustion-pressure build-up time) showed abnormal dispersions, but researchers had not been able to link them to observed phenomena. ESA said that the L03 test flight originally set for November 1980 might not occur until February 1981, and the fourth test flight by midyear, to qualify the rocket for operational launch. (ESA Info Bltn 17)
June 25: NASA reported that MSFC had chosen Ball Aerospace Division to negotiate a $9.5 million contract for design, development, and manufacture of a chemical release module for use in the first large-scale controlled investigations of dynamic phenomena outside Earth’s atmosphere. Information on such processes in Earth’s magnetosphere, ionosphere, and upper atmosphere was hard to obtain because the areas were so enormous and the dynamic activity was invisible.
Scheduled for mid-1983 launch on the Space Shuttle, the self-contained free-flying module would release in space chemical elements that would absorb sunlight and reflect distinctive colors; other chemicals would glow when reacting with oxygen particles in the upper atmosphere. Motion of atoms and ions colored in this way could be tracked. During the module’s six-month lifetime, it would make 20 to 30 chemical releases for visual, camera, and radar observation. (NASA Release 80-99; MSFC Release 80-89)
June 26: NASA announced that scientists studying data from Heao 2 had confirmed the emission of X-rays from Jupiter, making the giant planet the only one besides Earth to produce X-rays. Heao 2, launched November 13, 1978, carried a focusing X-ray telescope with four different instruments that could be positioned at the focus, including the imaging proportional counter used to view Jupiter. Dr. Albert Metzger of JPL, leader of the scientific team making the discovery, reported it to a meeting of the American Astronomical Society at the University of Maryland last week.
The X-ray find indicated the power needed by the intense radiation belts in the Jovian magnetosphere: from the brightness observed, scientists said that energetic electrons in the system emitted nearly a quadrillion watts of power. To maintain the radiation belts, an equal amount of power had to come from the planet’s rotational energy and the force of the solar wind. Also, energetic ions and electrons impacting the surfaces of satellites orbiting inside the Jovian radiation belt might also produce X rays; observing those X rays might help determine the composition of Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto. (NASA Release 80-98)
• MSFC announced that it would mark its 20th anniversary July 1 with an assembly honoring the 1,039 “charter members” who had been there since its founding. In 1960, the Development Operations Division of the Army’s Ballistic Missile Agency (ABMA) became the nucleus of a center belonging
174
JUNE 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
to the space agency founded in 1958, bringing to NASA property worth hundreds of millions of dollars and a staff headed by Dr. Wernher von Braun, the center’s first director. President Eisenhower had decided to name the center after George C. Marshall, five-star general, Secretary of State, and winner of the Nobel Peace Prize, an appropriate name for an organization devoted to peaceful uses of space. (MSFC Release 80-92)
June 27: A panel of the NRC said that the FAA had lost the engineering expertise to say whether airplanes were safe and waited until accidents occurred before seeking regulations that might have prevented them.
Both the Washington Post and the Washington Star reported a briefing by panel chairman George M. Low, president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and former deputy administrator of NASA. “The FAA engineering staff today is considerably less competent than the engineering they regulate,” Low told the press. The latest of a series of studies of the crash of an American Airlines DC-10 in Chicago May 25, 1979, that killed 273 people, the panel study was sought by Transportation Secretary Neil Goldschmidt, who said he had ordered an immediate analysis of the panel’s findings “with the intent of putting into effect promptly any recommendations that will improve our procedures.”
The Chicago accident was blamed on improper maintenance procedures by American Airlines, but a contributing cause was found to be the plane’s design. The panel said that the FAA relied too much on manufacturers and was performing “only a cursory review” of industry tests; FAA officials charged with supervising manufacturers and airlines had “gotten too close to their industry counterparts, weakening their independence and objectivity.”
The panel recommended reassignment of officials on a periodic basis to work with different manufacturers and airlines. It also recommended new licensing and training certification rules for airline and airplane mechanics “more like those for aircraft flight crews;” FAA should require aircraft to be designed to continue flying after any structural failure unless the failure would prevent flight, such as loss of a wing. In the Chicago crash, an engine mount had ripped from the plane, destroying vital controls in the cockpit; the mount, certified as safe, would not have- failed except for maintenance-induced damage. Asked if the DC-10 would have survived if the proposed rule had been in effect, Low replied “Yes.” (W Post, June 27/80, 1A; W Star, June 26/80, A-l)
• JSC reported that its engineers were working on automated ways to fabricate in space the beams and trusses needed in space construction projects of the future. Recently arrived on center was a truss such as a “beam builder” in space would form, the product of three years of analysis, design, and testing at General Dynamics-Convair Division. JSC engineers would begin evaluating it in July using a hydraulic cylinder to apply various loads to measure stiffness and strength of the truss. (JSC Release 80-040)
175
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JUNE 1980
June 30: NASA announced that MSFC had awarded a $230 million cost-plus-award-fee contract to Martin Marietta Aerospace for full-scale production of Space Shuttle external tanks, the only part of the: Shuttle not recovered for reuse. Martin Marietta had an earlier contract for design, development, and delivery of nine tanks—three test articles and six flight articles—for Shuttle test flights.
The new contract, for delivery of 7 flight tanks to support Shuttle operating missions, included long lead-time procurement of components and subassemblies for 5 additional tanks and raw material for 24 other additional tanks. Manufacturing of the external tanks would take place at NASA’s Michoud assembly facility. (NASA Release 80-100; MSFC Release 80-90) —MSFC announced that it planned to reduce the weight of the Shuttle external tank by 6,000 pounds, a change that could increase the Shuttle’s payload-carrying capability by about the same amount. The center amended its tank design and development contract with Martin Marietta, adding more than $42.9 million to cover the weight-reduction effort and modify tools used in future production. The change would affect tanks built under a new contract for full-scale tank production to support operational Shuttle launches. The first lightweight external tank would be delivered in the summer of 1982. (MSFC Release 80-93; NASA Release 80-102)
•	In an editorial headed “Shuttle at the Crossroads,” Aviation Week & Space Technology reviewed the delays and difficulties besetting NASA’s program, starting with the budget problem in Congress. The first flight, now set for early 1981, would be two years behind schedule, and “even that date may keep on slipping.” Technical problems other than tiles included retest of the first set of flight-rated engines “over objections of technical management but with the endorsement of the flight crew.” NASA’s dilemma in risk assessment was real, particularly because of the tile problem. Aviation Week & Space Technology said: “Loss or damage to one of the orbiters of its limited fleet, not to mention of a crew, could decimate public support and disrupt operations of the shuttle program. On the other hand, at some point fairly soon NASA’s top management is going to have to decide that risk has been reduced to a reasonable minimum, draw a deep breath and commit to first flight.” (AvWk, June 30/80, 9)
During June: Republic Airlines said June 9 that its representatives had signed a pact with Summa Corporation and the estate of Howard R. Hughes, Jr., under which it would purchase Hughes Airwest for $38.5 million. Acquisition would occur next fall, if legal and other regulatory problems were solved. {W Star, June 10/80, C-10)
•	United Airlines began a six-month test June 11 of air-to-ground telephone service for passengers, using a standard 12-button wall model installed on one of the airline’s DC-lOs. The firm was conducting the test with Sky-Tel, a sub-
176
JUNE 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
sidiary of Page-America. The caller would press buttons for connection with the ground station nearest to flight path, where an operator would place the call. The charge would be $10 plus cost of the call. (WPost, June 11/80, B-2)
•	The FCC authorized the ComSatCorp to begin construction of a $15 million ground station on Saipan, in the western Pacific Ocean, to bring the first satellite communications to the northern Mariana Islands. The ComSatCorp-owned and -operated station would provide direct communications between the northern Marianas and the United States, Hawaii, Guam, Japan, and other points in the Pacific. (W Star, June 12/80, B-7)
•	FBIS carried Tass reports on the continuing flight of Salyut 6 with its international crew, Bertalan Farkas of Hungary and Valery Kubasov, working with longtime occupants Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin. Preparing Soyuz 35 for return to Earth, the cosmonauts carried into it containers of materials on which research had been completed: exposed rolls of film, space navigation charts, flight logs, biological objects, and substances produced in materials experiments. Used-up equipment would be taken into the “living compartment.” The crew had shot a film about their joint operations, including development of plants in weightlessness and production of metal alloys and castings.
Tass reported June 3 that the descent module of Soyuz 35 had landed safely near Dzhezkazgan and that the Intercosmos crew were well. The Soyuz 36 that took them to Salyut 6 was still attached to it; on June 4, the Salyut 6 crew moved Soyuz 36 to the other docking port to make room for another craft. On June 5 at 1719 Moscow time the Soviet Union launched Soyuz T-2 carrying Lt. Col. Yuri Malyshev and, as flight engineer, veteran cosmonaut Vladimir Aksyonov, tenth crew to visit Salyut 6 since its launch. An unmanned Soyuz T launched in December 1979 had docked with Salyut 6 and remained for more than three months, testing new automated features. Before docking with Salyut 6, the crew turned the Soyuz toward the Sun to test its solar batteries, one of the new features.
On June 6 Soyuz T-2 docked with Salyut 6 at 1858 Moscow time. Tass said that the approach was automated up to within 180 meters, after which it was controlled by the crew. Konstantin Feoktistov explained that “earlier, during manual approach the station was.. .automatically aligned with the ship and was always directed toward it with its docking unit. .. [the crew] regulated the longitudinal speed and made sure that it went in straight. This time the station was immobile: the craft approached from the side... A quarter turn was made around the station and it came on to the axis level. The manual control system worked well. We think the crew was even better.” Later reports mentioned a malfunction of some automated part and the need for an unplanned manual docking.
The visiting cosmonauts performed “dynamic operations” including a photographic turn around the station, which had not been possible before.
177
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JUNE 1980
After a four-day mission, Malyshev and Aksyonov undocked Soyuz T-2 June 9 and returned to the spot near Dzhezkazgan where the previous Soyuz crew landed. Popov and Ryumin remained in Salyut 6, which logged its thousandth day of flight June 24. Progress 10 was launched June 29. (FBIS, Tass in English, June 1-29/80; NY Times, June 10/80, C-2; A/D, June 10/80, 219; AvWk, June 23/80, 18)
178
July
July 1: NASA announced selection of General Electric Space Division, Lockheed Missiles and Space Company, RCA Astro-Electronics, and Rockwell International to negotiate 9-month $750,000 fixed-price contracts for parallel definition studies of alternate ways to implement the NOSS. Studies would include flight segments, ground segments, and orbit operations.
NOSS would acquire ocean-surface data for delivery to selected users in weather and sea-ice forecasting, climate research, fisheries management, and ocean acoustic-propagation predictions. A large free-flying high-inclination spacecraft carrying a coastal-zone color scanner, scatterometer, altimeter, and large-antenna multichannel microwave radiometer would measure the ocean’s emitted and reflective energy in radio, infrared, and visible frequencies to satisfy both civilian and defense needs. DOC’s NOAA and DOD would cooperate in the NOSS program with NASA, which had given GSFC project responsibility. (NASA Release 80-103)
July 2. INTELSAT said that its board of governors meeting in Bogota last week had made decisions that would determine the course of international communications satellite system development for the decade. INTELSAT would purchase key items needed for a ninth Intelsat V series satellite; order from NASA three more Atlas Centaur launch vehicles with improved capability; procure from the ESA two more Ariane launch vehicles; and define specifications for an improved satellite, Intelsat V-A, and a high-capacity satellite to be called Intelsat VI. INTELSAT would spend more than U.S. $230 million, said W. Wood, deputy director general for operations and development. (INTELSAT Release 80-12-1)
July Z'NASA said that it had agreed with ESA to let two European scientists enter the mission-specialist training program for Shuttle astronauts at JSC [see May 30]. The Europeans, Claude Nicollier of Switzerland and Wqbbo Ockels of the Netherlands, were both ESA employees and, as Spacelab 1 payload-specialist candidates, had undergone a screening and selection process like that of U.S. candidates. NASA agreed to train them in view of Spacelab delay and in recognition of ESA’s contribution to the STS in funding Spacelab development; ESA would reimburse NASA for the cost of training the two. (NASA Release 89-106; ESA Info 19)
July S.WFC observed the 35th anniversary of the launch on July 4, 1945, of its first research rocket, a 17-foot Tiamat. Since it became a rocket range, Wallops Island had seen the launch of about 12,000 research vehicles of from
179
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JULY 1980
1 to 7 stages, sent as high as 19,000 miles above the Atlantic at speeds over
38,000	mph, and the launch of 19 satellites. From Wallops, rhesus monkeys Sam and Miss Sam rode into space on a Little Joe booster in 1959-60 to test the Mercury spacecraft before Alan Shepard took it into space; first test of the Echo balloon also occurred here.
Early research at Wallops collected aerodynamic data at transonic and low supersonic speeds as part of the push to break the sound barrier; today, the launches gathered data on space, aeronautics, and characteristics of aerospace flight and tested ideas and devices for future spaceflight.
NASA’s predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), put its Pilotless Aircraft Research Station on Wallops Island under the direction of LaRC; its mission was aeronautical research to supplement wind-tunnel and laboratory work at LaRC. When NASA came into being in 1958 and took over LaRC and other field centers and research facilities, it put the Wallops station directly under NASA Headquarters and renamed it Wallops Flight Center in 1974. (WFC Release 80-8)
•	NASA had no plans to carry tourists into outer space, the Washington Star said, even though its offices around the United Slates had floods of requests for rides since the Space Shuttle project was unveiled in 1977. At least 15,000 people had tried to book seats, and 1,200 new requests arrived each week. “Non-astronauts may be aboard some missions to conduct experiments,” said Chester M. Lee, NASA’s director of space transportation systems, “but we’re not ready to book tourists. There is absolutely no provision or thought for non-working passengers.” (W Star, July 8/80, A-2)
July 9. JPL reported that Viking orbiter 1, after more than four years of circling Mars, was reaching the end of its mission. JPL would command it off some time between July 23 and 30 after it had exhausted the attitude-control gas that kept its solar panels pointed at the Sun and its antenna toward Earth. A controlled burn during that time would change its orbit to fulfill planetary quarantine requirements, avoiding impact with—and contamination of—Mars before the year 2019. The orbiter would keep observing until commanded off, and thereafter circle Mars for decades in silence.
Viking 1 launched toward Mars in August 1975 arrived there June 19, 1976. Its lander reached Mar’s surface July 20 with a planned 90-day lifetime but on July 20, 1980, would have observed the planet for more than two full Mars years (four Earth years) and would operate unattended on Mars into 1990, perhaps into 1994. The orbiter and lander of Viking 2 had been commanded off on July 24, 1978 and April 11, 1980, respectively. Fewer than 30 people at JPL remained in Viking operations and data processing. (JPL Release 940; NASA Release 80-108)
•	MSFC’s Marshall Storreported the return of Shuttle main engines 2005 and 2007 from NSTL to KSC after modification and testing. The third engine
180
JULY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
(2006) of the cluster scheduled to power orbiter Columbia in its first flight was still at NSTL. NASA had called for retest after the engines were modified on the basis of flight readiness tests last year. (Marshall Star, July 9/80, 2)
July 10:ESA announced that its science program committee had approved a major space first: sending a spacecraft to Halley’s comet. The mission, called Giotto, would send a spacecraft derived from the Goes design through the comet in 1986 at a speed of 70 kilometers. Objective of the mission would be to measure the substances (atmospheric, ionized particles, and dust) from the coma boiling off the nucleus under the effect of solar heating and to photograph the nucleus with an on-board camera. The payload would consist mainly of the camera and spectrometers for measuring atomic composition.
The Giotto mission was named for the “Adoration of the Magi” scene in a fresco in Padua’s Arena Chapel done by Florentine artist Giotto di Bondone. The sky in the Adoration scene shows Halley’s comet, which made one of its periodic 76-year appearances in 1301; Giotto was thus able to use it as a model for the Bethlehem star in his painting, completed in 1304. The fresco might be called the first scientific description of Halley’s comet. (ESA Info 20)
July //. NASA reported award of an $8.5 million contract to Thiokol Corporation for Caster IV auxiliary motors for the Delta launch vehicle, part of a fixed-price supplement to an existing contract being negotiated with Thiokol for 63 of these motors at an estimated price of $20.9 million, all to be delivered to the KSC launch site by the end of 1982.
The VUill Street Journal commented that the “old-fashioned” liquid-fuel Delta rockets had long served to put vehicles into space, and its job was to have been taken over by the reusable Shuttle. But the Shuttle was two years behind schedule, so that NASA had to buy more solid-fuel Castors to help with the extended schedule of Delta launches. (NASA Release 80-110; WSJ, July 11/80, 3)
July 74.MSFC reported that a planned 542-second test July 12 of the three-engine cluster for Shuttle’s main propulsion system lasted only 106 seconds because of fire indication in the aft compartment of the orbiter simulator. Up to cutoff, all engines and other parts of the propulsion system apparently worked normally, including completion of the scheduled gimbaling and throttling of the engine. About 45 seconds of the firing reached 102% of rated thrust, first time for the cluster at this performance level. Inspection after the test showed a small hole in the no. 3 engine’s fuel preburner that allowed burning gas to escape into the area above the heatshield containing the powerheads. Damage was confined to the one engine, with none to the facility or the rest of the test article, MSFC engineers said.
The damaged engine would probably be returned to the manufacturer, Rocketdyne Division of Rockwell International at Canoga Park, Calif., for inspection and repair. A committee headed by Dr. Herman Thompson, deputy
181
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JULY 1980
director of the science and engineering directorate at MSFC, was appointed to find the cause of the accident; no date would be set for further testing until the committee made its report. (MSFC Release 80-97; NASA Release 80-113)
•	ComsatCorp said that it had signed a contract with MultiVisions, Ltd., of Anchorage for the first commercial use of a new 10-meter multiple-beam torus antenna, a revolutionary design allowing a user to work with as many as seven geosynchronous satellites at the same time. The usual parabolic dish antenna could work with only one satellite at a time.
The torus, scheduled to be in operation in Anchorage next year, would be equipped initially to receive television programs from three satellites simultaneously. With three dual-polarization receive-only feeds, the new antenna could receive up to 72 different programs from 72 different transponders from U.S. domestic satellites, and additional feeds would provide even greater capacity. Where access to more than one satellite was needed, the torus would be cheaper both to build and to operate than the two or more conventional antennas that would usually be required. It would also reduce the amount of real estate needed for several parabolic antennas and the amount of interference in congested frequency areas (of which Anchorage was one). ComSatCorp had asked the FCC for permission to locate torus antennas at Etam, W. Va., Andover, Maine, and Jamesburg, Calif. (ComSatCorp Release 80-30)
•	INTELSAT announced that Guinea became the 105th member in a ceremony at the U.S. State Department when Ambassador Mamady Lamine Conde signed the operating agreement. Guinea planned to operate a ground station using the Intelsat spacecraft located over the Indian Ocean. (INTELSAT Release 80-15-1)
July 15.'The Wall Street Journal said that ESA would go ahead with a $125 million probe of Halley’s comet because original plans for a $370-$470 million joint mission with NASA had become impossible due to U.S. budget cuts. The original plan called for launch of a Space Shuttle that would have sent a satellite to Halley’s as well as to Tempel 2, a comet much farther out in space.
NASA had to scrub the two-comet mission because it couldn’t get the money for a new kind of space engine to make the flight; the Wall Street Journal said that it was still studying a stopgap plan to use an old-fashioned rocket to shoot a spacecraft past Halley’s when it approached Earth. ESA now planned to put up a 750-pound satellite, Giotto [see July 10], from Kourou in July 1985 to rendezvous with Halley’s in March 1986. (JKSy, July 15/80, 30)
July i7.The Washington Star reported that discovery of a “serious potential safety defect” in the nation’s most widely used jet engine had led the FAA to order mandatory inspections for two-thirds of the short- and medium-range commercial jetliners in the United States. The engine was standard on three
182
JULY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
major planes: the medium-range Boeing 727, with three engines, and two short-range planes with two engines each, the Boeing 737 and the McDonnell Douglas DC-9. Each FAA-ordered inspection on a Pratt & Whitney JT8D engine would take 170 hours to disassemble it to the point where it could be checked. Some of the engines were nearly new; others had been serving for several years: a JT8D would normally be retired after 20,000 cycles in service.
When a Hawaiian Airline DC-9 blew up on takeoff at Honolulu June 15, FAA inspection revealed that a portion of the engine was subject to metal fatigue and failure because of the factory machining of the metal. No serious injuries occurred in the Hawaii incident. However, random FAA checking showed that other planes equipped with JT8D engines had cracks in the same engine spot as the Hawaii plane. The potential flaw in the engines was the eighth compressor hub, a 591-pound wheel with an array of blades located in the middle of the 3,000- to 4,000 pound engine. Each engine had 13 compressor hubs, each with a successively smaller set of fans to collect air and force it through smaller areas into the fuel-combustion chamber. Machining of a flange on the eighth compressor hub was ground against the grain of the metal, putting unusual strain on that part. FAA spokesman Dennis Feldman could not estimate the cost of the inspection programs, thought to be in tens of millions of dollars; nor could he give any definitive answer as to whether the manufacturer or the airline would have to cover the cost. (W Star, July 17/80, A-l)
July 18: Newspapers reported the launch at 8:04 a.m. local time of the 771-pound.Rohini 1 by India’s space research organization (ISRO), making India the sixth country in the world to build and launch its own satellite. Rohini 1 was launched from Sriharikota Island near Madras on a four-stage SLV-3 solid-fuel rocket into an orbit with a 919-kilometer apogee, 306-kilometer perigee, 44;7° inclination, and 97-minute period. “This is a great day for India,” said Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, who estimated the cost of the launch vehicle at $25.2 million.	.
The Washington Post said that the launch was remarkable “for a country that still used bullock carts as a prime mode of transportation.” Despite its poverty, India had the world’s third largest pool of technically trained personnel; Dr. Satish Dhawan, head of ISRO, said that the successful launch would pave the way. for liquid-fuel rockets carrying larger payloads up to 1,300 pounds. India’s 17-year-old space program had had setbacks, including a failure in August 1979, when its rocket dropped into the Bay of Bengal about 5 seconds after liftoff because the second stage failed to ignite. Launch of Rohini “underscored India’s place as the most powerful nation of the South Asian subcontinent,” said the Washington Post. (WPost, July 19/80, A-13; W Star, July 19/80, 4; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, July 21/80)
• Since Mt. St. Helens erupted May 18, NASA reported what it called the most complete observations to date of volcanic aerosols in the stratosphere.
183
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JULY 1980
Large volcanic eruptions had previously changed Earth’s weather (short-term) and climate (long-term). ARC had collected Mt. St. Helen’s data for its aerosol climate effects (ACE) program, using the U-2 aircraft in sampling missions on May 19, 22, and 27, and June 14 and 17.
A preliminary analysis of the volcanic plumes showed solid ash and sulfuric acid, the proportions varying in different samples. The acid in the stratosphere was several hundred times greater than before the eruptions. The first flight found ash particles as large as 30 microns, of composition similar to ash on the ground near the volcano. (Largest particles found on later flights were about 3 microns.) Gaseous sulfur dioxide also increased: levels on the first flight were 10 to 1,000 times ambient levels, and on the second flight were 100 times normal. The second flight found water vapor in the plume to be 10 times the normal amount, showing that volcanic water was injected into the stratosphere. A July 1979 ACE flight over Alaska gave baseline levels for comparison with conditions after the eruption.
On the day of the eruption, one of NASA’s SAGE teams in Wyoming launched instruments on a balloon to enter and measure the dust plume; it detected dust concentrations 400 to 1,600 times normal in the stratosphere. The SAGE satellite launched in 1979 tracked the Mt. St. Helens’ clouds as it had those of two previous eruptions. WFC sent an Orion P-3 a plane on an “underflight” as the cloud went over North Carolina and the Atlantic Ocean, along with a Super Loki rocket; these flights gave scientists simultaneous data readings from above and below the atmosphere. By late June, LaRC scientists decided that, although Mt. St. Helens could have boosted stratospheric aerosols by 50%, there was as yet no sign of adverse climate change. (ARC Release 80-62; NASA Release 80-107)
July 22.NASA unveiled the first scientific and applications payload for the STS (Shuttle) at GSFC’s clean room, where instruments were installed in the package planned as an alternate payload on orbital test flight 4, scheduled for April 1982. (Prime payload for this flight belonged to DOD.) Called OSS-1 for NASA’s Office of Space Science, the entire payload was designed, built, tested, and integrated by a team of GSFC engineers and scientists headed by Ken Kissin, OSS-1 mission manager, and Jon Busse, project manager for Shuttle payload integration and rocket experiment. Project scientists were Drs. Siegfried Bauer and Werner Neupert. The seven principal OSS-1 experiments were in the disciplines of space plasma physics, solar physics, astronomy, and life sciences, each represented by one or more instruments. (NASA Release 80-114, 80-117)
• NASA announced that a sunspot hotline set up at GSFC would keep the public informed about solar flares during the 1980 peak cycle of activity. Daily recorded messages would contain information on sunspots, solar flares, geomagnetic storms, and the impact of solar activity on radio transmissions, for instance. The recordings provided jointly by NASA and NOAA through
184
JULY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
its space environment services center in Boulder, Colo., would originate in the SMM facility at GSFC. The “Solar Max” spacecraft launched February 14 was an orbiting solar observatory carrying seven instruments whose data, coordinated with data from scientists at ground-based observatories throughout the world, would permit the most comprehensive investigation of solar flares ever made. Information from these sources would be relayed to GSFC on a 24-hour basis so that NASA scientists could determine which active regions of the Sun to study during the next 24 hours. (NASA Release 80-116)
July 23:The Soviet Union launched Soyuz J7 at 9:33 p.m. Moscow time, carrying Col. Viktor Gorbatko and a 33-year-old Vietnamese air force pilot, Lt. Col. Pham Tuan, first Asian space traveler and sixth citizen of an eastern-bloc country to be part of the USSR’s Intercosmos program. The Soyuz would link up within 24 hours with the orbiting Salyut 6 space station where Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin had been working for more than three months. The Salyut’s docking port had been cleared July 19 by jettisoning cargo ship Progress 10, which burned up reentry. (W Post, July 24/80, A-15; Today, July 24/80, 1A; W Star, July 20/80, 2; July 24/80, A-7)
• Forthright criticism of Carter-administration space policy came from Rocco A. Petrone, former director of MSFC, and Dr. Thomas A. Paine, who was NASA administrator during the early manned lunar landing years, the Huntsville Times reported. The two testified July 23 before the House Committee on Science and Technology’s subcommittee on space science and applications.
Committee chairman Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and ranking minority member Larry Winn (R-Kans.) both expressed support of the NASA veterans; Winn remarked that it was :“like old timers’ day up here.” Under Carter, Paine said, the U.S. had “lost both our senses of direction and our resolution.. .Ringing rhetoric proclaiming U.S. leadership in space is no substitute for plans and programs. In my view it is self-delusive to give lip service to leadership while avoiding initiative and commitment.”
Petrone said the usual pause for evaluation after a large program like the lunar mission “is now becoming dangerously close to a condition of stall and possible loss of minimum momentum needed” for complex space programs. He expressed concern over “technological timidity in a nation that has been built over the years on technological strength.” (Htsvl Tms, July 24/80, 6)
July 25:A rescue training exercise at KSC was about to begin: a mock-up of the Space Shuttle was set down in a pond, and the rescue team was ready to practice its procedures in case the Shuttle overshot the runway upon its return to launch site and landed in the drink. Then, Fat Albert rose from the pond and lumbered up to Sun himself about 10 feet from the mock-up. The test was halted until wildlife officers arrived on the scene.
Fat Albert, a local alligator, used to share lunches with KSC employees until
185
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JULY 1980
(so it is said) he ate an employee’s tennis shoe right off his foot. The wildlife officers who lassoed and carried away the alligator weighed him (1,00 pounds) and measured him (13 feet, 9 inches). With Fat Albert gone, the maneuver continued: the rescue team dropped from a helicopter into the pond and rescued two dummy astronauts from the mock-up. (JSC Roundup, July 25/80, 1)
July 28.-NASA reported on a solar-flare “first” resulting from coordination of data from the Solar Max spacecraft and from a network of sophisticated ground observatories participating in the International Solar Maximum Year.
On the basis of worldwide predictions, instruments on the Solar Max and at observatories in 18 nations had focused on an active region of the Sun June 24. On June 28-29, that region produced two major flares, captured by all seven spacecraft instruments (first all-instrument simultaneous measurement of the same flare since the spacecraft was launched in February). The observation was also the first in which scientists traced material ejected from a flare into the solar atmosphere. (NASA Release 80-120)
• The first Viking soft-landed on Mars just four years ago, the Washington Star noted, but “it seems now like ancient history”: this week, the Viking orbiter would shut down for good [see July 9]. It had been mapping Mars with high-resolution photographs since 1976; even more remarkable was the lander, scheduled to last for 90 days and now programmed to operate possibly through 1994.
“All this suggests an extraordinary contrast,” the paper said, “On Mars, American technology is thriving. . .on earth, the American genius that made such things possible is not being encouraged.” As the last messages arrive from the Viking orbiter, “its most important message—what the end of its useful life has to say about America’s scientific and technological future—is the one not heeded.” (W Star, July 28/80, A-6)
July JO.LaRC said that its researchers, working with the FAA in a Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics, might have solved a problem relating to general aviation aircraft distress-signal equipment, six of every seven failing to transmit after a plane crash and about 75% of all signals being false alarms.
The devices, emergency locator transmitters, emitted a signal on a wavelength designated for emergency use to locate downed aircraft and were supposedly activated by the impact force of a crash. The problem was in the sensor switch, which was sometimes too sensitive to normal aircraft vibrations (and sent false alarms), sometimes not sensitive enough to forces in a crash.
Langley engineer Huey D. Carden had designed and tested an experimental switch sensitive to low-cycle vibrations out of the range of normal aircraft vibrations and closer to the low-cycle pulselike force of a crash. The resear-
186
JULY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
chers were also looking into the general usefulness of the beacons and their performance as a total system. (LaRC Release 80-53; NASA Release 80-118)
•	MSFC reported that July 21 had marked the end of an era: Gustav A. Kroll, last of the original 118-man “von Braun team” to leave the center, retired just six weeks short of having 35 years of U.S. government service. He had headed the structures division of MSFC’s Structures and Propulsion Laboratory.
Kroll arrived in the United States in 1945 in Operation Paperclip and worked at Ft. Bliss, Tex., with the von Braun team, which transferred to Huntsville in 1950. Kroll became a U.S. citizen in 1954. He received NASA’s exceptional service medal in 1976 for “guiding the overall structural design of the solid rocket boosters,” two of which would be used in the first two minutes of flight on each Space Shuttle launch, recovered, and refurbished for reuse. He had worked in structures throughout his career: “all of them—every one of Marshall’s projects—Redstone, Jupiter, Saturn, Shuttle—all of them,” he said. Looking back, “there are no favorites, but the highlight would have to be the Saturn V flight and landing on the moon.” (MSFC Release 80-101)
•	The Washington Star said that prospects of mining on the Moon brought senators, scientists, and lawyers together to discuss profits that would not be earned for years, if ever. Witnesses at a Senate commerce subcommittee hearing said that some companies thought private investment would be hindered by any treaty that called for dividing lunar products among Earth’s nations. A proposed Moon treaty approval last year by the United Nations said that
lunar resources were “the common heritage of mankind,” a phrase that might threaten profits of the few nations or companies that could mount successful moon-mining expeditions.
NASA’s Dr. Robert Frosch said the treaty was not a problem, noting that years of development would have to precede any actual “issues of investment or returns in extraterrestrial resources.” Former astronaut Sen. Harrison Schmitt (R-N.M.) asked if the treaty might have a chilling effect on investment; Frosch replied, “Only if you want to be chilled.” (Washington Star, July 30/80, G-7)
July ^/.-Following an intensive review of the Space Shuttle program over the past few weeks, NASA confirmed a decision made earlier in 1980 to schedule the first Shuttle launch in March 1981. NASA administrator. Dr. Robert Frosch said the decision was made in spite of a potential setback when fire damaged a Shuttle engine cluster during a test [see July 14]. A study of the engine fire and its possible impact had already begun but would not impede the effort to maintain the launch schedule. The decision to commit to a March launch came after a series of meetings in which NASA and contractor personnel examined the status of hardware and software required for the first flight.
On the 15-week work schedule from rollout to launch, Frosch said that experience of previous “first launches of new vehicles” showed that original
187
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JULY 1980
schedules were seldom carried out in the time planned, but “the best chance of the earliest successful first flight comes in working to a tight but achievable work schedule.” (NASA Release 80-122; MSFC Release 80-102)
During July: ESA’s monthly newsletter said that the launch failure of its Ariane L02 launch vehicle [see May 23, June 17] did not call into question the continuation of the program. When the cause: of the engine failure was known, program officials would conduct the other two qualification firings. The six Arianes now being manufactured would launch Marecs B, Sino 2, Intelsat V, Exosat, ECS, and Telecom 1A, the organization said. (ESA newsletter, July 80)
•	NASA announced appointment of Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, DOE’s deputy assistant secretary for industrial and utility applications and operations, as associate administrator for space transportation operations, effective July 7. He would be responsible for STS functions including Shuttle, Spacelab, and expendable launch vehicles during transition to the Shuttle. (NASA anno July 2/80)
—NASA announced appointment of Gerald D. Griffin, deputy director of KSC, as acting associate administrator for external relations at Headquarters effective July 7. He would have responsibility for policy-level management, direction, and coordination of NASA’s Offices of Public Affairs, International Affairs, DOD Affairs, Government/Industry Affairs, and University Affairs, reporting to the NASA administrator. His KSC responsibilities would be given temporarily to senior managers at that center. (NASA Release 80-104; NASA anno July 3/80)
•	The Washington Post reported the death of Walter R. Dornberger, 84, who as a German general had supervised Wernher von Braun’s work on the V2 rocket during World War II. Cause of death June 26 was not given in either the Washington Post or Aviation Week & Space Technology. Dornberger was visiting in West Germany. He had come to the United States in 1947 after two years in a British prisoner-of-war camp; like more than 100 other German-born rocket scientists who worked for the U.S. Army and U.S. Air Force, he became a U.S. citizen. He also worked for Bell Aerosystems Company, where he was a vice president.
A volunteer in the imperial German army of World War I, Dornberger was a career soldier to the end of the second war. In 1932 he was given charge of a group of scientists working on rocket concepts and moved to Peenemunde in 1937. When the first test of the V2 October 3, 1942, was successful, Dornberger asked von Braun: “Do you realize what we accomplished today?” Von Braun said “Yes, today the spaceship was born.” In 1958, nearly three years before President Kennedy voiced the goal of landing a man on the Moon by 1970, Dornberger predicted that man would be on the moon in 10 years:
188
JULY 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
“whether he is Russian or American depends on how much money Congress is willing to spend,” he said. (W Post, July 2/80, B-6; AvWK, July 7/80, 25)
•	The Washington Star reported five new members for the Aviation Hall of Fame: former astronaut Charles Conrad, third man to walk on the Moon; Anthony H. G. Fokker, founder of Fokker Aircraft Company; William T. Piper, founder of Piper Aircraft Corporation; retired U.S. Air Force Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, “architect of the Air Force’s ballistic missile program”; and Robert F. Six, founder of Continental Airlines. Fokker and Piper were honored posthumously in the announcement at Dayton, Ohio’s, exhibition center. (W Star, July 21/80, A-2)
•	NASA announced that its quiet short-haul research aircraft (QSRA) had made more than 500 landings on a simulated aircraft-carrier deck in a NASA/U.S. Navy study of the application of propulsive-lift technology to aircraft carriers. The landings were made at a naval auxiliary landing field near ARC in California. Using a carrier-deck outline painted on the runway, the craft in 23 mph (37 kmh) headwinds touched down at about 52 mph (84 kmh), slow enough to make unnecessary the arresting gear normally used on carriers.
Actual operations would be demonstrated on a U.S. carrier at sea off San Diego later in July. Built by Boeing under NASA contract, the plane was essentially a new aircraft making extensive use of existing parts: fuselage and tail from a deHavilland C-8 Buffalo, landing-gear parts from a Boeing 727 jet transport, and engines from the US A.F. A-9A prototype. (NASA Release 80-111)
•	FBIS carried Tass reports on the flight of Salyut 6, with Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin aboard for 12 weeks. The crew spent the first week of July unloading cargo ship Progress 10, which linked with the Salyut July 1. Unloading was completed, and the orbiting station was refueled by July 15.
Experiments with Isparitel apparatus were performed, using a powerful beam of electrons to plate metal and glass surfaces with precious metals and alloys of aluminum and copper. Properties of plating done in weightlessness differed from those under Earth conditions, Tass noted. First tests of the apparatus were made last year when Lyakhov and Ryumin brought back 24 titanium plates with metal covering from Soyuz 32; the current tests should produce about 200 specimens covered with films of varied thicknesses.
Progress 10 separated from the Salyut 6-Soyuz 36 complex at 1:21 Moscow time July 18 after a 17-day stay, during which its engine was used to adjust the station’s orbit. On July 19 the cargo ship engines were switched on by ground command; it reentered over the Pacific and “ceased to exist.”
Soyuz 37, launched at midnight July 23 Moscow time, carried the first Vietnamese cosmonaut, Lt. Col. Pham Tuan, and veteran cosmonaut Col. Viktor Gorbatko as the sixth Intercosmos crew to visit with Popov and Ryumin,
189
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JULY 1980
fourth main crew on Salyut 6. At the launch, Boris Petrov, vice president of the Soviet academy of sciences, noted that “although space school in Vietnamese science was established later than in other Soviet countries,” experiments in space medicine and technology and in mapping of land and ocean surfaces had been prepared for the Soviet-Vietnamese expedition. Soyuz 37 docked with Salyut 6-Soyuz 36 at 2302 Moscow time July 24; on July 25, the visitors began a study of head blood circulation during adaptation to weightlessness, with Pham Tuan as first subject. The visitors returned in Soyuz 36 at 1815 hours July 31 to the preset area; near Dzhezkazgan. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 4-31/80)
190
August
August 1: WFC reported the successful launch July 31 or a two-stage sounding rocket to test both the vehicle system and a “mother-daughter” two-part payload, an electrodynamics package to be used in a series of three launches from Norway later in 1980. Launched at 8:18 a.m. on an Honest John-Orion rocket, the 216-kilogram (476-pound) instrumented payload was programmed to separate at about 95 kilometers (59 miles) altitude and measure the electric field and profiles of ion density and conductivity in the atmosphere. (The three experiments to be launched in Norway would measure energetic-particle and X-ray fluxes and ultraviolet light from the aurora in addition to the electric field and ion density and conductivity.)
Telemetry showed that the payloads separated as planned and both the sections reached peak altitude of 111 kilometers (69 miles). The “daughter” payload, a sphere with six 1-meter booms extending from it, performed well and exhibited good stability until descent. At 73 kilometers (45 miles) on the way down, a 65-foot-diameter mylar parachute deployed from the “mother” section; this was a lower altitude that planned, resulting in a faster fall than planned, but the section’s stability allowed it to acquire usable data. This section also contained a movie camera to film parachute deployment; recovery of the section from the Atlantic was in progress. (WFC Release 80-9)
August 4: The Wall Street Journal reviewed the competition for locating the Large Space Telescope’s science institute at one of three sites, each the protege of a university consortium: Princeton University in New Jersey, the Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, and the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory west of Chicago. NASA teams visiting the sites would make a decision in October.	,
In November 1979, five sites were being promoted with two others as minor contenders: Princeton, Hopkins, Fermilab, the University of Colorado, and the University of California at San Diego (UCSD) plus the Universities of Arizona and New Mexico, where numerous ground telescopes were already located [see November 18, 1979]. Usually the site for an astronomical installation would require clear skies and steady air, but “any old kind of sky” would do for the Space Telescope, the Wall Street Journal said, as the images its computers received would originate above Earth’s atmosphere. The winning manager would provide his own building, either a new one or a remodeled existing one; a resident staff of 100 to 150 persons; and room for a constant flow of visiting astronomers. {WSJ, Aug 4/80, 15)
MSFC reported that students from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) had returned to the center to continue a study begun last
191
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
AUGUST 1980
January on in-space assembly of large structures in MSFC’s neutral-buoyancy simulator, this time with a manned maneuvering unit they had built themselves. The MSFC simulator, a 1.3 million-gallon water tank, closely approximated a zero-gravity environment. The students had spent three weeks on a NASA-MIT project, assembling in the tank a tetrahedral truss containing 48 parts: 36 tubular beams 11 feet long with 12 joints, largest in number of components ever tested in the simulator.
Since their January stay, the students had modified the beams and joints (designed and made in MIT machine shops) on the basis of data derived from their work at MSFC and had been building an alternative crewed maneuvering unit. Testing it at MSFC would show whether it would be of use in assembling large space structures; like one previously built by MSFC engineers, it had instead of the gas jets needed to move it in space five small motor-driven propellers to move it in the tank. The motors were enclosed to prevent injury to other divers or damage to hoses and lines in the simulator. The unit would fit on the backpack worn over a pressurized space suit. (MSFC Release 80-103)
• Press reports said that Maxie Anderson, who made a transatlantic crossing in the balloon Double Eagle II in 1978, crashed his balloon Columbine II into a lake near LaCrosse, Wise., August 4 during opening ceremonies of the U. S. National Hot Air Balloon Championships. Anderson, his wife Pattie, and copilot Don Ida escaped injury, but the balloon was destroyed.
August 6: A small device flown in space for the first time had detected small changes in the Sun’s brightness over periods of days to months, NASA said. An experiment on the Solar Max satellite had registered fluctuations of about a tenth of 1% in solar radiation, corresponding to a change of up to 10°C (18 °F) in the Sun’s average temperature. This trend lasting for several years could make major alterations in Earth’s climate; measurement of even the slightest change in the Sun’s emitted heat and light might enable scientists to predict future changes in climate. A drop of 1% in the output of solar radiation would lower Earth’s mean temperature by more than a degree (2°F); if solar radiation decreased by only 6%, the entire Earth would be covered with ice.
Evidence showed that Earth had been cooling down for about 90 million years; it was about 8°C (15°F) warmer 150 million years ago than it was today and might cool by 10 ° or more in the next several million years. Cycles with frequencies ranging from 22 years to millions of years had caused ice ages ranging from glacial epochs to “little ice ages.” Most recent of the latter, beginning in the mid-17th century and lasting about: 200 years, was a 1.5 ° drop from mean global temperature of 14°C (58 °F): it resulted in observable increase of glaciation in the Alps. (NASA Release 80-124)
August 7.The Washington Post reported that schoolteacher Janice Brown, 32, piloted Paul MacCready’s solar-powered Gossamer Penguin as high as 12 feet
192
AUGUST 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
off the ground for 14 minutes, 21 seconds, going 2 miles along a desert streambed at Edwards Air Force Base in the first sustained flight by an aircraft powered only by the Sun. The top speed was 16.5 mph. The Gossamer Penguin had a 72-foot wingspan and weighed about 68 pounds, including the bank of 2,800 photovoltaic cells mounted above the wing. Unlike other electrically powered aircraft, Penguin had no storage batteries and relied only on direct solar power. (WPost, Aug 8/80, A-6; Indl Dsgn, Sept/Oct 80, 18; FRC X-Press, Aug 22/80, 2)
•	JPL engineers had sent a command August 7 to Viking orbiter 1, switching off its transmitter and ending its four year mission. Viking project manager Kermit Watkins said that its attitude-control gas would have been depleted before it completed another orbit: by commanding it to turn off, instead of allowing it to occur automatically, “we will be sure that the radio transmitter has been shut off.” Confirmation of the switchoff was received at 4:16 EDT August 7. The Viking lander would continue to transmit meteorological and engineering data weekly on command until about December 1994. (NASA Release 80-129; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Aug 11/80; W Star, Aug 5/80, A-2)
August 8: DFRC said that it was awaiting delivery of a new aircraft that would take off and land like a helicopter and cruise in flight like a conventional airplane: the XV-15A, built for NASA and the U. S. Army by Bell Helicopter Textron in Ft. Worth, Tex. Another XV-15 was at ARC preparing for research flight tests. The one being delivered to DFRC would serve to expand performance limits reached by NASA, military, and contract pilots in a flight-test program expected to last one year; the ARC craft would be flown within limits established at DFRC to accomplish specific research objectives. (NASA Release 80-127; DFRC Release 80-16)
•	NASA reported that its QSRA was the first four-engine transport jet to land and take off from an aircraft carrier at sea [see During July]. It made 37 touch-and-go landings and 16 full-stop landings on the carrier during the evaluation, and 16 takeoffs without the aid of catapult gear. The tests, by a Navy pilot, Lt. Cdr. Pete Strickland, and two NASA research pilots, Jim Martin and Bob Innis, deomonstrated QSRA’s use on short runways and its quieter operation. (NASA Release 80-126)
August 10: DOC reported that the Nimbus 7 satellite successfully tracked between October 16, 1979, and June 15, 1980, the 800-mile journey of a 2121-pound loggerhead turtle called Diane from a point south of Gulfport, Miss., past Louisiana and Texas to an area in the Gulf of Mexico near Brownsville, Tex., where Diane apparently shed the signal transmitter. (NOAA officials said that, after a break in transmission, a mystery developed when the signal resumed, moving inland to stop in Kansas—far from the turtle’s ocean or river habitat. A fisherman had found the 7-pound transmitter on
193
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
AUGUST 1980
a beach near Port Arthur, Tex., and had taken it home, where he used the $5,000 device as a doorstop.)
Robert Timko, electronic engineer at NOAA’s Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) laboratory in Galveston, said that no technology except satellite tracking could have followed a wide-ranging and generally inaccessible animal like the loggerhead turtle (a threatened species) over so large an area. NMFS would use the data to identify feeding, nesting, and mating areas to help manage the stock of sea turtles. The test was inspired by previous work with polar bears, which were tracked from 60 to 90 days. (NOAA Release 80-102)
August 11: ARC reported that eight men aged 35 to 50 would participate in a study of weightlessness to help NASA learn why spaceflight dehydrates humans. Dr. Joan Vernikos-Danielis of ARC’S biomedical research division would use a head-down method in prolonged bed rest for the study; the rush of blood to the head in the first exposure to zero gravity might trigger the body mechanism that eliminated fluids and salts. The Soviets for some time had been using bed rest with head down 6° from the horizontal to simulate weightlessness. Usable measurements were not obtainable during actual spaceflight because of the heavy demands on astronauts in the first stages of a mission. (ARC Release 80-68; NASA Release 80-131)
• LaRC staff working this summer at NOAA’s National Severe Storms Laboratory at Norman, Okla., guided a modified F-106B jet fighter plane through severe southwest thunderstorms to show that lightning could strike not just once but two or even three times in the same pilace. Most lightning study had been at ground level; LaRC was studying its effect on planes in flight.
The F-106, holder of a world single-engine speed record set in the 1950s, was still used by the Air Force and could fly up to 50,000 feet (15,250 meters); most flights would be around 15,000 feet (4,500 meters), the altitude where lightning was most statistically likely to strike. LaRC used an F-106B on loan from DFRC, considered top choice for the mission because of its thick wing skins and its larger-than-average bay with room for much experimental equipment.
All F-106B work was on storm hazards, divided into those that did or did not involve lightning (those unrelated to lightning were turbulence, wind shear, and storm-hazards correlation). Hazards from storms were factors in aircraft operations and design. Through the summer, WFC instruments would map thunderstorms and the exact location of the F-106B in them, to compare with pilot and instrument observations. (NASA Release 80-130; LaRC Release 80-56)
August 13: WFC reported that it had made nighttime electric-field measurements in the “middle atmosphere” from balloon ceiling to the ionosphere (30 to 100 kilometers), to extend measurement capability into this
194
AUGUST 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
region, and to compare techniques simultaneously on a worldwide basis. During the past decade scientists had become able to obtain reliable data elsewhere in the atmosphere (troposphere, stratosphere, ionosphere, magnetosphere, and even in deep space) but not in the middle region. WFC used rockets and a balloon for its local experiments; radars in Massachusetts, Alaska, Peru, Puerto Rico, France, and Scandinavia made supporting ground measurements.
At 8:35 p.m. EDT August 13, WFC launched a hundred-thousand cubic-foot balloon inflated with helium, carrying a 21-kilogram (46-pound) payload to measure AC and DC electric fields from to 10 kHz in the middle atmosphere. The mission ended 10 hours, and a chase plane located the payload near Roanoke, Va. At 10:40 p.m. EDT, WFC launched a two-stage Nike-Orion rocket carrying a 232-kilogram (510-pound) payload that reached peak altitude of 90.2. kilometers (56 miles) and recorded data during both ascent and descent. The payload included a water-recovery system; it was recovered at 11:58 p.m. and returned to WFC.
At 11:11 p.m. EDT, WFC launched a single-stage Super Areas to reach 90 kilometer (58-mile) altitude, carrying an experiment called Blunt Probe to measure electric fields as well as positive and negative conductivity in the middle region, for comparison with balloon and Nike-Orion measurement. (WFC Release 80-11)
•	ARC would close the free world’s largest wind tunnel for an $85 million modification. The 40 x 80 foot (12 x 24 meter) tunnel, in continuous use since completed in 1944, would have a 600-foot (183-meter) addition to house a new test section 80 x 120 feet (24 x 37 meters) with an air intake 362 feet (110 meters) wide and 132 feet (40 meters) high. The six 6,000-hp electric motors used since 1944 would be replaced with 22,500-hp units, raising drive from
36,000	hp to 135,000 hp. (NASA Release 80-125)
•	NASA reported results of a coordinated balloon and rocket launch at WFC August 13 to measure fair-weather electric fields. A balloon carrying Aerospace Corporation instruments measured vector electric fields on six booms and evaluated the data with an on-board COSMAC microprocessor. At 30-kilometer altitude, it saw unexpectedly large fields for about one hour. Rockets carrying payloads from Cornell and Penn State Universities launched 20 minutes apart during the balloon flight, both saw anomalously large electric fields that peaked near 70 kilometers. The results would call for revision of present theories, as they suggested that some other generator of electricity was active in addition to the thunderstorm-driven system and the ionospheric system. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 23/80)
August 20: NASA announced a student involvement project, a joint activity with the NSTA. Up to 200 semifinalists in a competition to develop experiments for flight on the Shuttle and their teachers would attend preliminary
195
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
AUGUST 1980
conferences in 10 regions to discuss the proposals with other students as well as NASA and industry scientists; many of the regional conferences would be at NASA centers. NASA awarded the science teachers’ group a contract to conduct the competition and select the winners.
From the 200, 10 would be selected whose concepts would best use the capabilities of the Shuttle. The 10 national winners would attend a special conference at KSC late in 1981; all entrants would receive a certificate of participation. Shuttle flights should begin in March 1981; the winning experiments might go on flights in 1981 or 1982. (NASA Release 80-132)
August 22: JSC reported on its new water-immersion facility (WIF) for Shuttle crew training. MSFC would furnish some payload training mock-ups; JSC would build others including a full-sized Shuttle bay. The new pool, measuring 33 x 78 x 25 feet and located in a building formerly housing an Apollo manned centrifuge, would hold half a million gallons—as much water as 25 average backyard swimming pools—heated to a constant 85 °F for diver comfort over long periods of time. It would replace a 25-foot-diameter tank built in the mid-1960s for Gemini and Apollo emergency training.
Filter and chemical systems would reduce bacteria and provide a clear medium needed for underwater photography. Six submersible television cameras, two operated by divers and four mounted under water, would follow the training operations, with pan, tilt, and zoom operated from a console at the pool edge. The facility would include a 5-ton air-powered overhead crane to lift trainers and mock-ups out of the water (and eliminate electrical shock), as well as air compressors to fill scuba tanks. (JSC Roundup, Aug 22/80, 1)
August 25: ARC reported on a space-technology assessment workshop held at the University of Santa Clara in California on robotics, automation, remotely operated systems, and artificial intelligence vital to future missions such as an orbiting space factory, a self-directed deep-space robot explorer, a fully automated Earth-resources and Earth-environment monitor, or a lunar base able to expand through self-replication of its elements. The 10-week workshop would end August 29 with an oral report and submission of other reports for publication.
Drawing on work by research institutions such as; Stanford University, MIT, and SRI International as developers of computer-based “intelligence,” the program participants included 18 professors of eng ineering, mathematics, and science, 15 NASA engineers and scientists, and several representatives of manufacturer groups. The workshop emphasized four areas:
—A versatile “intelligent” satellite information system able to select and interpret the data from its sensors to give specific items to a specific user, unlike previous systems recording everything they saw to produce great masses of superfluous data.
—A deep-space exploration system for reconnaissance, exploration, and intensive surface study of planetary bodies, specifically Saturn’s moon Titan,
196
AUGUST 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
bigger than the planet Mercury and with its own atmosphere. Uniting functions of previously separate craft (orbiter, atmosphere probe, mobile surface explorer), the vehicle would observe an unknown environment and modify its “knowledge model” and exploration techniques according to its observations. Systems of this sort could explore distant bodies in the solar system such as outer planets and their satellites, comets, and asteroids; such systems would be required for exploring planetary systems of other stars when communications distances and flight time of many years would preclude manned involvement.
—A permanent automated Earth-orbiting facility initially geared to process Earth-supplied raw materials in the space environment; later it would make progressively larger use of nonterrestrial materials from the asteroids and moons of Earth and other planets. The workshop considered a number of processing and manufacturing techniques adaptable to a space environment, starter facilities capable of producing a wide range of items, and the tools that would be needed to expand the facility’s capabilities.
—A factory on the Moon to use lunar materials and replicate itself, its first major product being another lunar factory or factory segment. Such a self-replicating facility had been of theoretical interest for some time as a way of rapidly expanding space resources. The workshop had studied types of logical organization for such a factory, and requirements for an Earth-based demonstration of the concept. (ARC Releases 80-69, 80-70; NASA Release 80-134)
August 26: Press reports said that the U.S. Air Force wanted to spend about $1.4 billion to replace the wings of 81 “trouble-ridden C5A cargo transports.” In 1965, Lockheed Corporation had decided to reduce the weight of C5A wings by 5 tons each, so as to underbid Boeing on a contract for building aircraft capable of carrying outsized loads. Robert B. Ormsby, Jr., president of Lockheed-Georgia, which built the planes, told a congressional hearing that the company’s sole objective was to reduce wing weight to “the absolute minimum within the design requirements” and denied any company plan to replace the wings later when they should prove unsatisfactory. The
10,000-pound weight reduction apparently caused cracks in the aircraft calling for wing replacement: “Ormsby did not explain why Lockheed did not know that the modification would reduce the effective life span of the wing from the
30,000	hours specified by the Air Force to an estimated 7,100 hours,” the Washington Star noted.
Principal focus of the hearings was on whether the 30,000-hour service life presented by Lockheed and the U.S. Air Force as justification for the $1.4 billion wing-replacement program was really necessary. Sen. William Prox-mire (D-Wis.), chairman of the subcommittee on priorities and economy in government of the House-Senate Joint Economic Committee, said Lockheed’s $2 billion cost overrun on the contract, discovered in 1968, was the largest in defense procurement history. He said the $1.16 billion Lockheed-Georgia
197
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
AUGUST 1980
would get for wing replacement would be “the biggest cost in history to correct a mistake.” When Ormsby said that his firm would make a $140 million profit on the contract, Proxmire said “a lot of businessmen would love to make a mistake like that.”
The subcommittee heard David Keating, legislative director of the National Taxpayers Union (NTU), charge that such a profit would set up “a terrible incentive system.” The message to defense contractors would be, “The more inefficient you are, the more profit you make. Build failures into the system and you’ll be rewarded.” Ormsby responded that, in terms of the critical need for the C5A in the nation’s defense, the $1.4 billion was a “bargain” for taxpayers.
Paul C. Paris, director of the center for fracture mechanics at Washington University (St. Louis), said that the U.S. Air Force set up a Structural Information Enhancement Program (SIEP) after receiving a 3-volume report from Rand Corporation suggesting that C5As could serve under “present constraints on operational use” until the year 2000 without significant modification. The U.S. Air Force had put “severe restrictions on the C5A to prevent it from being flown in accord with its design specifications,” Paris said, or it would have lasted “fewer than 3,000 flight hours”; it was “absolutely incredible” that.a major aircraft producer would miss the fatigue life of a wing by a factor of more than 10. He said the SIEP assumed “since the [wing replacement] was going to be done, other less expensive options were not to be considered.” (Paris was the only member of the SIEP steering committee not an employee of Lockheed or the U.S. Air Force.)
The Rand report recommended appointing a panel of independent specialists to assess the situation; Proxmire, Paris, and the NTU wanted the assessment done by the congressional Office of Technology Assessment. (W Star, Aug 26/80, A-8; W Post, Aug 26/80, A-8)
August 27: ARC announced selection of Burroughs Corporation and Control Data Corporation to study system design for its supercomputer, the numerical aerodynamic simulator, that would aid in developing and testing new designs for aircraft and other flight vehicles and perform research in areas of fluid flow such as meteorology, gas dynamics, and computational chemistry. The two parallel fixed-price studies, each valued at $350,000, should produce a data processor 40 times faster and with a high-speed memory 60 times larger than those presently in use.
The new computer would use fluid-flow equations for continuous calculation of three-dimensional air flows simultaneously at thousands of points; it could simulate conditions of wind-tunnel testing far more cheaply than actual model tests. It would do a billion operations per second, using a data base of 40 billion words, and could handle 100 users simultaneously. ARC, with project responsibility for the numerical simulator, had been working on the system since 1975. (ARC Release 80-71; NASA E;elease 80-135)
198
AUGUST 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
•	NASA announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Technical Services Company to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract to support JSC STS engineering and operations from October 1980 through September 1986. The contract, divided into three increments, would cover technical and analytical support in engineering-systems analyses, flight design, flight operations, and management-systems support. Contractor estimate of the cost for the first two-year increment, plus a firm two-year option, would be about $25 million. JSC would manage the contract. (JSC Release 80-053; NASA Release 80-136)
August 29: NASA announced that the GOES-D meteorological satellite, scheduled for early launch from KSC for NOAA, would carry a new type of instrument: the visible-infrared spin-scan radiometer (VISSR) atmospheric sounder. GSFC would join with the University of Wisconsin in long-term evaluation of the VISSR’s usefulness in predicting severe local storms, hurricanes, and other short-term weather phenomena.
Earlier spacecraft in the series had provided 24-hour two-dimensional cloudcover photography; the new sounder would measure temperature and moisture in various altitude layers besides returning high-resolution images. The synchronous GOES satellites, useful in observing storms during development, required observation schedules, data processing, and data analysis markedly different from those for polar-orbiting satellites such as the TIROS series. GSFC, NOAA, and the University of Wisconsin had set up facilities over the past few years to handle the atmospheric sounder data. (NASA Release 80-137)
•	In the last of a series on “Life Aboard the Space Shuttle,” KSC’s Spaceport News described the unisex space suits provided for the pilot and the ranking mission specialist on each flight. No longer tailor-made for an astronaut, the Shuttle space suit would come in small, medium, and large sizes to be worn by men or women. It consisted of an upper and a lower section snapping together with sealing rings, with a life-support system in the upper half.
In an emergency, each of the other crew members would use a “personal rescue enclosure,” a 34-inch-diameter ball fitted with life-support and communications gear for one person. Nonsuited crew would climb into the enclosures, and the suited astronauts would transfer them from a disabled vessel to a rescue ship by carrying them, by attaching them to the remote-manipulator arm used for deploying payloads, or by using a pulley line between the two spacecraft. (Spaceport News, Aug 29/80, 4)
During August: NASA distributed its Program Plan, Fiscal Years 1981 through 1985, containing “initial guidance for NASA’s activities over the short-term and, to some extent, the long-term future.” The introduction noted the current drive to curb inflation and resulting cuts in the federal budget—‘including NASA’s”—but called for a perception of the work the agency was technologically ready to undertake “and should undertake in the interest of the
199
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
AUGUST 1980
Nation.” Citing problems raised by “absence of major new initiatives,” the introduction called for “sound, logical, technological progression toward achievement” of U.S. goals in aeronautics and space.
Major goals to be met by the plan’s 46 “major initiatives” were:
—to fill the transportation and orbital operations needs of science and applications space missions and most transportation needs of national security space missions;
—to apply space technology in remote sensing, communications, materials processing, and technology transfer that “hold promise for immediate or potential benefits to humanity”;
—to continue developing aeronautical technology;
—to improve “by a factor of 10 to 100” NASA’s ability to acquire, transmit, and process data;
—to advance knowledge of how energy is transported from the Sun and through the interplanetary medium and how that energy effects Earth;
—to ensure good health and performance of humans in space and to study the effects of gravity on living systems;
—to understand the origin and distribution of life in the universe and the relationship between life and its habitat.
Major initiatives in the field of aeronautics numbered 6; in space science, 8; in space and terrestrial applications, 20; and in space transportation systems, 12, for a total of 46.
Half the initiatives listed in a similar program plan (for FY80-FY84) had been postponed: Of the 23 missions, 11 were previously scheduled for 1981; 7 for 1982; 4 for 1983; and 1 for 1984. Of the 11 previously scheduled for 1981, 9 were now postponed to 1982; and 1 each, to 1983 and 1984. Of the 7 missions previously scheduled for 1982, 5 were postponed to 1983; 1, to 1984; and 1, to a time “to be determined.” Of the 4 missions previously scheduled for 1983, 1 was scheduled for 1984; and 3, for 1985. The sole mission previously scheduled for 1984 had been postponed to 1985.
International programs in which NASA would fie concerned during the next fiscal years would include cooperative activities (Space Shuttle and Spacelab; space applications such as remote sensing, geodynamics, materials processing, and communications; space science such as astrophysics, planetary research, solar-terrestrial relationships, and solar energy; exchanges of experiments with the People’s Republic of China and the Soviet Union); reimbursable launches; and foreign competition in remote sensing, communications, spacecraft launching, and aircraft development.
The volume included probable schedules for NASA missions and tables of funding and development needed to carry out the program. Space transportation funding, for instance, showed increases in FY81 and FY82, then leveled off. Funding for applications showed rapid increase; that for aeronautics, space technology, and space science would also increase but at a slower rate.
The 235-page program plan contained detailed lists of activities in each program area, with graphs and tables showing schedules and funding for that
200
AUGUST 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
area. The book concluded with an index and a list of the abbreviations and acronyms used in NASA’s programs. (Text, NASA Hq Mgmt Sppt Ofc, distributed Aug 80)
•	Aviation Week and Space Technology reported that the Secretary of the Interior had asked the Secretary of Commerce to cancel the Hughes-built thematic mapper [see April 14] that was to form part of an operational Landsat system, originally scheduled for launch on Landsat-D. Cecil D. Andrus wrote Philip M. Klutznick that the main obstacle to achieving an operational Land-sat system was “the presumption” that Landsat-D research missions must come first. Andrus noted that Interior had proposed two years ago to give priority to solid-state multispectral linear-array technology [see June 16] instead of the “elaborate, expensive, and research-oriented” thematic mapper.
Andrus, who Aviation Week and Space Technology said was “extremely concerned about competition” from France, Japan, and the Soviet Union in remote sensing, emphasized the “implications for the President’s policy of leadership in space if France and others are able to offer better resolution data at lower cost before our core system becomes operational.” (AvWk, Aug 11/80, 17)
•	The British Interplanetary Society’s publication Spaceflight carried an article by one of its fellows (barrister Cyril Horsford, also a director of the International Institute of Space Law), on the agreement covering the activities of states on the Moon and other celestial bodies, opened for signature at the United Nations (U.N.) December 18, 1979. The “moon treaty,” 10 years in the making, was adopted by the U.N. General Assembly as a resolution; some of its principles were already in the first outer space treaty in 1967, but several nations, “notably the USSR,” had expressed the need for a separate agreement specially directed at exploration of the Moon. The treaty now awaiting signature would apply to all bodies in the solar system and their orbits, as well as the Moon; the text (reproduced as appendix to Horsford’s article) was already the subject of controversy among international lawyers and others in two particular areas.
First, Article IV said use of the Moon was “the province of all mankind”; Article XI said the Moon and its resources were “the common heritage of mankind .’’ The difference had raised questions whether the meaning was the same. Article I of the 1967 space treaty had used the words “province of all mankind,” whereas the words “common heritage” first appeared during a Law of the Sea conference, when a moratorium on exploration preceded a General Assembly resolution affirming the common-heritage principle. International law had not defined the limits of the principle; the new “moon treaty” would reserve privileges under it to States Parties to it (although “all mankind” would be beneficiaries). Also, the concept of “common heritage of mankind” was apparently limited to the terms of Article XI. 1.
Second, the third paragraph of Article XI would apparently prohibit any ap-
201
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
AUGUST 1980
propriation of resources found on the surface or subsurface of the Moon; in its literal meaning, this wording would preclude any mining or exploitation of valuable minerals found there in future. Some felt the language was “merely legal,” reaffirming the existing principle that no legal property in lunar resources in place could accrue to an exploring state. The U.S. delegate to the United Nation’s legal subcommittee was confident that the wording did not place any moratorium on exploration, pending the international “regime of management” required under Article XI.5. Horsford noted that opposition to Article XI had already led the U.S. Senate to postpone ratification of the treaty this year.
Although the 1967 space treaty “clearly enshrined” the principle of nonsovereignty over celestial bodies, “some quarters” feared that such a clause would inhibit space powers (particularly the United States) from embarking on “the costly adventure of lunar exploitation” while such a restraint existed or where an international regime of shared resources would result in little or no profit. “This danger is already apparent in. . .deep sea mining, when an international regime is involved,” said Horsford. (SF, July-Aug 80, 273)
•	The NAA reported that Howard Hughes’s Spruce Goose would remain intact under an agreement signed by the Summa Corporation, executor of the Hughes estate, with the Aero Club of Southern Calif. (NAA’s California chapter) and with the Wrather Corporation which would display the aircraft near the Queen Mary at the Port of Long Beach. Summa, under pressure to vacate the hangar site, had announced plans to dismantle the Goose and display parts of it at the Smithsonian and eight other museums [see May 23, June 17]. Now it would transfer the flying boat to the Aero Club after agreement on details of display and management. (NAA newsletter, July/Aug 80, 7)
•	NASA reported on its 17-year-old art program of inviting well-known artists to document major agency activities. Among participants were traditionalists like Peter Hurd and James Wyeth and modernists like Robert Rauschenburg and Lamar Dodd. NASA had stationed artists at the closest possible observation points during Moon launches and on recovery ships when astronauts returned from space and let them pilot simulators; of travel to make-believe moons.
In 1977 NASA commissioned Robert T. McCall to document the rollout of Enterprise at DFRC (McCall was muralist for the National Air and Space Museum). In 1978 Franklin McMahon and Tom O’Hara painted the first flight of the orbiter. Arthur Shilstone and Clayton Pond covered vibration tests at MSFC; Shilstone and Nicholas Solovieff recorded Shuttle progress, including rollout in May 1979 at KSC. NASA would send a team to paint the launch and landing of Columbia. The New York Society of Illustrators had given Shilstone a certificate of merit for his painting “The Crawler: Rollout of the Enterprise” which had been in an international exhibition, including
202
AUGUST 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Japan and China, and would appear in the society’s 1980 art annual. (NASA Actv, Aug 80, 18)
•	Science magazine carried R. Ganapathy’s report on existence in Earth’s Cretaceous-Tertiary geological boundary of debris from a major meteorite impact 65 million years ago, discussing the possible effects of such a catastrophe as extinction of the dinosaurs. (Science, Aug 22/80, 921)
•	NASA announced appointment of Roy S. Estess as deputy manager of NSTL, replacing Henry F. Auter, who retired in February 1979. Estess joined NSTL in 1966, working on the Saturn V acceptance tests and directing the advanced planning for Shuttle testing at NSTL. Since 1977 he had managed satellite remote-sensing research in NSTL’s Earth resources laboratory. (NASA anno Aug 29/80)
—The New York Times reported the death from a heart attack at her home in California of Jacqueline Cochran, first woman to fly faster than the speed of sound and director during WWII of the Women’s Air-Force Service Pilots (WASPS), which trained more than 1,200 women to fly transport planes. Brought up in poverty and working in a cotton gin in Georgia at the age of 9, she took her first flying lesson when 22 and in 1935 was the first women to enter the Bendix transcontinential air race, winning the Bendix trophy in 1938. She had married Floyd Odium in 1936 and served as a captain in the British Air Force Auxiliary, returning to the United States after Pearl Harbor. She set more than 200 flying records, breaking the sound barrier in 1953 in an F-86 jet fighter plane. In 1961 she set a new altitude record of 55,253 feet and in 1964 a women’s world speed record of 1,429 mph in an F-104G SuperStar. She retired in 1970 as colonel in the Air Force Reserve. (NY Times, Aug 10/80, 40)
•	ESA observed the fifth anniversary of its first satellite, Cos B, designed for an operational life of one year. ESA commended the quality of the spacecraft and its subsystems, especially the spark chamber for which no space experience existed at the time of its construction. The eighth satellite built by European industry for ESA’s predecessor, the European Space Research Organization (ESRO), Cos B made the first complete detailed survey of the Milky Way in high-energy gamma-ray spectra and discovered a score of new gamma-ray sources. The spacecraft was made by the CESAR consortium led by Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blom with industrial firms of seven ESA member states: Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom. (ESA Info 21)
•	Progress reports on the continuing flight of Leonid Ryumin and Valery Popov in the Salyut 6-Soyuz 37 orbiting space station noted that their mission had lasted 115 days as of August 1. The cosmonauts were busy redocking Soyuz 37 (which Pham Tuan and Viktor Gorbatko had used to get to the Salyut) to
203
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
AUGUST 1980
make room for more supply-ship missions. The visitors had returned to Earth safely July 31 in the Soyuz 36 craft; next on the list for the long-term occupants was “cleaning of the premises of the orbital complex” and physical training, Tass said.
On August 5 Tass reported completion of various crystal experiments using Splav and Kristall apparatus in “cosmic material studies” of semiconductors cast from gallium arsenide, and crystals of indium antimonide and gadolinium cobalt, a magnetic material. Tass August 9 reported a first: crystallization of a substance from a smelt in “directional microgravitation.” The idea was to form crystals at more than “minimum microacceleration.” The crew put into the Splav an ampule of raw material and activated it; they then used the space station’s motors in a twisting maneuver during which the station became “a sort of centrifuge” for a few hours. Acceleration, zero at the center, “near the transfer compartment and transfer chamber. . .was at its maximum.”
Previous experiments had always been during sleep periods, as movement of people around the station affected the results. For more data on crystal formation in orbit, the crew tried it in the span between Earth gravity and zero gravity. Tass called the test a first step in a new science of “weightlessness physics” whose practical conclusions were already being felt. On August 12 Tass noted the crew had been in space for 18 weeks; further tests were going on, making special glass in zero gravity and monocrystals of germanium.
On August 22, Moscow radio said that this expedition had had more technological tests than any previous ones: the lsparitel apparatus alone had provided more than 186 samples, most of them deli vered to scientists on Earth by Pham Tuan and Viktor Gorbatko. One substance, a solidified solution of cadmium telluroid and mercury telluroid, would be impossible to obtain on Earth where “when molten they separate out as oil and vinegar do when poured into the same glass.” The large crystals of this obtainable in space would permit “heat viewing” or detection of negligible variations in temperature, important to industry and to medicine. (FBIS, Tass in English; Moscow Dom Svc, Aug 1-26/80)
204
September
September 2: JSC reported that its television engineers were working on modifications of a U.S. Air Force camera for live television broadcast by crew members on spacewalks outside the Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA would buy three systems for flight, training, and qualifications at a cost (including integration, testing, and mission planning) of about $750,000.
The camera (which would include a battery pack, FM transmitter, antenna, and a receiver inside the orbiter, with other support hardware), located on an astronaut’s visor assembly, as miners’ lights are mounted on their foreheads, would see what the astronaut saw and send black-and-white pictures to a television monitor watched by crew members on the spacecraft. A wide-angle lens would give a 19.7-mm focal length with a 32° horizontal field-of-view; lens range would be present to focus from about 15 inches to the distance needed. The inside crew members could see hardware or spacewalk activity in real time, helping make joint decisions on repair. (JSC Release 80-052)
September 4: NASA issued a prelaunch summary of the GOES-D mission, sixth of a series designed for continuous cloud-cover observation from synchronous orbit. The program had two prototypes (Sms 1 and Sms 2) developed by NASA and follow-on craft (GOES-A through GOES-F), funded by NOAA of the DOC. The NOAA-funded craft were designated Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES).
Since the Sms 1 launch in May 1974, the satellites had continuously viewed Western Hemisphere weather patterns and relayed video scenes from orbit as part of everyday television weather reports. The reports five were produced by Ford Aerospace; GOES-D, GOES-E, and GOES-F would be from Hughes Aerospace.
The primary instrument on previous craft was a visible/infrared spin-scan radiometer with one visible and one infrared channel. GOES-D would be the first of three carrying a modified VISSR sounding the atmosphere in 12 infrared bands, acquiring temperature and moisture data profiles at various levels.
NOAA’s National Environmental Satellite Service (NESS) program required two operating satellites at all times to cover Atlantic and Pacific ocean approaches, as well as the American landmass. Sms 2 launched in 1975 and Goes 3 launched in June 1978 were covering east and west stations, respectively; Sms 1 and Goes 1 and Goes 2, none fully functional, were on operational standby. GOES-D, initially located at 90 °W for a demonstration of the atmospheric sounder, would later be located either east or west depending on operating need. Should one of the operating craft fail before the demonstration
205
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
SEPTEMBER 1980
ended, NASA would configure a time-sharing operating mode to continue coverage. (NASA MOR E-612-80-02 [prelaunch summary], Sept 4/80)
•	NASA announced that JPL’s Dr. Stephen R Synnott, the Voyager project navigator who discovered a 15th moon of Jupiter [see May 6], had done it again: searching through Voyager photographs token in 1979 to confirm discovery of a 14th satellite, he discovered a 16th.
The new find was about 40 kilometers (25 miles) in diameter and circled the planet every 7 hours, 4 minutes, 30 seconds, the same process had located the 15th satellite, found by Synnott in March 1980; at that time, he thought he was confirming an earlier sighting of a 14th moon because they had similar sizes and orbits. But, upon comparing data from Voyager 1 and Voyager 2, Synnott found that “the object I was looking at was on the opposite side of the planet—it couldn’t be J14, so it had to be a new one.” Before Voyager 1 reached Saturn the planet was believed to have 13 moons; a 14th (the one Synnott was trying to confirm) had been seen in October 1979. (NASA Release 90-139)
September 5: Joseph B. Mahon, director of NASA expendable launch vehicles program, said that NASA would use such vehicles in 18 missions through the end of September 1981. Of these, 7 would be flown on Deltas, 7 on Atlas Centaurs, 3 on the solid-fuel Scout, and 1 on the Atlas F.
Two flights would carry NASA science satellites; NASA would launch the other 16 (for which the energy would be reimbursed) for other government agencies or private firms. The latter would include three weather satellites for NOAA; five DOD payloads; and eight commercial geosynchronous communications satellites for SBS, RCA, Comsat General Corporation, and the INTELSAT consortium. The Office of Space Transportation Systems Operations would run the program. (NASA Release 80-140)
September 8: DOC announced that it had upgraded the satellite division of NOAA and renamed it the National Earth Satellite Service (NESS), reflecting broader responsibilities for the former National Environmental Satellite Service. Earlier in 1980, NOAA became responsible for developing and managing a remote-sensing satellite system based on NASA’s experimental Landsat program.
Since 1965, NOAA had managed operational weather satellites whose data served in navigation, commercial fishing, and water-resource management as well as weather forecasting. The greater resolution of the Landsat system should offer similar monitoring as well as data for uses such as farming, urban planning, and mineral exploration. (DOC Release 80-106)
•	The NY Times reviewed advances in phototypesetting technology, including satellite transmission, that had made it possible for publications to print identical copies simultaneously anywhere in the world.
206
SEPTEMBER 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
“Cold type,” the first generation of phototypesetting, replaced use of individual characters with a matrix of symbols on a transparent material. Light sent through characters produced an image on high-contrast photographic paper. The second generation of typesetting machines also used a photographic negative to generate characters, but used digital computer scan to produce the symbols, recreating them on a cathode-ray tube as a series of minute dots or lines reproduced on photographic paper. The third generation, developed in the late 1960s, encoded text on a disk and printed out entirely by computer, working 10 times as fast as previous machines. By the 1970s, publications such as U.S. News and World Report, Newsweek, and the New York Times had switched from either hot type or less sophisticated cold type to the third-generation technology, which was amenable to satellite transmission. Some of the machines could produce entire pages of newspapers and magazines, including advertisements, artwork, and text, reducing time and cost of publication.
A fourth generation would abandon photographic imaging altogether: using lasers, it would produce characters directly on paper without use of a cathode-ray tube. One such unit had the advantage of producing its output on nonphotographic paper, made without silver, at a price a third that of conventional light-sensitive paper. (NY Times, Sept 8/80, D-5)
• INTELSAT said that an “extraordinary session” of its signatories in Washington had authorized increasing the organization’s capital ceiling from $990 million U.S. to $1.2 billion to buy a follow-on to the Intelsat V series of satellites and launch vehicles that could fill “booming world demand” for international and domestic communications until the Intelsat VI is available around 1986.
INTELSAT’s announcement said that the actual cost per unit of satellite communications was dropping steadily, in spite of the increased investment required; its charges were about a sixth of the level in 1965 when the first Intelsat went into service. (INTELSAT Release 80-18-1)
September 9: NASA launched the fourth geostationary orbital environmental satellite (GOES-D) for NOAA from ESMC on a Delta at 6:27 p.m. EDT. The Delta put Goes 4 into a synchronous transfer orbit close to nominal. Firing an apogee kick motor at 8 a.m. September 11 would put it into geosynchronous equatorial orbit over 90°W for flight testing, after which it would be turned over to NOAA for operational use of the VISSR [see August 29]. The 103-day gap since NASA’s unsuccessful launch of NOAA-B May 29 almost set a record for inactivity. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 11/80; DfDly, Sept 12/80, 62; Spacewarn, Sept 30/80)
September 15: NASA announced plans to join a university research team in first-time transcontinental laser-radar soundings of the volcanic veil still hanging in the upper atmosphere over the United States from the eruptions of Mt.
207
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
SEPTEMBER 1980
St. Helens. Using NASA’s SAGE satellite with an aircraft “crammed with the latest in laser and electronic remote-sensing and near-sensing technologies,” scientists from LaRC and WFC and from Drexel University, the Universities of Maryland, Arizona, and Alaska, Dartmouth College, Michigan Technological University, and the Oregon Graduate Center would study volcanic aftermath.
This joint effort scheduled for September 17-21 by teams for the SAGE program and the Research on Atmospheric Volcanic Emissions (RAVE) project funded by NASA and operated through the universities would measure quantities of gases ejected by Mt. St. Helens and atmospheric dispersion of aerosols. Launched in 1978, SAGE had used a four-channel solar radiometer to track volcano plumes and take profiles of ozone and aerosols in the stratosphere, site of most of the ozone preventing harmful solar radiation from damaging life on Earth. (NASA Release 80-143; LaRC Release 80-61)
September 17: A partnership of the American Institute of Architects, Pacific Gas & Electric, and NASA’s ARC announced selection of the architect for a space-age advanced technology house to be built at ARC and opened to the public late in 1982 [see February 12]. The house, about 2,500 square feet, with additional facilities to accommodate visitors, would incorporate experimental’techniques, new materials, and systems originating in the U.S. space program.
Advanced technology that let astronauts live in the hostile environment of space under a controlled life-support system would be used in the house, as would self-contained water and sewage systems, recycling all its water and disposing of wastes by incineration; heat from the incineration would serve as an energy source. Energy-saving and water-saving design features would make the house 80% self-sufficient. (AIA/PG&E/ARC anno, Sept 17/80)
September 18: Tass reported that Soyuz 38, launched September 18, carried a Cuban cosmonaut and a Soviet mission commander to join cosmonaut Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin, who were within two weeks of breaking a space-endurance record on the orbiting Salyut 6 space station. Armando Tamayo Mendez, 38, was the seventh non-Soviet citizen to fly in the USSR’s Intercosmos program. His companion on Soyuz 38 was veteran cosmonaut Yuri Romanenko. (W Post, Sept 19/80, A-30)
• NASA announced that Administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch had signed a memorandum of understanding with Dr. David H. Jacobson, vice president of South Africa’s council for scientific and industrial research, for establishment of a Landsat ground station near Johannesburg. The pact would let the South African council, an early user of Landsat data, operate a ground station at Hartebeesthoek and receive, process, and disseminate data. The council would pay for a ground station and attending costs, plus an annual access fee of $200,000 after the first six months of data receipt, and would have to make
208
SEPTEMBER 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Landsat data available on a nondiscriminatory basis. Landsat users in southern Africa would have access to regular coverage of the region, as a contribution to development efforts of southern African nations.
Nine Landsat stations were operating outside the United States, two in Canada and one each in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, India, Italy, Japan, and Sweden. The People’s Republic of China and Thailand were buying ground-station equipment, and other ground stations were being planned. (NASA Release 80-147)
•	ComSatCorp announced appointment of Dr. Delbert D. Smith, vice president for corporate affairs, to a three-year term on the board of the International Institute of Communications (IIC) at the latter’s annual conference. Smith led a conference discussion of satellite communications for social and developmental purposes.
The IIC, based in London, was set up to further international cooperation in the field of communications; it put out research and policy studies of the impact of media on society and analyzed the implications of communications technology, seeking to eliminate barriers to the free flow of communications. (ComSatCorp Release 80-33)
•	INTELSAT announced that it would buy an additional Intelsat V satellite from Ford Aerospace and an additional NASA Atlas Centaur vehicle to launch it. The first Intelsat V launch had been scheduled for December 1980. The ninth in the Intelsat V series would help fill domestic and international demand until higher capacity comsats became available in the mid-1980s. INTELSAT’S decision would add about U.S. $70 million to the cost of the Intelsat V program, estimated at U.S. $650 million. (INTELSAT Release 80-19-1)
September 19: NASA reported selection of Rockwell International’s Energy Systems Group to negotiate a cost-shared $9 to $11 million contract under a DOE program for design, construction, installation, and test of an advanced multipurpose 350-kilowatt wind-turbine system with blades 38 meters (125 feet) in diameter.
LeRC with its expertise in aerodynamics and structures would direct the project for DOE; it was currently running a 100-kilowatt turbine testbed at its Plum BroOk test area near Sandusky and four 200-kilowatt versions built and installed by Westinghouse in New Mexico, Rhode Island, Puerto Rico, and Hawaii. A 2,000-kilowatt machine by General Electric was supplying power to the Blue Ridge Electric Cooperative System in North Carolina. Boeing was building a 2,500-kilowatt machine, three of which would be working in the Bonneville Power System by the end of 1981. (NASA Release 80-148)
•	The Washington Post reported that NORAD in Colorado Springs, Colo., had identified a flaming object that streaked across the sky and plunged into the Gulf of Mexico earlier in the week. The object was apparently the remains
209
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
SEPTEMBER 1980
of a Soviet rocket, probably Cosmos 549, that had been in orbit for seven years. (W Post, Sept 19/80 A-5)
September 20: Today newspaper said that a 13-nation U.N. committee that met in Geneva, Switzerland, had drafted a report on a proposed satellite system to scan the Earth and spot disarmament violations. Ending a closed two-week session of the committee, the report said that the scientific, financial, and legal experts would meet there again in February 1981 to consider and approve the draft for submission to the United Nations. The statement contained no details of the proposed satellite monitoring system.
U.N. Secretary General Kurt Waldheim had appointed the committee after a special General Assembly session in 1978 on disarmament received a proposal by France for U.N. establishment of an international satellite agency to check up on disarmament pledges. {Today, Sept 20/80, 10A)
September 22: JPL Director Bruce C. Murray announced appointment of Dr. Freeman Dyson, theoretical physicist and leader in studies of new systems for spacecraft propulsion, as a distinguished visiting scientist. A professor at Princeton University’s Institute for Advanced Study, Dyson participated in Project Orion at the General Atomic Laboratory, San Diego, from 1958 to 1965, studying the potential use of atomic explosions to propel crewed spacecraft. In 1977 he led a laser-propulsion study for the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and was later active in studies of solar sailing and NASA’s SETI (research for extraterrestrial intelligence) project.
Author of “Disturbing the Universe,” Dyson would join Jacques Blamont of France, Klaus Hasselmann of Germany, Giuseppe Colombo of Italy, Michael Longuet-Higgins of the United Kingdom, and Richard Goody and Gene Shoemaker of the United States as a JPL distinguished visiting scientist. (JPL anno Sept 22/80)
September 23: ComSatCorp announced the formation of a new organization, ComSatCorp World Systems Division, to handle all matters of global telecommunications through the INTELSAT system and global maritime services through the INMARSAT system. John L. McLucas, most recently ComSatCorp vice president for international communications and technical services, would head the new division. Joseph V. Charyk, president and chief executive of ComSatCorp, said that the change responded to FCC concern expressed in a study of ComSatCorp organization, as it would let FCC regulate rates and costs within an organization segment. (ComSatCorp Release 80-34)
• LaRC reported that staffer Wesley R. Cofer, Jr., would participate during October with other researchers from the United States and Europe in an expedition on the Atlantic Ocean to evaluate the effect of humans on Earth’s troposphere by studying environmentally important trace gases. Cofer would measure hydrocarbon concentrations with an instrument he and Gerald C.
210
SEPTEMBER 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Purgold developed at LaRC: designed for marine operation, the device was built during a 1978-1979 LaRC remote-sensor technology study, for use in aircraft tracking of atmospheric pollutants up the eastern shore of Virginia. (LaRC Release 80-64)
September 27: Today newspaper attended the christening of the first ship built to recover NASA’s Shuttle boosters from the Atlantic after launch. United Space Boosters, Inc., subsidiary of UTC would operate the UTCLiberty, first to be named, and UTC Freedom out of KSC. Today said that everybody “involved in the lengthy process of building the ship was in attendance from the banker to the builder to the ship’s captain.” (Today, Sept 28/80, 16A)
September 30: NASA reported that the Winkfield tracking station completed its last Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (STDN) support pass at 2345Z and was transferred to U.K. ownership at 0001Z. It would now be operated by Britain’s Science Research Council. Part of NASA’s network for about 20 years, the station had “performed in an exemplary manner,” NASA said. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Oct 1/80)
During September: NRC’s News Report included an article on asteroids, comets, and meteroids, subject of a report by the Space Science Board’s committee on planetary and lunar exploration, calling for investigation and analysis of the solar system’s “primitive objects” to determine their chemical and isotopic composition and deduce their history through Earth-laboratory and theoretical studies as well as from spacecraft and space probes, as part of a strategy for understanding solar system development. The committee, chaired by Eugene Levy of the University of Arizona, called for initial exploration and reconnaissance of asteroids and comets by spacecraft encounter as a “goal of high priority” for the period 1980-1990. (NRC News Kept, Sept 80, 1)
• NASA issued a summary of Saturn encounter events for the period August 22 through December 15, beginning with “in-bound movie sequences” from Voyager 1 through Saturn-Titan close approach and ending with a postencounter movie sequence. Subjects of Voyager research at Saturn would be the planet itself, its rings, its satellites (especially the Mercury-size Titan), and Saturn’s magnetosphere; the summary listed points of special interest and the unique properties to be investigated. (NASA Release 80-145)
211
October
October 1: Cosmonauts Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin set a new record for spaceflight duration, breaking the mark of 175 days, 36 minutes set last year by a crew in Soyuz 32. Ryumin had been on that record mission also; he had stayed on Earth for only 236 days since February 25, 1979. Popov, 40, and Ryumin, 34, had set out April 9, 1980, in Soyuz 35 to occupy the orbiting Salyut 6 launched September 29, 1977, one of 13 crews to visit the 20-ton
49-foot-long space station.
Three times during the spring and summer visiting crews brought the “permanent occupants” food and experiment materials, life-support equipment, and companionship. These relief missions included the first Vietnamese, Hungarian, and Cuban cosmonauts. Earlier this week, an unmanned cargo ship Progress 11 arrived with fresh supplies of food, fuel, and technical equipment for the cosmonauts. The Soviet Union had not set a time limit for the Salyut-Soyuz flight; Popov and Ryumin reported themselves healthy. (NY Times, Oct 2/80, A-17)
October 2: Rep. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.), chairman of the House Committee on Science and Technology, said that his space science subcommittee would hold hearings at the Severe Storm Forecast Center in Kansas City, Mo., on the consolidated storm information system, a joint NASA-NOAA program. The committee heard about the project in July 1979 when it was merely a concept; “it will be a pleasure to see if coming to fruition.”
When fully operational, the system would give a forecaster real-time atmospheric data such as temperature, air pressure, and wind forces, from around the globe, a substantial improvement on current systems requiring several hours to obtain the data. It would combine communications links with data sources, such as environmental satellites and atmosphere soundings, into a single computer system. (H Comm Sci Release 96-235)
• Nature magazine described equipment problems on Heao 2, also called the Einstein observatory, that might end the mission prematurely. Launched in 1978, Heao 2 carried the first X-ray telescope “as sensitive as ground-based optical telescopes”; it had a planned lifetime of only one year. Its success in generating new scientific data had led to extension of its mission; until the recent setback, NASA scientists hoped that it would continue to return data well into 1981 when atmospheric drag would take it from orbit. The outcome would depend on the “behavior of the gyroscopes used to position it.”
Data transmission was halted three weeks ago when two of the six gyroscopes failed after a temporary blackout. Heao 2 needed three function-
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
S	irUF.NTIQNftLlY HUN*
213
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
OCTOBER 1980
ing gyroscopes for positioning. One of the other four was already dead; another, running erratically, was on standy. NASA, was working on software for backup control using the two gyros still functioning, along with either a Sun sensor or star tracker on the satellite. (Nature, Oct 2/80, 379)
October 4: Cosmonaut Aleksey Yeliseyev, veteran of Soyuz 5, Soyuz 8, and Soyuz 10, told a press conference that the flight of Rvumin and Popov on Salyut 6 “is coming to an end. The flight will be completed in the first half of October and no more Soyuz expeditions will visit.” “The station today,” he added, “is in a perfectly good state and the question of its being manned in the future may be answered in the affirmative.” (FBIS, Mosc Dom Svc in Russian, Oct 4/80)
October 7: Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, told President Carter that he would leave January 20 to become the first president of the American Association of Engineering Societies, a federation created in January of 39 major engineering societies of the United States representing more than a million engineers. In a memorandum headed “Dear Colleagues,” Frosch said that he could ‘'no longer ignore the competitive opportunities available to me and to my family in private life. . .1 continue to be devoted to our common interests in aeronautics and space.”
Frosch was sworn in as NASA administrator June 21, 1977. He had been associate director for applied oceanography at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution since 1975. He had attended Columbia University, where he received a bachelor’s degree in 1947, a master’s in 1949, and a doctorate in theoretical physics in 1952. He had been assistant secretary of the Navy for R&D, assistant executive director of the U.N. environment program, and deputy director of DOD’s DARPA. (NASA Release 80-151)
•	NASA announced award of its largest contract so far to a small business firm. KSC entered a fixed-price contract of $6,689,666 to W&J Construction Company of Cocoa, Fla., for work on Pad B of Launch Complex 39 where the Space Shuttle would be launched in 1982 when it became operational. W&J would put in long-run pipes and cables to pump and monitor fuels, coolant, nitrogen and gaseous helium, compressed air, and hydraulic fluids, from storage areas to the fixed and the rotating service structures. Connections to the Space Shuttle would be from the two service towers. The contract would be completed in 20 months. (NASA Release 80-152) •
•	NASA announced an MSFC award to Martin Marietta and Aerojet Liquid Rocket Company of contracts to define a liquid-propellant boost module for the Shuttle external tank, to increase its cargo-carrying capacity to 5,400 kilograms (12,000 pounds).
Under the new terms, modifying initial program-definition contracts let earlier in 1980, the two firms would study adapting Titan hardware and
214
OCTOBER 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
systems to the boost module. They had been building Titans for years; the U.S. Air Force had used Titan 2 in the mid-%1960s to launch Gemini and was still using it. Martin Marietta, under a contract valued at $1.18 million, would carry out follow-on studies and design activities on the overall system; Aerojet, under a contract for $782,500, would work on modification of the Titan 3 stage 1 engine. A modified version of Titan had launched communications satellites and other Earth orbiters as well as deep-space Viking and Voyager payloads. The first use of the augmenting booster would be in 1986. (NASA Release 80-154; MSFC Release 80-126)
October 8: ComSatCorp announced that it would dedicate its new ground station on Saipan in the Marianas in November [see During June]. At the ceremony would be Carlos Camacho, governor of the Northern Marianas; ComSatCorp head Joseph V. Charyk; officials of the U.S. Department of the Interior and of U.S. communications carriers; and dignitaries from several Pacific nations. The Saipan station working with an Intelsat 22,300 miles over the Pacific could offer a wide range of services: in addition to more reliable telephone calls, residents would have access to television, telex, data, and facsimile, “an era of modern and improved communications,” the organization said. (ComSatCorp Release 80-38)
October 10: LaRC announced an award to Dynamic Engineering Inc., Newport News, Va., of a three-year cost-plus-fixed-fee contract valued at $4.3 million for design and fabrication of dynamic models for NASA research and development programs. It would include personnel, equipment, materials, and facilities for feasibility studies, engineering design, and assembly and calibration of models.	.
Used primarily in wind-tunnel tests, the models would be of three kinds: general-performance, holding a fixed geometry through a range of angle-of-attack and dynamic pressure; free-flight and spin models, simulating mass properties of aircraft; and aeroelastic models simulating configuration changes .with load, for performance and flutter investigations. The models would consist of fiberglass-reinforced resin, wood, metal, moldable or for-mable materials, or combinations of these. (LaRC Release 80-73)
October ,11: .The longest spaceflight in history ended at 12:50 Moscow time when cosmonauts Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin landed near Dzhezkazgan in the. descent module of Soyuz 37 after 185 days aboard the Salyut 6 space station. A previous record of 175 days was set last year by Ryumin and Vladimir Lyakhov; shown on Soviet television immediately after landing, they seemed to have trouble walking and talking. The Soviet Union did not have television coverage of the Ryumin-Popov landing, but the two appeared on television at 9 p.m.. local time in recliners, being interviewed. A Reuters report from the landing, carried by the New_ York Times, said that the two men appeared well when they climbed from their capsule in the rain, Ryumin
215
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
OCTOBER 1980
noting “it’s always pleasant to have a soft landing.” He joked with journalists and insisted on walking two yards unaided “almost without staggering,” said Trud, a trade-union newspaper. Doctors said that neither man seemed to show the physical deterioration suffered by other long-mission crews; Popov had gained 6.5 pounds, Ryumin almost 11. They had kept up their strength in space with exercises.
(The New York Times noted that the new record far outdistanced the longest U.S. space mission, the 84-day mission of Skylab 4 with Gerald Carr, Edward Gibson, and William Pogue, that ended in 1974. In the absence of U.S. space exploits since the Moon landings, Western observers said that the new Soviet feat might indicate that the Soviet Union had regained the lead in space; coupled with the delay in the U.S. Shuttle program and public awareness of growing Soviet military might, the Salyut accomplishment might translate into political advantage.)
Salyut 6 had been orbiting for three years, being manned for about half that time. Four main and eight visiting expeditions had been working there, backed by automatic cargo craft bringing fuel and supplies. Tass said that the preventive maintenance and resupply procedures carried out by the crews were a big step toward “lasting manned complexes for scientific and national economic purpose.” (FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 11/80; NY Times, Oct 12/80, 23; Oct 13/80, A-13)
October 14: The FCC called for public comment on ComSatCorp reorganization, to prevent its role as sole U.S. representative in the global communications satellite system from interfering with its growing competitive activities. An official said that this “could lead to changes” in ComSatCorp operations.
An FCC staff study earlier in 1980 said that the potential for conflict was substantial enough for ComSatCorp to need two separate parts: one for its role in the global system, the other providing services like a long-distance telephone system or satellite-to-home subscription television. As a result, ComSatCorp had set up a World Systems Division to take charge of its congressionally mandated role in the global system, its competitive activities remaining with its subsidiary Comsat General [see September 23]. However, research and development by Comsat Laboratories would remain in the parent company. FCC noted that the subsidiary could obtain new technology developed by the laboratories either free or below cost, enabling it to undercut competitor prices. It was debating further action to ensure that ComSatCorp did not use the knowledge gained in its monopoly role to compete unfairly with other communications firms. (W Star, Oct 14/80, D-7)
October 15: NASA reported that it had begun a three-year program with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources using Landsat data to detect gypsy-moth damage. Under an agreement signed recently, the data would identify and locate damage so that subsequent satellite images could be
216
OCTOBER 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
used to monitor affected areas. Foresters could identify infestations and isolate areas for pest management.
Results would be passed on to other states in the eastern United States that could use the techniques to control spread of gypsy-moth damage initially mapped in New England in 1910. Damage to hardwood forests in Pennsylvania over the past 10 years was an estimated $32 million; in 1980 alone, gypsy-moth caterpillars defoliated 440,000 acres of hardwood forest, (NASA Release 80-155)
• MSFC reported that it had recovered scientific packages launched from Palestine, Tex., on two 30-story-tall balloons after both balloons “by a remarkable coincidence” floated directly over the Alabama center. The 300-foot balloons traveled 20-35 mph about 23 miles up. Dr. Gerald Fishman, of MSFC’s space science laboratory, said that it was “almost unbelievable” that the payloads flew over the center after drifting some 700 miles. MSFC had run a research balloon program for seven years, but not one balloon had ever come over the center, much less two.
The two experiments were also the most successful, Fishman said, recording more than 28 hours of gamma-ray data and more than 38 hours of cosmic-ray data. The first, which had been launched October 6 with a gamma-ray package, was seen by unaided eyes over MSFC about 1:30 p.m. October 7; MSFC scientists tracked it and took pictures by telescope. The second, launched October 7 with a cosmic-ray detector, flew over about 3 a.m. October 8. Both balloons were tracked by a telemetry station on Redstone Arsenal that received experiment data. A National Scientific Balloon Facility team recovered the gamma-ray package after it came to Earth near Roanoke, Va., and then sought the cosmic-ray package in a heavily wooded area near Elkins, W.Va., where a helicopter retrieved it. Both packages were returned to MSFC for analysis. (MSFC Release 80-129)
October 16: ESA announced that the cause of the failure of Ariane L02 May 23 was “combustion instability” on one of the four first-stage engines 5.75 seconds after launch. The violent event “altered the characteristics of the injector” and destroyed the vehicle 108 seconds after liftoff. ESA had analyzed telemetry, looked over hardware recovered from the ocean, conducted acoustic simulations and 37 static firings between July and mid-October, and investigated manufacturing processes. It would change its procedure for buying injectors. (ESA Info 24)
October 17: ComSatCorp announced that it would reduce its charges for international satellite communications by 11.8%. FCC was concerned over the increase in international carrier earnings for these services and had begun a formal rate procedure against ITT WorldCom for the same reason. ComSatCorp president Joseph V. Charyk said that the reduction could save its members about $19 million in 1981 and asked FCC to see that the savings reached the
217
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
OCTOBER 1980
public. (ComSatCorp Release 80-39)
October 20: NASA declared successful the mission of Magsat, launched Ocober 30, 1979, to measure Earth’s magnetic field. The satellite’s lifetime exceeded that planned for it by three months and met or exceeded accuracy requirements in instrumentation and in attitude and position determination. The mission had met the objectives of developing a worldwide magnetic-field model; acquiring data for crustal magnetic-anomaly maps; and adding to knowledge of Earth’s magnetic field and its temporal variations. (NASA MOR E-662-80-01, Oct 20/80)
• NASA reported that Voyager 1 would approach closest to Saturn November 12, third episode in a 10-year multibillion-mile trip to the outer planets. A briefing on the encounter would take place October 28 at Headquarters with Andrew Stofan, associate administrator; Angelo Guastaferro, director of planetary programs; Dr. Edward Stone of CalTech, project scientist; Ray Heacock of JPL, project manager; and Dr. Bradford Smith, University of Arizona, of the imaging team. (NASA Release Oct 20/80; LaRC Release 80-77)
October 21: The Washington Star reported a warning from the Center for Defense Information (“an unofficial defense study group”) that technological progress in U.S. and Soviet space programs could spark an arms race in space. The United States had a 12xl3-inch device—the miniature homing interceptor vehicle—that could home in on infrared radiation “to destroy a target satellite by high-speed impact,” the group said; if the device were actually tested in space, “it could destroy more than the target satellite: it could destroy U.S. and Soviet negotiations aimed at limiting antisatellite warfare as well.”
The group said that the Pentagon believed that the Soviet Union had an operational but limited antisatellite weapon that had been tested about 17 times; 7 of the tests were failures, but 10 were “possible successes” in that the interceptor passed less than a mile from the targets. No target was destroyed, suggesting that the Soviet Union might be working on inspection of foreign satellites. PRC reconnaissance satellites traveled in orbits like those of the Soviet test targets, and an interception program might be aimed mainly at the Chinese, the group said.
Rear Adm. Gene LaRocque (USN-ret.), head of the center, said wars might begin in space “but they’re going to end right here on earth. It won’t be a Star Wars show with a lot of robots. . .vaporizing each other in the remote regions of space.. . . Once those nuclear missiles start to fly, the science-fiction drama will be over.” (W Star, Oct 21/80, D-10)
October 23: Nature magazine commented on Dr. Robert Frosch’s leaving NASA, “the latest to join the exodus of science administrators from the
218
OCTOBER 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
federal government” with the departure in June of Dr. Richard Atkinson, director of the NSF, and the “widely expected” appointment of Dr. Frank Press, head of the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, as president of the National Academy of Sciences. Dr. Frosch’s time at NASA had seen “the agency struggling increasingly against the escalating costs of the [Shuttle] which is now biting deeply into the space research budget.” (Nature, Oct 23/80, 673)
October 27: DFRC announced plans for a ceremony at which ARC officials representing NASA and the Army’s Tilt Rotor Research Aircraft project would accept the first of two aircraft built under a joint program. One of the two planes built by Bell Helicopter Textron arrived at ARC in March 1978 for tests in its full-scale wind tunnel; the other arrived at DFRC August 13 for followup of tests by Bell. So far, two contractor pilots, two NASA pilots, one Army pilot, and one Marine pilot had tested and evaluated the aircraft. (DFRC Release 80-28)
•	MSFC noted the arrival of the age of automation in its Materials and Processes Laboratory, where industrial robots were improving manufacturing techniques in Space Shuttle hardware production. Robotics, integrated into totally computer-controlled systems, would help meet high launch-rate fabrication and between-flight refurbishment requirements of reusable Shuttle items.
One of the two MSFC robots was helping spray foam insulation for thermal protection on booster structures such as forward and aft skirts or nosecones. The second, currently used for advanced welding, would serve in a thermal protection process for the external tank. A third robot to arrive in December would run a high-pressure water blaster to strip insulation from reusable Shuttle hardware. (MSFC Release 80-138)
•	Aviation Week & Space Technology said that General Dynamics Convair had developed a prototype , deployable space truss as a. building block in large space structures^., A 26-foot beam stowed in a flat pack 3 feet long, 5 feet wide, and 9.5 inches high would unfold in five segments to 5 feet in width and 7.5 feet- in height, The hinged and folded struts of graphite-epoxy bonded to aluminum would deploy in three automatic steps, forming first a triangular, then a diamond-shaped, section. A Shuttle could carry 24 500-foot beams into space on a single mission. (AvWk, Oct 27/80, 49)
Ocotober28: NASA reported that DFRC had conducted a “highly successful” sixth HiMAT flight October 28, lasting more than 32 minutes and reaching
45,000	feet and a maximum Mach number of 0.9. No anomalies occurred. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Oct 29/80)
219
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
OCTOBER 1980
•	INTELSAT announced that its assembly had agreed to technical and some economic compatibility with seven other satellite systems. Found technically compatible with existing and planned INTELSAT systems were Eutelsat, spare craft for a European communications satellite system; Germany’s TVSat broadcasting system; India’s Insat 1-A and Insat 1-B for television and meteorological use; Indonesia’s Palapa-A system for limited regional service to remote areas in southeast Asia; the Intersputnik system for limited use by Algeria; Japan’s GMS-2 metesat system; and Saudi Arabia’s broadcast-satellite system.
Algeria’s proposal was the first instance of an INTELSAT signatory’s seeking use of another system for general international public traffic instead of for limited regional service. INTELSAT said that its permission would apply only through 1985 and to a total of 22 telephone lines; similar proposals by other members would require separate handling. The spec ific request by Algeria for use of Intersputnik would not constitute significant economic harm to INTELSAT at present; however, the assembly noted that INTELSAT’s objective was to promote development of “a single” global communications satellite system, and all signatories must continue to consider that a goal. (INTELSAT Release 80-23-1)
October 29: Newspapers said Voyager Vs Saturn approach had discovered two new moons, a 13th and 14th, and confirmed existence of three previously shown in Earthbound observations. Until the recent discoveries, the giant planet was thought to have only nine satellites. Closing on Saturn at 45,000 mph, Voyager 1 should come within 77,000 miles of the surface on or about November 12 and obtain high-resolution photographs of the planet and its satellites. It was already returning pictures with resolution far higher than those taken in 1979 by the less sophisticated Pioneer 11.
Images relayed over the past 10 days showed dozens of divisions never seen before between Saturn’s rings, meaning that the six known rings would have to be recounted. “Almost everything we’re seeing at Saturn right now is brand new,” said Dr. Bradford Smith, head of the Voyager imaging team. JPL’s Ray L. Heacock, project manager, said that 9 of Voyager’s 10 instruments were working, 1 having failed after encounter with Jupiter, and the spacecraft was in good shape after traveling 1.3 bilion miles through space. (NY Times, Oct 29/80, A-20; W Post, Oct 29/80, A-2; IV Star, Oct 29/80, D-18)
•	MSFC said that it would static-fire for 581 seconds a test prototype of the Shuttle main propulsion system in one of two tests remaining before the first flight in March 1981. Rockwell International would conduct this 11th firing of the system at NSTL. The test would serve to evaluate thrust-vector controls, low-level fuel cutoff, and liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen pressurization. Final main propulsion-system test firing would be in late November. (MSFC Release 80-139)
220
OCTOBER 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
•	Comsat General announced that it was providing consulting service to Alascom Inc., based in Anchorage, on a new generation of communications satellites to meet Alaska’s future communications needs. Alascom was now leasing 15 to 17 transponders on a domestic Satcom to relay communications throughout Alaska, but growth by the late 1980s should require double that number. Comsat General would help design a spacecraft to meet increased transponder demand. (ComSat Gnl Release 80-5)
October 30: NASA launched FltSatCom-D into a synchronous transfer orbit from Launch Complex 36, ETR, on an Atlas Centaur at 10:54 p.m. EST. An apogee kick motor fired November 1 at fifth apogee put it (as FltSatCom 4) into the desired synchronous orbit [see October 20]. Spacecraft systems were turned on and operated normally. (NASA MOR M-491-202-80-04 [postlaunch] Nov 21/80)
October 31: The Washington Post reported that SBS was “having a hard time getting off the ground” with launch of its first satellite put off for the third time in a month. Technical problems with the Delta had delayed the launch of SBS 1, built by Hughes Aircraft, first of its kind to offer a high-frequency interference-free signal. Liftoff had been postponed to November 6 because of insulation damage, then to November 12 when a motor bolt broke. The latest problem was a leak in the liquid oxygen system. (WPost, Oct 31/80, E-3)
•	MSFC reported signing a $2,271,391 contract with a small business, OAO Corporation of Beltsville, Md., for design, assembly, delivery, test, and checkout within 18 months of a data-base management system to handle an “immense volume” of instrument data transmitted at “extremely high rates” by spacecraft during missions between 1985 and 1995. The system would accept data at rates tip to 50 million bits per second (44,650 pages of computer printout per minute). “Firsts” to be included in the system would be a data bus of fiber-optic cabling for use in a computer configuration and use of lasers to transmit and receive data at the high rates required. (MSFC Release 80-141)
During October: NASA appointed Dr. Jack L. Kerrebrock, head of MIT’s aeronautics and astronautics department, as associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology as of June 1, 1981. Replacing Dr. James J. Kramer who retired in October 1979, he would be responsible for aeronautics, space and energy research, and technology programs. Dr. Walter B. Olstad would act as associate administrator in the interim. (NASA Release 80-156) —JSC announced that Dr. Edward G. Gibson, scientist-astronaut, would leave October 31 to become advanced systems manager for TRW Defense and Space Systems Group. The science pilot on the record 84-day Skylab 4 mission in 1973-1974, he had left NASA in 1974 to work for Aerospace Corporation and for ERNO but had rejoined the agency in March 1977. (JSC Release 80-057)
221
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
OCTOBER 1980
—C. A. Syvertson, ARC director, named Angelo Guastaferro of the Headquarters Office of Space Science as his deputy, replacing A. Thomas Young, recently named director of GSFC. John Boyd, associate deputy director, would remain acting deputy director for six months. (ARC anno Oct 31/80; NASA Release 80-165)
—The NAA newsletter reported that Maurice Bellonte, copilot of the first east-to-west transatlantic nonstop flight in 1930, was guest of honor at the National Air and Space Museum on the 50th anniversary of his flight from Le Bourget airfield near Paris to Curtiss Field, NY. In 1929 Bellonte and his copilot Dieudonne Coste had set a world record for longest nonstop flight, 4,788 miles from Paris to Manchuria in 51 hours, 39 minutes. The Atlantic crossing had taken 37 hours, 18 minutes. (NAA nsltr Sept-Oct 80, 2)
—The New York Times reported that after long service in orbit and “a galaxy of discoveries” the astrophysics observatories Copernicus and Galileo were nearing the end of their useful lives. Copernicus (Oao 3, launched in August 1972 and named to honor the 500th birthday of the Polish astronomer) carried the first UV telescope above Earth’s atmosphere and made precise measurements of the amount of deuterium in the universe. Galileo (Heao 2, launched in November 1978) carried the only imaging X-ray telescope ever orbited and mapped X-ray emissions from every known quasar. (NY Times, Oct 31/80, A-19)
—INTELSAT announced that its Italian signatory member, Telespazio, had set up an award of U.S.$10,000 for contributions to the field of satellite communications. Established on the 10th anniversary of the death of Dr. Piero Fanti, first general manager of Telespazio, the award would go every two years to a researcher or student in an INTELSAT member country who made a contribution of significant value to the field. (INTELSAT Release 80-22-1)
• FBIS carried Tass reports during October on the flight of Popov and Ryumin aboard Salyut 6, beginning with resupply of water from the cargo vessel Progress 11 October 3 and completion of unloading by October 6, including resupply of air. On October 8 Tass said that the crew was measuring the dynamics of the orbital complex for use in designing new space systems. Launched September 29, 1977, Salyut 6 had received 13 Soyuz (7 with international crews), 2 Soyuz-T, and 11 Progress craft during its three-year flight, manned about half that time by four main and eight visiting expeditions; 24 dockings occurred, plus 4 redockings from one port to another. On October 11, after Popov and Ryumin returned to Earth, Tass reported that no irreversible effects of weightlessness had occurred. The crew’s diet included meat and dairy products, confectionery, beverages, and various seasonings. Fresh vegetables and fruits brought from Earth during the flight helped diversify the meals. On October 13, Tass said that the cosmonauts had gone for a walk in less than 24 hours after their return from six months in space and had met with journalists for interviews. Both said that working in space would be possible for longer than six months; Ryumin said that he felt better after his
222
OCTOBER 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
second prolonged flight, thanks to better ground training and better scheduling of on-board activity. A rest period every fourth day had made them “more eager to do exercises.” On October 29, the cosmonauts reported to a meeting of the State Commission representing 400 organizations and agencies interested in their results on the 3,500 photos and 40,000 atmospheric spectra, more than 70 materials experiments, and the medical and biological tests. (FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 3-29/80)
223
November
November 1: OMB told Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, that President Carter concurred with NASA’s request for a 1986 mission to make a detailed examination of the surface of Venus. Previously, both U.S. and Soviet probes had penetrated the planet’s cloud cover to send data over a few minutes to several hours; Pioneer Venus returned data on the atmosphere, but none had given an idea of the surface. The President would request the necessary funds in his FY82 budget.
The Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) spacecraft, managed by JPL, weighing about 5,000 kilograms (11,000 pounds) at launch, and costing $500 to $600 million, would carry a synthetic-aperture radar (SAR) and other scientific instruments. Lanched from the Space Shuttle in May or August of 1986, it would arrive at Venus in December 1986 and circle it for seven months in a 300-kilometer (180-mile) near-polar orbit, taking radar pictures and measuring atmosphere as well as surface. VOIR images should disclose the presence of continents, ocean basins, mountain chains, rift valleys, fault belts, or volcanoes, as well as nature and timing of plate-tectonic activity (continental drift) or the size and frequency of occurrence of impact craters. (NASA Release 80-166)
November 2: ComSatCorp said that telephone and other services in Saipan improved with dedication of a new ground station there [see October 8], Saipan communications carried by high-frequency radio had suffered delay and interference from atmospheric disturbance. Better telex, facsimile, and television would also be possible through a large dish antenna working with an Intelsat spacecraft 22,000 miles over the Pacific. (ComSatCorp Release 80-42)
November 3: NASA said that Dr. Floyd W. Stecker of GSFC had found evidence to suggest that subatomic particles called neutrinos might have mass, redefining the nature of all matter and the ultimate fate of the universe. Observations of rocket-launch results had detected a spectral line that might mean neutrino decay near the UV wavelength of 0.00017 mm. Neutrinos were previously thought to lack mass, like photons. In the “Big Bang” theory, an explosion of all matter in the universe 15 billion years ago formed galaxies that continued to expand away from the original site. The theory suggested roughly a billion neutrinos for every proton (protons, the nuclei of hydrogen atoms, made up 90% of the atoms in the universe).
If Stecker’s findings were correct, a spherical area of “heavy” neutrinos created by the Big Bang would surround the galaxy; they would live so long
I	PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
f	tNTENTlQN&mr t&Afft
225
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
NOVEMBER 1980
that only one in 10 million would have decayed since the time of the Big Bang. The weight of a billion would equal the weight of one nitrogen atom, but they would be so numerous that they would account for the mysterious “missing mass” in large clusters of galaxies. Absence of this mass had thwarted calculation of whether the original expansion would continue forever or would collapse on itself to produce another Big Bang. (NASA Release 80-163)
•	Ground testing of Space Shuttle engines suffered another setback, the New York Times reported, when three engines shut down prematurely during a static test firing in Mississippi. The engines, identical to three now on the Columbia at Cape Canaveral, were supposed to fire for 9 minutes, 41 seconds, the time it would take to put a Shuttle into orbit. NASA said that instruments indicated overheating in part of a turbopump. This 11th firing of the three engines in the test series would have been the 5th for the full time needed to launch a Shuttle. Columbia was scheduled for its maiden launch in March 1981. (NY Times, Nov 4/80, C-3)
•	NASA said that JPL would arrange for media coverage of Voyager 7’s Saturn encounter over a 47-hour period on or about November 11-13, relaying live television to television stations, science centers, and planetariums across the United States. The Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., also planned to change its regular closing time from 5:00 to 8:30 p.m. during the encounter to handle the expected crowds and had scheduled special programs around the encounter. (NASA Release 80-164)
November 6: ESA announced plans to mark a milestone in space cooperation on or about November 28 when prime Spacelab contractor VFW-ERNO delivered the engineering model to NASA. After 6.5 years of development and manufacture, the model would be ready for shipment to KSC for verifying flight-unit interface with ground equipment and for training.
Delivery of the prototype, not meant for flight, would be the first Spacelab-hardware transfer under a 1973 memorandum of understanding, followed in 1981 by delivery of the first flight unit, which would carry experiments being developed in Europe and the United States. NASA, which had ordered a second flight unit for delivery in 1982-1983, had scheduled Spacelab launches for June and November 1983. (ESA Info 25; NASA Release 80-180; MSFC Release 80-152)
November 10: The Washington Star reported the latest photographs from Voyager 1 on its way to Saturn revealed that the ring system was far more complex than Earth-based observation suggested. Besides rings within rings and a collection of particles filling the gaps between the major rings, the images showed in the brightest and widest inner rings fingerlike shadows like spokes, first seen two weeks ago, that scientists could not explain. Dr. Bradford A.
226
NOVEMBER 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Smith, imaging team leader, called the photos “baffling.” {W Star, Nov 7/80, B-2)
•	LaRC announced selection of Martin Marietta Corporation for negotiations leading to a $2 million, two-year contract for design and development of a real-time signal-processing system using new technologies to perform on a spacecraft several processing functions formerly carried out on the ground.
Elements to be developed included radiometric and geometric correction and packeting of data. The contractor would demonstrate these operations on Landsat-type data in a laboratory and would incorporate new signalprocessing functions into commercial-grade electronic components. Martin Marietta would do the work at its Denver facility. (LaRC Release 80-93)
•	ESA reported that Professor P. Wild, University of Berne, had discovered a supernova in spiral galaxy NGC 6946, a relatively close galaxy appearing nearly face-on to the Earth and a prolific source of supernovas (5 in the past 63 years). Within three hours after Dr. Wild alerted the astronomical community, the Villafranca (Spain) tracking station used the international ultraviolet explorer Iue to acquire the first spectrum, before optical astronomers could do so from the ground.
Early spectra taken by the station near Madrid showed the supernova nearly at maximum and fading slowly, with a strong continuum representing a temperature of about 20,000°C. Before the object faded too far, it would be a target of concerted observations over the electromagnetic spectrum. ESA noted that such supernovas were rare, only two occurring per decade on the average; Iue observers were fortunate in witnessing the event, second seen since Iue's launch in January 1978. (ESA Info 26)
November 11: Only a day away from its closest encounter with Saturn, Voyager 1 had surprised scientists again with images of a huge hill on the moon Tethys and some distorted “ringlets” inside Saturn’s concentric ring system. The head of the imaging team, Dr. Bradford Smith, said Saturn’s rings were a complex system with dozens of small ringlets forming perfect circles within circles; traditional theories did not explain even the series of concentric ringlets.
Of one ringlet offset in a ring gap, Smith said that it was not circular and not of uniform width, varying from 15 to 50 miles wide; this and another found elsewhere might be caused by small moonlets not yet visible on either side, distorting the ring particles with their gravity. (W Star, Nov 12/80, A-5)
•	ESA announced that France had deposited its “instrument of ratification” of the convention establishing the agency, completing legal formalities for its going into force. Countries that signed the convention May 30, 1975, had agreed to make it applicable immediately, permitting ESA to operate de facto for more than five years. Formalizing the agency meant that the 11-member
227
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
NOVEMBER 1980
states could now avail themselves of all possibilities offered by the convention intended to give a “truly European dimension” to the space effort.
Current member nations were Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, Italy, Ireland, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. Ireland had signed the convention December 31, 1975, and would soon deposit with ESA its own instrument of ratification to obtain the legal status of a member state. Austria, under various agreements to participate in ESA programs, would be an associate member as defined in the convention. Canada and Norway, which had also participated in some ESA programs, would remain in observer status. (ESA Info 23; Df Dly, Nov 14/80, 65)
November 12: Climaxing a 1.3 billion-mile, 38-month trip from Earth, Voyager 1 came within 77,000 miles of Saturn for “man’s best-ever look” at its surface, the Washington Star reported. Cameras surveying some of Saturn’s moons revealed a huge crater with a central peak on Mimas; bright cobweb markings on Rhea and Dione; and a 500-mile canyon cutting through the frozen surface of Tethys, all moons that until now were only points of light as seen by Earth telescopes.
Voyager 1 showed particles in the narrow outer F ring orbiting in three “braided” strands, as JPL scientists described them; from 470,000 miles, the ring appeared about 20 miles wide with small “knots” that might be clumps of ring material, or mini-moons. (W Star, Nov 13/80, A-5)
November 14: NASA reported that the People’s Republic of China had been admitted as the 48th member of the United Nations outer space committee, which the General Assembly had expanded from 48 to 53 members. The president of the General Assembly would appoint five new members, one each from the U.N.’s regional groups; those expressing interest were Upper Volta, Syria, Uruguay, Peru, Vietnam, and Bangladesh. The United States supported admission of the People’s Republic but was the sole nay in a 113-1 vote to expand the committee. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Nov 14/80)
• The Washington Star reported that SBS had bet its future on the launch of a $20 million satellite as the basis of a revolutionary long-distance telephone service. SBS had promised new communications at lower rates than those of AT&T; its network would be the first in the world to use satellites and ground stations alone to transmit voice, data, and video messages from one place to another. Telephone firms had previously transmitted messages by underground cable or microwave-relay towers.
The system would connect a firm with its faraway offices without reference to local phone lines: it would use a 16- to 25-foot-diameter antenna installed on a roof or in a parking lot to signal the satellite, which would relay the signal to ground stations at distant company offices and give service not presently available. Computers at far locations could talk to each other at speeds 20 times faster than was now possible; facsimile pictures could be transmitted
228
NOVEMBER 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
200 times faster; and the system would allow customers to hold videoconferences with executives located all over the United States.
SBS had had difficulty in selling its services, designed for companies or government agencies conducting a large amount of nationwide business. It estimated a need for 25 to 30 private-line customers to break even by 1983. Two of its owner companies, IBM and Aetna, were among its 10 customers, and General Motors had asked for three stations to link Detroit, Atlanta, and Dayton. SBS said that the launch, scheduled for November 15, should attract attention and more customers to the company. (W Star, Nov 14/80, B-5)
November 15: NASA launched SBS-A, the SBS spacecraft, from ESMC on a Delta at 5:49 p.m. EST into a transfer orbit. At 5:30 p.m. EST November 17, the apogee motor fired it as Sbs 1 into a circular geosynchronous orbit over 176 °W. The final station would be over the equator at 106 °W, south of Santa Fe, N.M., for coverage of the continental United States.
Sbs 1, first of a new satellite series built by Hughes Aircraft, was a spin-stabilized 1,212-pound (550-kilogram) craft 216 centimeters (7 feet) in diameter, 282 centimeters (9 feet, 3 inches) high when stowed for launch. In geosynchronous orbit, extension of its telescoping solar-panel cylinder and communications antenna would make its height 660 centimeters (21 feet, 8 inches). Sbs 1 would also be the first U.S. domestic communications satellite to use the less congested 12- to 14-GHz (K-band) high frequencies. Its highspeed all-digital 10-transponder system could relay up to 480 million bits per second, equal to more than 10 million words. It would begin early in 1981 to provide integrated all-digital interference-free transmission of telephone, computer, electronic mail, and videoconferencing to SBS business and industrial clients.
This launch was also the first use of a new McDonnell Douglas solid-fuel payload-assist module (PAM) as part of the SBS-A payload, to increase Delta capability on launches to geosynchronous orbit by 20 % over that of the usual Delta third stage. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Nov 19/80; NASA Release 80-167)
November 18: NASA reported that LeRC awarded a two-year $2,917,800 contract to Energy Research Corporation, Danbury, Conn., under a DOE program managed by LeRC, for fuel cell technology to provide 120-kilowatt capacity needed to meet all heating, cooling, and electrical needs of an apartment complex or small shopping mall with greater efficiency than that of usual systems. Fuel cells would combine hydrogen and oxygen electrochemically to produce electricity as well as a usable by-product, heat. A fuel-conditioning system would produce hydrogen from natural gas or naphtha, oxygen coming from the air; future such systems could make hydrogen from synthetic fuels, liquid or gaseous, derived from coal. The LeRC contract would aid the government’s effort to develop high-efficiency means of reducing U.S. dependence on scarce fuels while meeting environmental standards. (NASA Release 80-170)
229
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
NOVEMBER 1980
•	NASA reported selection of Hughes Aircraft’s space and communications group for negotiation of a $40 million contract to be managed by ARC for a carrier spacecraft to transport the Galileo probe to Jupiter. Launched from the Space Shuttle in March 1984, the probe would reach the planet by July 1987, separate from the carrier, and enter the atmosphere to measure it for about one hour down to a level where pressure would be 10 times that of Earth’s.
The carrier would be powered by two radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs); solar energy at Jupiter’s distance would be too weak to furnish power to the carrier, which would maintain contact with Earth during the entire mission, returning data both in real time and for playback on tape recorders. The carrier would receive data from the probe during its entry and descent into Jupiter’s atmosphere, transmitting it to Earth stations. Data on Jupiter’s atmosphere, believed to consist of the original material that formed the stars, would give scientists better understanding of Jupiter’s and Earth’s weather mechanisms. (NASA Release 80-171; ARC Release 80-79)
•	NASA launched an eighth space-processing applications rocket, SPAR 8, November 18 from the White Sands missile range in New Mexico. Its payload, developed and tested by MSFC, was three experiments processed in about five minutes of zero gravity in the coast phase of the suborbital flight, using a three-axis room-temperature acoustic levitator; a single-axis acoustic-levitator furnace to produce 1,575 °C; and a specialized processing furnace.
All experiments had apparently performed as expected: two were on acoustic levitation (use of soundwaves to keep liquids from contamination in touching the walls of a container), one of them to produce a high-temperature glass; the third experiment studied movement of bubbles in molten glass. The payload, damaged at impact on Earth, was recovered for damage assessment and study by the investigators of the results. (MSEC Release 80-148)
November 19: NASA announced that it had signed a memorandum of understanding with TVA on NASA support of TVA programs in energy research, development, and demonstration. The two agencies were currently negotiating an agreement for TVA reimbursement of NASA for MSFC support of TVA’s coal-gasification project. NASA for some time had supported DOE and other agencies’ programs on energy research and development (R&D) because its facilities were adaptable to such research. TVA had requested NASA assistance because of the NASA staffs experience in engineering and scientific disciplines applicable to energy research and technology, as well as in managing such programs. (NASA Release 80-172; MSFC Release 80-145)
November 20: NASA said that the Shuttle orbiter Columbia would move out of the orbiter-processing facility at KSC no earlier than November 23 for tow to the VAB and mating with the external fuel tank and solid-fuel rocket
230
NOVEMBER 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
booster. Actual date would depend on results of final inspections now in process; NASA would issue an update November 22. (NASA Release 80-173)
•	ESA reported that INMARSAT had awarded it a five-year contract at U.S.$1 million a year for leasing MARECS satellites A and B when located over the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. The completed INMARSAT system would cover the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian oceans by using those satellites with Intelsat Vs carrying maritime communications payloads, and with one of the MARISAT satellites already in orbit. For the first time a European-built satellite would let ships at sea dial shore-based subscribers directly and establish telephone and telex links with them, through the real-time highly reliable MARECS system operating in the 4- and 6-GHz band and on 1.5- to
1.6-GHz frequencies. (ESA Info 28)
•	NASA announced that Dr. John E. Naugle, its former chief scientist, would return December 1 on a temporary basis as acting chief scientist, principal scientific adviser to the NASA administrator, and continuing member of the Advisory Council responsible for planning long-range solar system exploration and other long-range goals for the agency. Naugle had joined GSFC in 1959 as head of its nuclear emulsion section and retired from the agency in June 1979.
During those 20 years, he had been chief, physics and astronomy programs, at Headquarters Office of Space Sciences in 1961; director of physics and astronomy programs, Office of Space Science and Applications, from June 1962 to May 1966; associate administrator for space science and applications in 1967; and deputy associate administrator of NASA in 1974. He became acting associate administrator in April 1975 and associate administrator in November 1975. He was appointed chief scientist in the 1977 reorganization. (NASA Release 80-175; Hq anno Nov 21/80)
November 21: LeRC awarded a one-year $150,980 grant to Atlanta University for research in high-strength fibrous polymers (a low-cost silicon product) for use in solar cells, and complex iron molecules for a chemical-storage system. Lockheed-Georgia Company would give $25,000 in technical support. (NASA Release 80-174)
November 24: The Space Shuttle Columbia, OV-102, rolled out of KSC’s orbiter-processing facility at 6:01 p.m. and moved to the VAB for mating to its external tank and solid-fuel rocket boosters. Next rollout, from VAB to launch pad, would occur late in December. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt Nov 26/80; NASA anno Nov 24/80)
•	NASA reported that Dr. Robert A. Frosch, its administrator, had signed an agreement November 18 in Bangalore, India, with Dr. Satish Dhawan, secretary of the Indian government’s Department of Space, for launch by
231
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
NOVEMBER 1980
NASA of two India communications satellites/metesats. In geosynchronous orbit, India’s national satellites (INSAT) 1A and IB would provide the subcontinent with point-to-point television and voice, community broadcasting, and weather data. Launch would be either by Shuttle or, at India’s option, on Delta (expendable) launch vehicles.
Under the agreement, India’s Department of Space would be responsible for manufacture of the satellites (under contract to Ford Aerospace), and for checkout and integration of a spinning solid upper stage (SSUS) to boost them into transfer orbit for maneuver to geosynchronous stations. NASA through KSC would provide all other launch-related services. INSAT 1A was scheduled for Shuttle launch in August 1983, or on a Delta in February 1982; INSAT IB, by Shuttle in December 1983 or a Delta in July 1983. (NASA Release 80-176)
November 25: ARC announced that it would host a workshop in December on the atmosphere of Titan, largest of Saturn’s moons and bigger than the planet Mercury. Experts on Titan from NASA, the university community, and elsewhere would discuss the temperature, pressure, and physical nature of Titan’s surface, in view of new data from Voyager 7’s flyby. (ARC Release 80-85)
•	ARC announced a briefing December 4 on findings from the Pioneer Venus orbiter and five atmosphere probes. Scientists could now explain the planetwide circulation of the Venus atmosphere; ultraviolet photography over a two-year period showed long-term patterns of cloud circulation; more new work seemed to explain the “hothouse effect” that produced Venus’s heat; and new measurements were available of elements in that atmosphere. For television, ARC had prepared large color illustrations of Venus atmosphere circulation as well as new color pictures of the planet and models of the Pioneer orbiter. (ARC Release 80-84)
•	NASA announced selection of Ball Aerospace Systems to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee contract estimated at $21 million for an Earth Radiation-Budget Satellite ERBS and mission operations support. The satellite would be integrated, tested, and delivered for Shuttle launch by April 1984. Working with NOAA-F and NOAA-G, it would become part of a three-spacecraft system using scanning and nonscanning radiometers to measure solar radiation received and reflected from various regions of Earth. NASA’s experimental Nimbus 6 and Nimbus 7 carried radiation-budget instruments, but the (ERBS) would offer for the first time measurement of radiation on a global basis 24 hours per day. (NASA Release 80-178)
•	NASA reported that Peter Bird, a 33-year-old London photographer, who in 1974 crossed the Atlantic with a friend in a rowboat, had left Baja California for Australia November 11 alone in the same vessel (Royal Navy rescue boat
232
NOVEMBER 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Britannia IT) carrying a NASA locator beacon of the type used on Nimbus 6. This type of beacon had tracked a two-man balloon crossing of the Atlantic, an expedition into the Egyptian desert, and a Japanese explorer’s hike from Canada to the North Pole and the length of Greenland, all in 1978, sending data to GSFC for computation and relay to pinpointing locations. Bird would use the locator for his own position computations. (NASA Release 80-177)
November 26: ARC announced plans to flight test the parachute system for the Galileo Jupiter-atmosphere probe, third and last test of the system at the Naval Weapons Center test range at China Lake, Calif. Previous tests revealed the need for improvements, which had been made on the chutes to be tested. On completion of the test program, the design would be ready for delivery.
Early in 1982 a U.S. Air Force Geophysics Laboratory balloon would carry a fully equipped probe to 100,000-foot altitude over the White Sands missile range and release it in a drop like the Jupiter descent, including parachute and hardware staging. When launched by a Shuttle and released from its carrier at the planet in September 1987, the parachute would slow descent of the probe in the turbulent atmosphere, using its six instruments to measure chemical elements and compounds, weather patterns, and pressures. (ARC Release 80-81)
• ESA said that Erik Quistgaard, its director general, would meet in London November 27 with Olof Lundberg, director general of INMARSAT, to sign a contract for lease to ESA of 2 Marecs satellites [see Nov. 20]. The contract, worth about U.S.$65 million, would go into effect in 1982. ESA was first of three entities expected to contract with INMARSAT for satellites to provide a new worldwide maritime telecommunications service for the international shipping community. (ESA Info 29)
November 27: The Soviet Union launched a redesigned spacecraft, Soyuz 13, carrying three cosmonauts in what the New York Times called a possible bid to break the 185-day endurance record set in October. Launch at 5:18 p.m. Moscow time was from the cosmodrome at Baykonur in Soviet central Asia; Tass reported that all systems were working well. The pilot of the flight was Lt. Col. Leonid Kizim, 39, a first-time flyer in space; flight engineer Oleg Makarov, 47, had flown on Soyuz 12 in September 1973 and Soyuz 27 in January 1978, as well as the “anomaly” of April 1973. Research engineer Gennady Strekalov, 40, also a rookie, had worked for 20 years in spacecraft design. This was the first three-person flight launched by the Soviet Union in nine years, since the crew of Soyuz 11 died during reentry in June 1971 when their capsule sprang a leak and lost pressure. The cosmonauts had not worn their space suits because of crowded conditions on the capsule.
Vladimir Shatalov, head of cosmonaut training, said that Soyuz T3 had “all the latest accomplishments of science and technology” including a fast onboard computer to free the crew “to the maximum from . . . .routine opera-
233
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
NOVEMBER 1980
tions.” The system was said to perform all calculations needed to dock with another craft such as Salyut 6. However, Radio Moscow did not say how long the flight would last, and Moscow media did not say whether Soyuz T3 would link with Salyut 6, which had been in orbit three years—only that the crew would test a new spacecraft.
Soyuz T3 was first of that type to carry a three person crew, 39th in the Soyuz series, and sixth manned craft to be launched in 1980. Two tests of the new design had been successful: an unmanned Soyuz 7"had docked with space station Salyut 6 in December 1979, and Soyuz T2 carrying Yuri V. Malyshev and Vladimir V. Aksyonov had joined the Soyuz 36 crew (record-holders Valery Ryumin and Leonid Popov) there in June of this year. Salyut 6, designed to last only 18 months, had supported four expeditions over its three years in orbit. When Ryumin and Popov left it six weeks ago, after a thorough overhaul of its equipment, they said that it was fit for further use. (NY Times, Nov 27/80, A-3; W Post, Nov 28/80, A-28)
During November: MSFC announced that Dr. William R. Lucas, center director, had appointed Thomas J. (Jack) Lee deputy director, effective December 1. Lee had worked at the center and its predecessor since 1958 and for the past six years had managed the Spacelab program, working with ESA on this Shuttle payload. John W. Thomas, Lee’s deputy, would succeed as manager of the Spacelab office.
Lucas named John S. Potate, associate director for management, to a new position as associate director. Potate had come to MSFC in 1973 from the Apollo lunar-landing program at KSC and at Headquarters. (MSFC Release 80-149)
234
December
December 1: Astronomer Robert Victor, a professor at Michigan State University, said that the Christmas season would be marked by a triple conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn “worth gazing at” that would not occur again until A.D. 2238 or 2239, The event had occurred in 7 B.C. and resembled a similar conjunction of Jupiter and Venus in 2 B.C., either of which could have appeared as the guiding light of the Magi or star of Bethlehem. (fV Star, Dec 1/80, A-2)
•	ARC announced plans to mark the second anniversary of Pioneer Venus’s orbiter when it would complete two Earth years (equivalent to three Venus days) circling the cloud-covered planet. It should remain in orbit there until 1992, looking at Venus from a variety of new vantage points.
Since its arrival December 4, 1978, Pioneer had made 730 24-hour orbits and returned more than a thousand UV pictures of Venus’s clouds. It has mapped 93% of the surface by radar, showing a terrain of mountains, high plateaus, and wide plains. To transmit its 40 billion data bits back to Earth, its antenna had made more than 5 million rotations relative to the spinning spacecraft; it had recorded 75 gamma-ray bursts from other parts of the galaxy, and its other instruments had measured Venus’s atmosphere and surface, interior, and surrounding environment.
During the first two years, Earth commands had kept Pioneer in a fixed position; from now on it would “float” in response to pressures of solar radiation and of Venus and solar gravity, orbiting over the planet’s equator by 1986. It would be able to measure the bow shockwave of Venus and its wake region in the solar wind, or “tail,” possibly in cooperation with USSR spacecraft scheduled to arrive there in 1982 and 1984. (ARC Release 80-88)
December 2: The NSTL in Mississippi completed a fourth and final cycle of certification tests on the Shuttle main engine. Certification required successful completion of four test cycles each of 13 tests and more than 5,000 seconds of operation,, using two different engine assemblies. A cluster of three main engines and two solid-fuel rockets would thrust the Shuttle into orbit. (NASA Release 80-182; MSFC Release 80-158)
•	MSFC said that the Michoud facility near New Orleans had begun assembling the lightweight external-propellant tank for the Space Shuttle. Built by Martin Marietta Aerospace, the modified tank would weigh 6,000 pounds less than its predecessor, increasing Shuttle payload capacity by about that amount. Recent structural tests showed that reducing thickness of skin panels
235
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
DECEMBER 1980
would not affect tank integrity; changing materials of some components would also take advantage of recent research.
The external tank (actually two tanks connected by a collar-like intertank) would contain liquid-hydrogen and liquid-oxygen propellants for the three Shuttle main engines and would be the only major element not recovered for reuse. First of the lightweight tanks should be ready for delivery in the summer of 1982 for the fifth Shuttle launch. (MSFC Release 80-155)
•	The New York Times reported that the first attempt at long-distance solar-powered flight lasted 22 minutes when Solar Challenger, Dr. Paul Mac-Cready’s lightweight high-strength plastic-and-balsa craft driven by a 2.75-hp motor, took off December 3 about 1:00 p.m. from an airport north of Tucson, Ariz., headed for Phoenix, and came down six miles away. Former teacher Janice Brown, 32, who piloted Challenger, said that it was “fantastic” and she would “try again tomorrow.”
Powered like other record-setting MacCready vehicles by solar cells covering its wing and tail, Challenger apparently experienced failure of its motor (no larger than a champagne bottle, and of lighter weight, the New York Times noted) and Brown set the 1351-pound plane down on the desert, where nearby farmers and several American Indians came to look at it. (NY Times, Dec 4/80, A-18)
•	GSFC said that a team of its scientists and technicians had pioneered a stereo-imaging technique for studying hurricanes, using photographs of the top of the same hurricane taken by two spacecraft, geostationary operational environmental satellites Goes East and Goes West, hovering over the equator at 75 °W and 135 °W. The team combined time-lapse cloudcover photos of Hurricane Frederic over the Gulf of Mexico September 12 in a stereo display showing changes in the storm as seen from space and allowing estimates of its intensity. (NASA Release 80-181)
•	ESA said that it was training at Toulouse and Marseilles the U.S. and European Spacelab mission and payload specialists to give them a better idea of the scientific objectives and let them operate 2 of the 11 French experiments. The first Spacelab payload would be launched in June 1983.
PICPAB (phenomena induced by charged-particle beams), a plasma-physics experiment under test at Toulouse, would study results of energetic-particle emission along Earth’s magnetic-field lines, such as neutralization and instability, for use in remote measurement of electric fields and creation of artificial auroras. At Marseilles the crew would become familiar with the very-wide-field camera for general UV survey of mosl: of the celestial sphere and study of galactic and extragalactic sources. (ESA Info 30)
December 4: NASA adjudged Solar-Maximum Mission Smm successful in observing solar flares using five or six experiments simultaneously, coalign-
236
DECEMBER 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
ing the narrow field-of-view instruments and measuring total solar radiation over at least six months. Launched February 14, 1980, Smm had collected the most data ever on solar flares, about 25 in number, coordinating with ground-based optical and radio telescopes under the International Solar-Maximum Year program. These valuable joint observations would continue. (NASA MOR-S-826-80-01 [postlaunch] Dec 4/80)
•	NASA reported successful static-firing for 591 seconds December 4 at NSTL of the main Shuttle propulsion system. The test exceeded the firing time needed to put the Shuttle into Earth orbit. This 11th test of the three-engine cluster brought total test time on the main system to almost 32,000 seconds, in addition to more than 86,400 seconds of tests on individual engines conducted in separate firings. (NASA Release 80-184; MSFC Release 80-160)
December 5: KSC reported that Shuttle orbiter Columbia, mated with other elements on a mobile launcher in the VAB, was ready for its first major test as a unified system. On November 24, Columbia moved 300 yards from the VAB to the orbiter-processing facility where solid-fuel rocket boosters and external tank had been assembled on the mobile platform. A Shuttle-interface test running more than two weeks would check electrical and mechanical connections between elements and on-board flight systems. Interface tests originally scheduled earlier this week were delayed by problems including failure of a device providing umbilical link with the orbiter.
This was the first flow of flight hardware through KSC processing facilities: the orbiter Enterprise, not built for spaceflight, served as “pathfinder” through the facilities in 1979 but lacked many of the systems installed in Columbia. Individual Columbia systems had passed checkouts in late 1979 and early 1980, but the,upcoming test would check the entire Shuttle system as a unit with the prime and backup crews taking part in simulations of ascent to orbit, abort, and descent to landing.
William H. Shick, chief of prelaunch test operations, noted that this would be the first time the astronauts had occupied the cabin with the vehicle in a vertical position; they would “get a feel of what they can and can’t reach,” he added, to assess crew comfort while awaiting launch. (KSC Release 206-80)
•	Press reports said that the FCC had voted 7 to 0 to approve construction and launching of 20 new communications satellites by 8 companies, tripling the number of commercial satellites providing domestic communications service, in what the New York Times called “in a single action the greatest impetus ever to the expansion of satellite service.”
Besides alleviating a shortage of satellite capacity faced by cable television and other industries, FCC said that the decision would open the way for investment of more than $2 billion by the eight companies. This was their first chance to compete directly in the long-distance field with AT&T, instead of
237
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
DECEMBER 1980
tying their local networks to the Bell System. Already operating their own satellite networks were three companies operating eight commercial communications satellites: Western Union Telegraph Company with three, RCA-American Communications, Inc., with two, and Comsat General Corporation with three leased entirely to AT&T and General Telephone & Electronics (GTE). Also Satellite Business Systems had finally launched its Sbs in November, making nine.
All four current owners would expand operations under the new policy: AT&T and GTE as well as Hughes Communications and Southern Pacific Communications would build their own systems for the first time. Continental Telephone Corporation and partner Fairchild Industries would enter the field through purchase of 50% of WU’s Space Communications Corporation. (NY Times, Dec 5/80, D-l; W Post, Dec 5/80, E-2)
December 6: NASA launched Intelsat 5A F2, first of a new communications satellite series, from ESMC at Cape Canaveral, Fla., at 6:31 p.m. EST on an Atlas Centaur, into a transfer orbit with 35,950-kilometer apogee, 166.8-kilometer perigee, and 23.75° inclination. ComSatCorp fired the kick motor December 8 to put the craft into near-geosynchronous orbit at 15 °E for tests. By mid-1981 the communications satellite would be on station at 338.5°E. (NASA MOR 0-491-203-80-01 [postlaunch] Dec 29/80)
—NASA issued a press kit describing the spacecraft, which weighed 1,928 kilograms (4,250 pounds) at launch. Built by Ford Aerospace using system components developed by firms in France, the United Kingdom, West Germany, Japan, and Italy, it had a capacity of 12,000 voice circuits and 2 television channels, almost double the capability of earlier Intelsats. Cost of the launch was about $76.6 million, including $34 million for the spacecraft and $42 million for the Atlas Centaur and launch services. INTELSAT, with headquarters in Washington, D.C., would reimburse NASA for costs of the vehicle and launch services, under an agreement signed in May. (NASA Release 80-179)
December 8: The Washington Post reported that two Florida launches had lit up evening skies with brilliant colors and a streak of light that prompted calls to authorities from as far away as Nashville, Tenn.
In the second of four tests to see whether ionized clouds blocked communications among aircraft, satellites, and ground stations, a U.S. Air Force rocket from Eglin Air Force Base in the Florida panhandle sprayed the ionosphere 116 miles above the Gulf of Mexico with 106 pounds of barium Sunday, December 6, creating a pink, green, and purple haze monitored by scientists on the ground and in airplanes. One aircraft was positioned so that the barium cloud passed between it and an experimental satellite in orbit
25,000	miles up. About 30 minutes later, the Intelsat 5A F2, largest communications satellite ever built, roared into orbit with the rocket trail familiar to Space Coast residents. (W Post, Dec 8/80, 4)
238
DECEMBER 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
December 9: The Washington Post reported that Dr. Paul MacCready had completed a round of test flights of his solar-powered airplane Solar Challenger to prepare it for a Paris-to-London flight in June 1981. In six days of tests at the air park in Marana, Ariz., the Challenger had not achieved a planned 63-mile flight over the desert [see December 4], Trouble with the propeller pitch control and related equipment continued, and MacCready said that he wanted to consider some changes before resuming the tests. The plane’s 47-foot wingspan and stabilizer carried 16,000 solar cells to gather sunlight and convert it to power for the 2.7-hp motor that turned the propeller. (W Post, Dec 9/80, A-20)
• Responding to press reports on the Ariane, ESA issued a statement on its program of four flight tests, the second of which failed when the first stage malfunctioned. ESA had identified the trouble and taken steps to rectify it.
Test 3 would now take place in June 1981 and test 4 in the autumn of that year, a timetable ESA said was compatible with its commitments to put scientific and communications satellites into orbit in late 1981 and 1982. Financing arranged at the outset, which included 20% for contingencies, would cover the additional studies and tests needed. (ESA Info 31)
December 10: Press reports said that the three cosmonauts launched November 27 in Soyuz 73 on a repair mission to the three-year-old space station Salyut 6 had returned safely from their 13-day flight December 10 at 12:26 p.m. Moscow time. Landing was in Kazakhstan in Soviet central Asia. Leonid Kizim, Oleg Makarov, and Gennady Strekalov were in perfect condition, Tass said. This was the sixth manned mission by the Soviet Union this year and the first three-person crew orbited since 1971, when three cosmonauts died during reentry after a valve blew on Soyuz 77.
A new guidance system on Soyuz T3 took over after liftoff and guided it to smooth docking with Salyut 6. The spacecraft, third of an improved version of the Soyuz (mainstay of the Soviet space program since 1967), carried solar batteries, an. on-board computer, improved maneuvering rockets, and improvements in cabin comfort for the cosmonauts. The crew had performed repairs and maintenance oh Salyut 6 telemetry, refueling systems, and temperature controls. {W Post, Dec 10/80, A-2; Dec 11/80, A-13; NY Times, Dec 11/80, A-23)
December 11: ARC reported that its Earth-resources survey aircraft (U-2) was helping the U.S. Forest Service, National Park Service, and California Department of Forestry fight fires by providing real-time infrared imaging of smoke-obscured landscapes. The images, used for the first time October 2 during a fire at Kings Canyon National Park in the Sierra Nevada where thick smoke blocked aerial viewing, gave the size, shape, direction of burn, and hot spots of the fire. Crews had to hike four hours each way to get to some areas.
239
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
DECEMBER 1980
Steep terrain would endanger firefighters and equ ipment if the fire perimeter was unknown.
Flying at 21-kilometer altitude (about 65,000 feet), the plane used a Daedalus multispectral scanner with a Fairchild charge-coupled linear-array scanner to send infrared (IR) images directly to ARC, which transferred the hard copy of processed information immediately to U.S. Geological Survey maps of the area. Within 10 minutes, fire control headquarters would receive a telecopy for use in deploying manpower and equipment. The U-2 could photograph a fire for up to 5 hours and transmit anywhere within 500 kilometers (300 miles) of ARC, located near San Francisco, covering virtually all forested lands in California. (ARC Release 80-90)
•	NASA announced development of a new lightweight flame-resistant material subject only to charring even at 800°F (426°C): polyimide resilient foam, a product of International Harvester’s solar division at San Diego, under contract to JSC. Use of the new foam, available next year, would reduce hazards for buses, trains, and automobiles as well as planes.
Between 1965 and 1978, fires occurred in 20% of all passenger air-carrier accidents and caused 2,727 deaths, 469 of them (17%) attributed to effects of fire or smoke. Airlines and builders of commercial planes had sought improved materials since the 1960s; in the late 1960s, materials developed by NASA for Apollo and Skylab were made available to the industry, which chose not to use them because of cost, scarcity, and lack of durability. (NASA Release 80-185)
•	INTELSAT said that the full launch sequence for Intelsat 5A F2, world’s largest and most advanced commercial communications satellite, was completed successfully December 10 when the craft unfolded its antennas upon command from the Washington, D.C., control center relayed through a ground station at Fucino, Italy.
Launched December 6 on an Atlas Centaur into a highly elliptical orbit, the satellite went into near-circular orbit when the apogee motor was fired December 8. For the next two days the control center staff had been activating it into operational configuration, unfurling its giant 51-foot (15.6-meter) solar arrays and locking its sensors on the Earth, spinning up the momentum wheel to stabilize it facing Earth’s surface. Final operation was antenna deployment.
Intelsat 5A F2 would now drift in equatorial orbit to its station as primary Atlantic Ocean communications satellite by May 1981, when it would begin serving as communications link between the western hemisphere and Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. (INTELSAT Release 80-29-1)
December 12: NASA reported that GSFC scientists had developed a high-precision radioastronomy system to study movements of Earth’s crust. A technique known as Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) used ground antennas to observe fixed extragalactic sources, usually quasars. Arrival of the
240
DECEMBER 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
quasar signal at the different points at different times could serve to calculate geometrically the distance between the stations with a high degree of accuracy.
The VLBI technique had been one means used by NASA with other federal agencies to study movement and deformation of Earth’s crust, including how and why earthquakes occur. A team representing GSFC; the Haystack observatory at Westford, Mass.; MIT at Cambridge; and JPL, Pasadena, Calif., had refined the technique for ultraprecise geodesy using fixed or mobile radioastronomy antennas 4 to 64 meters (13 to 210 feet) in diameter to measure Earth and polar rotation with precision better than 10 centimeters (4 inches), and detect Earth movement preceding large earthquakes. Such movement might occur so slowly and over so wide a region as to be undetectable by conventional means. The project had used fixed stations in California and Massachusetts and at Green Bank, W.Va., and Ft. Davis, Tex., as well as in Sweden, West Germany, and England. JPL was also working the system into a mobile station to measure movement in the Western United States. (NASA Release 80-187)
•	NASA said that the Shuttle integrated flight system was in its second week of tests in the VAB at KSC. Electrical and mechanical interfaces between the elements and between the individual Shuttle systems were under extensive test the past week, including umbilical connections between launcher and orbiter, external-tank tumble siystem, and inertial-measurement unit. Interface tests began at 2:00 a.m. December 4 and had continued around the clock since that time. The integrated test began early December 10; flight simulations with prime and back-up crews would begin December 14. (NASA Release 80-190; KSC Release 261-80)
•	NASA announced signing of an agreement in Jakarta December 9 by Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, associate administrator for space transportation operations, and Drs Suryadi, Indonesia’s director general of posts and telecommunications, for NASA launch of two Indonesian communications satellites. Satellites Palapa B-l. and Ralapa B-2 in geosynchronous orbit would offer voice, video, telephone, and high-speed data service to member states of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) including, besides Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia, and Singapore. NASA would launch B-l between January 1983 and January 1984, depending on Shuttle availability, and B-2 between January and March 1984; it had launched earlier versions of Ralapa in 1976-77. (NASA Release 80-183)
December 16: NASA reported that it was test firing Shuttle main engines with spalled (pitted or flaked) bearings and cracked turbine blades, to show that the liquid-fuel engines could tolerate less-than-perfect conditions and still perform Shuttle missions successfully. Firing began this week at NSTL and at Rockwell’s Rocketdyne Division in California. The bearings and blades were parts of the engine’s high-pressure oxidizer pump: in more than 153 tests on
241
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
DECEMBER 1980
23 pumps, totaling more than 34,000 seconds of operation, only five instances of spalling on the bearings occurred, detected in inspections after the tests. In each instance, operation of engine and pump was satisfactory.
Since procedures for chilling before operation were improved, 6 pumps had gone through 25 tests (7,500 seconds of operation) with zero spalling. Although engine runs had produced some cracked turbine blades, such cracks had caused no failures or engine malfunctions in more than 98,000 seconds of testing. NASA had instituted the tests for added assurance of successful performance even with cracked blades or spalled bearings in the Shuttle engines. Testing was under the direction of MSFC. (NASA Release 80-191)
•	DFRC reported that on December 16 Dr. Robert A. Frosch visited it for the first time as NASA administrator, holding an all-hands meeting in the auditorium for an overview of NASA status and a farewell speech. Center director Isaac T. Gillam IV gave Frosch a montage of photographs of DFRC research aircraft. After the meeting, Frosch briefed local reporters on Shuttle status. (FRC X-Press, Dec 19/80, 4)
December 18: KSC reported that the Shuttle interlace tests were coming to an end. This first major checkout of the integrated flight system was to close with a series of four simulations using prime and back-up crews of the first launch to validate computer programs that would serve cn-board flight systems during the first STS mission in 1981; the last two simulations were scheduled for December 18.
Tile work and processing of gap fillers was continuing, with only a small amount of gap-filler work to be completed after the Shuttle moved to Pad A of Launch Complex 39. At the pad, filling of the liquid-oxygen storage tank was to be complete December 17, as would insertion and removal of dummy payloads to test the service structure. Tests of UTC Liberty retrieving solid-fuel rocket casings from the ocean would continue through December 19, and sister ship UTC Freedom would begin sea trials later. (KSC Release 268-80)
The Washington Star carried a UPI report that astronauts Richard Truly and Joe Engle had put Columbia through its third rehearsal of the week December 18 “as slick as silk,” improving chances of launch March 14. (W Star, Dec 19/80, A-5)
•	NASA announced that rollout of orbiter Columbia to the launch pad would occur no earlier than December 29 at KSC. The move was postponed from December 26 because of time lost in VAB processi ng, intensity of crew work, and a two-day holiday vacation. Gap-filler closure rate was averaging 275 per day and would not constrain the rollout data, NASA said. (NASA Release 80-195)
•	INTELSAT announced that its board of governors had decided to purchase three more Intelsat 5A satellites in addition to the nine already on hand for
242
DECEMBER 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
the Intelsat 5 series, the latter to be launched by the end of 1982. Launching of the 5A series would begin in 1984; basically similar to Intelsat 5, they would have increased reliability and 25 % more communications capacity, handling
15,000	telephone calls compared to 12,000. (INTELSAT Release 80-30-1)
December 19: LaRC announced successful demonstration of the world’s first gas laser powered directly by sunlight. Conventional laser systems required intermediate energy conversion to achieve lasing: LaRC’s device without conversion components reduced system size, weight, complexity, and cost. Researchers J.H. Lee and W.R. Weaver directed light from a solar simulator onto a quartz tube filled with gaseous iodide; the light excited the iodide, causing lasing and emission of a 5-W burst of concentrated light waves.
NASA plans for lasers included use of a space-based system powered by sunlight to direct a laser beam at remote space operations; at the operations site, the laser would change to conventional energy such as electricity or heat. A laser might propel a special space engine to provide economical transfer of payloads in orbit. (LaRC Release 80-96; NASA Release 80-196)
• NASA noted that Pioneer 6 had completed 15 years of circling the Sun and returning solar data, longest operating life attained by an interplanetary spacecraft. Original Pioneer specifications had called for a working life of six months.
Pioneer 6 was first to measure the interplanetary medium in detail, sometimes over a half-billion-mile distance. It measured the Sun’s corona, returned data on solar storms, and measured a cornet’s tail. It acquired data on solar cosmic rays, the solar wind, and the solar magnetic field, all three of which extend far beyond the orbit of Jupiter.
Launched in December 1965, the 140-pound (64-kilogram) drum-shaped TRW-built craft was 35 inches (89 centimeters) high and 37 inches (94 centimeters) in diameter, covered with solar cells, and carried three booms 120° apart. With Pioneer 7, Pioneer 8, and Pioneer 9, its sister craft, it constituted a network of solar weather stations circling the Sun millions of miles apart. All current Pioneers (6 through Z7, and the Pioneer orbiter at Venus) were still operating; mission manager Richard Fimmel said that Pioneer 6 was so good “that we may get another 10 years out of it.” (NASA Release 80-194)
December 23: KSC reported final preparations under way for moving the orbiter Columbia from VAB to pad A, Launch Complex 39, within the week. Mating Columbia in the VAB to its external propellant tank and solid-fuel rocket boosters November 24 was followed by tests of ground-support connections for checkout, fueling, and launch, and of the entire flight system. December 23 should see completion of the installation and checkout of ordnance (any explosive devices for parting components like the boosters and external tank from the vehicle in flight).
Gap-filler work needed before rollout would be complete by December 27;
243
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
DECEMBER 1980
the crawler-transporter would take its place under the mobile launch platform December 28. Senior NASA managers would review the VAB tests and pad A status before rollout to make sure no constraints existed. (KSC Release 275-80)
December 24: NASA said that ARC had begun a study of the effect on airline pilots of irregular work schedules and sleep patterns and frequent crossing of time zones. Studies of animals and humans showed that reduced performance, short-term memory lapses, loss of attentiveness and alertness, and fatigue were results of “circadian desynchronosis” (jet lag), the disturbance of 24-hour biological rhythms, especially sleep cycles. Previous research was on shift workers, truckers, ship crews, and railroad engineers, but little on airline crews.
A workshop last August for airline, research, and FAA personnel agreed on pilot fatigue as a problem but could not agree on its magnitude. A group of life scientists checked reports from NASA’s safety reporting system for events possibly related to fatigue; another group reviewed scientific literature to prepare a bibliography on jet lag in lay terms and distribute it to the aviation community. ARC would also do a field study on dietary, sleep, rest, and drug-use patterns of commercial airline crews and study altered sleep and nutrition patterns in its simulation facilities. (NASA Release 80-197)
December 29: Dr. Alan M. Lovelace, NASA’s deputy administrator, submitted his resignation effective this date, but agreed to be appointed agency associate administrator and general manager. Named deputy administrator by President Ford in June 1976, Lovelace had been associate administrator for the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (OAST) since September 1974. In his new post he would continue the basic management he did as deputy administrator and be acting administrator during the absence of departing administrator Dr. Robert A. Frosch from January 20 until appointment of a new administrator and confirmation by the Senate. This arrangement, agreed to by both President Carter’s and President-elect Reagan’s staffs, would give NASA maximum continuity of management. (NASA Release 80-200)
• Bolted nose up to crawler-transporter, Shuttle orbiter Columbia arrived at its KSC launch pad for final tests before launch into space in 1981. The transporter made the 3.5-mile trip over a rocky road at 1 mph or less, completing the operation about 8:00 p.m. Dr. Robert A. Frosch, NASA administrator, told a “shivering crowd” that turned out to watch the journey that “we are now at the threshold of a new capability to investigate the universe.”
Richard G. Smith, KSC director, and George Page, Shuttle launch director, said that test firings, simulated countdowns, and other work at the pad would probably delay liftoff to the end of March or early April. Navy Cdr. John W. Young, who had gone into space four times and would command the first flight, told reporters that delays in the program resulted from the concern for
244
DECEMBER 1980
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
safety: more than a year went into attaching, replacing, and strengthening thermal tiles designed to protect the Shuttle astronauts from the heat of reentry. (B Sun, Dec 30/80, 4)
245
mJUL
