387
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,
1983
,	PRECEDING PAGE
BLANK NOT FILMED
January
January 3: President Reagan approved a joint resolution designating 1983 the “Bicentennial of Air and Space Flight.” His proclamation recalled the first manned flight in history, in a hot-air balloon that traveled 5 Vi miles after its launch on Novemeber 21, 1783, over Paris, France. He said that the commemoration would be “an opportunity to increase public awareness of our na-tioh’s achievements in aviation and space flight and to rededicate ourselves to the spirit of excellence which has brought us so far so fast.” (Text, Jan 3/83)
January 5-31: The Pentagon issued a warning January 5 that a nuclear-powered Soviet reconnaissance satellite had “run into problems” and would probably crash somewhere on Earth before the end of January. The Soviet Union’s Cosmos 1402, like an earlier Cosmos that crashed in northern Canada in January 1978 and caused minor radiation contamination, was carrying about 100 pounds of enriched uranium to provide electrical power for its radar.
The Soviet Union confirmed loss of its control over Cosmos 1402, launched to observe U.S. naval operations from an orbit of 64.9° inclination that covered most of North America and all of China, Africa, South America, and Australia, as well as part of the Soviet Union. The danger lay not in the possibility of an explosion but in the radioactivity of the nuclear fuel core if the craft should come down in a densely populated area.
The foreign press had warned that Cosmos 1402 had “separated into individual fragments on a command from earth.” The nuclear power unit aboard it was a matter of concern to all other nations; the United States had “expressed its concern to Moscow” that the object and its TOO pounds of uranium would crash on ttie Earth like the other. (FBIS, Xinhua in English, Jan 7/83;
Pravida in Russian, Jan 8/83; Tass in English, Jan 15/83)
Normally, said the United Press, when an ocean-surveillance satellite such as 1402 exhausted its 4-to-7-month life expectancy it would be raised and “parked” at a high orbit altitude “for centuries.” The Tass news agency said January 7 that Cosmos 1402 had been “divided into separate fragments by commands from earth in order to isolate the active part of the reactor, which ensured its Complete combustion in the atmosphere strata.” Department of Defense (DOD) sources said January 10 that one piece had burned up in the atmosphere, i>ut two larger sections were still descending—those holding the reactor, biggest and heaviest part of the 6,000-pound satellite. At the current rate of descent, the parts could enter the atmosphere in the week beginning January 23, sources said.
Tass reported January 24 that “the main part of the satellite structure” had reentered over the Indian Ocean at 1:10 a.m. Moscow time: the fuel core was
NTKMHU m preceding page blank not filmed
391
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JANUARY 1983
forecast to enter between February 3 and 8 [see Feb. 7]. (NY Times, Jan 6/83, A—1; Jan 22/83, 9; Jan 31/83, A-25; WPost, Jan 7/83, A-21; Jan 8/83, A-ll; Jan 11/83, A-9; Jan 20/83, A-2; Jan 24/83, A—1; Tass in English, Jan 7/83, Jan 24/83)
January 7: NASA said it would conduct another flight-readiness test of Challenger’s three main engines late in January because of high gaseous-hydrogen levels in the aft compartment after the first firing December 18. Several leaks had shown up, including a split cooling tube in the # 3 engine nozzle. The need for a second test would delay the STS-6 Challenger launch to late February. (NASA Release 83-2; MSFC Release 83-2; AvWk, Jan 17/83, 24)
• Lewis Research Center’s (LeRC) basic organization was revised following a recent strategic planning session. The four research and technology (R&T) directorate (aeronautics, energy, science and technology, and space) were changed to aeronautics, spaceflight systems, space technology, and materials and structures. An office of comptroller was established to manage resources and budget. Other directorates affected were administration, engineering services, and technical services, (NASA anno Jan 14/83; LeRC Release 83-3)
January 17: The People’s Republic of China (PRC) announced that it would buy from the United States a Landsat ground station to be hooked into the U.S. system. A spokesman for the China Academy of Sciences said that the new station would help analyze China’s geological structure, locate mineral resources, and provide data for land use, crop estimates, irrigation, environmental monitoring, alterations in watercourses, pest and disease control, and predicting natural disasters.
The Washington Post said that a Maryland company, Systems and Applied Sciences Corporation, had a signed contract with the People’s Republic of China to build the station at a cost of up to $12 million. The firm, among the largest black-owned enterprises in the United States had “worked on many projects” for NASA, but the PRC contract would be its first significant international venture. PRC officials would press Secretary of State George Shultz when he visited in February to approve the sale, as the United States had blocked technology transfers in the past because of possible military application. Both the Carter and the Reagan administrations had approved such a sale in the past, but the People’s Republic’s economic problems had forced a delay. (FBIS, Xinhua in English, Jan 17/83; W Post, Jan 18/83, A-18; AvWk, Jan 31/83, 21)
January 19: The press reported the death in North Carolina at the age of “about 26” of Ham, the chimpanzee sent on a Mercury capsule into suborbital flight January 21, 1961, to prepare for the flight of Alan B. Shepard, Jr., first U.S. astronaut.
392
JANUARY 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Ham, named after the Holloman Aerospace Medical Center in New Mexico, retired from the space program in 1963 to live at the National Zoological Park in Washington, D.C., and after 1981 in the North Carolina Zoological Park. His trip in “a very primitive space capsule on an experimental suborbital run” was attended with “excitement and suspense,” even dread, because no one could predict whether he would survive the shocks of the trip or undergo emotional trauma.
“Ham rose to the occasion and took it all in stride,” the report said. “Never mind that the capsule, through an error, had been shot 40 miles higher than planned or that it had landed 30 miles past the target area where a fleet awai ted it or that it had been traveling 5,000 miles an hour, 800 miles faster than planned. ... During the time radio signals were received the chimp pushed various levers and performed other behavior tasks assigned him.” (WPost, Jan 21/83, A-16; Jan 26/83, B-3; Jan 27/83, A-22)
January 21: NASA declared successful the mission of Nimbus 7, launched October 24, 1978, from Vandernberg Air Force Base into a polar orbit. Using eight interdisciplinary research experiments representing domestic and international scientific and government communities, it accomplished mission objectives, including proof of the feasibility of mapping upper-atmosphere characteristics, of supplying space-collected oceanographic data to scientific uses, and of extending the solar-radiation and Earth-radiation data base. Objectives were met or exceeded with high-quality and high-quantity data, and Nimbus 7would continue into its seventh year “in good health.” (NASA MOR E-604-78-08 [postlaunch] Jan 21/83)
January 25: NASA launched the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) at 6:17 p.m. PST from Vandenberg Air Force Base on a Delta into polar orbit with 883.6-kilometer apogee, 856.6-kilometer perigee, 100.1-inclination, and 102.4-minute period. A joint endeavor of NASA, Netherlands Aerospace Agency, and U.K. Science and Engineering Research Council, IRAS, was a 2,360-pound spacecraft carrying a 22-inch Cassegrain telescope cryogenically cooled by a helium tank to measure infrared radiation in four bands between 8 and 119 microns. At low temperature the detectors would have the sensitivity needed for an all-sky survey of the “heat signatures” of stars.
The $80 million mission might find up to a million infrared sources not previously detected, filling “a significant gap in the electromagnetic spectrum between visible light and radio waves.. .about which we have no or very little information,” according to Dr. Dale Compton, telescope manager at Ames Research Center (ARC). IRAS was designed to cover about 95% of the sky over the next sixth months and produce the first comprehensive catalog of infrared objects.
The United States built the telescope and the rocket and was managing operations through the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). The Netherlands built the spacecraft and three other scientific instruments. The United
393
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JANUARY 1983
Kingdom would handle the tracking and collect the data. (NASA MOR E-885-83-01 [prelaunch] Jan 3/83; NASA wkly SSR, Jan 27/83; Spacewarn SPX-352; NY Times, Jan 27/83, A-7)
• Discovery of another hydrogen leak during a second test-firing of Shuttle Challenger’s main engines would delay the launch recently postponed to late February for at least several more weeks, said Lt. Gen. James A. Abraham-son, Shuttle program head, at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). The leak meant delaying Challenger’s five-day mission for a month or more if one or more of the engines had to be removed from the Shuttle, test-fired, and replaced. The new leak was “on the same order of magnitude” as the first; as the source was never located, the leaks might be from the same or different areas. (W Post, Jan 26/83, A-5)
January 31: James M. Beggs, NASA’s administrator, told a press conference on the agency budget that President Reagan was committed “to a strong national space and aeronautics program,” citing NASA’s obligation to help strengthen national security and maintain U.S. leadership in space. “This budget, I believe, moves us forward toward those goals,” he said.
NASA’s FY84 budget would be just over $7.1 billion, an increase of $267 million (4%) over FY83. Of $5.7 billion sought for research and development (R&D), 61% (about $3.5 billion) would be earmarked for the Shuttle program to cover Shuttle procurement and operation, upper stages for Shuttle use, the Spacelab, the tethered satellite, and other equipment and launch vehicles.
Beggs said that the trend begun last year was to spend relatively more on operations and less on capability development. NASA’s FY84 budget request included four initiatives to “stretch the scope of our program in science, applications, and aeronautics.” They were the Tethered Satellite System (TSS), a cooperative U.S.-Italian project for conducting experiments in space up to 100 kilometers from a Shuttle orbiter; the Venus radar mapper, replacing the Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR) authorized by Congress in FY82; the Advanced Communications Technology Satellie (ACTS) to flight-test high-risk technology, using “a novel procurement approach” of cost-sharing with industry; and a numerical aerodynamic simulation (NAS) capability, a large computer system to improve accuracy and reliability in aircraft design while reducing the need for wind-tunnel and flight testing.
Beggs said U.S. space policy called for “permanent space facilities,” to be embodied in the Space Shuttle program; FY84 money would define and plan for such facilities. We have no specific plans to establish a permanent manned space station in earth orbit,” he said, but NASA would continue the study of user requirements, hardware and software systems, science applications, and designs to accommodate specific missions. (Text, press conf, Jan 31/83)
During January-: Speaking in the House of Representatives, Reps. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and Larry Winn (R-Kans.) noted the 25th anniversary of the start of
394
JANUARY 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
the U.S. space program. When the Navy’s Vanguard rocket exploded on its pad in December 1957, the Army “quickly moved forward” to finish developing Explorer 1, and the Jupiter C rocket carried it into orbit January 31, 1958. After two Soviet space firsts—Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957, and Sputnik 2 carrying the dog Laika into space on November 3, 1957—the United States had entered the space race that would land two astronauts on the moon just over 11 years after Explorer 1.
Explorer 1 exceeded all expectations, transmitting data until its batteries were exhausted May 23, 1958. Scientists basing a decay rate on data from Sputnik said that Explorer 1 would not last more than five years. But on March 3, 1970, more than 12 years after launch, Explorer 1 plunged back into Earth’s atmosphere and burned up. It had made the most significant discovery of the International Geophysical Year (the Van Allen radiation belt about Earth), controlled the temperature in a satellite, and found that micrometeorities were not serious hazards to space vehicles, data valuable to the Moon missions.
Although “the American story in space is only 25 years old,” Winn added, “we have made tremendous progress in that quarter century, and it all began with Explorer 1.” (CR, Jan 31/83, E204; AFSC Newsreview, Feb 11/83, 1)
•	The hydrogen leak that caused postponement of Challenger’s maiden launch had been traced to one of the three engines, according to KSC’s Dick Young. A three-quarter-inch-long crack appeared in the combustion manifold of the #1 engine, a piece of metal an eighth of an inch thick. (W Post, Jan 30/83, A-2)
•	NASA reported a number of differences between Shuttle orbiters Columbia and Challenger, most of them stemming from Columbia’s being a vessel for research and development, whereas Challenger came equipped as an operational craft.
Control and display panels on Columbia had sensors configured for data collection and processing in the flight-test phase; those on Challenger had fewer of these arid more support equipment, such as a Ku-band antenna system for tracking future data-relay satellites. On the first four flights, Columbia had an ejection-seat system for the commander and pilot in case of accident in the launch or landing phase of flight-testing. Challenger had no ejection system; the space used for it on Columbia would serve on Challenger to seat the mission specialists. On its first flight in February, Challenger would seat all four of the flight crew on the orbiter’s flight deck; it would be able to seat three more crew members in the mid-deck on later flights.
Challenger would weigh abot 2,000 pounds (907 kilograms) less than Columbia and could carry more payload and additional crew on operational flights. The orbiters differed in thermal-protection systems: heat-shielding tiles on Columbia were being replaced with densified tiles to eliminate porosity that made the original tiles vulnerable to loosening. All of Challenger’s tiles had been densified. Challenger also had an advanced thermal-protection
395
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JANUARY 1983
blanket, a silica material sandwiched between an upper and lower quilt and bonded directly to the orbiter skin. Its identification marking also differed from Columbia’s, being located so the name would be visible during on-orbit operations. (NASA Actv, Jan 83, 4)
396
February
February 1: NASA transferred operation and management of its Landsat system to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) during ceremonies at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). Beginning in 1972 with the launch of Landsat 1 (Erts 1, the Earth-resources technology satellite), the Landsat program was a research and development effort to determine the usefulness of satellite multispectral data from synoptic views of the Earth’s surface for agricultural and urban planning, geologic exploration, land management, and snowmelt and flood-runoff analysis.
Over the following 10 years NASA had operated four Landsats, including Landsat 4, launched in July 1982, and a ground system at GSFC. Landsat 1 and Landsat 2 were no longer operating; Landsat 3 would be retired later in 1983 because of degradation related to age. In 1979 the Reagan administration told NASA to transfer operation to NOAA so that the latter agency could work toward eventual commercialization of the system.
NASA had relinquished operation of Landsat 4 (except for the thematic mapper, which NASA would continue to use), the control center at GSFC, and the multispectral-scanner data-processing facility, also at GSFC, and would hand over control of the thematic mapper early in 1985. NOAA would also take over the Landsat 4 backup spacecraft (the Landsat D now in final checkout by General Electric) that would replace Landsat 4, probably in mid-1985. NOAA would reimburse NASA for the use of buildings and utilities. (NASA Release 83-7)
February 1-11: Despite “intense efforts” to communicate with Viking lander 1 on the surface of Mars, silent since mid-November, controllers and scientists at JPL and a Martin Marietta group had received no signals during a scheduled downlink February 11. Since February 1 they had sent commands that should have started the lander’s on-board computer executing the steps needed to transmit to Earth. Declining battery power on the lander was thought to have tripped a protective low-voltage switch that shut down major subsystems; if the commands had been followed, the lander would have communicated February 11.
JPL would go ahead with efforts to reestablish contact, which would be unsuccessful if the lander had multiple problems. No telemetry dala were available to diagnose the situation. The 64-meter Deep Space Tracking Network antenna, near Canberra, had bombarded the lander on Mars with 80-to 100-kilowatt signals, said George Gianopulos, Viking team leader at JPL. Gianopulos said that commands from JPL through Australia could be up to
397
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
FEBRUARY 1983
40° off the receiving line into the leader’s antenna dish and still be picked up. Getting into the lander to reset the switch “is going to be a neat trick,” he added.
Launched August 20, 1975, and designed for a 90-day mission, Viking 1 had shown “incredible stamina” in the harsh environment of Mars. Radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) could provide power for years, but in 1982 its four nickel-cadmium batteries began to show their age. Viking could be instructed to charge or discharge batteries to keep them functioning longer. A command sent November 19 to repeat this exercise apparently got into the antenna-pointing subroutine and switched the crucial communications antenna to point away from Earth. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Feb 16/83; JSC Roundup, Jan 28/83, 1)
•	A NASA team investigating space-suit failures that occurred during STS-5 issued a report listing ways to improve and simplify contractor test and inspection procedures. Regulators and motors would undergo more extensive testing on the Shuttle orbiter just before being stored, and space suits would be fully tested the day before a scheduled space walk. The first failure to be detected, shutdown of a fan motor while Joseph R Allen was donning his suit, was the fault of sensors in the motor electronics. The other failure, that of an oxygen regulator in William Lenoir’s suit, resulted from the absence of two tiny devices holding a regulator spring in place. (NASA Release 83-9)
February 4: Japan launched its first “practical communications satellite, Cs2A, at 5:37 p.m. local time from its Tanegashima space center on a three-stage rocket toward a stationary orbit at 36,000 kilometers over New Guinea. It would be Japan’s sixth in stationary orbit, although it would be the first used for practical purposes.
Cs2A carried eight transponders with communications capacity equal to
4,000	telephone circuits, to improve links between the mainland and outlying islands in the Pacific south of Tokyo. It would be used by government agencies and public transportation rather than by the public sector for research to develop new media such as television communications links, electronic mail, high-speed datafax, and color television. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Feb 4/83)
•	NASA announced crew selections for STS-11 and STS-12, both to be commanded by veterans of earlier shuttle missions. The crew for STS-11 in January 1984, led by Vance D. Brand, who commanded STS-5 in November 1982, would include pilot Robert L. Gibson and mission specialists Bruce McCandless II, Robert L. Stewart, and Dr. Ronald E. McNair. STS-11 would be the fifth flight of Challenger, and its seven-day mission would launch an Indonesian communications satellite.
The crew for STS-12, led by Henry W. Hartsfield, who commanded STS-4 in June 1982, would include pilot Michael L. Coats and mission specialists
398
FEBRUARY 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Dr. Judith A. Resnik, Dr. Steven A. Hawley, and Richard M. Mullane. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) said that a sixth crewman might be added later under a new NASA policy permitting major customers to send a payload specialist along. To be launched in March 1984, STS-12 would be the first flight of a new orbiter, Discovery; its 5-day mission would include deployment of the third tracking and data-relay satellite. (NASA Release 83-15; MSFC Release 83-6)
•	MSFC announced that it would begin drop tests in cooperation with Dryden Flight Research Facility (DFRF) to try out larger parachutes for Slhuttle boosters. The current means of slowing booster descent after launch into the ocean for retrieval and later use consisted of small pilot chutes, a drogue, and three main chutes 115 feet in diameter. The new main chutes being tested would be 13 feet in diameter. Use of larger chutes would slow velocity at impact from 89 feet per second to about 75 feet per second, reducing loads on (and amount of damage to) boosters that had occurred during Shuttle flight tests, officials said.
A modified B-52 aircraft from DFRF would fly the test article to about
20,000-feet altitude and release it. Both ground-based and airborne cameras would record the mock booster’s descent to evaluate design, deployment, and parachute performance. (MSFC Release 83-9; DFRF Release 83-1)
•	NASA announced its decision to locate a refurbishment and assembly facility for Shuttle solid-fuel rocket boosters elsewhere than in the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB) at KSC. High production rates required in the 1986-and-later timeframe could not occur in the available space; also, the VAB did not lend itself to efficient “factory operation” for refurbishment of the solidTuel rocket boosters.
NASA had considered alternate locations, such as a complex on government property at KSC or Canaveral Air Force Station or an off-site location near KSC. All these sites had problems, and the search had expanded to include some partially empty industrial facilities formerly used to build Saturn rockets at MSFC. The location chosen would be cost-effective as well as the best for recompeting the contract. (NASA Release 83-17; MSFC Release 83-7)
February 7: In a White House speech to persons from the aviation, government, diplomatic, military, and business areas, President Reagan hailed 200 years of manned flight and announced a decision to “keep the shuttle production lines intact” to “preserve the option of building the fifth shuttle” and advantage of “the tremendous opportunities that lie ahead.” (Text, Feb. 7/83)
•	Senior NASA managers, headed by Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, associate administrator for space flight, had met with contractors and “cleared the way” for returning the tracking and data-relay satellite to KSC’s launch pad in preparation for the first launch of Challenger, the agency said.
399
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
FEBRUARY 1983
Results of the second flight-readiness firing led to a decision not to conduct a third firing before launching Challenger early in March. The #1 engine had been removed for exchange with the flight spare. The spare would have the high-pressure pump from the #1 engine installed before the change took place. (NASA Release 83-16)
• Tass reported that the fuel core for the nuclear-powered Cosmos 1402 entered the atmosphere over the Atlantic at 1:56 p.m. Moscow time and “burned up entirely.” Data from “competent Soviet organizations tracking the flight” said the Sputnik “totally ceased its existence.” (FBIS, Tass in English, Feb 7/83)
February 18: A panel investigating the loss of two solid-fuel rocket boosters after the launch of STS-4 said that a switch in the booster decelerators was at fault.
Premature separation of one of two riser attachments on each main chute occurred about 365-seconds after liftoff, when the frustrums were exploded away from the booster, instead of at impact with the water. A switch designed to release the chutes when the boosters hit the water had freed the parachutes from the boosters before impact, probably because of severe shock when the explosion separated the frustrum from the boosters.
Before STS-5, NASA modified the decelerating system to fix both risers firmly to each booster, to eliminate switch separation, and to prevent shock from affecting other subsystems. The booster deceleration worked perfectly during STS-5. (NASA Release 83-19)
February 22: NASA announced the selection of crews for STS-13 and Spacelab 3, as well as mission specialists for Spacelab 2. Robert L. Crippen, who piloted STS-1 and was scheduled to command STS-7, would command STS-13 in April 1984 with Francis R. Scobee as pilot. Mission specialists would be Dr. George D. Nelson, Terry J. Hart, and Dr. James D. van Hoften.
Robert F. Overmyer, who has pilot of STS-5, would command STS-18 (the Spacelab 3 mission, now scheduled for launch ahead of Spacelab 2) with Frederick D. Gregory as pilot. Mission specialists v/ould be Dr. Don L. Lind and physicians Dr. Norman E. Thagard and Dr. William E. Thornton. Both of the latter would be on Shuttle flights before Spacelab 3: Thagard on STS-7, Thornton on STS-8. Payload specialists would be selected later.
Mission specialists for STS-24 (Spacelab 2) would be Dr. Anthony W. England and Dr. Karl G. Henize. Spacelab 3 was originally to be the first operational mission; Spacelab 2, which should have preceded Spacelab 3, was delayed for completion of an instrument-pointing system. (NASA Release
83-22)
During February: The Florida Historic Preservation Society charged that NASA had breached a 1974 agreement by arranging for demolition of the last
400
FEBRUARY 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Apollo launch tower at KSC and sale of the metal as scrap. NASA said that it had to award a contract for demolition by February 18 or risk further delay in Shuttle schedules: the tower had to be removed by October so that NASA could begin modifying the mobile launch pad for use by the Shuttle beginning in 1986.
NASA had postponed demolition for a week to let the society find a way to preserve the tower but said none of the suggestions was practical. The matter arose when two U.S. Air Force engineers at KSC said that the tower could be a major tourist attraction and started a move to save it. NASA said that it would cost up to $4 million to remove the tower and reassemble it for display. The agency had accepted a bid of $557,000 to remove the tower, and the demolition company would keep the steel, worth about $400,000, as scrap. A coalition of historic preservation groups said that the tower could be removed and rebuilt for $1 million (admittedly only an estimate). NASA had offered free storage and a site for reconstructing it if the coalition would pay a contractor to dismantle and move it. (NASA Release 83-25; W Post, Feb 17/83, A-17)
• NASA said that its IRAS launched January 25 had revealed infrared sources in the Large Magellanic Cloud not visible to optical telescopes on Earth. The Large Magellanic Cloud was the galaxy closest to Earth, about 155,000 light years away. IRAS produced an image from the nebula, called 30 Doradus, of a cloud called Tarantula by astronomers, from its long separate filaments giving it a spider-like appearance. Astronomers suggested that the nebula (a giant H II region, consisting of hydrogen clouds ionized by the ultraviolet radiation from a very hot star) might contain a monster star thousands of times; more massive than Earth’s Sun. (NASA Release 83-21)
401
March
March 1: NASA technicians at Cape Canaveral removed two of Challenger’s main engines for repairs; a third engine, on its way from Mississippi, would undergo similar maintenance. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, associate administrator for space transportation systems, told a House subcommittee on science and technology that discovery of the flaws while the Shuttle was still on the ground showed the agency’s conservative approach to safety. He blamed tight budgets in the past for a lack of spare parts. Delay from the original January 20 launch date had already cost NASA about $1.5 million; costs would increase later when crews would have to work overtime to meet program commitments.
Challenger’s tt\ engine was removed February 4 when a crack in a coolant line allowed inflammable gas to leak into the aft compartment. Then, the replacement engine was found to have an oxygen leak in its heat exchanger, a system to pressurize the external fuel tank. An inspection of the #3 engine revealed the same flaw.
As Challenger’s engines were intended to handle heavier payloads than Columbia’s, a design change had added a metal sleeve over the fuel-supply tubes to absorb greater vibrations. Soldering apparently overheated and embrittled the underlying metal tubing. Welding new tubing would make the configuration like the old Columbia engines, and Challenger would not be able to run at full thrust. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Mar 2/83; NY Times, Mar 2/83, A—1; W Post, Mar 2/83, A-5)
March 5: NASA said that it would have to revise the schedule for Challenger’s first launch because delays had pushed the date past the vernal equinox and would put the Shuttle’s communications satellite payload in Earth’s shadow for an undesirably long time. Liftoff would be reset for 1:30 p.m. EST, regardless of the date, shortening the launch window from 4 hours to 18 minutes, because of the need for daylight conditions at an emergencylanding runway in Dakar, Senegal.
Spring would start March 20 at 11:39 p.m. EST. With the sun directly over the equator, the time in darkness between transferring the communications satellite from the Shuttle’s low Earth orbit to stationary orbit at 22,300 miles altitude would have resulted in too much heat loss. All five Columbia missions were launched in the morning, the earlier the better according to NASA, so that the crews had more daylight to work in. (NY Times, Mar 6/83, 38)
March 7-19: A KSC spokesman said that another problem could delay further the first flight of Challenger: contamination of the giant tracking and data-
PRECEDISMG PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED «NTf NTtnWAI t V RIANT
403
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MARCH 1983
relay satellite (TDRS) to be carried on that flight. A storm February 28 with winds from 60 to 70 mph had carried “sand, salt, silica particles, and paint chips” into the room at the launch pad where the payload was kept and onto the satellite. NASA said earlier that the TDRS was not seriously damaged by “particulate matter” found on it; however, the contaminants were undergoing laboratory tests, and the sensitive Earth-scanner and tracking instruments were being closely examined. Launch would again be delayed, probably to April 7.
Spokesman James Kukowski said that NASA could fly the 2'/2-ton satellite as is; try to clean it inside the Challenger cargo bay (where it was installed February 25); remove and clean it at the launch pad; return it to a KSC payload assembly building; or send it back to TRW’s plant in California. Delays were costing up to $3 million a day in overtime. (NY Times, Mar 8/83, C-8; Mar 11/83, A-14; Mar 19/83, 14; W Post, Mar 9/83, A-17; Mar 11/83, A-18; Mar 19/83, A-10)
March 9: NASA said that it had joined with the Department of Energy (DOE) and the DOD in a program to advance technology of nuclear-reactor power systems for use in future civilian and military space missions. The SP-100 program would assess promising concepts with the aim of beginning engineering and ground testing within a few years. Research would proceed on thermoelectric and other power-conversion systems; high-temperature metals and materials; radiators for dissipating waste heat in space; and high-temperature nuclear fuels. A project office at JPL would provide day-to-day management of SP-100. (NASA Release 83-30)
•	LeRC issued a request for proposals to design, build, and launch an ACTS system, including flight spacecraft, ground system, and operations. Launched by the Space Shuttle in 1988, ACTS would serve for two years in communications experiments. (NASA Release 83-28; LeRC Release 83-14)
•	Tass announced the docking of Cosmos 1443, probably an advanced version of earlier Salyut craft, with Salyut 7 that had been orbiting since April 1982. Cosmos 1443, launched unmanned from Baykonur March 2, weighed about 20 tons and was larger than the Soyuz or Progress spacecraft. The 21-ton Salyut 7 was about the size of a small house trailer., said the New York Times. The linkup was thought to demonstrate the Soviet Union’s ability to assemble larger space stations. (FBIS, Tass in English, Mar 10, 11/83; NY Times, Mar 11/83, A-12; W Post, Mar 11/83, A-24)
March 12: Launched January 25, IRAS had already discovered up to 20 distant galaxies too small to see previously. Dr. James Houck of Cornell University, one of 18 astronomers on the three-nation IRAS science team, said at JPL that only 20 small galaxies outside the Milky Way were measured before IRAS went into orbit. “In 12 hours of operation with this satellite, we doubled that
404
MARCH 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
number.” In a single minute, the 22.4-inch IRAS telescope found out more about the Large Magellanic Cloud, galaxy closest to the Milky Way, than ever discovered by Earth telescopes.
The IRAS telescope, cooled by liquid helium to 2.5° above absolute zero to offset any stray heat that might confuse its imaging, was so sensitive that it could detect an object with temperatures far below that of freezing on Earth. Optical telescopes, by contrast, could see only objects with temperatures hot enough to make them shine (above 10,000 °F). The telescope was built in the United States, the spacecraft in the Netherlands; Great Britain was tracking it.
The biggest surprise, said Houck, was that the $80 million satellite was “working better than we had hoped,” seeing cooler objects in greater detail than astronomers thought possible. Over its 12-month lifetime, IRAS could survey 95% of the sky in the infrared, never attempted from the ground. Infrared lightwaves were longer than those in the visible spectrum but shorter than radiowaves. The projected lifetime would probably be extended by 50% because of the slow rate of helium use so far. (W Post, Mar 12/83, A—10)
March 17: MSFC test-fired a high-performance development motor for a Shuttle solid-fuel rocket booster, redesigned for more thrust at liftoff and higher payload capability. Successful completion of the test would qualify the motor for flight. First use would be on the eighth Shuttle mission, set for summer 1983. (MSFC Release 83-12)
March 22: NASA announced the establishment of a Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science at ARC, to begin operations in June. Funded by NASA through the Universities Space Research Associations (USRA), the institute would be a place for the academic community to work in computer science, applied math, and computer applications to solution of scientific and engineering problems. Director of the institute would be Dr. Peter J. Denning, head of the computer sciences department at Purdue University. (NASA Release 83-38)
March 23: The Nimbus 5 Earth-observation satellite would end operations as of April 1, said Dr. S.G. Tilford of NASA’s environmental observation division. Launched in 1972, Nimbus 5 would probably reenter after the year 2000. Its last on;bOard tape recorder stopped in November 1982. The U.S. Navy, the only user of its data, would get this information from Nimbus 7. (NASA Release 83-40)
• MSFC said that NASA transferred the Astro program (Spacelab astronomy missions beginning in 1986) to it from GSFC. Leon B. Allen, Astro manager, said that the move followed reallocation of internal resources at GSFC. MSFC was the logical place for the program because of experience in managing shuttle missions. (MSFC Release 83-14)
405
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MARCH 1983
March 28: NASA launched NOAA-E for NOAA from the Western Space and Missile Center (WSMC) on an Atlas vehicle at 7:52 a.m. EST into an orbit with 829-kilometer apogee, 806-kilometer perigee, 101.2-minute period, and 98.8° inclination. Called NOAA 8 in orbit, it carried search and rescue (SAR) equipment to locate signals from emergency beacons on planes and ships.
An hour later, when the satellite came over Vandenberg Air Force Base for the first time, malfunction of a control device was rotating the spacecraft “like the propeller on a plane,” said a NASA spokesman. As it solar panels could not fix on the Sun, the spacecraft was losing the power needed to make corrections and was put into a safety mode to prevent further discharge of battery power. A similar problem occured in 1978 with TIROS-N and was corrected in two weeks. (NASA MOR E-615-83-04 [prelaunch] Mar 23/83; NY Times, Mar 29/83, A-14; W Times, Mar 29/83, 3; A/D, Mar 30/83, 171; P Inq, Mar 30/83, 10; Spacewam SPX-354, Apr 26/83)
• A report from the House Appropriations Committee said that the Space Telescope, called by NASA Administrator James M. Beggs “the most important scientific instrument” ever to be flown, would cost $200 million more and reach orbit a year later than expected because of difficulties in development.
The report blamed delays and cost overruns on NASA for understaffing the program by 50% in its early development, and on Perkin-Elmer Corporation, one of two major contractors, for failing to “properly plan for a project of the technical and manufacturing difficulty of the Space Telescope.” Besides the glitches in tracking and alignment devices, possibly unremovable dust on the primary telescope mirror after 15 months in a Perkin-Elmer “clean room” had lowered its reflecting power by 20 to 30%. (IT Post, Mar 28/83, A-8)
March 29: An international team of scientists studying the upper tropical atmosphere completed a month of rocket launches in Peru. Project Condor was an equatorial-atmosphere rocket and radar mission by universities and agencies of the United States, Peru, and the Federal Republic of Germany. The equatorial jet stream spawned the largest electrical currents and fields outside the auroral zone. Also, high- and low-density plasma mixing in the post-sunset ionosphere created greater disturbances than magnetospheric substorms.
Project Condor, part of NASA’s sounding-rocket program, was managed by GSFC’s Wallops Flight Facility. Condor would map electrical conditions and wind- and radio-wave patterns in the tropic upper atmosphere; applications would include, for instance, satellite ranging systems used to locate ships at sea that could be affected by ionosphere conditions. (GSFC Releases 83-4,
83-7)
406
April
April 1-14: Countdown for the April 4 launch of STS-6, first flight of shuttle orbiter Challenger, began when inspection of its payload—’TDRS—showed “a much lower level of contamination than originally thought.” Robert E. Smylie, associate administrator for space tracking and data systems, said that the cargo bay and critical parts of the TDRS solar array had been cleaned and that TDRS would be put back into the cargo bay.
Press reports noted that the 75-ton Challenger, a slimmed-down version of Columbia, could lift more and was nearly 2,500 pounds lighter than its predecessor. Made of lighter materials, it had no crew-ejection seats. Crew of the five-day $26-million mission would be Paul Weitz, the only spaceflight veteran; Karol Bobko; and Donald Peterson and Story Musgrave, who on the fourth day of the mission would perform the first Shuttle space walk.
Launch April 4 at 1:30 p.m. EST from KSC exhibited “no sign of the engine trouble that forced four of its five launch postponements,” said press reports. Challenger was in orbit 10 minutes after liftoff.
About 11:30 p.m. the crew launched TDRS from the cargo bay by firing six explosive bolts that hurled it a mile or so from Challenger. About one: hour later, from a distance of about 32 miles, the crew fired a huge rocket engine attached to TDRS to start boosting it to a permanent position 22,400 miles above the equator. TDRS-A would be first of three communications satellites to be stationed in a global network that would quadruple the area from which U.S. spacecraft could communicate with Earth, as well as the amount of time available for such communication, and would begin to eliminate the need for global ground stations.
About 6 a.m. EST April 5 ground control lost touch with TDRS,during a 104-second firing to nudge it into higher orbit. This was the second use of the rocket system called inertial upper stage (IUS), built by Boeing for the U.S. Air Force. The second state ignited but burned only about 70 seconds; TDRS arid its rocket were out of contact for 3 hours. The STS-6 crew was asleep at the time. At 9 a.m. EST, mission control suddenly reacquired signals from TDRS,. and project officials reported that it had separated from the IUS and stabilized itself. All satellite sytems appeared to be working normally. NASA said that it had appointed a panel to look into anomaly, which was blamed on misfire of an on-board rocket. The misfire put TDRS into an eccentric orbit at an angle to the equator, instead of almost directly over it. Flight directors said that they could correct the TDRS orbit by period firings of on board hydrazine.
Just before the space walk April 7, President Reagan congratulated the STS-6 crew on being “ahead of schedule,” adding “I can’t say I envy you.”
407
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
APRIL 1983
A reporter who asked the president why was told “May be a little claustrophobia.”
Musgrave and Peterson exited through an airlock just after 4 p.m. EST, fastened themselves to 50-foot safety wires, and moved about the 65-foot-long cargo bay to test new space suits, handholds and footholds, tools, and ropes to be used in retrieval and repair of orbiting spacecraft. While Weitz and Bobko watched from inside, Musgrave and Peterson stayed outside Challenger for 3 hours and 52 minutes, doing the first U.S. space walk since February 1974, when Edward Gibson and Gerald Carr left Sky lab to retrieve film from an exterior camera. A space walk scheduled last November from the Shuttle Columbia had been canceled when both space suits exhibited mechanical failures.
On April 8 from JSC mission control, Vice President George Bush told the crew that their mssion was a “significant contribution.” The crew had suffered some space sickness but felt “pretty chipper,” according to the capsule communicator. When the astronauts appeared on television during Bush’s visit, Musgrave was performing rolls in the weightless environment, and Weitz explained that he was “trying to see if he can make himself sick again.”
Challenger, with Weitz at the controls, landed at Edwards Air Force Base April 9 at 1:53 p.m. EST. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight, said that the crew and the vehicle were “in great shape.” Besides launching TDRS, the mission exposed seeds to effects of weightlessness and cosmic radiation. It also carried a snowflake machine from the Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun to produce symmetrical crystals, such as those needed in computers; a device to separate rat and egg proteins in weightlessness, aimed at ultrapure medicines; a device to produce uniform microscopic latex beads to test supersensitive measuring instruments; and an Air Force Academy canister containing a tiny oven to solder metals in weightlessness.
STS-7, tentatively set for June 9, was to land Challenger at KSC only a few miles from its launch point. STS-8 was supposed to take TDRS-B into orbit as part of a communications link needed for the European Space Agency’s (ESA) Spacelab mission due to fly on STS-9; Spacelab would carry about 40 scientific experiments requiring constant communications with Earth through the two TDRS communications satellites.
However, Abrahamson said that NASA “will not fly a second satellite on the eighth shuttle flight until we understand what went wrong on this flight.” He said that a U.S. Air Force camera in New Mexico had recorded, from a distance of about 20,000 miles, what happened to put the $100 million TDRS into a wrong orbit. (NASA MOR T-313-83-01 fpielaunch] Jan 14/83, Mar 25/83; NASA Releases 83-37, 83-49; MSFC Release 83-21; text, Pres. Doc., Apr 4, 7/83; NY Times, Apr 6/83, A—1; Apr 7/83, D-7; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 9/83, 8; Apr 10/83, 1; WPost, Mar 31/83, A-15; Apr 5/83, A-l; Apr 6/83, A-l; Apr 8/83, A-l; Apr 10/83, A-l; W Times, Apr 5/83, 2A)
408
APRIL 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
April 4: For the first time in the U.S. space program, one satellite used signals from another satellite to navigate. The Air Force System Command said that Landsat D (Landsat 4), a NASA remote-sensing craft built by General Electric, was getting signals from the U.S. Air Force Space Division’s NavStar global-positioning system (GPS) satellite to compute position, velocity, and time. Landsat 4, first satellite to carry a GPS receiver, could record its precise position as it acquired Earth-imaging data. The receiver also eliminated transmission of navigation signals between space and Earth; direct signal reception ensured efficient and economic spacecraft operation. (AFSC Newsreview, Apr 4/83, 5)
April 11: NASA launched RCA-F at 5:39 p.m. EDT from the Eastern Sipace and Missile Center (ESMC) on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 36,266-kilometer apogee, 169-kilometer perigee, 634.2-minute period, and 24° inclination, before reaching geosynchronous orbit at 139 °W where for 10 years it would provide commercial and official voice, digital, and video communications between Alaska and the continental United States.
Called Satcom 1R in orbit, the 3-axis stabilized craft weighed nearly 600 kilograms (1,320 pounds) and carried 24 solid-state transponders. It would replace the first of RCA’s domestic communications satellites, RCA Satcom 1 launched December 12, 1975, which had served for seven years. Satcom 1R joined five previous RCA communications satellites to provide television, voice, and high-speed data transmission to all 50 states and Puerto Rico. More than 4,000 Earth stations had direct access to these spacecraft. (NASA MOR M-492-206-83-07 [prelaunch] Mar 31/83; NASA Release 83-44; SPX-354; NASA wkly SSR, Apr 14/83)
•	NASA said that President Reagan asked his Senior Interagency Group for Space, chaired by William P. Clark, assistant to the president for national security affairs, to establish a basis for an administration decision on whether to proceed with NASA development of a permanently based manned space station. (NASA Release 83-51; MSFC Release 83-24)
•	After months of unsuccessful effort to communicate with Viking lander 1 (the Mutch Memorial Station on the surface of Mars), engineers at JPL decided that they probably could not reestablish contact.
Launched in August 1975, the lander reached Mars July 20, 1976, and was joined by lander 2 September 3 of that year for the most thorough examination of another planet ever undertaken. When contact was lost in November 1982, engineers vainly transmitted command series based on studies of possible failure modes. However, lander l’s internal program could initiate signals to Earth without being commanded; if the lander were still operating, it might transmit in May.
Lander 1 was renamed the Mutch Memorial Station to honor Dr. Thomas A. Mutch, former leader of the Viking imaging team, who disappeared in
409
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
APRIL 1983
September 1980 during a climbing trip in the Himalayas. (NASA Release
83-47)
April 14: Efforts to push the $100-million TDRS communications satellite into its proper orbit were suspended when NASA engineers found that two of its maneuvering rockets were damaged and would not work. Firing the 16 small thrusters on the satellite was the obvious way to correct the orbit, but Ron Browning, TDRS project manager, said that engineers from NASA and TRW Inc., manufacturer of TDRS, would take four to six weeks to figure how to operate it with “less than a fully optimal control system.” (W Post, Apr 14/83, A-3)
April 16: A Solar System Exploratory Committee, representing the science community and NASA, concluded a two-year study by recommending that the agency undertake “moderately priced missions” to Mars, Venus, Titan, and a comet before the end of the century. NASA had sent 32 unmanned spacecraft to other worlds in the 1960s and 11 in the 1970s; only 2 in this decade.
Proposals were a Venus radar-mapper in 1988, a Mars orbiter in 1990, flyby of an asteroid and rendezvous with a comet in the mid-1990s, and a probe of Saturn’s moon Titan between 1988 and 1992. Other missions of interest to the group would be sampling Mars and comets; robot rovers on Mars; and probes to Neptune, Uranus, and Saturn. (W Post, Apr 17/83; A-9; NY Times, Apr 17/83, 22)
April 17: India, for the third time since 1980, launched a satellite into orbit from its own soil. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi watched liftoff of the 17-ton four-stage rocket carrying the 91-lb Rohini satellite from Sriharikota island off India’s east coast. The launch, part of a series aimed at perfecting the launch vehicle, would be followed in the next 10 years by higher investment in the national space research program, Gandhi said. (If Post, Apr 18/83, A-17; FBIS, Apr 20/83; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Apr 25/83)
April 18: NASA announced a deal with Orbital Systems Corporation, a private company, to develop and market a $20-million propulsion system for launching satellites from the Space Shuttle. (NY Times, April 19/83, D—1)
• GSFC said that signals radioed to the NOAA-E environment satellite had stabilized it, apparently solving the attitude-control problems it had developed after launch March 28 from Vandenberg Air Force Base. A team of experts from government and industry drew up instructions for the corrections that resulted in complete recovery, according to Gerald W. Longanecker, project manager. The satellite carried six environmental-monitoring devices and one search-and-rescue satellite-aided tracking (SARSAT) experiment, the latter for use in locating and rescuing victims of plane crashes and ships in distress.
Launched on a U.S. Air Force Atlas E, NOAA-E went into near-perfect or-
410
APRIL 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
bit but was found to be in the wrong attitude after reaching a 450-nautical-mile altitude; it was in a spin every 17 minutes instead of pointing its sensors and antennas toward Earth. The correcting signals stopped the tumble and allowed the control system to acquire Earth lock. (NASA Release 83-61)
April 19-22: The Soviet Union launched from Baykonur three cosmonauts at 5:11 p.m. Moscow time in Soyuz T-8 on a mission to dock with orbital complex Salyut 7-Cosmos 1443. Commander of the mission was Soviet air force Lt. Col. Vladimir Titov as commander, Gennady Strekalov as flight engineer, and Aleksandr Serebrov (who was on a week-long mission in August 1982) as researcher.
Tass later said that “deviations from the planned rendezvous program” canceled plans to dock with the orbital station, and the crew made a soft landing near the city of Arkalyk April 22 at 5:29 p.m. Moscow time. Radio Moscow had said this would be the first time a piloted craft docked with such a huge space complex. Although North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) radar showed the Soyuz and Salyut in close orbits, the Kettering satellite-monitoring group in England said that the mission did not proceed as expected and that communications between the cosmonauts and ground control were “very terse.” This was the first failure of a Soyuz-T, a type in use for three years. (FB1S, Tass in English, Apr 20/83, Apr 22/83; Beijing Xinhua in English, Apr 22/83; WPost, Apr 19/83, A-20; Apr 22/83, A—1; Apr 23/83, A-l)
April 25: Scientists at ARC said that Pioneer 10 would be nearly 2.8 billion miles beyond the Sun at 2 p.m. PDT, when it passed the orbit of Pluto, traveling 30,000 mph on its way outside the solar system. The first manmade object to reach such a distance, Pioneer 10 might go on for millions of years and carry Earth greetings to another galaxy. Launched March 2, 1972, the craft had functioned “almost with flaw,” said project manager Richard Fimmel.
Because of its elliptical orbit, Pluto—usually the outermost planet—at this time was nearer than Neptune to the Sun and would travel inside Neptune’s orbit for the next 17 years. Pioneer 10 would cross Neptune’s orbit June 13, effectively leaving the solar system behind. Radio signals moving at the speed of light needed more than four hours to cross the distance between Earth and spacecraft; even after a decade in space, Pioneer 10 was transmitting data of great value to scientists. Since the date of its launch with a predicted lifetime of 21 months, long enough for a Jupiter encounter, Pioneer 10 signals over vastly increasing distances had remained detectable because of improvements in antenna sensitivity. NASA said that it hoped to track the craft for another eight years, to a distance of 5 billion miles, 2.2 billion miles beyond its present location. (NASA Release 83-57; ARC Releases 83-13, 83-14; W Post, Apr 25/83, A-23)
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
APRIL 1983
•	In an exercise called Balloon Intercomparison Campaign, NASA launched four giant balloons from the National Scientific Balloon Facility (NSBF) at Palestine, Tex., to a 40-kilometer (25-mile) altitude in the largest study ever of ozone depletion in the stratosphere and global air pollution from natural events like El Chichon’s eruption in April 1982. Each 800-foot-high, 450-footwide balloon could carry two tons of scientific devices. Investigators were from Canada, Europe, Japan, and the United States. (JPL Release 1019; NASA Release 83-62; LA Her-Exam, April 24/83, 2)
April 28: NASA launched GOES-F from ESMC at 6:26 p.m. EDT on a three-stage Delta into a transfer orbit with 48.400-kilometer apogee, 33,483-kilometer perigee, 1707.4-minute period, and 0.5° inclination, before moving it into geosynchronous station at 135 °W over the Pacific to acquire environmental data as “Goes West.” The launch was the 34th consecutive success for a Delta. (NASA MOR E-612-83-04 [prelaunch] Apr 28/83; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Apr 29/83; Spacewam, SPX-355)
•	Press reports described NASA plans to raise the orbit of TDRS to the proper 22,300 miles altitude by as many as 12 separate firings of different engines over a two-week period. Robert Aller, TDRS program manager, said that TDRS was essential to U.S. military and civilian satellites for the next 20 years. “Without it, we can’t use the space shuttle [or] Spacelab the way we want to, and we can’t Use some very expensive projects like Landsat or the space telescope at all.” The $1 billion telescope, called the most ambitious scientific instrument ever built, would be useless without TDRS’s high-speed communications relays.
TDRS was about 10,000 miles below the lowest point at which it should approach Earth. The proper orbit would be geosynchronous at 22,335 miles altitude, where its speed would match Earth’s spin at the equator. TDRS should reach that point by June: if not, NASA would face “a long trudge up Capitol Hill to explain the impact of the loss.” (NY Times, Apr 25/83, B-12; W Post, Apr 28/83, A-17)
412
May
May 2: Engineers at GSFC sent commands to fire 6 of the 24 small control thrusters on the TDRS that was launched from Challenger in April into a faulty orbit. Scheduled to last one hour, the firing ended after 41 Vi minutes, when one thruster overheated. Engineers said that they could prevent overheating in future maneuvers. The firings would continue daily for two to three weeks. (NY Times, May 3/83, C5; W Post, May 3/83, A-ll)
May 4: MSFC reported successful simulation of Solar Maximum Mission (SMM) spacecraft-repair procedures in its huge neutral-buoyancy tank as rehearsal for the actual task set for 1984 during the 13th shuttle mission.
Solar Max, launched February 14, 1980, worked for 10 months until fuses blew on three of its four attitude-control momentum wheels. The repair mission would replace its 500-pound attitude-control subsystem and part of the coronagraph-polarimeter. Three of its seven instruments continued to work despite the malfunction.
Dr. George Nelson, lead astronaut for the repair, and STS-13 pilot Francis Scobee wore space suits during the underwater simulation to experience the physical difficulty of working in the space environment. Dr. Nelson and Dr. James D. van Hoften would make the actual repairs.
Dr. Ernie Hildner, coinvestigator on the polarimeter and MSFC’s solar physics branch chief, said that watching the simulation made him “more optimistic about the success of the endeavor.” (MSFC Release 83-30)
May 6-27: Challenger’s second flight in August would probably not include the second TDRS, said NASA’s Robert Aller, as the agency still had no idea why the first tumbled out of control after launch April 5. STS-8 would carry only a small communications satellite for the government of India; as a substitute for the $100-million TDRS, NASA would fly the “payload flight test article,” an 8,500-pound package designed to test the robot arm’s ability to retrieve and deploy satellites.
Postponement of TDRS-B would keep the $1 billion Spacelab built by ESA and scheduled to fly in September on STS-9 from carrying out its full mission, as its 40 instruments were designed to work at such high speeds that they needed at least two tracking satellites to operate properly. However, ESA and NASA agreed to launch Spacelab on schedule and get a 60% to 70% return from its experiments. Even this, Aller said, would depend on NASA’s ability to move TDRS-A into a synchronous orbit. Two test firings had raised its perigee 350 miles, and Aller expressed “confidence we will have [TDRS] in geosynchronous orbit sometime in June.”
413
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MAY 1983
Press reports said that firings May 10 and 11 raised the perigee more than 800 miles, still 7,000 miles short; it would take another three weeks of daily firings to achieve synchronous orbit. On May 27, NASA said that it removed TDRS-B from the cargo manifest for STS-8 and substituted the test article. By that time it had moved TDRS-A within 3,675 miles (5,915 kilometers) of proper perigee. (WPost, May 7/83, A-3, May 11/83, A-9; May 12/83; NASA Release 83-86; MSFC Release 83-38)
May 16: President Reagan issued a directive for the government to rent launch pads and sell rocket parts and plans to private firms as “a domestic backup for the shuttle at essentially no cost to the U.S. government. . . .the private sector would assume all costs of [expendable launch vehicle] production now borne by the U.S. government.” U.S. government facilities and equipment that would otherwise be underutilized or no longer required would find a market.
The government began 10 years ago to phase out expendable rockets like Delta, Atlas, and Titan in favor of reusable Space Shuttles. Contracts with rocket firms were ending, and launch pads at the Cape were closing down.
Gilbert Rye of the National Security Council said that the costs of keeping the U.S. facilities open and operating would be borne by the private companies. The president’s directive would allow the firms to buy parts and government-owned plans for the rockets at cost and to pay for the use of launch pads, equipment, and engineers. (Text, PresDoc, May 16/83; W Post, May 17/83, A-l)
May 18: Pioneer 9, orbiting the Sun since its November 1968 launch, returned its last signals to Earth. The 148-pound TRW-built craft and its sisters, Pioneer 6, Pioneer 7, and Pioneer 8, were among the earliest interplanetary probes, and the other three were still functioning. Designed to transmit data for only six months, Pioneer 9 had continued to do so until May 18, 1983. ARC engineers tried vainly to revive it. (NASA Release 87-23; WPost, Mar 5/87, A-9)
May 19: NASA launched Intelsat 5-F at 6:26 p.m. EDT from ESMC on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit. This was the 100th launch for LeRC. The 4,400-pound Ford Aerospace-built communications satellite carried 12,000 voice and two color television channels and was the first to have a maritime communications link for ship-to-shore communications. (NASA Release
83-77; LeRC Release 83-25; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, May 20/83; D/SD, May 17/83, 95)	"
NASA declared the May 19 launch of Intelsat 5-F successful, as the Atlas Centaur had put the satellite into the desired transfer orbit. After an apogee kick motor fired May 22 put it in near-geosynchronous orbit for initial positioning and preliminary tests, the Intelsat would be moved on station over the Atlantic Ocean. (NASA MOR M-491-203-86-06 [postlaunch] June 13/83)
414
MAY 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
May 22: Final attempts to contact the Viking 1 lander on Mars failed, and JPL spokesman said that they would try no more “unless NASA Headquarters changes its mind.” The craft outlived its 90-day guarantee by years; it was survivor of a pair of two-part spaceships, each including an orbiter that circled Mars while its robot laboratory sampled and photographed the planet’s surface. Viking 2’s lander and Viking l’s orbiter went mute in April 1980. The $500-million project returned data on Mars, including pictures of rust-red rocks and boulders, dust storms, and periodic layers of frost; recorded temperatures ranged from 124-24°°F below zero. (NY Times, May 23/83, A-17; W Post, May 23/83, A-8)
May 26: NASA launched ESA’s X-ray observatory, Exosat, from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 3:18 p.m. GMT on a Delta. Designed to study cosmic X-ray sources from 0.04 to 80 Kev, the craft carried four instruments: two imaging telescopes, a large-area proportional counter array, and a gas-scintillation spectrometer. It reached a planned highly elliptical orbit with
192,000-kilometer apogee, 340-kilometer perigee, and 72.5° inclination. ESA’s operations control center (ESOC) took over shortly after liftoff. (NASA MOR M-492-304-83-01 [prelaunch] May 20/83; ESA Infos 18, 20)
May 27: NASA reached agreement with the National Trust for Historic Preservation and five co-plaintiffs in a U.S. district court suit to preserve the last of the Apollo-program rocket gantries at KSC. NASA said that it would disassemble the gantry into 20-foot sections and store them until a place was found to display the tower and money could be raised to reassemble it.
Michael Ainslie, president of the National Trust, said that the agreement recognized “the growing national imperative for the preservation of our physical history, even if that history was built less than 20 years ago.” NASA said that it would cost $1.8 million to take the tower apart and $8 million to reassemble it. (W Post, May 28/83, A—11)
During May: Dr. Jack Kerrebrock, associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology at Headquarters, announced that he would return to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) July 1 to resume the position as head of MIT’s department of aeronautics and astronautics that he held before coming to NASA in July 1981. Dr. Raymond S. Colladay would act as associate administrator until the position was filled (Hq anno May 27/83)
—Robert C. Goetz, director of structures at Langley Research Center (LaRC), would become deputy director of Johnson Space Center (JSC), effective July 1, replacing Clifford E. Charlesworth who would become JSC director of space operations. (LaRC Release 83-32)
415
June
June 2-7: The Soviet Union launched from Baykonur two interplanetary spacecraft, Venera 15 on June 2 on Venera 16 on June 7. The spacecrafts first went into “an intermediate orbit of an artificial earth satellite”; then, an onboard engine sent them toward Venus, where they were scheduled to arrive in October.
Venera 15 had no descent module, indicating that “a landing is not being planned” and that the spacecraft would conduct atmospheric and surface research from orbit. Tass said that Venera 16, “by its design and mission,” was “analogous to” Venera 15. Tass also mentioned the lapse of more than 20 years since the Soviet Union began its interplanetary program with the launch in February 1961 of Venera 1, which reached a heliocentric orbit. First probe to land on Venus was Venera 3, in March 1966; Venera 4 landed gradually and sent data on the planet’s atmosphere for 93 minutes. Venera 13 and Venera 14 soft-landed in March .1982 and returned photographs of the landing site. (FBIS, MoscDomTvSvc in Russian, Tass in English, June 2&7/83)
June 10: A NASA board said that slippage of a mechanical adjustment caused a December 1982 accident at ARC during tests of the world’s largest and newest wind tunnel. The collapse of a structure smoothing airflow through the tunnel pulled debris through the power section and damaged the fan blades beyond repair. The damage cost more than $10 million and would delay completion by a year or more. No persons were injured. (NASA Release 83-96)
June 12:. The prototype Shuttle Enterprise, returning from an overseas tour that included the Paris air show, flew over Washington, D.C., and Baltimore, Md., early in the morning before landing at Dulles airport in Virginia for public viewing at a distance. “Hundreds of thousands,” according to the Washington Post, came to see the Shuttle, “despite soaring temperatures.” Enterprise, and its Boeing 747 transport jet left for California the next day. (NASA Releases 83-89, 83-93; W Post, June 13/83, B—1; USA Today, June 13, 7A; W Times, June 13/83, LA)
June 13: Press reports said that the 10th Shuttle mission originally set for November, first to have a secret mission and first to be flown solely for the U.S. Air Force, was delayed “indefinitely” at the request of the Air Force and that NASA officials had “no idea” when it would be rescheduled. The Air Force confirmed the delay but would not discuss the reasons. NASA and the Air Force had an agreement allowing the service to preempt any scheduled Shuttle mission.
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
jiff Vi'tMUUHHJJL
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JUNE 1983
Unidentified sources said that the reason was the Boeing-built upper stage that failed when the TDRS was launched from the Shuttle in April. Postponement indicated that the payload scheduled for the Air Force would have used the type of upper stage that malfunctioned. A special board convened to investigate the matter had not issued a report. (NY Times, June 14/83, C—3; W Post, June 14/83, A-7)
• At 8 a.m. EDT June 13, unmanned U.S. spacecraft Pioneer 10 crossed the orbit of Neptune on the way out of the solar system. The 570-pound robot craft 2.81 billion miles from the Sun and traveling 30,558 mph at the time. (NASA Releases 83-39, 83-91; ARC Releases 83-11, 83-18; W Post, June 12/83, A-l; June 14/83, A-l; NY Times, June 14/83, A-l)
June 16: Associated Press (AP) said that ESA launched Ariane 6 at 7:59 a.m. EDT from Kourou, French Guiana, carrying two communications satellites: the first ESA telecommunications craft, the British Aerospace-designed Ecs 1, and a smaller West German satellite to retransmit amateur radio broadcasts.
This sixth attempt to get the three-stage Ariane off the ground was considered a “crucial boost” to Europe’s space program as a way to break th superpower monopoly on space. Ariane faced competition from the U.S. Space Shuttle and from private companies planning to buy conventional Thor, Atlas, and Titan vehicles from the U.S. government. ESA was counting on enough business for everyone, but admitted that Ariane would have had trouble getting any if this sixth launch had failed. (ESA Info 21; WPost (AP), June 17/83, A-2)
June 18-26: STS-7, carrying the first U.S. woman astronaut, took off June 18 at 7:33 a.m. EDT from KSC launch pad 39A for a six-day mission that would deploy two foreign communications satellites and practice freeing and retrieving a pallet containing 11 experiments from the West German government. Crew members were Navy Capts. Robert L. Crippen, commander, and Frederick H. Hauck, pilot, plus mission specialists Dr. Norman E. Thagard, a civilian physician; U.S. Air Force Col. John M. Fabian; and Dr. Sally Ride, a civilian with a Ph.D. in physics.
Mission control stated that the group of five was “the largest human payload in the history of the space age.” The Soviet Union had maintained crews of five on its Salyut space station but had never carried that number on a single launch.
First deployment of a payload was at 5:02 p.m. EDT when the crew launched from the cargo bay a seven-ton communications satellite, Anik C2, for Telesat (Canada’s governmental telecommunications organization). At 9:36 a.m. EDT the next day the crew launched a $40 million Palapa B communications satellites for the government of Indonesia. Two previous Palapas launched by the United States were providing communications to Indonesia, Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia, and the Philippines. Palapa B, twice the size
418
JUNE 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
of the earlier communications satellite could increase television and telephone traffic in the area by 10% to 15% a year. The 147 million Indonesians living on islands extending more than 3,200 miles east to west had only 560,000 telephones: Palapa B could provide service for as many as a million new telephones in the next 10 years.
After the second communications satellite was launched, the four rookie astronauts (Ride, Fabian, Hauck, and Thagard) appeared on the television screen assembled in the cockpit and wearing dark-blue T-shirts with white letters reading “TFNG: We Deliver.” TFNG stood for “thirty-five new guys,” the astronaut class, recruited in 1978, to which all four belonged. Crippen stayed out of camera range, but mission control said “That’s all right, Crip. We can tell you’re a steely-eyed veteran from here.”
On June 19 mission control said that the families of the four fathers aboard Challenger had gathered “to wish you a happy Father’s Day.” The four male astronauts had a total of 10 children: Crippen and Thagard, 3 each, Hauck and Fabian, 2 each.
Major activities for the next three days would be the release of the mechanical arm and rehearsal for deployment and retrieval of the West German pallet. Ride and Fabian would drop the 15-foot, 5,000-pound package off the Shuttle and try to pick it up again. (This would be a first for an exercise that could be commonplace on future missions.) On June 22 the team released and retrieved the package five times, as television cameras on Shuttle and package sent spectacular shots of the procedure with a backdrop of Earth and black space. When the exercise concluded and the arm and the payload were back in the cargo bay, Crippen reminded mission control that some crews had announced “We deliver” (referring to the STS-5 crew’s boast when they launched two communications satellites from the shuttle last November): “Well, for flight 7, we pick up and deliver.”
The USSR’s Valentina Tereshkova, first woman to make a flight in space 20 years ago, wired congratulations to Sally Ride. The telegram expressed pleasure “to know that a third representative of this planet’s women, now from the United States of America, is in outer space today.” Last year the Soviet Union sent a second woman, Svetlana Savitskaya, into space.
Among more than 20 experiments in Challenger’s cargo bay and mid-deck was the colony of 150 carpenter ants sent into space by high-school students from Camden, N.J., to record their reactions to weightlessness. The ants were considered good space subjects, being hardy and naturally social creatures.
Marginal weather at KSC raised a question whether Challenger would land near its launch point, as planned. Landing on the Florida runway was a way to reduce time in preparing Challenger for its next flight. STS-7 cOuld be extended, or landing could be shifted to Edwards Air Force Base in California; a shift to California would mean an eight-day delay in bringing Challenger back to KSC for a mid-August mission, adding pressure to the timetable for launching Spacelab between the end of September and mid-October. The next chance for a Florida runway landing would be early in 1985; the two interven-
419
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JUNE 1983
ing missions would be a night launch and landing and the heavyweight touchdown of the Shuttle carrying Spacelab. Also of concern was the effect of rainstorms on the Shuttle tile covering: planes carrying strips of the insulation had been flown through rainstorms with a uniform result of “significant erosion of the tile surfaces.”
Mission control offered three landing times, 6:53 a.m. and 8:29 a.m. EDT at KSC and 9:56 a.m. EDT at Edwards Air Force Base. The crew appeared on television “stowing the cabin” in preparation for landing. A sign “The Doctor Is In” was held up as Thagard showed viewers the experiments he was conducting to find clues for the cause of space sickness. STS-7 had been the first shuttle mission to have no space-sick astronauts.
The Challenger landed at Edwards Air Force Base June 24 at 9:57 EDT after a steady downpour began at KSC. In a congratulatory telephone call to the astronauts, President Reagan mentioned Ride’s handling of the mechanical arm and said “You were there because you were the best person for the job.” Ride said that the flight was “the most fun I’ll ever have in my life.” When the astronauts attended a brief homecoming ceremony at Johnson Space Center June 24, Ride refused to accept a bouquet of flowers from a NASA official; she had said before the mission that she wanted to be treated no differently from her four male crewmates. Wives of the male astronauts each received a red rose; Ride’s husband, astronaut Dr. Steven Hawley, did not. (NASA MOR E-420-07-83-04 [prelaunch] June 9; NASA MOR M-989-83-07 [prelaunch] June 13/83; NY Times, June 20/83, A—1; June 23/83, A—1; June 25/83, 16; June 26/83, 4-8; W Post, June 17/83, A-2; June 20/83, A—1; June 21/83, A-6; June 22/83, A-3; June 23/83, A-l; June 24/83, A-3, C-4; June 25/83, A-l; June 26/83, A-2)
June 27: NASA launched HiLat (U.S. Air Force satellite P83-1) from WSMC on a Scout at 11:37 a.m. EDT into an orbit with 834-kilometer apogee, 765-kilometer perigee, 100.9-minute period, and 82° inclination. The 248-pound HiLat would obtain data on propagation effects on plasma distortion on radar and other communications and baseline data for interpreting the distortions. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, June 29/83; NASA MOR M-490-604-83-01 [prelaunch] June 22/83)
• U.S. balloonists Maxie Anderson, first to make a balloon crossing of the Atlantic, and Don Ida were killed when they crashed in a forest in Bavaria during the Gordon Bennett race for distance from Paris. Police saw the basket of the balloon detach and fall into the forest; a West German search-and-rescue unit said that the ballon struck a high-tension wire that separated it from the gondola. Police found both occupants dead at the scene.
Anderson, with Ben Abruzzo and Larry Newman, landed Double Eagle II in France August 17, 1978, after a transatlantic flight. He and his son Kris hand flown across North America from San Francisco to Quebec, landing the balloon at Kitty Hawk May 12, 1980, far from its North Carolina goal. He
420
JUNE 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
and Don Ida had attempted a 45-day around-the-world flight in the balloon Jules Verne last November but encountered mechanical trouble in India. (NY Times, June 28/83, B-8)
June 27-30: The Soviet Union launched Soyuz T-9 at 1:12 p.m. Moscow time June 27 to link with orbiting complex Salyut 7-Cosmos 1443. Crew members were Col. Vladimir Lyakhov, pilot, and flight engineer Aleksandr Aleksandrov, Soyuz T-9 docked with the complex at 2:46 p.m. Moscow time June 28, and the cosmonauts entered the station to begin “practicing. . .control of large-size manned complexes.” On reactivating life-support and communications systems, the crew began unloading the automatic cargo craft that had brought about three tons of supplies. (FBIS, Tass in English, June 27, 28, 29, 30)
June 28: NASA launched Galaxy 1, first of a series of three wholly owned Hughes communications satellites, at 7:08 p.m. EDT from ESMC on a Delta into a transfer orbit before stationing it at 135 °W to serve the cable television industry. Hughes had sold its 24 operating transponders on a noncommon-carrier basis to ensure purchasers a stable source of programming. NASA would launch the other Galaxies in September 1983 and June 1984. (NASA MOR M-492-215-83-01 [prelaunch] June 27/83; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, June 29/83)
June 29: NASA said that TDRS-1 had achieved geosynchronous orbit at 67°W at 12:31 p.m. EDT. By 7:41 p.m. EDT, the communications satellite was stabilized in a normal Earth-oriented mode, with momentum wheels and Earth sensors controlling it for the first time. The White Sands ground station was activating the payload.
The press said that NASA’s $100 million rescue mission had put TDRS into proper stationary orbit on the equator over Brazil, two months after the
5,000-pound communications satellite went off course when a second-stage thruster misfired after launch from the Challenger in April. The 39th firing of thruster jets moved TDRS into an orbit parallel to Earth’s rotation and at the same speed, keeping it in the same position above Earth. Saving the satellite meant that Spacelab, due to fly in September on STS-9, could proceed as planned. Also, the Landsat now in orbit could send its images to Earth through TDRS, and all future Shuttle flights could keep in touch with Earth 85% of the time instead of the present 20%.
An adjacent story in the Washington Post said that the House had approved and sent to President Reagan for signature a compromise bill authorizing NASA to spend $7.3 billion in FY84, slightly more than the president’s request, but approval was expected. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, July 1/83; W Post, June 30/83, A-3)
421
July
July 1: Tass reported that the two cosmonauts aboard Salyut 7 had opened doors to a large attached module, Cosmos 1443, and were working in essentially a three-part assembly consisting of a Salyut, a Cosmos, and the Soyuz T-9 in which they arrived at the space station June 28.
When the Cosmos docked automatically March 10 with the Salyut, U.S. space experts said that it would double the size of the 21-ton Salyut and had carried 3 tons of cargo, such as scientific gear, experiments, and life-support materials. Cosmos had sets of small thrusters generally used to change the orbit of the entire complex, which weighed in total about 50 tons. The Cosmos itself, 43 feet long and 13 feet in diameter with solar-cell panels to generate electricity, consisted of an orbital module and a descent module. The descent module could return to Earth unmanned and land by parachute carrying experimental data and materials no longer needed on the Salyut, giving the same sort of round-trip supply service instead for the U.S. Shuttle without being reusable.
Tass said that the cosmonauts, Vladimir Lyakhov and Aleksandr Aleksandrov, were unloading Cosmos 1443 and reactivating systems on Salyut 7, putting film into cameras and turning on observation instruments, such as an East German mass spectrometer, which would photograph and measure “vast tracts of Soviet territory in middle and southern latitudes.” (FBIS, Tass in English, July 1/83; NY Times, July 1/83, A—1)
• A team of engineers from NASA and industry celebrated at GSFC their success, after 58 days of maneuvers, in putting the tracking and data-relay satellite into geosynchronous orbit. Using tiny one-pound thrusters with nozzles about the size of a thimble, the team boosted the 5,000-pound TDRS more than 8,600 miles further into space, a feat never before attempted. The TDRS was launched from the Shuttle Challenger during its first mission April 4; after a successful deployment from the Shuttle, some difficulty in the inertial upper stage (IUS) rocket threw TDRS into a tumble from which ground control rescued it, stabilizing it far short of the altitude needed for geosynchronous orbit.
A joint board representing NASA and the U.S. Air Force said later that the problem was loss of oil pressure in an engine seal, probably caused by excess engine heat. The board had viewed photographs taken by U.S. Air Force camera over New Mexico and had conducted “extensive tests.” Because of the importance of TDRS operation to space communications, NASA and the Air Force had rescheduled two shuttle missions that were to use the IUS. (NASA
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED IMTEflTi0WM.1T mm
423
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JULY 1983
Releases 83-104, 83-114, 83-116; MSFC Releases 83-49, 83-50; W Post, July 13/83, A—1; July 28/83, A-4)
—NASA announced that Charles D. Walker, an engineer at McDonnell Douglas, would be the first payload specialist representing a project designed for commercial purposes. He would fly on the 12th Shuttle mission set for March 1984, operating a materials-processing device developed by McDonnell-Douglas to separate large amounts of biological materials in space for new pharmaceutical uses. As chief engineer responsible for spaceflight tests and evaluation, Walker had worked with project support at KSC and JSC, training NASA astronauts who operated the device for electrophoresis research on earlier Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 83-105)
July 5: A colony of carpenter ants flown on the shuttle Challenger in June had apparently not survived the trip. Press reports said that no signs of life were seen through the clear plastic top of the casing housing the 151 ants. The sponsors, students from two New Jersey high schools who flew to Cape Canaveral with a teacher to recover the experiment, checked heat and light supply to the canister, as well as the cameras—one making periodic exposures and the other recording on television tape—that monitored the ants in flight. Everything worked. RCA Corporation had supported the experiment with a
S10,000	grant.
Press reports noted that the ants had been inside Challenger’s cargo bay almost two months before launch and might have died before the flight; however, two control colonies in New Jersey had survived under the same conditions. The canister would be opened in New Jersey in the presence of two biology professors from Temple University who were advisers to the students. (IV Post, July 7/83, A-2)
July 15-17: Reports from Tass on the flight of the Salyut 7-Soyuz T-9-Cosmos 1443 complex included “an unpleasant surprise'’ when a micrometeorite struck one of the windows with quite a loud crack, leaving a four-millimeter at diameter crater on the pane. “Luckily,” the report added, “the windows have double panes, each 14mm thick. That is why nothing terrible has happened.” Earth was passing through a meteorite shower, and Valery Ryumin had noted during his space walk that the skin of Salyut 6 had been riddled with small craters.
The incident had “amazingly coincided” with a preplanned exercise in “urgent escape from the station.” Journalists “could not help asking” how long it would take for the crew to abandon station. Deputy flight director Victor Blagov said that the “minimum required time is 15 minutes, but we consider 90 minutes—that is, one orbit—to be standard time” during which the crew could take all steps needed for an emergency mothballing of the station and enter the return module. The cosmonauts could “spend several days [there] in absolute safety,” Blagov added, but if necessary they could “splash down in the reentry vehicle in the ocean, or touch down in one of the reserve
424
JULY 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
landing ranges in the USA, France, and other countries. There is an international convention on that score.” (FBIS, Tass in English, July 15, 22 , 27/83)
July 18: NASA Administrator James M. Beggs told a symposium of several hundred government, industry, military, and foreign space-station planners that President Reagan would approve a manned U.S. space station within the next 12 months. Dr. George A. Keyworth, presidential science adviser, had dropped opposition to the space station and asked NASA to come up with a “grand vision.” NASA hoped to get from the administration and Congress “seed money” of about $200 million for the fiscal year beginning October 1, 1984; Beggs said that it would cost $6 to $8 billion to get a permanent station with four to six persons aboard into orbit by 1991. The station would enhance U.S. economic well-being by providing new areas for research. (NY Times, July 19/83, C-3; C Trib, July 18/83, 1)
July 28: NASA launched Telestar 3A for the American Telephone and Telegraph Corporation (AT&T) from the Eastern Space and Missile Range at 6:49 p.m. EDT on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 37,516-kilometer apogee, 185-kilometer perigee, 23° inclination, and 664-minute period, preparatory to moving it to geosynchronous station at 96 °W over the Pacific just west of the Galapagos.
Telestar 3A was the first of a new series of three domestic communications satellites offering AT&T long-lines customers television, phone, and data service over the continental United States, Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico; it had 24 transponders and 6 spares, each able to relay a color-television signal at 60 million bits per second or up to 3,900 two-way phone calls. (Telestar 1 launched 21 years ago for the first transatlantic television relay could offer only 600 one-way voice channels or one television channel.) Launch of Telestar 3A was declared successful December 16. (NASA Release 83-110; NASA MOR M-492-216-83-01 [postlaunch] Dec 16/83; Spacewam SPX-358, Aug 30/83, 2)
During July: NASA appointed Dr. Milton A. Silveira, assistant to the deputy administrator, to succeed Dr. Stanley I. Weiss as chief engineer. Weiss, who came to NASA in 1980 as associate administrator for space transportation operations at Headquarters, was leaving to become vice president for engineering at Lockheed Corporation, where he had worked from 1957 to 1978.
Silveira began at Langley with the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) in 1951 and worked in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs. He was deputy project manager at JSC for the shuttle orbiter program before coming to Headquarters in 1981. (Anno, July 1/83)
NASA also appointed John W. Boyd associate administrator for management at Headquarters effective September 4. He had begun at ARC in 1947
425
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JULY 1983
and served there until appointed deputy director of DFRC in 1979, returning to ARC in 1980 as associate director. (Anno, July 1/83)
• Dr. Homer E. Newell, Jr., associate administrator of NASA when he retired in 1973, died July 18 at his home at the age of 68. Before joining NASA shortly after its formation in 1958, he had been acting superintendent of the Naval Research Laboratory’s atmosphere and astrophysics division, and coordinator of the science program for the Navy’s Project Vanguard. The New York Times said that Newell was “primarily responsible for organizing early [U.S.] scientific efforts in space” and “firmly championed the view that scientific exploration of space should be under civilian rather than military auspices.” (NY Times, July 20/83, B-8; W Post, July 20/83, C-8)
426
August
August 5: Japan launched a second operational communications satellite, Cs-2B (code-named Sakura 2B), at 8:20 p.m. GMT from Tanegashima Island toward a stationary orbit above northwestern New Guinea. This seventh satellite launched by Japan was only the second “for practical purposes”; the first was Sakura 2A launched in March as communications link between Japan’s mainland and outlying Pacific islands. Each communications satellite had capacity equal to 4,000 phone circuits, and the two were designed for use in a major emergency like an earthquake. (FBIS, Tokyo Kyodo in English, Aug 6/83)
August 9: JPL said that NASA’s IRAS launched in January had found a formation of large particles orbiting Vega, one of the brightest stars seen from Earth, in what might be a solar system like Earth’s in a different stage of development. This was the first evidence of large solid objects orbiting a star other than the Sun.
IRAS scientists Dr. H.H. Aumann of JPL and Dr. Fred Gillett of Kitt Peak National Observatory, working at the Rutherford-Appleton Laboratory in Chilton, England, had decided to use Vega (commonly serving astronomers as a standard for measuring other stars’ brightness and spectra) as a source for calibrating IRAS. “To their surprise,” Science magazine said that Vega’s image in the 20-, 60-, and 100-micrometer channels was much brighter than the infrared images of similar stars or than expected from an A-type star.
The heat-sensitive telescope on IRAS was measuring infrared radiation extending out as far as 80 astronomical units (about 7.4 billion miles) from Vega, reporting the temperature of the bodies in orbit around the star at about —300 °F, far above the norm of “cold black space” and about that of the inner rings of Saturn. The JPL announcement said that the material orbiting Vega could compare in mass “to all the nine planets and other matter” in Earth’s solar system, not including the Sun. Scientists had long speculated that Earth and its companion planets were not the only system of that type in the cosmos, but they had never had evidence to prove it. The IRAS discovery was a bonus of the decision to use Vega as a ship’s navigator might use the North Star as a guide across the ocean. (JPL Release Aug 9/83; NASA Release 83-120; NY Times, Aug 10/83, A—1; W Post, Aug 10/83, A-l; Aug 11/83, A-2, A-22; Science, Aug 26/83, 846)
August 12: NASA signed with the California Institute of Technology (CalTech) an extension of its contract for performance of research and development at JPL. The contractual relationship had been in effect since
427
astronautics and aeronautics
AUGUST 1983
1962; JPL studies for NASA’s Office of Space Science and Applications (OSSA) had been principally in space science and unmanned exploration of the Moon and planets. Extension from October 1, 1983, through September 30, 1988, would cover space exploration and Eiarth observation. (NASA Release 83-122)
August 15: MSFC said that it had installed the reusable orbital-research Spacelab in the cargo bay of the Shuttle Columbia at KSC. Designed, developed, and funded by ESA, Spacelab had undergone tests for three months in a cargo-integration test equipment (CITE) stand at KSC. Columbia would carry Spacelab and a four-member crew into orbit October 28 to perform more than 70 individual investigations in five research areas during a nine-day mission. (MSFC Release 83-59; ESA Info 36)
• In “a frank portrayal of the difficulties of life in orbit.. .extremely rare in the Soviet media,” the daily newspaper Pravda printed extracts from the diary of a cosmonaut who spent a record 211 days in space between May and December 1982, the Washington Post reported.
Flight engineer Valentin Lebedev, flying on Salyut 7 with Lt. Col. Anatoly Berezovoy, found the seven-month mission an intense strain relieved only by the fascination of Earth spinning by below the station. Halfway through the mission, fatigue had made the two so nervous and sensitive that effort was needed to avoid losing their tempers. Arrival of two visiting space crews was viewed with apprehension because the original crew feared they might disrupt the working relationship they had established; one entry said “They won’t get any of our food. We think they will have to bring their own.” Once on board, the visitors apparently offered welcome company. The Soviet Union had presented the cosmonauts as heroic, almost superhuman figures, Reuters news agency said, and television had invariably shown them smiling. (W Post, Aug 16/83, A-18)
August 19-25: The People’s Republic of China launched RPC 13 August 19, according to the People’s Daily quoted by Reuters, which gave no other information on it. The People’s Republic had retrieved the spacecraft from orbit August 25 and said that all systems had worked normally. (Spacewarn SPX-358, Aug 30/83; W Post, Aug 26/83, A-20)
August 22: ARC scientists said that exercise, coupled with a low-calorie diet, might counteract effects of weightlessness on the levels of insulin and glucose in the blood of space travelers. Plasma and glucose had increased during simulated weightlessness, returning to normal after exercise.
Simulations of weightlessness for one or two weeks of prolonged bed rest had approximated the physiological responses occurring in space; resting without exercise had decreased the ability to use glucose, and average levels of blood sugar rose more than 10% above normal, a condition like a
428
AUGUST 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
prediabetic, state. Also, a more than 200% rise in blood insulin occurring in the test subjects seemed to result from normal production of the hormone and less use of it. Tests showed that, even with ample circulation of insulin, the body was less able to control glucose storage. Exercise and low-calorie diets would be used to solve the problem in test subjects. (NASA Release 83-130; ARC Release 83-37)
August 26: NASA said that IRAS had completed its primary mission objective at 12:30 p.m. EDT by conducting an all-sky survey and giving an opportunity for double confirmation of sources. Survey data had a few “holes” because of Sun-Earth-Moon observation constraints and an anomaly that occurred early in June. NASA had begun another survey to fill in the gaps and confirm earlier observations; end-of-life would come early in January. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept. 1/83)
August 30-31: NASA STS-8 at 2:32:02 EDT August 30 from KSC after a 17-minute hold because of thunderstorms passing through. “Tropical disturbance” Barry had moved ashore August 26 about 40 miles south of the Cape and could have turned into a hurricane, but it bypassed the launch-pad area. This third flight of Shuttle Challenger was commanded by Navy Capt. Richard H. Truly, who was copilot of the second Shuttle mission two years ago; pilot for STS-8 was Navy Cdr. Daniel C. Brandenstein. Mission specialists were Navy Lt. Cdr. Dale A. Gardner; civilian physician William E. Thornton, oldest American in space; and U.S. Air Force Lt. Col. Guion S. Bluford II, first black American in space.
This was also the first night Shuttle launch. NASA was testing its ability to launch at night from KSC, where weather was often more favorable than in the daytime. The DOD wanted a demonstration of night launch in case of needing the Shuttle for a military-mission on short notice. And Challenger was carrying into orbit a $43 million India satellite to forecast weather and relay radio, television, and phone calls that required a night launch for proper location, NASA’s first manned night launch had been December 7, 1972, when Apollo 17 lifted off at KSC on its way to the Moon; that launch had been visible to people in the Great Smoky Mountains more than 500 miles away.
NASA also planned to land STS-8 at night, another first, for the same reasons it launched at night. Landing would be at Edwards Air Force Base in the Mojave desert of California instead of KSC, because of the longer runway and the greater probability of good weather there in midsummer. This would be the first time the public would not be allowed at the landing; NASA did not want “hundreds or even thousands of moving automobiles with headlights” to confuse Shuttle pilots descending out of total darkness toward the concrete runway.
About three hours after reaching orbit, the crew began communicating with mission control through the properly relocated $100 million TDRS launched from STS-6 in April, instead of using ground stations out of reach during most
429
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
AUGUST 1983
of their orbit. The first major task of the STS-8 mission would be deployment of INSAT-B, and the crew spent most of August 30 checking the performance of the 50-foot mechanical arm in the Shuttle’s cargo bay that had entitled “a slightly arthritic reaction” in its elbow. The arm would grapple and move a heavy dummy-spacecraft package later in the mission in rehearsal for future release or retrieval of satellites.
INSAT-B was launched over the Indian Ocean August 31 at 7:49 GMT and successfully put into transfer orbit, according to the Indian Space Research Organization, which said that all on-board systems were working well and that the solar panel was partly deployed. {NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Aug 30/83; FBIS, Delhi DomSvc in English, Aug 31/83; NY Times, Aug 3/83, A-10; Aug 31/83, A-l; WPost, Aug 25/83, A-8; Aug 26/83, A-10; Aug 30/83, A-l; Aug 31/83, A-8; USA Today, Aug 30/83, 1A, 3A; W Times, Aug 30/83, 12A; Aug 30/83, 1A; Intervia, Aug 83, 817)
During August: NASA said that it would cease in September to operate Nimbus 6, launched June 12, 1975, for tracking balloons floating around the Earth to gather data on winds in the tropical and mid-latitudes. This system was the forerunner in one-way platform-to-satellite data collection that had provided worldwide ocean temperatures from buoys, tracked animal migration on land and sea, and kept in contact with numerous adventures, such as the crew of the Eagle I balloon rescued after it crashed in the Atlantic and a Japanese who crossed the North Pole by dogsled from Canada.
Nimbus 6 had lost attitude-control capability in October 1982 when two momentum wheels failed with an accompanying severe power reduction. It would remain in polar orbit at 600 miles altitude, reentering the atmosphere some time after the year 2500, NASA said. (NASA Release 83-126)
• Tass reported that the cosmonauts on the Salyut 7-Soyuz T-9-Cosmo 1443 complex were working on a “new and unusual mission” to determine the ways in which man affects Earth’s environment. The Soviet Union had established about 10 biospheres in its territory, and space photography would allow experts to assess the state of the flora and fauna there. The Soviets were emphasizing environmental issues, as provided in the USSR constitution, and space surveys were helping to detect sources of environmental pollution and mapping ways to improve land reclamation or bring water to desert areas.
The crew had loaded Cosmos 1443 with half a ton of excess material for the return to Earth, including photographic films and some instruments (including a nonworking air regenerator and a defunct memory unit of the autonomous navigation system) that would be examined for effects of space. Cosmos 1443 undocked August 14 at 6:04 p.m. Moscow time and soft-landed August 23 with 350 kilograms of cargo. Another cargo ship, Progress 17, was launched August 17 at 4:08 p.m. Moscow time and clocked August 19 at 5:47 p.m. Moscow time. (FBIS, Tass in English, Aug 1-23/83)
430
September
September 1-6: Press reports said that the continuing STS-8 mission followed up its successful nighttime liftoff and nighttime launch of India’s INSAT-B, deployed from Challenger’s cargo bay at 3:49 a.m. EDT by mission specialist Air Force Lt. Col. Guion S. Bluford, Jr. This was the sixth successful launch of a communications satellite from a shuttle cargo bay in orbit. Navy Capt. Richard H. Truly and Navy Lt. Cdr. Dale A. Gardner spent most of the mission’s third day using the 50-foot mechanical arm to lift and move around a 19-foot 7,460-pound lead-and-aluminum dumbbell-shaped weight “the size of a truck,” practicing for retrieval next April of a dummy satellite platform before trying to catch and repair the crippled 20,000-pound Solar Max satellite.
The next two days would see tests of the TDRS, now properly located to transmit communications during next April’s Spacelab mission for most of the Shuttle orbit rather than the present 20%.
The odd workday beginning at night and launching INSAT in the dark had the crew retiring about 2 p.m. EDT, starting tasks in the late evening, and ending in the early afternoon. The computer at White Sands began refusing to acknowledge commands or to correctly position the three TDRS-use antennas at White Sands, on board the Challenger, and on TDRS. Flight controllers encountered a three-hour silence from TDRS, but other communications links showed no problem with Challenger, and the crew was not awakened. Harold Draughon, flight director at JSC, said that 90% of the trouble lay in the instructions given the White Sands computers and that he expected Spacelab to fly on time.
The crew, also underwent tests by Dr. William Thornton on the causes of space sickness. In an unusual news conference between mission control in Houston and the crew in orbit, Thornton said that he had “learned more in the first hour and a half on orbit here than I had by all literature research I had done and all of the active work in the past year.” His crewmates had suffered symptoms like nausea, drowsiness, and “just plain giddiness,” although he refused to give details. However, he expressed confidence that the medical problem cpuld be solved through physiological studies aboard the Shuttle flights and would become a thing of the past “as in the early days the weight losses that were of great concern turned out to be a simple thing.”
The mission also accomplished a successful first-time separation in weightlessness by mission specialists Bluford and Gardner of live pancreas cells, in a pharmaceutical process that could be a step toward conquering diabetes. The “astrorats’—six specimen flown on STS-8 to try out an “animal housing module” that would carry laboratory animals into orbit for various
431
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
SEPTEMBER 1983
tests—were returning healthy and “feisty”; veterinarians at DFRF later found them dehydrated, as potatoes had been their source of water during flight. The rats were flown to ARC, where tests showed a postflight drop in blood volume like that of astronauts.
STS-8 concluded its series of firsts September 5 with a first-time night landing at 3:40 a.m. EDT on an Edwards Air Force Base runway, touching down 300 feet from the aiming point with no on-board power or lights to assist. “That’s as good as we see in the daytime,” said Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space flight. “Based on what we’ve seen here tonight, I think night landings will become routine,” Truly told a welcoming ceremony. NASA had turned on the world’s most powerful searchlights, beams of 4.8 billion candlepower, visible for 100 miles in every direction, to guide Challenger down.
The largest and most enthusiastic crowd of invited guests ever gathered at the end of a Shuttle mission gave the crew a standing ovation; Bluford said he was “really humbled tonight to see so many people out here at 4 o’clock in morning to welcome us back.” Thornton, the oldest person at 54 to fly in space, was visibly moved by the welcome and said “I know of no point in my life that will ever reach this.” President Reagan’s plan to visit KSC on Labor Day September 5 to greet the crew in person was canceled; he returned to Washington cutting short a vacation, when a Korean airliner was reportedly shot down. However, Vice President George Bush was to come in his place and attend a picnic for 15,000 employees, government and contractor.
Challenger was in better shape than any of the Shuttles used on the seven previous flights, said Herman K. Widlick, KC ground operations manager, at Edwards to plan for the fastest turnaround so far. Despite a four-hour exposure to pelting rains before liftoff, six days in orbit, and landing in the dark on a concrete runway, Challenger showed less damage on the fuselage or underbelly. Tires and brakes also came through the night landing in good shape; however, the space toilet experienced the eighth straight breakdown in flight. Lt. Gen. Abrahamson said that he was “not at all pleased with the waste management system” and would set up a task-force 'equivalent to deal with the problem. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 9/83; NY Times, Sept 2/83, D-20; Sept 4/83, 1, 36; Sept 5/83, 9; Sept 7/83, A-18, A-22; WPost, Sept 2/83; Sept 3/83, A-3; Sept 5/83, A-3; Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 7/83, A-4; W Times, Sept 1/83, 2A; Sept 2/83, 2A; Sept 5/83, 3A; Sept 6/83, 1A; Time, Sept 12/83, 42)
September 4-19: INSAT IB, the India communications satellite successfully launched from STS-8 August 31, had solar-array problems, said Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) scientists who worked with engineers from Ford Aerospace, the manufacturer, to extend the panels on both sides of the spacecraft.
Press reports later said that the ISRO center in Bangalore had been able to put the entire solar panel in operation after tilting it toward the Sun. But ISRO also announced September 9 that “an unidentified object” struck INSAT IB
432
SEPTEMBER 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
only seconds after its release from Challenger; an object about eight inches across that came from outside the Shuttle hit the satellite 23 seconds after separation. Study of a videotape shot during INSAT development ruled out origin of the object in Challenger’s cargo bay. Experts said that this was the first spacecraft to be hit in space by a stray object. INSAT reached the correct geostationary orbit 19 days after launch and was to be operational by October 15; the first transmission test, sending and receiving a picture by a master control facility at Hassan, was successful and INSAT IB was “fully responding to ground commands.”
India’s first commercial communications satellite INSAT 1, built and launched by the United States to India specifications, was declared officially dead a year ago when it failed to respond to ground commands and ran out of fuel 150 days after launch. (FBIS, Delhi DomSvc, Sept 8, 10, 11, 14, 15/83; WPost, Sept 6/83, A-3; Sept 10/83, A-22; Sept 12/83, A-21; Sept 20/83, A-6; W Times, Sept 12/83, 6A)
September 1: Three new companies entering the “race to commercialize space” would launch Space America, a venture to provide remote-sensing satellite data services by 1986, the Washington Post reported. The companies were two in Washington, D.C.—American Science & Technology and AEROS Data Corporation—and Space Services Inc. (SSI) of Houston, which developed the first U.S. privately funded and operated launch vehicle. SSI would be managing partner. All three companies were less than three years old, privately owned, and “actively seeking capital,” according to Donald “Deke” Slayton, former astronaut and president of SSI. The group hoped to put into polar orbit a privately owned satellite built by Honeywell Inc. and Ball Aerospace Systems with sensors to collect data on Earth resources such as agriculture, mineral deposits, and water. (W Post, Sept 8/83, D-l)
September 8: NASA launched RCA-G, third in a series of high-traffic capacity communications satellites, for RCA Americom from ESMC on a Delta at 6:52 p.m. EDT into a transfer orbit with 35,758-kilometer apogee, 176-kilometer perigee, 104-minute period, and 24° inclination, preparatory to assuming station over the equator at 72 °W. RCA-G would join four other communications satellites in orbit (RCA-C through RCA-F) to provide a five-satellite RCA network providing coverage to all 50 states. More than 4,000 ground stations had direct access to these communications satellites, which all carried 28 completely solid-state C-band amplifiers in a configuration that gave 24 operating channels for television, voice, and high-speed data transmission. (NASA MOR M-492-206-83-08 [prelaunch] Sept 8/83, [postlaunch] July 26/84)
September 21: NASA said that it had signed a contract with Fairchild Industries for design and development of an unmanned space platform called Leasecraft, to be deployed from the Shuttle to serve commercial and govern-
433
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
SEPTEMBER 1983
ment users. James M. Beggs, NASA administrator, said that the move was consistent with administration plans to promote space exploitation by commercial firms. Fairchild said that the platform, which would measure 15 by 15 by 9.5 feet and carry power and command and data-handling modules with other equipment needed by various payloads, would cost more than $200 million. Payloads would include materials-processing and remote-sensing equipment and scientific experiments. (NASA Release 83-143)
September 22: NASA launched Galaxy-B for Hughes Communications from ESMC on a Delta at 6:16 p.m. into a transfer orbit before moving it on station at 74”W over the equator. Second of 3 for Hughes to relay television, voice, data, and FAX for U.S. business customers, the craft carried 24 transponders and 6 spares, 12 of these already sold to MCI and another to be used by IBM. The Galaxy craft were designed to take full advantage of the concept of private ownership. (NASA MOR M-492-215-83-02 [prelaunch] Sept 20/83, [postlaunch] July 26/84)
September 23: NASA began moving the TDRS to its permanent location over the Atlantic Ocean, from 67 W to 41W, said Charles M. Hunter, deputy TDRS project manager at GSFC. Using six tiny thrusters, the move began with a 19-minute bum at 8:57 p.m’. EDT, with a second burn for 17 minutes at 8:57 a.m. September 24. The craft would move to its permanent station at the rate of 1.2° per day, drifting until October 16, when the first of two burns to stop the drift would occur. Another burn on October 17 should put TDRS over the Atlantic just east of Brazil, Hunter said. The fuel to be used, about 8 pounds, would not affect operations over the planned 10-year life of TDRS. (NASA Release 83-145)
During September: NASA announced that Richard H. Truly, commander of STS-8, was named the first commander of the Naval Space Command to be set up October 1 at Dahlgren, Va. Selected as a NASA astronaut in August 1969, Truly had been on one of the crews for Shuttle approach-and-landing test flights in 1977. His spacecraft was as pilot of STS-2 in November 1981. (NASA Release 83-133)
•	NASA said that astronaut Jack R. Lousma would leave the agency and retire from the Marine Corps October 1. A NASA astronaut since April 1966, he was pilot on Skylab 3 in 1973 and commanded shuttle orbiter Columbia on its third test flight in March 1982. (NASA Release 83-151; WPost, Sept 30/83, A-4)
•	Cosmonauts Vladimir Lyakhov and Aleksandr Aleksandrov on the Salyut 7-Soyuz T-9-Progress 17 complex continued geophysical observations using photography and spectrometry from orbit. They loaded used equipment on Progress 17 and undocked it September 17 at 3:44 p.m. Moscow time; Tass
434
SEPTEMBER 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
reported that it “ceased to exist” in the atmosphere the next day. The Cosmos 1443 module sent into the atmosphere August 14 also burned up September 18. On September 29 the crew marked three months in the complex. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 2, 13, 17-18, 23, 29-30/83)
435
October
October 1: President Reagan issued a proclamation calling on the nation to observe the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s 25th anniversary with “appropriate ceremonies and activities.” Reviewing the agency’s history and accomplishments, including preeminence of U.S. civil and military aviation, the Apollo program, planetary exploration, and the Space Shuttle, the message stated “The future looks bright, and NASA will be an important part of it.” (Text, pres, doc., Oct 1/83)
October 3: The New York Times carried a report by “American intelligence sources” that three Soviet cosmonauts escaped death but might have been injured when a USSR launch vehicle exploded or caught fire September 27 at a site in Asia. The crew was saved when an escape rocket on top of the capsule pulled the spacecraft away from the booster. The incident, first of its kind in manned space programs, occurred as the liquid-fuel rocket was about to launch the crew to the orbiting Salyut 7 space station. (NY Times, Oct 3/83, B—13)
October 4: The Washington Post said that an experiment on the next U.S. Shuttle flight was canceled because of the shooting down last month of a South Korean airliner by the Soviet Union. The experiment would have made the first mapping photographs from orbit of the entire area of Afghanistan, whose government the Soviet Union supports.
Cancellation was a joint decision of NASA and ESA, which built the $1 billion Spacelab scheduled to make its first flight October 28 in the Shuttle Columbia’s cargo bay. This mission would take the Shuttle farther north and south than any previous manned U.S. flight, going 55° from the equator over the end of Argentina as well as the Hudson Bay region of Canada and the upper areas of Scotland. Columbia and Spacelab would also fly over most of the Soviet Union (including Moscow for the first time) but would take no photographs of the Soviet Union. (W Post, Oct 4/83, A-2)
October 7: NASA said that prelaunch processing for STS-9 would include removal of the OV-102 waste-management system and replacement with the system from OV-099. The job would take place after the completion of a launch-confidence test that included a wet-countdown demonstration, hot-fire testing of propellant units, and operation of the fuel-cell power systems. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Oct 7/83)
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
OCTOBER 1983
October 10: Tass said that Venera 15, launched June 2, had reached Venus October 10 and fired its engine to assume an elongated elliptical orbit around the planet with a 24-hour period of revolution. Venera 16, still on its way, was scheduled to arrive about October 14. (FBIS, Tas;s in English, Oct 10/83)
October 10-27: FBIS carried a report from Paris quoting “a source close to Soviet space circles” that three Soviet cosmonauts, one a woman, were injured when a rocket blew up at Baykonur two weeks ago. The crew was ejected from the launcher by a secondary rocket, the source said. (FBIS, Paris AF in English, Oct 10/83)
The New York Times said that Soviet officials had “privately admitted” that one of their rockets exploded on the launch pad as three cosmonauts prepared to join the crew on orbiting space station Salyut 7. However, “in the absence of any public accounting of the incident,” questions remained as to the damage done to the Soviet Union’s space program or its effect on the mission of the crew now in their fourth month aboard Salyut 7.
The private sources said that the 160-foot A-2 rocket began to topple on the launch pad before its liquid oxygen and kerosene fuel exploded. The accounts were contradictory, some saying that a woman was in the crew and others that the crew was either injured or merely shaken up by the experience. The explosion could amount to a major setback, in view of a Soyuz crew’s failure to dock with the Salyut last April at the end of a “harrowing 17-hour struggle.”
The Washington Post said that the crew sustained “unspecified injuries” and that the event was important because the visitors to the Salyut would have returned to Earth in the capsule that took occupants Aleksandr Aleksandrov and Vladimir Lyakhov to the station June 28, leaving their module for the “permanent crew” to use on their return. No immediate concern was expressed about the latter, as the original capsule was still usable.
A later report noted that Aleksandrov and Lyakhov had been endangered September 9 by a leak of nitrogen tetroxide propellant into space; the cosmonauts had put on their space suits in case the toxic gas entered the cabin. They were allowed to remain in orbit after they found no traces of the gas. But the leak had left 16 of the station’s 32 control jets unusable, and less than
1,000	pounds of the gas in its single operating tank, meaning that a new crew could not operate the station in a normal mode. A new crew could fly a different type of space tug to one of the docking ports, however, and use its control jets to maneuver the station.
The New York Times reported October 18 that a Soviet official with direct contact to senior mission control that said two experienced cosmonauts were recuperating from effects of acceleration when emergency rockets blew their capsule clear of the exploding A-2 launch vehicle and that the crew did not include a woman.
The Washington Post said October 20 that the two cosmonauts on Salyut 7 were “in no danger,” according to Eugeny Tabakaev of the Soviet academy of sciences; the statement followed a British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC)
438
OCTOBER 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
report that the station was crippled because of a propellant leak. British teacher Geoffrey Perry, a regular listener to Soviet radio transmissions, told AP that he had detected no signs of stress and that the cosmonauts “sound fine.” James Oberg, U.S. specialist on Soviet space programs, said that the Salyut 7 crew could get back to Earth in the Soyuz that took them into space, but the Soviet Union had not used the Soyuz craft after 115 to 120 days in space because batteries and other systems could deteriorate over time. Oberg said that Lyakhov and Aleksandrov were to have returned late in September after another crew arrived but were delayed by the launch-pad explosion.
The Soviet Union launched a supply ship, Progress 18, from Baykonur at 4:59 a.m. EDT October 20 to rendezvous with Salyut 7, claiming that the cosmonauts there were “living normally.” Lyakhov and Aleksandrov appeared on Moscow television October 16 and appeared to be “in high spirits.” However, their flight had reached its 116th day October 21, and the previous record for a stay in space was the 114 days set last year in the course of a 211-day endurance flight. It would take 10 days to 2 weeks for the cosmonauts to unload Progress 18, which would be burned on reentry.
Nature magazine, published in Great Britain, said that the crisis was exaggerated and concern for the crew came not from Soviet engineers but from physicians, who had seen significant declines in activity and efficiency after four months in space. Nature described as “fanciful” a suggestion that the Soviet Union wanted to keep the cosmonauts in orbit until they could be rescued by the U.S. Shuttle on its November flight. (FBIS, Paris AFP in English, Oct 10/83; Tass in English, Oct 14, 20, 21, 22, 28/83; NY Times, Oct 12/83, A-7; Oct 18/83, C-2; W Post, Oct 12/83, A-19; Oct 14/83, A-10; Oct 20/83, A-39; Oct 21/83, A-7; Nature, Oct 27/83, 756)
October 13: LeRC said that Dr. Henry G. Kosmahl, an electron physicist employed there, had developed an amplifying system that could double the number of channels on a communications satellite. The system, called a dynamic velocity taper, was a “relatively minor technical modification” of an existing device.
Most nations had been seeking additional output from communications satellites for voice, picture, and data transmission. However, communications satellites could be spaced around the globe no closer than 20 part; otherwise, the signals from one would interfere with those adjoining. The number of possible communications satellites in orbit was therefore limited, and all available slots would be full by the year 2000.
Kosmahl’s idea would make each communications satellite able to.handle more traffic without affecting quality of the signals or increasing the power supply. He had applied for a patent on the device, which would be owned by NASA but available to industry. (LeRC Release 83-62)
• The Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum said that it would build an adjunct facility at Dulles International Airport to house an expanding
439
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
OCTOBER 1983
collection of aircraft, including the Shuttle Enterprise. Estimated to cost $40 million, the facility would replace the restoration site now at Silver Hill, Md., but would not be completed for another 7 to 15 years. Possibilities for Dulles included a group of four buildings to accommodate a Boeing 707, a Boeing B17 bomber, Boeing 727, a Boeing 747, and others; the design and funding were not yet settled.
The collection had outgrown the Mall area, said Walter Boyne, director of the museum: “We are going to get the space shuttle and the Concorde,” which it would be physically impossible to move to the Mall area. “They are so complex, you can’t simply take a wing off and move them.” The present museum now has 10 million visitors a year, and Boyne said that people would be as interested in the Shuttle 100 years from now as they were in the Wright Brothers’ plane today. (W Post, Oct 13/83, D-l)
October 13-17: Press reports said that NASA might have to delay the first flight of Spacelab on the Shuttle Columbia until the end of November, because a protective liner on the inner surface of the solid-fuel rocket-engine exhaust nozzles might be part of what one official called “a bad batch.”
A three-inch layer of the carbon-epoxy material was intended to protect the metal nozzles from flaming exhaust by charring, to dissipate heat; about half the layer would normally burn away during the two-minute firing of the booster. On the last mission, one nozzle’s lining came within 0.2 inches of burning away completely. Damage to a metal nozzle could send the Shuttle off course; had the flame burned through part of the engine in flight, “it could have caused a catastrophe,” said the Washington Post. A test firing October 11 at Thiokol’s Utah plant, where the rockets were built, showed that the liner had begun to “delaminate,” which would make the Shuttle aerodynamically unstable after two minutes of flight.
If NASA decided to replace one of Columbia’s motors, it would have to move the entire vehicle off the pad. Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, head of the Shuttle program, said that chances of staying on schedule for a Spacelab launch between October 28 and November 5 were “diminishing rapidly”; however, he would not set a launch date “with this type of uncertainty.” The next possible launch date after November 5 would be November 27: astronomy experiments to be carried on Spacelab had to orbited while the moon was dark.
[Students at Camden, N.J., high schools said that the carpenter ants flown on Challenger in June had died from lack of moisture before leaving Earth.]
The New York Times said that NASA might have to delay the next Shuttle mission for one to four months, possibly to next February 6, because of concern about reliability of the nozzles in the Shuttle boosters. Positions of stellar targets would again be favorable for Spacelab observations by next February. ESA and scientists from the United States and Europe were asked to suggest rescheduling that would have the least impact on their experiments.
440
OCTOBER 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
A later report said that engineers who examined one of the engines recovered from the Atlantic after the mission in August found that the three-inch coating inside the rocket nozzle had burned down to 0.2 inches. Astronaut Daniel C. Brandenstein, pilot of that flight, told CBS News that the lowest part of the engine would have burned through if the engines had fired 2.7 seconds more, which would have “spelled curtains for the crew.” A NASA official said that was conjecture, though the agency admitted that a burn-through might have occurred after 20 more seconds.
NASA decided October 14 to postpone the first flight of Spacelab for “at least a month” but would announce a new launch date. Gen. Abrahamson said October 16 that the probable date would be late next February, but the decision would be made jointly by NASA and ESA. He said that NASA engineers still did not know what caused the near-failure of the engine on the eighth shuttle flight in August. Two test firings in the last 10 days had produced confusing results: one engine lining had almost burned through, the other less than halfway, as it was meant to do. NASA had changed the manufacturing process not long ago, he noted, and the change might have trapped gases in the lining instead of baking them out.
With Columbia waiting for Spacelab, the next Shuttle flight would take place in January as planned. Challenger would deploy two communications satellites, and astronaut Bruce McCandless would demonstrate in space a self-propelled manned maneuvering unit that could go 500 to 600 feet from the Shuttle. (W Post, Oct 13/83, A-15; Oct 14/83, A-10; Oct 15/83, A-20; Oct 17/83, A-3; NY Times, Oct 13/83, A-16)
October 16-17: Engineers from NASA, TRW Inc., and Spacecom successfully carried out two maneuvers to put TDRS 1 at its permanent station at 41W. The communications satellite, launched from the shuttle in April, was now over the Atlantic Ocean at the equator just off the north coast of Brazil. (NASA Release 83-156)
October 19: ESA launched Ariane 8 from Kourou, French Guiana, at 12:45 a.m. GMT from Intelsat 5-F7 as Payload, which it deployed at 1:00 a.m.' into an orbit with 36,158-kilometer apogee, 183-kilometer perigee, and 8.5° inclination. Representatives from ESA and France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES) were delighted with a new success for the European space industry. (FBIS, Paris AFP, Oct 19/83)
• The NY Times said that “computer enthusiasts” had invaded NASA’s electronic mail system, left cartoon images and “Kilroy was here” messages for agency employees, and played pranks on others. A NASA official said that the intruders had destroyed some information but had not “significantly disrupted” the electronic mail service. NASA first noticed the intrusions in mid-July, and they continued into mid-September. Besides reading
441
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
OCTOBER 1983
unclassified NASA messages, the intruders had destroyed some messages and created personal passwords and new files for themselves and their computer friends. Some NASA employees who used Telemail had been inconvenienced, but the system had never been halted.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) said that it was investigating a number of youths in connection with the intrusions. To make Telemail easy to use, NASA had told employees to use their first initial and last names as part of an entry code; employee names were available from agency telephone directories sold by the Government Printing Office (GPO). The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) told a House subcommittee that it was trying to increase security for federal computers, and an FBI official asked Congress for a law prohibiting unauthorized entry into a computer. Without such a law, federal authorities were treating the cases as wire fraud, like use of telephone lines to obtain service without paying. (NY Times, Oct 19/83, A-16)
Another report said that the FBI had seized computers and other equipment from 15 computer enthusiasts around the United States, mostly teenagers. The bureau said that there was “extensive” penetration into commercial and DOD computers and that intruders had tampered with the files of some corporations. (NY Times, Oct 17/83, A-12)
During October: Kurt Debus, who helped develop Germany’s World War II V-2 rocket and worked on the Redstone ballistic missile for the U.S. Army in the 1950s, died after a heart attack at his home near Cocoa, Fla., at the age of 74.
He had joined Wernher von Braun’s rocket team on the Baltic coast during the war and came to the United States afterwards. Von Braun said of him: “We develop the rockets and it’s up to Debus to see they do what they’re supposed to do.” In 1952, Debus became director of what would later be NASA’s Kennedy Space Center; his last official act before retirement was to break ground for a KSC landing strip for Shuttles returning from orbit. (W Post, Oct 11/83, B-6)
• MFSC said that the Space Telescope, NASA’s future optical orbiting astronomical observatory, had been named the Edwin P. Hubble Space Telescope to honor a foremost U.S. astronomer who had died in 1953.
Scientists had differed on the extent and dimensions of the universe: Earth’s solar system was considered part of a larger system of all stars visible to the naked eye. It was not known whether faint spiral nebulae were part of the Milky Way or distant universes, each composed of myriad stars.
Hubble, working with the 100-inch telescope at Mt. Wilson, Calif., looked at individual stars in the Andromeda nebula and by the end of 1924 was able to show that Andromeda was many times farther away than any star in the Milky Way system. He later showed that the universe was expanding (evidence of the Big Bang theory), that external galaxies were moving away from earth, and that the more remote the galaxy the faster it was moving. This was called
442
OCTOBER 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Hubble’s Law; the coefficient relating distance and velocity of the galaxy was called Hubble’s Constant.
The newly named Space Telescope was scheduled for launch from the Space Shuttle in 1986. (MSFC Release 83-70)
443
November
November 18: The European Space Operations Center (ESOC), at the request of the International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT), completed a switching operation on board ESA’s operational Maritime European Communications Satellite Marecs-A that increased the satellite’s capacity from 30 simultaneous voice telephone channels to 46. ESOC completed the transfer in less than 10 minutes; thus, avoiding the need to transfer communications to the spare satellite and back again. The satellite provided the total of the Atlantic Ocean region shore-to-ship and ship-to-shore satellite communications.
Marecs-A was providing to INMARSAT its full capacity, one in excess of the contractual requirement of 40 voice telephone channels. The increased capacity seemed to bode well for Marecs-A to fulfill its design lifetime of seven years. (ESA Release, Nov 28/83)
November 22: The Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), launched on January 25, 1983, as a joint project of the United States, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom, depleted its supply of helium at 1:30 a.m. GMT. The superfluid helium refrigerant cooled the telescope, which would cease operations in about a week, mission officials said. Throughout the mission, the telescope’s focal plane was cooled to a temperature of about 2.5° above absolute zero (—■455 °F), making the instrument the coldest manmade object ever flown in Earth orbit.
The telescope surveyed more than 95 % of the sky, pinpointing the locations and intensities of more than 200,000 infrared objects. During its 300 days of observations, IRAS carried out the first complete survey of the infrared sky and made many discoveries, including the detection of a ring of solid material around the star Vega and seven comets and bands of dust around the Sun between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. More than 200 billion bits of data came from IRAS, and results announced to date represented only a hurried look at a very small proportion of this data. It was evident, however, that IRAS would have a major impact on many areas of astronomy and that astronomers would be making new discoveries from its data for years to come.
On November 9, NASA announced two IRAS findings: a new object in the solar system—possibly an asteroid or a dead comet—that passed closer to the Sun than any planet or known asteroid and three giant rings of dust that circled part of the solar system. The unknown object, temporarily designated minor planet 1983TB, appeared to be less than 2 kilometers (1.2 miles) in diameter and about 30 million kilometers (19 million miles) from Earth. 1983TB passed within 15 million kilometers (9 million miles) of the Sun, closer than any planet or known asteroid and 10 times closer than Earth. And its orbit almost
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
tNTFMWOMftftT WAW! 445
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
NOVEMBER 1983
exactly matched that of the Geminid stream of meteoroids, which were visible as a shower of meteors (shooting stars) in December 1982. Astronomers were planning additional observations with photometers and spectrometers in an effort to clear up the mystery of the identify of 1983TB. The three dust rings were 100 million miles wide and were circling the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter 200 to 300 million miles from the Sun. The dust bands appeared to defy the laws of physics by encircling the asteroid belt in three extremely stable and symmetrical rings. Particles making up the dust bands “this small can only survive in stable orbits for a few ten-thousands of years before they are pulled apart by the sun,” said Dr. Frank Low of the University of Arizona. “There must be something that replenishes the rings because three stable bands that large cannot exist any other way.”
In addition, NASA announced that same day that astronomers studying IRAS data at the University of Groningen, the Netherlands, had discovered three giant dust shells that were asymmetrically placed around the star Betelgeuse. It was already known that the red supergiant star lost material, but IRAS data showed evidence of the presence of dust shells that extended more than four light years from the star. At that distance, the material must have left the star 100,000 years earlier. The IRAS observations thus allowed astronomers to study the earliest stages in the episode of mass loss. (NASA Release 83-162, 83-171, 83-172, 83-181; W Post, Nov 10/83, A-l)
November 23: Soviet cosmonauts Vladimir Lyakhov and Aleksandr Aleksandrov returned to Earth aboard the Soyuz T-9 descent module after a 150-day flight on board the Salyut-7-Soyuz orbital space station. The two landed at 3:00 p.m. EST (in the middle of the night in the Soviet Union), 16 kilometers east of Dzhezkazgan in that country. U.S. intelligence sources said that the two were expected to return in September, when an exchange crew of cosmonauts was due to visit them. However, they were forced to stay in orbit an additional six weeks when an explosion at the launch pad almost killed the two other crewmen. And at about the same time that the launch pad accident forced the extension of their flight, the two cosmonauts had to deal with a fuel leak aboard the Salyut that left the space station with less than half of its normal navigating propellant. The two men had to live in space suits, because the fuel that leaked was nitrogen tetroxide, which was so toxic it might have killed them if it penetrated the cabin of the space station.
Western space observers had noted that the six-week extension in space might cripple the Soyuz T-9 spacecraft because it had been in orbit longer than 115 days and this length of time could possibly cause its nonrechargeable batteries to burn out, allowing the corrosive nitrogen textroxide fuel the Soyuz used to navigate to eat through engine valves and jeopardize the flight home. Western space experts were also interested in the night landing. The cosmonauts, earliest day landing would have been December 15, which might have been too long for them to trust the Soyuz T-9 to return safely.
The official Soviet news agency Tass said that, during the flight, the crew
446
NOVEMBER 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
carried out a large volume of scientific-technical and medicobiological research and experiments and gathered data on the Earth’s natural resources, its atmosphere, seasonal changes, and the biological productivity of the world’s oceans. New research was carried out under the program of material studies in space. An Elektrotropgraf instrument on board the station provided data on the state of construction materials following exposure to open space. Tass also noted that an important part of the crew’s flight program was to carry out complex assembly work on the external surface of the Salyut 7 station. During two space walks of 5 hours and 45 minutes, the two cosmonauts installed additional solar batteries on the station, in addition to other construction tasks. Over the course of the flight, there were regular medical checkups of the crew, which confirmed the possibility of man’s active functioning in weightlessness. (FBIS Moscow Pravda in Russian, Nov 25/83; NY Times, Nov 3/83, A-8; W Post, Nov 12/83, A-2, Nov 24/83, A-12)
November 28: NASA launched at 11:00 a.m. EST the Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-9) from KSC. Columbia carried the largest space crew ever, which consisted of John Young, commander; Brewster Shaw, pilot; Dr. Robert Parker and Dr. Owen Garriott, mission specialists; and Dr. Byron Lichtenberg and West Germany’s Dr. Ulf Merbold, payload specialists. The crew would operate in two shifts to permit 24-hour operation of experiments. The mission was originally scheduled to get under way September 30 but was delayed to October 28 to give engineers additional time to check out a communications satellite needed to relay data to Earth from Spacelab, carried on Columbia. The flight was postponed again when an examination of the booster rockets used for the Space Shuttle mission in August revealed serious erosion of the insulation lining one of the rocket nozzles. The rocket was replaced.
Columbia carried Spacelab, designed and built by ESA, which marked Europe’s first major entry into a manned space program. Other firsts associated with the flight was that it carried the heaviest payload on a Shuttle, the 33,584-pound Spacelab and pallet, and that it would include more experiments and spacecraft maneuvers than did any previous flight.
Immediately after liftoff, Columbia rolled over and turned northward to put itself into an orbital path that would range from as far north as Scotland and Leningrad to as far south as Tierra del Fuego at the tip of South America in order to take pictures of Europe. The orbit would also take Columbia over Moscow and many militarily sensitive areas of the Soviet Union, the first time a U.S. manned spacecraft had flown over the Soviet Union in daylight. No pictures or other sensing would be taken of the ground while Columbia passed over the Soviet Union.
The $l-billion Spacelab’s 23-foot-long laboratory was sealed and pressurized so that the scientists/astronauts could work in shirtsleeves as they carried out more than 70 experiments on 38 sets of equipment. Operating Spacelab were Merbold and Lichtenberg, a new breed of astronaut—payload specialists—who were not career astronauts but scientists trained to operate
447
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
NOVEMBER 1983
the science instruments on the mission. Wired with sensors, the scientists were guinea pigs in a number of experiments designed to explore how the body adapted to space and how it performed in the absence of gravity. Blood samples were taken three times so that scientists could study how the ratio of red to white blood cells changed once the body was weightless. Several experiments were conducted to measure eye movements; in another experiment, Garriott was given mild electric shocks to see how the muscles in his body responded to a sudden jolt that was the bodily equivalent of a sudden movement in weightlessness (doctors believed that one of the causes of space sickness might be abrupt movements that disoriented the inner ear). In another experiment, the crew in shifts pushed two balls identical in shape and size, although of different weights, to determine how quickly humans would distinguish weight from size in weightlessness.
Other Spacelab studies were concerned with the growth in space of sunflower seedlings, a fungus, and four types of microbes. Exotic metal mixes were melted, and crystals were grown in three Spacelab furnaces. There were experiments intended to determine the practicality of orbiting factories to produce products not possible in the gravity of Earth.
During the flight, two antennas failed on the TDRS-1 that was used to relay data from Spacelab to Earth. The failure meant that Litchtenberg and Merbold had to share the voice link to Mission Control Center in Houston with the four astronauts in Columbia’s cockpit, and it meant that the two scientists got their instructions from the ground via a teleprinter aboard Spacelab. Columbia landed December 8 at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. (NASA MOR M-977-09-83-01 [prelaunch], Oct 83; NASA Releases 83-163, 83-176; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Nov 29/83; W Post, Nov 22/83, A-8, Nov 28/83, A-l, Nov 29/83, A-l, Nov 30/83, A-l; USA Today, Nov 29/83, 1A; W Times, Nov 22/83, C—1; B Sun, Nov 29/83, A-l)
November 29: NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced that NASA and Canada’s Department of Communications signed an arrangement to cooperate in the definition of a space program that could lead to the development of commercial satellite service to meet mobile communications needs in both countries. The arrangement would provide a framework for the Department of Communications and NASA to work with telecommunications carriers in both countries to initiate mobile satellite service. This approach could lead quickly to a commercial satellite system that simultaneously allowed for the development of advanced research and development to support second generation systems.
In the event that the program definition activities were successful, the next step would be to agree to cooperate in the implemention and postlaunch phases of the program. Under that arrangement, N ASA would invite U.S. carriers to participate in a joint endeavor arrangement through a Notice of Opportunity, under which the carrier would be responsible for the development of
448
NOVEMBER 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
commercial markets and, with Telesat Canada, the specification, procurement, and operation of the system.
Succesful completion of this program would result in initiation of new services and industries in both countries to provide two-way radio, radio telephone, and low-speed message and data services to mobile terminals operating in rural and nonmetropolitan areas. Potential users would include radio common carriers, telephone companies, resource industries, trucking companies, federal and state governments, and emergency and law enforcement agencies. (NASA Release 83-186)
During November: NASA announced that it had set up at JSC the Biomedical Research Institute, which would function as part of the Space Adaptation Project within the Space Transportation Systems Program Office, to focus efforts on solving some of the problems space crews had in adjusting to a weightless environment. The Space Adaptation Syndrome was the name that NASA gave to a wide range of physical problems that astronauts sometimes experienced, including nausea, vomiting, and general malaise. Approximately 45% of astronauts who had flown had experienced some of those symptons. Flight data on the problems had been collected over 22 years of manned spaceflight, particularly during the extended Skylab missions. Experiments were performed on Space Shuttle flights with physician astronauts Dr. Norman Thagard on STS-7 and Dr. William Thornton, the principal investigator and designer of much of the experimental hardware and research on STS-8. In an attempt to speed up the process of finding countermeasures and perhaps predict who might be more susceptible to the condition, NASA created the research project and established the institute. Elena Huffstetler was named project manager, and Dr. Sam Pool, chief of medical sciences at Johnson, was director. At NASA Headquarters, the Space Medicine Branch, Life Sciences Division, Office of Space Science and Applications, would be responsible for managing the program of both clinical and applied research in this area. (NASA Release 83-167)
—NASA announced that Robert O. Aller was appointed associate administrator for space tracking and data systems. Aller, then director of the Tracking and Data Satellite System Division, succeeded Robert E. Smylie, who left NASA October 28 to become vice president for government communications services at the RCA American Communications Company in Princeton, N.J. Aller came to NASA in August 1964 from the Philco Corporation in Houston. Prior to joining Philco, he served for 10 years in the United States Air Force. He had held numerous positions in NASA during the Gemini, Apollo, Skylab, Apollo Soyuz Test Project (ASTP), and Space Transportation System (STS) programs. In September 1977 he was appointed deputy director of expendable launch vehicles and in 1979 to his current position, where he was responsible for the planning, direction, execution, and
449
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
NOVEMBER 1983
evaluation of the TDRS Program. Aller had twice been awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal for his work in the Apollo and Skylab programs, and he also received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal while working on the Apollo/Soyuz test project. (NASA anno, Nov 3/83)
450
December
December 1: NASA announced that its scientists studying motion sickness were focusing on a chemical substance in the fluid core of the brain that might cause vomiting. The fact that there might be a chemical link in motion sickness was discovered through NASA’s research into the causes of space motion sickness. The research was being conducted at ARC in the Biomedical Research Division and at the new Biomedical Institute at JSC. Studies by Ames scientist Dr. Nancy Daunton and two colleagues at Wright State University in Dayton, Ohio, showed that blocking the flow of cerebrospinal fluid in the brain stopped motion-induced vomiting and that an incomplete block did not suppress vomiting. The scientists were attempting to isolate the responsible chemical from cerebrospinal fluid.
When a person received sensory cues for motion, the brain responds with its normal, programmed responses to control eye, head, and body movements. But when the responses do not yield the expected results—especially when the visual image does not stabilize and posture control is not easily maintained— humans and animals often experience motion sickness. (NASA Release
83-191)
December 8: The Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-9) landed at 3:47 p.m. PST at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., after 10 days in space and 167 orbits—the longest Space Shuttle mission ever. The landing followed a delay necessitating 22 more orbits than planned when Columbia’s computers failed 3 hours and 49 minutes prior to the planned reentry bum. Six hours after the two computers went off line, Columbia also lost one of its three inertial measurement units that provided orbiter orientation information. The orbiter carried five IBM general purpose computers and three inertial measurement units. Today’s reentry was flown with one of each inoperative. A reentry could be flown with only a single computer and single measurement unit. Mission pilots John W. Young and Brewster H. Shaw, Jr., said at the time that they believed that the triggering of an upward firing 870-pound nose reaction control jet, which caused an unusually strong impact to the orbiter, was the likely cause of the computer failures. However, telemetry analysis showed that the thruster activity was coincidental to the computer malfunction. Instead, NASA came to the conclusion that it was a transient hardware internal problem. About 40 minutes after the problems occurred, the crew restored the second computer to operation.
On December 5, President Reagan and West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, in Athens at the time, held a conference call with the five U.S. crew members and one German payload specialist on Columbia. The U.S.
451
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
DECEMBER 1983
Information Agency (USIA) used five satellites and thousands of miles of land lines around the world to bounce the signals among Athens. Washington, and JSC to provide live television coverage of the call to seven European cities and the Cable News Network (CNN).
Aside from the computer problems, the ninth Space Shuttle mission was almost flawless and was distinguished by some significant scientific discoveries. One discovery involved the workings of the inner ear, disproving a 77-year-old hypothesis that had won the 1914 Nobel Prize in medicine for Swedish professor, Robert Barany. Barany had said that nystagmus, a flickering of a person’s eyes when cold air is blown into one of his ears and hot air into the other, was caused by convection, the motion of fluids under uneven heating. But in space, the lack of gravity meant that convection did not occur. Nevertheless, the astronauts aboard Columbia showed the characteristic eye movements.
The six-man crew completed work on all but one of the 70 scheduled experiments; only a microwave sensing device misfired. Scientists from 14 countries designed the experiments, and the experiments did not end with touchdown. The four scientists were in quarantine, where they would be required to remain motionless so that scientists could observe how their bodies acclimated to gravity. (ESA Release, Dec 9/83; WH annon, Dec 5/83; W Times, Dec 6/83, 3A; WPost, Dec 6/83, A-3, Dec 8/83, A-3, Dec 9/83, A-l; NY Times, Dec 9/83, A-l; P Inq, Dec/83, A-l; AvWk, Dec 12/83, 23)
December 12: Professor Konstantin Feoktistov, a senior Soviet space official, told a news conference that “work was being done” on the Soviet space shuttle project, which he described as being “more complex” and more “expensive” than Moscow’s current orbiting manned-station program, the Washington Post reported. Also at the news conference were cosmonauts Vladimir Lyakhov and Aleksandr Aleksandrov, who had just returned from their record-long stay aboard Salyut-7. The two confirmed a series of recent mishaps in the Soviet space program, including a fuel leak in their Salyut 7 orbiting station and a launch pad explosion of a booster rocket September 26 that was to have brought a fresh crew to relieve them. Because of the explosion, the two cosmonauts said that their mission was extended by 50 days. General Vladimir Shatalov, space training chief, told the news conference that there was a leak of toxic propellant on the Salyut 7 space station but denied reports that the craft was so crippled by this as to endanger the crew’s lives. “There was a problem with one of the subsystems and there was a leak of a certain amount of fuel,” he said. “That part of the station was switched off and it continues to be viable today.” That subsystem was used for space/maneuvering, the general added, noting that backup systems were sufficient to deal with the problem.
Another senior Soviet space official said privately that the Soviets were working on a space shuttle and that in “general terms we are considering both
452
DECEMBER 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
types of orbital vehicles—single-use and multiple-use,” the Washington Post said. (W Post, Dec 13/83, A-10)
December 14: Three U.S. biomedical experiments were flying aboard a Soviet spacecraft, Cosmos 1514, launched today. In an announcement following the launch, Moscow said only that “scientific experimental systems with various biological objects” were aboard and made no reference to foreign collaboration. However, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs disclosed that NASA had provided three pieces of medical equipment that the Soviets incorporated in the scientific payload of Cosmos 1514. Later, NASA said that the experiments had to do with blood system and biorhythm studies in monkeys and fetal development studies in rats. Beggs said that talks that paved the way for the Cosmos 1514 experiments were held “about five years ago.”
Cosmos 1514 was recovered on December 19, 1983, and in May 1984 TASS reported that the rats on the flight were developing normally and that Soviet scientists believed the weightlessness did not affect the normal development of embryos. (GSFC SSR; FBIS, USSR, May 9/84; W Post, Dec 17/83, A-15)
December 15: Jane’s All The World’s Aircraft, released today, said that the Soviet Union was developing the world’s largest jet airplane, the Antonov 400, the Washington Post reported. Jane’s said that the plane had the ability to transport SS20 nuclear missiles and that new supersonic Soviet fighters carried advanced electronics and weapons that enable them to shoot down cruise missiles and engage Western fighter jets on an equal footing. Jane’s also said that the AN400, known as the Condor, was specifically designed for the rapid deployment of SS20s, tanks, and other heavy equipment and that it was about 5% larger than the U.S. C5A Galaxy. {W Post, Dec 16/83, A-37)
December 19: West German physicist Ulf Merbold, the first European to share flight with U.S. astronauts, said at a news conference that he believed that more Europeans should be assigned to future Space Shuttle flights. “The return to Europe should be better than it was for this particular flight [STS-9],” which had a crew of six. “The politicians in Europe will not be able to sell European participation in the future because there’s not enough balance. I think things should be changed.” He continued, “The memorandum of understanding signed by the Europeans and Americans called for joint space flights by Europeans and Americans, not one European and many Americans. I think the Americans have to rethink this agreement to make it fairer.” (W Post, Dec 20/83, A-4)
December 21: An Office of Technology Assessment study released today said that the Soviet Union was nearing construction of a permanent space base that would serve as an eventual springboard for Soviet settlements on Mars and the Moon. “The Soviet space station program is the cornerstone of an official policy which looks not only toward a permanent Soviet human presence in
453
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
DECEMBER 1983
low-Earth orbit but also toward permanent Soviet settlement of their people on the Moon and Mars,” the report said. “The Soviets take quite seriously the possibility that large numbers of their citizens will one day live in space.” The report pointed out that the United States was still debating NASA’s request for as much as S200 million in FY85 to begin development of a U.S. space station. However, the Soviets had committed to a permanent space base.
The report pointed out that, while the United States “seems to have gained a substantial lead over the Soviet Union” in space science and communications, the picture in human spaceflight was “less clear.” The report noted that Soviets had flown six models of the Salyut space station in the last 12 years; their cosmonauts had flown more than three times as many hours in space as U.S. astronauts and had accumulated extensive experience “in flight operation, experimentation, and earth observation on trips that last for months.” However, U.S. space experts had long criticized the Soviets for sticking with what they believed was essentially outdated technology in the Salyut. It could not fly back to Earth, deploy other satellites, or carry as many people as the Space Shuttle. But the report pointed out that “Salyut may be the penultimate step leading to a permanent, large-scale presence in space.” As evidence that the Salyut represented only a stepping stone to b.rger ventures in space, the report said that there is “unclassified photographic evidence” that the Soviets were developing a small space plane and a larger “heavy-lift” shuttle that would carry “more massive payloads into low-earth orbit” than the U.S. Space Shuttle could lift. (WPost, Dec 22/83, A—1; Salyut, Soviet Steps Toward Permanent Human Presence in Space, A Technical Memorandum, OTA, Washington, D.C., Dec 83)
December 22: The International Sun-Earth Explorer (ISEE), a spacecraft intended to be the first man-made machine to encounter a comet, came within 72 miles of the Moon’s surface in a maneuver designed to carry it through the tail of the comet Giacobini-Zinner in September 1984. Engineers at GSFC stored the five-year-old spacecraft on a horseshoe-shaped path behind the Moon, then down over the Sea of Smyth on the visible side of the Moon, where it picked up speed and sped out oward deep space. Goddard’s worldwide tracking network lost contact with the spacecraft when it flew behind the Moon, then regained contact when it flew across the Moon in a flyby as close as any unmanned spacecraft had ever made to another heavenly body without going into orbit around it. The close approach to the Moon was intended to provide a slingshot effect from the brush with lunar gravity that accelerated the spacecraft from 2,900 to 5,145 miles per hour.
The flight through the comet’s tail was to take place on September 11, 1985, when Giacobini-Zinner was 44 million miles from Earth. It was planned that the spacecraft would fly through the comet’s tail for about 30 minutes at a distance of about 12,000 miles from its head.
On passing the Moon, the ISEE-3 spacecraft was renamed the International
454
DECEMBER 1983
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Cometary Explorer to emphasize its new mission. (NASA Dly Actv Rept, Dec 28/83; W Post, Dec 23/83, A-4)
December 23: NASA published in the Federal Register a proposal on how it would select passengers to ride on the Space Shuttle, possibly as early as 1985. NASA emphasized in the proposal that it was not accepting applications. It had already received more than 2,000 written requests for rides since the 1960s, and it had received so many telephone calls about riding the Space Shuttle that it had to attach a recorded message to its telephone line to request that potential astronauts have patience. All requests that had been received by NASA would be disregarded, said NASA’s Sara Keegan.
The proposed selection plan would use a multitiered process to choose Shuttle passengers. All requests would be screened by an outside review panel appointed separately by NASA for each flight and then reviewed by a panel of seven top space agency officials before NASA’s administrator made the final selection.
Several months before liftoff of a flight, the agency would announce when it would accept applications and disclose specific requirements for the flight. Such requirements could change according to the Space Shuttle’s mission. There were, however, broad requirements for all passengers. Citizen observers/participants would have to be in good health and condition, pass a detailed background investigation, and be willing to undergo rigorous training. NASA was accepting comments from the public on its proposed selection process until mid-February. (NASA Release 83-190; Federal Register, Dec 23/83, Vol. 48 No. 248, pages 56770-71. Published in final form in Federal Register, Apr 25/84, Vol. 49 No. 81; NY Times, Dec 16/83, A-ll; WPost, Dec 23/83, A-3)
During December: The large number of malfunctions that struck the Space Shuttle Columbia in its final hours of flight during STS-9 forced engineers to inaugurate the most extensive trouble-shooting operations since the Space Shuttles began flying in April 1981. They were not sure how long the undertaking would last, what they might find, or what effect their findings could have on future flight schedules. NASA officials did not rule out the possibility that the Columbia’s troubles could cause a delay in the next Space Shuttle mission scheduled for January 30, 1984.
The malfunctions included two computer failures, a navigation instrument shutdown, and an explosive fire in the rear compartment. Early Space Shuttle flights had had troubles with computers and the heat-shielding tiles, but these were straight forward physical defects that were easily identified. The current problems were more perplexing and came when the Space Shuttle was assumed to be a fully tested, operational vehicle. NASA engineers and other aerospace observers had suggested that the Columbia’s problems stemmed from a phenomenon not uncommon in any new, complex technology : that is after the initial text phase, when extreme care and attention were given to
455
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
DECEMBER 1983
every step in a project, it was human nature to relax a bit, and it was the nature of machines to misbehave occasionally in unexpected ways.
International Business Machines (IBM), contractor for the computers, would examine the faulty computers; NASA engineers would closely examine data in search of clues to the cause of the two malfunctions, which did not seem to be related to any fundamental design flaw but could have been caused by loose circuitry resulting from vibrations. NASA would ship the inertial measurement unit to its manufacturer, the Singer Kearfott Company in Little Falls, N.J., for examination. (NY Times, Dec 15/83, A—1)
—JPL announced that the IRAS had found a ring of planets being born around Fomalhaut, one of the most studied stars in the southern skies. Earlier in the year, the telescope had discovered a primitive solar system around the star Vega. The discovery that Vega and Fomalhaut appeared to have solar systems was the first evidence supporting the theory that Earth’s solar system was not the only such in existence. Vega and Fomalhaut might be undergoing the same kind of evolution that Earth’s solar system went through three to four billion years ago. “The discovery provides the second direct evidence that solid objects of substantial size exist around a star that is not our sun,” said Dr. Gerry Neugebhuer, IRAS program scientist at JPL. “These objects could be a solar system in a different stage of development and evolution than our own or the one that we found to be circling Vega,” he added. The IRAS detected the two extraterrestrial solar systems by measuring the temperature of the bodies circling the two stars. It found them much cooler than the stars but far too warm and far too large to be rings of interstellar dust. (JPL Release, Dec 16/83; W Post, Dec 17/83, A-3)
—Lt. Gen. Charles H. Terhune, Jr., retired December 31 as deputy director, JPL. Following retirement from the Air Force in 1969, he joined JPL as deputy director, functioning as general manager responsible for the day-to-day management of the laboratory’s resources and the direction and coordination of its technical, administrative, and service activities. General Terhune received the NASA Distinguished Service Medal in October 1982. He will be replaced as deputy director by Robert J. Parks, JPL associate director. (JPL Release, Dec 12/83)
456