ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,
January
January 6: The Washington Post reported that Air Force Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator, said that coded software instruction cards on both computers on the Space Shuttle Columbia’s last voyage (STS-9) were contaminated, delaying Columbia’s landing at Edwards Air Force Base in California by eight hours. The instruction cards were shaken from their printed circuits when the Shuttle pitched up and down just before reentry; however the up-and-down maneuvers would not ordinarily loosen the software cards unless there was something wrong with them.
Abrahamson said that postflight analysis of the cards at IBM’s Owego, N.Y., plant, where the computers were built, showed that one card was contaminated with solder and the other had a carbon chip coated with gold that should not have been there. Abrahamson pointed out that “the most disturbing thing.. .is that both computers were contaminated. I do not like the idea that we flew 10 days in space with contaminated computer parts.”
The six-man crew, commanded by astronaut John W. Young, was able to land the Shuttle and its $1 billion European Spacelab safely by relying for navigation on three standby computers. (W Post, Jan 6/84, A-8)
January 16: NASA reported on scientific data of the Viking Lander Monitor Mission (VLMM) in the areas of meteorology, radio science, and imaging. The Viking program had explored Mars, using two instrumented orbiters operating in conjunction with two instrumented landers on the planet’s surface. Two identical spacecraft, each consisting of a lander and orbiter, were launched in 1975 and began operating at Mars in 1976. A frugal VLMM was conducted from the end of the extended mission in 1980 until June 1983. Based on the data acquired in support of the mission objectives, NASA judged the VLMM successful. Analyses of the data from the mission would continue for some years, supported by the Mars Data Analysis Program of the Solar System Exploration Division. (NASA MOR S-815-75-01/02 [postlaunch] Jan 16/84)
January 23: Japan launched today the BS-2A (Broadcasting Satellite) from Tanegashima. The apogee kick motor (AKM) firing occurred successfully on January 26 at 12:14 a.m. EST. Under NASA’s Space Tracking and Data Network (STDN) support for Japan, the STDN would provide continuous coverage for 30 hours after AKM firing and contingency support for another 30 days. STDN support to BS-2A had been nominal to date. Launch and early orbit support was provided by the STDN on a cost-reimbursable basis. (NASA Dly Act Kept, Jan 30/84; GSFC SSR)
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JANUARY 1984
January 25: President Reagan, in his State of the Union address, endorsed the development of the U.S.’s first permanently manned space station. “Wc can follow our dreams to distant stars, living and working in space for peaceful, economic and scientific gain. Tonight, I am directing NASA to develop a permanently manned space station and to do it within a decade,” he said. “A space station will permit quantum leaps in our research in science, communications and in metals and life-saving medicines which can be manufactured only in space. We want our friends to help us meet these challenges and share in their benefits. .. .Just as the oceans opened up a new world for clipper ships and Yankee traders, space holds enormous potential for commerce today,” he said.
NASA presented the agency’s plans to the presidenl on the day that he spoke to astronauts in the Spacelab orbiting in the Space Shuttle in December 1983. NASA Administrator James N. Beggs had sought the space station as a science laboratory, astronomical observatory, space manufacturing center, servicing facility for spacecraft, and an assembly site for larger orbiting structures.
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Director William J. Casey had opposed any major commitment to space station funding because they feared it could draw money from their own space programs, government officials said. The officials added that military and intelligence agencies were concerned that they would have to share the space station with civilian agencies such as NASA and sometimes with astronauts of other countries.
NASA also had found little enthusiasm when it turned for support from other agencies. When the National Academy of Sciences space science board was asked whether basic research in science would “require or be enhanced by the space station,” Thomas M. Donahue, chairman of the space board, said the answer was no. “I don’t think you could ever really justify $20 billion for a space station,” he said.
At this early stage, there was no design for the space station, but officials of NASA had previously sketched the broad outlines of the most likely initial design. {Weekly Compilation of the Papers of Ronald Reagan, Jan 25/84, 87ff; NY Times, Jan 26/84, A-l; W Post, Jan 18/84, A-l, Jan 29/84, A-4)
January 27: Johnson Space Center (JSC) spokesman Dave Alter said today that NASA had imposed a $131,250 penalty on contractor Hamilton Standard, Windsor Locks, Conn., for failure of two space suits that it had built for use on the fifth Space Shuttle mission in November 1982. Hamilton Standard was to be paid a $175,000 fee over costs for service from October 1982 through March 1983. However, the failures had prevented space walks by astronauts Joe Allen and Bill Lenoir on November 11-12, 1982. After a lengthy investigation, NASA blamed the contractor for the failure of a fan in Allen’s life support backpack and an oxygen pressure regulator on Lenoir’s suit. {WPost, Jan 28/84, A-7)
460
JANUARY 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
January 30: The People’s Republic of China (PRC) announced that it had launched on January 29 a space satellite that achieved “important results,” and the New York Times reported that Western experts speculated that the launch could be the debut of a more powerful Chinese rocket and the nation’s first communications satellite. They added that the launching could mean that China had joined the United States, the Soviet Union, and the European Space Agency (ESA) in its capability to loft satellites into geostationary orbits 22,300 miles above the Earth, the orbit favored for commercial and military communications satellites. There were no details of the satellite launched; only “Close observation is being undertaken of the satellite’s operations,” from China’s official Xinhua new agency.
There had been reports as early as 1980 that China was developing a three-stage rocket for boosting heavy payloads. (NY Times, Jan 31/84, C-8)
During January: The Washington Post reported, according to declassified documents, that the $100 million Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS) that the U.S. Air Force found unusable in April 1983 had lost its bearings and was unable to determine its position. After being launched from the Space Shuttle, the inertial upper stage (IUS) rocket veered so far from course that the TDRS ended up in an orbit almost 10,000 miles closer to Earth than was intended. It took NASA and its contractors three months to get the satellite into geosynchronous orbit above the equator.
According to the declassified documents, instructions to the gyroscope in the IUS were in error, causing the guidance computer to ignore them just before the rocket misfired. The Air Force said that the software error had been corrected.
At the same time, the guidance computer’s memory became confused, rendering it unable to distinguish between right and wrong information about its location in space. Engineers said that they still did not know what caused this failure.
Because of the changes that had to be made in the IUS rocket, the flight of a secret Department of Defense (DOD) satellite aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger would be delayed from July 1 until the end of 1984, sources said. (W Post, Jan 31/83, A-2)
—NASA announced that John J. Martin was named associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology. Previously, Martin had served as vice president and general manager at Bendix Advanced Technology Center, Columbia, Md.; at the Institute for Defense Analyses; on the staff of the president’s science adviser at the White House; as associate deputy to the director of central intelligence for the intelligence community; as principal deputy assistant secretary of the Air Force; and as assistant secretary of the Air Force for research, development, and logistics. A graduate of the University of Notre Dame and commissioned by the U.S. Navy, Martin is the author of
461
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JANUARY 1984
numerous technical papers and reviews and a book on “Atmospheric Reentry,” published in 1966. (NASA anno, Jan 30/84)
—NASA announced that C.A. “Sy” Syvertson would retire on January 13 as director of Ames Research Center (ARC). Syvertson had a major part in the first U.S. research in supersonic and hypersonic flight, both in finding new aerodynamic theory and in development of hypersonic wind tunnels. He designed the first lifting body (a vehicle for flight from orbit to airfield landing and the precursor to the Shuttle) and did planning for major NASA missions in both aeronautics and space. During his tenure, ARC merged with NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and continued advances in aircraft research.
Syvertson received the Lawrence Sperry Award for “fundamental understanding of hypersonic air flow and its application to efficient aircraft design.” He received the NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1971 for work as executive director of the joint Department of Transportation (DOT)—NASA Civil Aviation Research and Development (CARD) policy study, which made a series of recommendations for future civil aviation policy. He was named a fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 1976 and of the American Astronautical Society in 1978 and was elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 1981. (NASA Release 84-01)
Dr. William F. Ballhaus, Jr., director of astronautics at ARC, was named director of the center, succeeding C.A. Syvertson. who retired January 13. Ballhaus is a nationally known expert in computational fluid dynamics—use of supercomputers to stimulate air flow around flight vehicles. As ARC director of astronautics, Ballhaus had been responsible for interplanetary spaceflight projects, operation of a number of airborne observatories used in astronomy and Earth resources research, development of supercomputer systems, research in computational fluid dynamics and computational chemistry, space science, thermophysics, and materials science. Ballhaus came to ARC in 1971, after receiving his doctorate at the University of California at Berkeley (UCB). He joined what is now the Army Aeromechanics Laboratory at ARC and was assigned to the Computational Fluid Dynamics Branch. He has lectured throughout the United States, Europe, and Asia and has published more than 35 technical papers. (NASA Release 84-5)
—Jack Lousma, commander of the Space Shuttle Columbia on its third flight, announced at the state capitol in Lansing, Mich., his campaign for the U.S. Senate. He will seek the Republican nomination to run against Democratic Senator Carl Levin. “Twenty-five years ago, I made a commitment to serve my country—a commitment that has led me from Michigan to the Marine Corps to missions in space,” he said. “That same commitment brings me home today.” He spent 59 days in orbit as part of Skylab’s second manned mission in 1973 and was commander of the Shuttle Columbia in 1982. (W Post, Jan 26/84, C-2)
462
February
February 2: NASA announced the crew assignments for Space Shuttle flights
51-D, scheduled for launch in February 1985, and 61-D, set for January 1986. Brewster H. Shaw, Jr., would command 51-D. Shaw was pilot of the orbiter Columbia on STS-9, the first Spacelab mission flown in November and December 1983. His crew would consist of Bryan D. O’Connor as pilot and mission specialists Mary Cleave, Sherwood C. Spring, and Jerry L. Ross. Mission 51-D would be the 21st Space Shuttle flight and the 9th for the orbiter Challenger. The principal objectives of the six-day flight would be deployment of a SYNCOM communications satellite and retrieval of the free-flying Long Duration Exposure Facility.
John M. Fabian, an Air Force pilot with more than 3,500 hours of flying time, would fly as one of the pilots on 61-D. He flew as mission specialist on STS-7 in July 1983 and was scheduled for 51-A in October as a mission specialist. Flight 61-D mission specialists would be James R Bagian, M.D., and Rhea Seddon, M.D., who is also scheduled to fly on mission 41-F in August. Mission 61-D would be the fourth Spacelab flight, focusing on experiments in life sciences during its seven days in space. It would be the ninth flight of the orbiter Columbia. A commander and another pilot for 61-D would be named at a later date. (NASA Release 84-11)
—Donald J. Johnston, Canadian Minister of State for Science and Technology, announced that a Canadian would fly as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle mission 51-A, set for launch in October, in addition to two earlier Canadians already scheduled for Shuttle flights. NASA offered Canada the opportunity to fly a payload specialist in keeping with President Reagan’s initiative to increase international cooperation. Shuttle flight 51-A would be a six-day flight, carrying Telesat Canada’s ANIK C-l satellite and a Getaway Special experiment designed by two Canadian high school students. The Canadian crew member and backup for the October flight would be announced in March. (NASA Release 84-12)
February 3-10: NASA launched at 8:00 a.m. EST from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 51-D, what space observers called the most dangerous Space Shuttle mission to date. Commander of the flight was Vance D. Brand, 52, a former Marine pilot and veteran of two spaceflights, and the pilot was Navy Cmdr. Robert L. Gibson, 37, who flew combat missions in Vietnam. The mission specialists were Navy Capt. Bruce McCandless, 46; Lt. Col. Robert L. Stewart, 41, the first Army officer to make a spaceflight; and Dr. Ronald McNair, a physicist.
463
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
FEBRUARY 1984
Seven hours after launch, the astronauts pushed Westar VI, Western Union’s $30 million satellite, out of the cargo bay to join two identical satellites already serving North America. However, NASA officials said that the satellite could not be contacted by radio and was considered lost in space. Officials said that the satellite’s on-board rocket engine, which was to propel it into higher orbit, either misfired or never fired. Radars operated by the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NAADC) later found the satellite in an erratic orbit above and behind Challenger. The radars found two large pieces in an orbit more than 800 miles high at its peak and just over 200 miles high at its lowest point above Earth.
On February 5, a large balloon that the astronauts were to chase through space exploded just after it had begun to inflate. Plans called for the astronauts to back up to 120 miles away from the balloon, then move in over the next eight hours to contact it. Instead, the crew spent 90 minutes tracking pieces of the balloon and never got farther than 20 or 30 miles from the debris. The astronauts tracked the balloon’s largest piece with radar for almost 20 miles and used special binoculars and an optical sextant to follow the same piece more than 20 miles by watching sunlight reflected off the balloon’s aluminum surface.
The Indonesian satellite Palapa-B2, launched February 6, went into a useless orbit, believed to be caused by the same technical problem that Westar VI suffered. The NAADC located Palapa-B2 about seven hours after its ejection from the Challenger’s cargo bay, but it was in an orbit so low that it “cannot perform its mission,” said Richard Brandes of Hughes Aircraft Company, builder of the satellite. He added that both satellites’ rocket motors apparently shut down 15 seconds early; they were intended to burn for 80 seconds.
On February 7, astronauts Bruce McCandless and Robert Stewart left Challenger and flew unrestrained for the first time, adding another milepost to man’s conquest of space. They unhooked their lifelines and rose up more than 100 yards away from the Space Shuttle. Propelled by $10 million jet-powered backpacks, they traveled at 4.8 miles a second, although they had no sensation of speed. The two reentered Challenger after 5 hours and 55 minutes. The exercise was a rehearsal for the next Shuttle flight, when other astronauts would try to retrieve an ailing satellite, bring it into the cargo bay for repair, and release it to orbit again. On February 9 the two took a second walk in space, which lasted 6 hours and 17 minutes.
The Space Shuttle made its first landing at KSC on February 11, when it touched down at 7:16 a.m. EST. The Florida landing had been a Shuttle program goal because it would save money and time by eliminating sending maintenance crews to California to prepare the vehicle for a return flight to Florida on the back of a Boeing 747. It was the first Florida landing in two attempts and the first of six planned for the year. Challenger was in relatively good shape following the landing, although its windshield, fuselage, and landing gear were damaged. The windows were hazed and pitted; and 31 of its
33,000	protective tiles, two brake assemblies, and all four tires on the main
464
FEBRUARY 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
landing wheels would have to replaced. Repairs should not slow the preparation of Challenger for its next flight in April. (NASA MOR M-989-41-B [prelaunch] Jan 30/84; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Feb 6/84; W Post, Feb 2/84, A-2, Feb 4/84, A-l, Feb 5/84, A-l, Feb 5/84, A-l, Feb 8/84, A-l, Feb 9/84, A-12, Feb 11/84, A-2, Feb 12/84, A-l, Feb 13/84, A-3; W Times, Feb 6/84, 2A, Feb 7/84, 1A, Feb 8/84, 1A; USA Today, Feb 6/84, A-l)
February 8: Because of the failure of two telecommunications satellites launched by the Space Shuttle, the insurance industry would receive more than $200 million in claims, and premiums would skyrocket when underwriters resumed writing satellite risk policies, the Washington Post reported. Analysts said that it was too early to determine what impact the satellites’ failures would have on their manufacturer, Hughes Aircraft Company, or McDonnell Douglas Corporation, which built the rocket motors that apparently failed on the two satellites.
Western Union, owner of one satellite, was insured for $105 million to cover the cost of the satellite and potential revenue; Indonesia, owner of the other satellite, had $75 million in insurance to cover the cost of building and launching the payload. Robert J. Tirone, vice president of the large insurance broker Alexander & Alexander, said that underwriters would likely hold off issuing any new policies until they found out what went wrong with the two satellites. “Something went wrong,” he said, “and it went wrong twice.”
A spokesman for McDonnell Douglas said that the company was puzzled by the apparent failure of the rockets that were supposed to lift both satellites into stationary orbits about 22,300 miles from Earth. The rockets, payload assist modules (PAM), had been successfully used in 16 previous commercial satellite launches—5 from the Space Shuttle and 11 by missiles.
At the end of 1983, the insurance industry had collected $205 million in premiums and paid $210 million in claims. As a result of the two recent failures, claims would rise to about $420 million. An insurance broker, who asked not to be identified, said that he expected premiums to quadruple as a result of the loss of the two satellites. (W Post, Feb 8/84, D-2)
—The Soviet Union launched today a three-man crew on board the Soyuz T-10 spacecraft, which successfully docked with the Salyut 7 space station on February 9. The crew consisted on Col. Leonid Kizim (commander), Vladimir Solovyev (flight engineer), and Oleg Atkov (cosmonaut-researcher). It appeared that only Kizim had previous space experience, having commanded the Soyuz T-3 in 1980 in the first three-man mission to test and dock the upgraded Soyuz-T and the Salyut 6.
Because of the greater amount of instrumentation and power then in place, TASS noted that the current mission “will have broader possibilities for research than any of the previous ones.” Scientific, technical, medical, and biological studies were on the schedule of the current mission, and the cosmonauts were reactivating life support, power supply, and heat control
465
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
FEBRUARY 1984
systems and were inspecting on-board equipment as part of their “demothballing” process [See Oct 2/84 for return of crew], (NASA Dly Actv Rept, Feb 14/84; FBIS, USSR Feb 9/84, Ul)
February 9: Pilot Brooke Knapp landed a Gulfstream III business jet at Washington (D.C.) National Airport today and claimed a new speed record for an around-the-world flight by any type of aircraft. Her unofficial average speed was 512 miles per hour. Knapp had originally intended to break the record for a heavy class of business jet, but she bested by nine miles per hour the old record for all types of planes, set by an Pan American World Airways 747 in 1976. Knapp was president of a California executive charter and aircraft management service.
The flight raised about $500,000 in gifts and pledges for the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and carried children’s letters and art from country to country. At the Novosibirsk Airport in the Soviet Union, children carrying their paintings greeted Knapp. The elaborate welcoming ceremony lost time for the crew, but they believed they could not ignore it.
After refueling stops in London, Moscow, Novosibirsk, Peking, Tokyo, Honolulu, and Los Angeles, Knapp landed the twin-engined jet at National at 9:12 a.m., 45 hours, 32 minutes, and 53 seconds after taking off. The plane flew about 20,300 miles. (W Post, Feb 10/84, C—1)
February 10: Inflight refueling tests on the NASA 747 Shuttle Carrier Aircraft had been suspended following a series of preliminary flights intended to check potential buffeting and turbulence levels on the specially equipped widebodied jet, NASA reported. The aircraft carrier with its orbiter cargo was required to travel at low altitude and to avoid bad weather, so it could not travel long distances without frequent stops. Therefore, NASA had hoped to develop airborne refueling techniques that would reduce the number of landings required to travel coast to coast or to international locations.
The preliminary tests had the 747 without the orbiter flying behind two tanker aircraft—first a KC-135 and then a KC-10. Heavy turbulence encountered in the vortices of the tanker aircraft had produced minor cracks in the tail of the 747. Although the cracks were of no serious concern, NASA had decided to suspend the flight tests and to investigate an alternative refueling technique that allowed the 747 carrier to fly in front of the tanker aircraft. If the alternative approach proved feasible, it could likely be adopted with little or no additional flight testing with the carrier aircraft. (JSC Release
84-007)
February 14: The Washington Post reported that a secret military payload set for launch July 14 on the Space Shuttle had been canceled and that the mission would be scrubbed without it, according to Air Force and NASA officials. A Pentagon spokesman declined to identify the payload or say when it would be flown. Glynn Lunney, Shuttle program manager, said “if they remove the
466
FEBRUARY 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
payload, we won’t fly.” The canceled mission left astronauts Thomas Mattingly, Loren Shriver, Ellison Onizuka, and James Buchli without a flight for the second time; they were to have flown the Shuttle in the fall of 1983 on a military mission canceled because of rocket problems. (W Post, Feb 14/84, A-7)
February 15: NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced today that JSC was named “lead center” for the agency’s Space Station Program. In a letter to center director Gerald D. Griffin, Beggs said that he was requesting the center to form a program office to execute five basic program responsibilities: systems engineering and integration, business management, operations integration, customer integration, and support of NASA Headquarters Space Station Program Office.
Beggs noted that he planned to form a new organization at NASA Headquarters to direct the Space Station Program and that he would make assignments to other centers under overall project management of JSC.
Terry White, a NASA spokesman in Houston, said that space station work would probably not require a large increase in personnel there because people working on the Space Shuttle program would shift over to the Space Station, the New York Times reported.
February 29: NASA announced the establishment of seven intercenter teams to conduct advanced development activities for high potential technologies to be used in Space Station design and development. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would lead three of the intercenter teams; JSC, three of the teams; and a lead center for the seventh team would be assigned later.
The teams would identify emerging technologies for advanced development for Space Station design and establish test beds into which prototype technology hardware could be integrated, tested, demonstrated, and evaluated. MSFC would be the lead center for the Attitude Control and Stabilization System, the Auxiliary Propulsion System, and Space Operations Mechanisms. JSC would be the lead center in the Data Management System, Environmental Control and Life Support System, and the Thermal Management System. The Electronic Power System would have a leader designated later. Assisting on various assignments would be the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Langley Research Center (LaRC), Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), KSC, ARC, National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL), and Lewis Research Center (LeRC). (NASA Release 84-31).
During February: The mission of ESA’s first preoperational remote-sensing satellite, ERS-1, would be mainly to monitor ice and coastal and ocean zones, the agency announced. Among the instruments in the ERS-1 payload would be an active microwave instrumentation package operating in the C-band and combining the functions of a synthetic aperture radar, a wave scatterometer, and wind scatterometer for the purpose of measuring wind fields and the wave
467
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
FEBRUARY 1984
image spectrum and taking all-weather high-resolution images of coastal zones, open oceans, ice areas, and (on an experimental basis) land. Germany, the Netherlands, France, and Canada, each built a C-bank scatterometer for comparison of data in order to evaluate the optimal technical characteristics of the C-band scatterometers on board ERS-1 and to check the mathematical models used for data processing.
This experimental campaign organized by ESA would operate in the North Sea, in conjunction with a German scientific platform supplying “sea truth” data, and about 40 kilometers off the Brittany coast, in conjunction with a French oceanographic vessel supplied by the Centre National d’Exploitation des Oceans (National Center for Ocean Exploitation). This would allow comparison of the data acquired by the various scatterometers and data acquired by conventional means on board the platform and the oceanographic vessel. (ESA Release, Feb 6/84)
468
March
March 6: Charles Yost, a member of NASA’s Space Station task force, speaking at the Shuttle/Space Station business opportunities conference in Washington, said “There’s been an overhyping of the commercialization of space idea.” He added that it would take years before investments in many of the space-based opportunities being explored showed a significant return. However, he pointed out, “industry must be willing to risk its money up front,” and said that nine companies had applied for a joint endeavor agreement with the space agency. At the time, only four companies had actually signed with NASA to use the Space Shuttle for business ventures.
Space industry analysts said that it would cost “a minimum of few million dollars” to begin exploiting the commercial potential of space. Though satellite communication had proved profitable, most space-based efforts faced an uncertain future. A Reagan administration recommendation to turn the nation’s Landsat remote-sensing and weather satellite systems over to private industry had met resistance in Congress, and some analysts believed there might not be a market for remote-sensing data. Many attendees at the conference questioned whether any company would make money in space manufacturing before 1990. (W Post, Mar 7/84, D—16)
March 7: NASA Administrator James M. Beggs and Professor Ernesto Quagliarello, president of the Italian National Research Council (CNR), signed today in Rome two memoranda of understanding; the separate agreements established the development of the Tethered Satellite System (TSS) and the development and launch of Laser Geodynamics Satellite-2 (Lageos-2).
The TSS would be a data-gathering satellite that would be carried into orbit by the Space Shuttle and released from payload bay on a tether. It would provide an important new reusable, multidisciplinary facility for conducting space experiments in Earth orbit and open the way to several areas of longterm scientific experimentation not otherwise possible. NASA would develop the TSS deploy, perform the system-level engineering and integration, and launch TSS on the shuttle. CNR would develop the two-module (science and service) TSS satellite and provide system-level support to NASA for technical aspects of the satellite.
Eleven countries were conducting laser ranging activities with the passive Laser Geodynamics Satellite-1 (Lageos-I) launched by NASA in 1976. The agreement signed today outlined the terms for the development of Lageos-2, which would significantly enhance study and understanding of the solid earth and its dynamic processes. Lageos-2 would be identical in configuration to Lageos-1 and would be placed in an orbit of similar altitude but with a dif-
469
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MARCH 1984
ferent inclination (51-53° prograde instead of 70° retrograde). Lageos-2 would contribute to the study of plate tectonics and the accumulation of crustal strain in areas of high seismicity through very accurate measurements of baseline changes resulting from crustal motion. The two satellites, in essentially opposite orbits, would improve the precision of current laser-determined baselines by a factor of two and would make possible achievements of a precision of one centimeter for baselines of several thousand kilometers. CNR would be responsible for the fabrication of the Lageos-2 satellite, integration of the apogee stage and the Italian research interim stage, and delivery to NASA. NASA would provide existing ground support equipment, hardware, and software remaining from the Lageos-1 mission, technical consultation, and launch on the Space Shuttle as a payload of opportunity with a planned launch in 1987. (NASA Release 84-34)
March 11: NASA announced that the fifth group of applicants to be interviewed for possible selection as Space Shuttle astronaut candidates, including 15 mission specialists and 7 pilot applicants, reported to JSC today for a week of interviews and medical evaluations. A total of 4,934 men and women had applied for the approximately 12 positions open.
The selected candidates would begin in July 1984 a year of training and evaluation at JSC and be selected as astronauts after satisfactory completion of the evaluation period.
The selected candidates were: David T. Allen, Ph.D., employed by University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA); Maj. Larry D. Autry, U.S. Air Force; Lt. Commander Dennis N. Bostich, U.S. Navy; Capt. Joseph A. Car-retto, U.S. Air Force; Lt. Commander Keith E. Crawford, U.S. Navy; William M. Decampli, M.D., Ph.D., employed by Stanford Medical Center, Stanford, Calif., Jan D. Dozier, employed at MSFC; Lt. Col. William A. Flanagan, U.S. Air Force; Wendy S. Hale, Ph.D., stationed at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.; Rosario M. Izquierdo, employed by National Security Agency (NSA); Lt. Fred D. Knox, Jr., U.S. Navy; G. David Low, employed by JPL; Lt. Commander Michael J. McCulley, U.S. Navy; Kenneth J. Myers, M.D., employed by the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn.; William S. O’Keefe, employed by Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Mich.; Donald R. Pettit, Ph.D., employed by Los Alamos National Laboratory; Lt. Commander William F. Readdy, U.S. Navy; Lt. Commander Gregory J. Rose, U.S. Navy; Lonnie Sharpe, Jr., Ph.D., employed by North Carolina A&T State University, Greensboro, N.C.; Kathryn C. Thornton, Ph.D., employed by the U.S. Army Foreign Science and Technology Center, Charlottesville, Va.; C. Lacy Veach, employed by JSC; and Lt. Commander James B. Waddell, U.S. Navy. (NASA Release 84-018)
March 16: NASA announced that it had selected McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, Huntington Beach., Calif., and TRW, Inc., Space and Technology Group, Redondo Beach, Calif., for negotiations that would lead
470
MARCH 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
to two parallel Space Station study contracts, each contract for a firm fixed price of approximately $2 million, covering a performance period of approximately 27 months, beginning in March. Contracts would be for the development of functional, performance, and technology requirements; the definition of system architecture for the Space Station data system; and the relationship of that system to the overall NASA end-to-end flight and ground information system.
The studies would define the role of the Space Station data system and its relationship, and interfaces to the Space Station information systems elements. They would also define the data system to determine the environment in which both the user and facility subsystems interface and operate; address all avionics and other electrically automated Space Station functions; develop a clear understanding of system functional, operational, and interface requirements; identify major cost items to enable effective management decisions and development control; and define a program plan.
NASA’s JSC would negotiate and administer the TRW contract; NASA’s GSFC, the McDonnell Douglas contract. (NASA Release 84-36)
March 19: The Soviet Union was developing a large laser-equipped prototype military spacecraft for launch on its heavy Saturn-5-class booster, which was also competing development, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Soviet scientists were designing the spacecraft to attack U.S. satellites and would launch it on the booster within the next two years. The new booster’s primaiy mission was to place the 300,000- to 400,000-pound Soviet space station elements in orbit, but the U.S. DOD had been concerned for some time that it also could be used for the type of heavy, unmanned, prototype directed-energy weapon known to be under development. (AvWk, Mar 19/84, 13)
March 27: Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger today named Air Force Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA’s associate director for space flight, to be manager of what the Reagan administration called the strategic defense initiative, a program to explore the feasibility of building a space-based defense against nuclear ballistic missiles. President Reagan had suggested the program the previous year.
Abrahamson’s job would be to direct and coordinate several research programs that had been under way for some time at DOD and in the Department of Energy (DOE). These included research on several kinds of laser and particle beam weapons, work on large mirrors needed for some lasers, advances in high-speed data processing, and methods of generating large amounts of electrical power in space.
Abrahamson had been at NASA since November 1981 and had directed not only the Space Shuttle operation but also commercial sales of Shuttle services and relations with Congress and the space industry. He would begin his new duties on April 15 after the nation’s 11th Space Shuttle flight, scheduled for launch on April 6. (NY Times, Mar 28/84, A-19)
471
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MARCH 1984
—NASA announced that Jesse W. Moore would become acting associate administrator for spaceflight on April 15, succeeding Lt. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, who would become director of strategic defense at DOD. Moore, who had been Abrahamson’s deputy, had come to NASA Headquarters in 1978 as the deputy director of the Solar Terrestrial Division in the Office of Space Science. He was director of the Spacelab Flight Division until December 1981, when he assumed the position of director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division in the Office of Space Science and Applications. In February 1983 he was appointed to the position of deputy associate administrator for spaceflight. (NASA Release 84-40)
—U.S. Ambassador to Portugal Allen Holmes and Portuguese Foreign Minister Jaime Gama signed today in Lisbon an accord that would provide for a satellite tracking station in Portugal. Under the accord, the United States would provide Portugal with $60 million annually, of which $20 million would be for military aid and $40 million for economic aid. The United States would use the station to track flying military targets; U.S. plans called for five satellite tracking stations in the world, and stations in New Mexico, Hawaii, and South Korea were completed. (FBIS, Beijing Xinhua in English, Mar 28/84)	"
During March: In an interview following his around-the-world trip to sell the U.S. Space Station idea to U.S. allies, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said, “I thought the trip went well, I thought it went extremely well.” He added that he had proposed that as much as one-fourth of the proposed $8 billion cost of the Space Station be borne by western Europe, Japan, and Canada. “They didn’t exactly stand up and cheer when I said I’d like them to think about contributing a couple of billion dollars, but they didn’t blink at the numbers either,” he said.
Beggs said that the countries had about a year to decide if they wanted to join in a partnership with the United States, since NASA planned to begin awarding contracts for the Space Station’s final design in the spring of 1985. He noted that all of the countries had laid down conditions under which they would agree to participate: the station must provide technological challenges to their industries; they must have what Beggs called a “clearly defined role” in the direction of Space Station operations and selection of flight crews; they must have access to the entire station; and their industries must have the same access that U.S. industry had. (W Post, Mar 27/84, A-2)
472
April
April 3: NASA announced that it awarded to the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colo., a cost-plus-fixed-fee contract of $7,076,741 for operation and maintenance of the National Scientific Balloon Facility (NSBF) in Palestine, Tex. The contractor would provide the personnel, materials, supplies, and services to manage, operate, and maintain the NSBF, including flight program operation, engineering activities, and research and developmnet. The NSBF would annually conduct 60 to 70 scientific balloon flights.
GSFC’s Wallops Island, Va., facility would administer the contract. (GSFC Release 84-4)
April 3-11: The Soviet Union launched today, aboard the Soyuz T-ll, two Soviet cosmonauts, Col. Yuri Malyshev and Gennady Strekalov, and the first Indian cosmonaut, Rakesh Sharma, a 35-year-old Air Force pilot, for an eight-day visit to the Salyut-7 space station to join three other cosmonauts who had been living there since February 8. The joint flight was the 11th in the Intercosmos series that had taken non-Soviet cosmonauts into space along with Soviet counterparts.
On this flight, Sharma would conduct medical experiments in which he would practice yoga as a possible means of coping with space sickness. Experiments would also include detailed space surveys of the Indian subcontinent. The Soviet Union and India televised the launch, and Tass quoted Prime Minister Indira Gandhi as saying that the joint mission gave a “new dimension” to friendship between India and the Soviet Union.
The three returned to Earth April 11 in a perfect parachute landing of their Soyuz T-10 space capsule near the town of Arkalyk, 1,500 miles southeast of Moscow. Tass reported that the cosmonauts were “feeling fine.” The report continued, “New information on peculiarities of the human organism’s adaptation to space flight conditions was obtained.” Beyond stressing Soviet-Indian cooperation and friendship, the flight also demonstrated the peaceful uses of outer space, Soviet officials commented. (FBIS, USSR, Apr 4/84, Ul-4; FBIS, USSR, Apr 11/84, Ul-3; NY Times, Apr 4/86, A-16; W Post, Apr 12/84, A-33)
April 4: The Washington Post reported the death of April 4 of Oleg Antonov, 78, one of the Soviet Union’s leading aircraft designers. Antonov, whose obituary was signed by Communist Party leader Konstantin Chernenko and other dignitaries, became the head of that country’s aircraft design office in 1946. One of his first creations was the AN-2 transport and agricultural biplane, which soon became the national airline’s (Aeroflot) workhorse and
473
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
APRIL 1984
still was in use. Under his leadership, the office also designed a range of Antonov aircraft, including passenger planes and the long-range AN-22 heavy-transport aircraft. (W Post, Apr 6/84, B-6)
April 6-13: NASA launched at 8:58 a.m. EST today from Cape Canaveral the Space Shuttle Challenger (STS-41C) carrying Capt. Robert L. Crippen, commander; Frances R. Scobee, pilot; and mission specialists Terry J. Hart, Dr. James D. Van Hoften, and Dr. George D. Nelson. Challenger flew to an altitude of nearly 300 miles, the highest any Shuttle crew had flown, because the astronauts had to match the orbit of, rendezvous with, and repair the burned out Solar Maximum Observatory satellite that had been out of service for almost four years.
At 12:20 p.m. EST on April 7 the astronauts deployed the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF), a 30-foot-long cylinder carrying 57 varieties of space-age materials. Following retrieval by other astronauts next February, scientists would examine the cargo to determine how it stoop up to the heat, cold, and cosmic rays of space. The Space Shuttle’s 50-foot-long robot arm pushed the cylinder out of Challenger’s cargo bay.
The initial attempt on April 8 to retrieve the orbiting Solar Max satellite failed when astronaut George (Pinky) Nelson, propelled by a jet-powered backpack, tried unsuccessfully to attach himself to the crippled, slowly spinning observatory. He bounced away from the satellite each time, causing it to spin faster with each bounce. After running low on fuel, Nelson returned to Challenger. However, on April 9 radio commands from ground controllers at GFSC stabilized the satellite just before its batteries went dead. On April 10 Crippen inched Challenger’s robot arm up to one end of the 21-foot-tall Solar Max, and then Hart caught the slow-spinning satellite on the first try. They then moved it into flight support system, a berthing area in the back of the Space Shuttle’s cargo bay. The following day, Nelson and Van Hoften, wearing space suits, stepped out into the cargo bay and replaced a 500-pound fuse box and fixed a smaller electronics box supplying power to one of seven instruments. The work was completed in slightly less than the alloted six hours. The astronauts redeployed the observatory on April 12. The Washington Post reported that, because the repair job was done so well, the observatory would do better in its restored state than in the 10 months it had worked before breaking down almost four years previously.
Challenger landed at 5:38 a.m. local time April 13 at California’s Edwards Air Force Base instead of the preferred site at KSC, due to poor weather in Florida. NASA officials pronounced the Space Shuttle to be in excellent condition. “Compared to 10 previous recoveries, the condition of the ship is much better,” Fritz Widick, operations manager for the recovery, commented at a news conference. “During the flight there were only something like 12 problems recorded in the ship, which is remarkable.” (NASA MOR M-989-41-C, Mar 19/84; WPost, Apr 8/84, A-3, Apr 6/84, A-2, Apr 9/84, A-l, Apr 10/84, A-l, Apr 11/84, A-l Apr 12/84, A-l, Apr 13/84, A-2; NY Times, Apr 15/84, 23)
474
APRIL 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
April 6: Engineers at NASA’s GSFC completed checkout and activation of the Landsat-5 Earth resources satellite, launched from the Vandenberg Air Force Base complex in California on March 1, and turned over today operational control of the spacecraft to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The 1,950-kilogram (4,300-pound) spacecraft was placed in a 705-kilometer (438-statute miles) near-polar orbit. NASA engineers had checked out all computer, communications, telemetry, and other spacecraft systems and declared the spacecraft ready for operational use.
With Landsat-4 still functioning, data acquisition over the same ground swath was possible on an eight-day repeat cycle. NASA planned to turn over to NOAA operational responsibility for Thematic Mapper operation and data processing in January 1985. (NASA Release 84-49; NASA Dly Ac tv Rept, Apr 9/84)
—NASA announced that it had established an interim Space Station Program office as a result of President Reagan’s January 25, 1984, directive to NASA to develop a permanently manned Space Station and to do it within a decade. Philip E. Culbertson, in addition to his duties as associate deputy administrator, would assume the role of acting director of the interim office, with John D. Hodge (former director of the Space Station task force) as acting deputy.
The interim office superseded the former Space Station task force and would be responsible for direction of the Space Station Program and for planning the organizational structure of a permanent Program Office. (NASA anno, Apr 6/84)
April 8: The PRC New China News Agency announced that China had launched on April 8 its first permanently orbiting communications satellite, the Washington Post reported. The geosynchronous satellite was positioned over the Moluccan Sea near Indonesia. The news agency reported that all meters and instruments were working normally as the satellite began experiments on telephone communications and radio and television transmissions.
Foreign experts said that the launch was a major achievement that could improve communications in all facets of Chinese life, including the far-flung military. It also had vast implications for China’s fledgling nuclear force. The rocketry required to propel the satellite into orbit—a three-stage launcher with a refined guidance system—far exceeded the firing capability of the nation’s best intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs).
China also had pending contracts with the United States to launch three larger communications satellites with the Space Shuttle, but no dates were set. (W Post, Apr 19/84, A-31)
April 9: NASA named Neil B. Hutchinson manager and John W. Aaron deputy manager of the Space Station Program Office at JSC in Houston, Tex.
475
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
APRIL 1984
Hutchinson was serving in a staff assignment to the Johnson director since his return in January 1984 from a one-year assignment at NASA Headquarters, where he was director, Space Shuttle Operations Office in the Office of Space Flight.
Aaron had been chief of the Spacecraft Software Division at JSC since 1981. He also had served as avionics flight software project manager for the Shuttle approach and landing test and orbital flight test programs. (NASA Release
84-50)
April 13: NASA announced that LeRC awarded a $161 million contract to General Dynamics Corporation, Convair Division, San Diego, Calif., for two Shuttle/Centaur G vehicles tor the DOD. A previous contract included two NASA-unique Shuttle Centaur G-Prime vehicles for the Galileo (Jupiter) mission and the International Solar/Polar Mission (ISPM), scheduled for launch in 1986. The two contracts together totaled $414 million.
Centaur was a high-energy upper-stage booster expected to add substantially to the Space Shuttle’s ability to deliver heavier payloads from low-Earth orbit to geosynchronous orbit or interplanetary trajectories. (NASA Release
84-44)
April 25: NASA announced that it and its Italian counterpart, the National Space Plan office of the Italian National Research Council (PSN/CNR), had asked scientists from around the world to submit their ideas for experiments to be performed on a joint U.S.-Italian program known as the TSS—Satellite that later in the decade could be reeled into and out of the Space Shuttle’s cargo bay on a miles-long tether. NASA and PSN/CNR would evaluate scientists’ proposals and decide what experiments would be performed on the system. NASA planned to carry the system aboard the Space Shuttle by sometime in 1987.
On its first flight the satellite, once the Shuttle was in orbit, would be deployed upward about 40 feet by an extendable boom. The satellite would be checked out while at the top of the boom and then released. As it moved upward away from the Shuttle, the reel would unwind until the satellite was at its proper distance for conducting electrodynamic experiments.
As the Shuttle passed through the space plasma, the satellite, with its conducting tether, could become a generator, much as a copper coil moving within a magnet on Earth can produce a flow of electricity. By drawing off the energy from the conducting tether and releasing it into space, scientists would be able to study magnetic lines of flux that surround the Earth. (NASA Release 84-54)
During April: Science reported that the first commercial product manufactured in space, 15 grams of 10-micrometer polystyrene spheres that were produced on the STS-6 mission, would soon be transferred from NASA to the National Bureau of Standards (NBS) for sale to the public. The spheres could
476
APRIL 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
be used for calibration of microscopes, laser light scattering equipment, and particle sizing equipment. The spheres also had potential uses in biomedical sciences, particularly for sizing of pores and membranes. The spheres fit the two key criteria for space manufacturing: they could not be made on Earth, and they were very expensive.
NBS would divide the 15 grams of spheres into 1,000 samples, each of which would sell for about $350. Total value of the spheres would thus be about $23,000. (Science, Apr 84, 265)
477
May
May 4: NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said that engineers had determined the problem with two types of rocket motors that had caused the loss of two $75 million satellites and the near-loss of a third and had led to postponements of two Space Shuttle flights, the Washington Post reported. A report from McDonnell-Douglas said that a team had found a way to determine which rocket nozzle would fail in space and which would work. Such a procedure might have saved the two communications satellites that gone into useless orbits. However, the solution had come too late to put a Canadian communications satellite on the next Space Shuttle flight scheduled for June 19.
(W Post, May 4/84, A-2)
—In a continuing series of reports on orbiting cosmonauts Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov, who had been in space for 85 days aboard the Salyut-7, Tass said that the crew had completed planned operations with the cargo craft Progess-20, storing supplies and pumping drinking water into the station’s tanks.
Kizim and Solovyev then made their fourth walk in open space. The two removed a heat-resistant coating that had been installed during a previous space walk, assembled a second conduit, and checked it for airtightness. The two then reinstalled the heat-resistant coating, put tools into a container, and returned to the station. Their walk lasted 2 hours and 45 minutes, bringing their total time in open space to 14 hours and 45 minutes during 4 walks in 12 days. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 4/84)
May 16: NASA announced that approximately 200 people representing every NASA installation and the JPL were selected to augment the staff of JSC to help plan the next phase of NASA’s Space Station Program. This team had two major objectives: issue a request for proposals to industry for the definition of the specific elements of the Space Station and define a reference configuration or configurations to accompany the request for proposals.
“The purpose of the reference configuration is to provide a framework to help industry understand how the various elements of the Space Station are related,” said Dr. Ralph Muraca, deputy head of LaRC, designated a “center of excellence” to help plan this next phase of the program. “In addition, it will help individual companies determine which of the elements or work packages they would be interested in competing for.”
The group’s guidelines were to develop a configuration that would meet all the requirements associated with the final configuration of the Space Station, expected to be operational in the 1999-2000 time frame, and then scale that
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
INTFNTIONALLf	j*.WHj	479
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MAY 1984
back to an $8 billion configuration that would provide maximum mission capability in 1991. (LaRC Release 84-35)
May 18: At a ceremony today in Washington, D.C., NASA transferred ownership of Viking Lander 1, which was on the planet Mars, to the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. It was the first time a museum would own an object located on another planet. The transfer also included loan of the official Viking Lander plaque, which renamed the lander the Thomas A. Mutch Memorial Station in memory of the Viking landing imaging team leader and NASA associate administrator for space science who had died in a climbing accident in the Himalayas in 1980. NASA retained reclaimant rights to the lander for scientific purposes. (NASA Release 84-58; NY Times, May 3/84, A-19)
May 22: An Arianespace Ariane I rocket lifted off at 9:33 a.m. EDT to orbit a U.S. communications satellite 22,300 miles above the equator in the world’s first strictly commercial space venture. Virginia-based GTE Spacenet Corporation built the satellite, which was intended to relay thousands of simultaneous television, telephone, and data transmission channels to U.S. domestic subscribers over the next 10 years. The corporation would launch other satellites later in the year and early in 1985.
ESA had contracts for 28 launches worth more than $800 million, plus options for another 19. More than 40% of the orders came from outside Europe. (W Post, May 22/84, A-24)
During May: NASA and Deere & Company, Moline, 111., signed a memorandum of understanding to cooperate on the design of metallurgical tests to be conducted aboard a future Space Shuttle flight. In 1981, Deere became the first private company to sign a Technical Exchange Agreement with NASA that permitted the company to perform cast iron solidification experiments on board conventional suborbital NASA aircraft, which simulated microgravity for 30 to 60 seconds.
Deere was already working on the design of additional metallurgical tests, where engineers used data from the low-gravity tests conducted earlier. Based on this work, Deere and NASA engineers concluded that further experimentation would be productive. The Space Shuttle tests would permit experiments in space for longer periods, which could yield new information to aid in the search for stronger irons. These tests could also provide new data about the process for forming iron molecules, leading to improved foundry efficiencies. (NASA Release 84-56)
—NASA announced that astronaut Terry Hart, who had operated the Space Shuttle’s mechanical arm to retrieve the Solar Maximum Satellite during the April 6-13, 1984, Space Shuttle flight, would leave NASA effective June 15 to work in an engineering management position for the newly formed Military and Government Systems Division of Bell Laboratories in Whippany, N.J.
480
MAY 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
The division would produce large digital communications networks for government applications. Hart was also a member of the astronaut support crews for Shuttle missions 1, 2, 3, and 7, serving as capsule communicators in mission control for those flights. (NASA Release 84-59)
—Officials at the U.S. Department of State blocked an offer by the Soviet Union to use its rockets to launch Western satellites, the Christian Science Monitor reported. The Soviets had offered to “sell” their rockets to INMARSAT, the International Maritime Satellite Organization based in London, for launching a new generation of satellites in the 1980s. INMARSAT was running a network of communications satellites that routed telephone calls and data among some 2,300 ships and their shore bases. However, it had not decided on the companies that would supply the new satellites, which could number up to nine and cost up to $500 million. Under the Soviet Union plan, satellites would have to travel to the Soviet rocket site prior to launch into space, and the satellites would undoubtedly contain a large proportion of U.S. parts. Such a transfer would be prohibited under the technology control regulations that sought to stop the channeling to unfriendly countries of hardware that could be used in weaponry. The State Department said that “under no circumstances” would it permit the transfer to the Soviet Union of American-made satellite components. Only two organizations had submitted tenders to INMARSAT to build the satellites: a joint venture of Hughes Aircraft Corporation and British Aerospace and a consortium of Marconi of the United Kingdom, Aerospatiale of France, and Ford Aerospace of the United States.
The Soviet Union had said that it would make available its Proton rockets for a fee of about $23 million a launch. That was roughly half the comparable charge for a satellite launch by either the Space Shuttle or the Ariane rocket sold by Arianespace, a semipublic company dominated by French interests.
U.S. officials feared shipment to the Soviet Union’s main launch site at Baykonur in Central Asia of hardware containing electronic components that could be useful to the Soviet’s military buildup. (CSM, May 3/84, 1)
—NASA announced that Dr. Hans M. Mark, deputy administrator of NASA since July 1981, would become chancellor of the University of Texas System, effective September 1, 1984. In announcing the appointment, Texas Board Chairman Jon Newton said of Mark: “With his Air Force and NASA background, he has demonstrated the management ability to administer effectively a complex organizational enterprise such as the U.T. System, which involves 119,000 students, 50,000 faculty and staff, and an operational budget for FY84-85 of $1.8 billion.”
Mark was born in Mannheim, Germany, and in February 1969, after receiving his doctorate in physics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1954, became director of NASA’s ARC. He had also served as a consultant to government, industry, and business, including the Institute for
481
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MAY 1984
Defense Analyses and the President’s Advisory Group on Science and Technology. (NASA Release 84-65)
—Martin A. Knutson was named director of Flight Operations and Ames Dryden Site manager for ARC. In this position, Knutson would be responsible for the operation of more than 40 highly specialized research and support aircraft at ARC and its Ames Dryden Flight Research Center. He also would be responsible for site management of the Mojave Desert facility that conducted NASA’s high-speed flight research and served as one of the prime landing sites for Space Shuttle missions. Knutson joined NASA in 1971 as the ARC’s manager of the Airborne Instrumentation Research Project. He was instrumental in creating the project and in acquiring its U-2 aircraft and was a pilot with over 6,000 hours of flight time. (ARC Release 84-11)
482
June
June 5: NASA announced the selection of four career scientists to fly as payload specialists on the next two missions of Spacelab, a reusable Space Shuttle-based research facility. Dr. Lodewijk van den Berg of EG&G Corporation, Goleta, Calif., and Dr. Taylor G. Wang of JPL were named flight payload specialists for Spacelab 3, scheduled for launch in January 1985. Dr. Mary Helen Johnston of MSFC and Dr. Eugene H. Trinh of JPL would serve as alternates for Spacelab 3.
Dr. Loren W. Acton of Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory, Palo Alto, Calif., and Dr. John-David Bartoe of the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., were named flight payload scientists for Spacelab 2, which was slated for launch in April 1985. Alternates named were Dr. Dianne K. Prinz of the Naval Research Laboratory and Dr. George W. Simon of the Air Force Geophysics Laboratory.
Spacelab 3 would be the first operational mission of the research facility with mission emphasis on materials processing in space. Spacelab 3 would use the long version of the laboratory module, in which the scientists would work on a special cargo bay instrument support structure. Spacelab 2, which followed Spacelab 3 due to experiment development delays, included experiments in solar physics, plasma physics, infrared astronomy, high-energy physics, atmospheric physics, and life sciences and technology (NASA Release 84-74)
June 7: The research satellite orbiting Venus, Pioneer Venus Orbiter, briefly tilted to watch passing comet Encke and sent back information showing that the comet was losing water at a rate three times higher than earlier calculations predicted, scientists at Ames Research Laboratory reported. The surprising finding “could be due to the particular arrangement of ice and dust which comprise the comet or to crumbling of steep-sloped hills and mesas that may cover the surface of the 1.2-mile diameter of the comet nucleus,” said NASA spokesman Peter Waller. He added that the finding might shed some light on the exact nature and makeup of comets.
Comets were “dirty cosmic snowballs” of dust, rocky materials, and ice, Waller said. “Whether the ice and dust are layered, mixed together in chunks, or form hills and valleys remains a mystery.”
Observations of the comet were made with an ultraviolet spectrometer, one of many scientific instruments aboard the orbiter, which detected light in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum. “Because most atoms emit ultraviolet light when they’re bathed in sunlight, measuring the wavelength and intensity of the emitted light can give scientists an idea of what elements are in a sample as well as how much of an element or compound is present,” said Dr. Ian Stewart
483
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JUNE 1984
of the University of Colorado. His team at the university built the spectrometer and calculated the comet’s rate of water loss.
Johann Encke, a German astronomer who calculated the comet’s orbit in 1818, noted that the comet was behaving abnormally, with the time it took to travel once around the Sun getting shorter in apparent contradiction to the laws of classical physics. Scientists now explained the phenomenon with the fact that comets spun slowly, like frozen tops. “The ice vaporizes, particularly when the comet is near the Sun and may cause a jet reaction that can change the comet’s orbital path,” Stewart said. (ARC Release 84-27; NY Times, June 10/84, 25)
June 8: Addressing a conference on “Space, Our Next Frontier,” sponsored by the Dallas-based think tank National Center for Policy Analysis, retired Lt. Col. Thomas H. Krebs, former chief of the Defense Intelligence Agency’s (DIA) space systems branch, said that the Soviet Union had obtained blueprints for the Space Shuttle and would within a year or two launch an or-biter that was an “identical copy.” He said that U.S. military experts were not sure how the Soviets obtained the plans but were certain that the Soviet vehicle was made within U.S. blueprints. He indicated that it was likely that they had bought a copy of the Space Shuttle plans. “We’ve seen the [Soviet] orbiter, and it’s identical to ours,” Krebs pointed out. “I can’t tell how far along they are, but in a year or two you can expect to see one launched.
Krebs said that the Soviets improved on the U.S. design by adding engines to the bottom of the external fuel tank, thereby increasing the tonnage the Shuttle could carry into orbit. “The space shuttle was totally unclassified. Anyone could buy a set of plans. However, no one has been able to find the requisition,” he said.
In Washington, DIA sources speaking off the record said that they knew nothing specifically about the Soviets obtaining Shuttle blueprints. {W Post, June 8/84, A-4)
June 9-11: Investigations were continuing into why a $30 million international communications satellite, Intelsat 5, tumbled out of control after launch June 9 by a new model Atlas-Centaur rocket. NASA launch director Skip Mackey said that attention focused on a thruster jet, 1 of 14 small jets intended to keep the upper stage of the Atlas-Centaur rocket flying straight. Mackey said that a fuel filter in one of the jets may have become clogged, causing the upper stage and the attached satellite to spin out of control 23 minutes after launch. The rocket and satellite were in a looping orbit ranging from 93 to 750 miles high, circling the Earth every 90 minutes.
It had been the 62nd launch of an Atlas Centaur rocket, but it was the first of the new lengthened model. The International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) had paid NASA $60 million to launch the satellite, which had 12,000 voice channels and 2 color television channels and was to have joined 15 other satellites serving the 108-nation organization. (NASA
484
JUNE 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Release 84-62; W Post, June 10/84, A-13, June 11/84, A-4; W Times, June 11/84, 4A)
June 11: NASA announced that it had selected a team of scientists to observe Halley’s comet in 1986 using a Space Shuttle-based astronomy observatory called Astro. The scientists were Dr. Michael A’Heam, University of Maryland, College Park, Md.; Drs. John Brandt, Bertram Donn, and Malcom Neidner, GSFC; Dr. Barry Lutz, Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Ariz.; Dr. Chet Opal, University of Texas, Austin; Dr. C. Robert O’Dell, Rice University, Houston; and Dr. Susan Wyckoff, Arizona State University, Tempe. These reseachers, together with a scientist representing each of the three ultraviolet telescope teams, comprised the Astro Halley Science Team that would plan the overall program for observing the comet.
Astro consisted of three specially designed ultraviolet telescopes and two wide-field cameras that would be carried as a Spacelab payload in the Space Shuttle cargo bay.
The observatory was scheduled for assembly and integration into the Space Shuttle at KSC during 1985 for launch in early March 1986. The first seven-day Astro mission was scheduled at a time when several comet probes would intercept Halley, and it was intended to return important scientific data and photography of the comet. ESA, Japan, and the Soviet Union had each designed probes that would fly by the comet and through its tail in early March 1986. (NASA Release 84-72)
June 12: NASA scientist Dr. Hartmut H. Aumann said that the annual meeting of the American Astronomical Society that satellite observation in space had produced evidence of rings around nearby stars that might be the birth sites of new planets. Aumann, of JPL, said that indications of orbiting material around more than 40 stars within 75 light years of Earth came from observations made by the IRAS launched in 1983. Scientists had said that the existence of other planetary systems would increase chances that life similar to that on Earth had evolved elsewhere in the universe. Only in our solar system had scientists confirmed the existence of planets.
Scientist discovered the material circling the stars by measuring infrared light energy. The stars produced more of it than could be accounted for by their number. Scientists would try to obtain a telescope image of the rings around the closer stars for further verification of the theory, Aumann said. If existence of the orbiting material was confirmed, it would take about 500 million years for the material to develop into planets.
In a background report, NASA said that the discovery suggested that stars orbited by solid materials might be almost commonplace in the Milky Way galaxy. (USA Today, June 13/84, 4D; W Post, June 13/84, A-15)
June 17: Hundreds of spectators gathered to watch giant balloons float overhead in honor of the first American to build a full-scale hot-air balloon
485
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JUNE 1984
and fly the tethered balloon June 16, 1784, 70 feet over a field in Bladensburg, Md. Peter Carnes had been a Bladensburg innkeeiper, lawyer, and adventurer and had built the hot-air balloon, the first of its kind in this country. Carnes had had no interest or knowledge of ballooning until he read newspaper accounts of the first flights in France in 1783. Having never seen a balloon, Carnes fashioned his 35 feet in diameter based on sketchy newspaper stories.
One week after his unmanned balloon flight, Carnes took his balloon to Baltimore, where 13-year-old Edward Warren volunteered to ride in the tethered craft, making him the first American to ascend in a hot-air balloon.
Shortly thereafter, at the Philadelphia Commons, spectators watched 234-pound Carnes ascended about 10 to 20 feet in the balloon, when a wind shift pushed him into a wall, breaking the chains and dropping him to the ground.
Tom Crouch, curator of aeronautics at the National Air and Space Museum, said that the balloon construction “was considered a great scientific achievement. It is difficult to realize what an achievement flying that balloon really was. His flight was a demonstration of the fact that while this nation was young, it was a nation with great hope for the future.” (W Post, June 17/84, B—1; B Sun, June 25/84 D-l)
June 28: NASA announced that three of its centers would participate with JSC, named earlier in the year to be the lead center, in definition and preliminary design studies of the Space Station.
MSFC would be responsible for definition of the pressurized Space Station modules that would be built and equipped with appropriate systems for use as laboratories, the ward room and galley, and logistic transports. Development of this single “common” module design, with provisions for data distribution, power, environmental control, thermal control, and communications systems to be used in all pressurized areas in the station would provide significant savings in the overall program.
LeRC would be responsible for the definition of the electrical power generation and conditioning and storage systems. Although most Space Station studies had focused on large solar arrays as the probable power generation system, Lewis would also examine and evaluate a number of alternative systems.
GSFC would be responsible for definition of the automated free-flying platforms that would be part of the overall Space Station program and for provisions to service, maintain, and repair these platforms, as well as other free-flying spacecraft. Goddard would also define the provisions for instruments and payloads to be attached externally to the pressurized sections of the Space Station and the pressurized modules as a laboratory.
In addition to its lead contractor role, JSC would be responsible for the definition of the structural framework to which the various elements of the Space Station would be attached and for the integration and installation of systems into this structure. The center would oversee the interfaces between the Space Station and the Space Shuttle and be responsible for mechanisms
486
JUNE 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
such as the remote manipulator systems. JSC would also manage the attitude control, thermal control, communications, and data management systems and the equipping of a common module for crew use as a ward room and galley.
Other NASA centers would support the definition and design activities, particularly in technology areas. KSC would be responsible for preflight and launch operations and be involved in logistic support activities. (NASA Release 84-85)
June 23-27: NASA began on June 23 the countdown at Cape Canaveral for the maiden flight of the Space Shuttle Discovery. This twelfth flight would carry Henry Hartsfield, commander, who was pilot on STS-4; Michael Coats, pilot; mission specialists Judith Resnik, Steven Hawley, and Richard Mullane; and payload specialist Charles Walker of McDonnell Douglas, the first payload specialist for private industry. Originally scheduled for launch on June 22, NASA had delayed liftoff when workers inspecting the orbiter’s rocket motors following a test firing found that a heat shield inside a high-pressure pump in engine No. 1 had “debonded” and pulled away slightly from the wall of a chamber that contained superheated gases during launch. This necessitated replacement of one of the main engines, a three-day job that would delay launch until at least June 25.
The flight of Discovery was delayed on June 25 for at least 24 hours when its backup navigating computer failed less than 30 minutes before takeoff. Though it was not operational in space, the fifth backup computer was used during ascent to “watchdog” the other computers during the critical first 10 minutes of flight.
Four seconds from launch on June 26, the flight of Discovery was automatically aborted by a computer due to malfunctioning of a fuel valve on the rear starboard engine, causing the engine to catch fire. The fire was extinguished after three attempts with heavy sprays of water. NASA placed Hartsfield and his five-member crew on leave for two days after experiencing this first launch abort in 12 Space Shuttle missions and only the second launch abort in American manned spaceflight history. Thomas E. Utsman, Shuttle operations manager at KSC, said that he had no idea when the maiden flight of Discovery could be rescheduled. It depended, he said, on how much damage had been done to the malfunctioning engine that caught fire and to the Space Shuttle’s protective tiles from the high-speed water jets that extinguished the fire on the aft part of the fuselage. Utsman said that the fire may have burned through the heat shield on the engine nozzle, meaning that the entire engine would have to be replaced.
NASA announced on June 27 that Discovery’s maiden flight would not be attempted for at least two weeks in order to verify all three main engines. John Talone at KSC said, “I don’t think we’re talking about mid-July before we can get to the point of launching again.” Talone said that the only serious question remaining about the aborted launch was why the valve stayed closed when commanded to start the liftoff firing sequence. When the valve failed to open,
487
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JUNE 1984
a backup actuator automatically started the opening sequence, and the valve opened soon enough for the engine to build full power, although it did not. He said that Discovery probably would have reached orbit, but mission rules said that a Space Shuttle could not lift off without redundant valve, and when the Shuttle’s main computer sensed that one actuator system was out, the computer ordered engine cutoff. Photographic inspection of Discovery showed remarkably little damage from fire that broke out below the main engine nozzles after engine shutdown. The only structural damage to the Space Shuttle’ airframe was the speed brake just below the tail and half of the brake’s protective enamel was scorched off. {W Post, June 23/84, A-3, June 25/84, A-7, June 26/84, A-l, June 27/84, A-3)
During June: ARC Director William F. Ballhaus announced that center aircraft and their operation would be transferred to the Ames Flight Operations Directorate. Martin A. Knutson, director of flight operations and site manager of the Ames Dryden Flight Research Facility, would be responsible for all flight activities at the Ames’s Moffett Field location in northern California and at the Ames Dryden Facility in southern California. The Flight Operations Directorate office would continue to be maintained at the Ames Dryden Facility at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Factors in the management change were continued safety of flight and continuity of aircraft operations to be assured with all flight operations reporting through a single management chain. And the change served to integrate more fully the Ames Dryden Facility into the day-to-day operations of the parent Ames Center. The Ames Research Center and the former Dryden Flight Research Center, now Ames Dryden, were consolidated in 1981, a move that enhanced the capabilities of both organizations.
Ames officials said that the latest move was a continuing part of the overall Ames-Dryden consolidation and would centralize all flight operations activities in terms of operations procedures, safety, and management philosophy. There were no plans to move any aircraft or personnel involved from either location. (ARC Release 84-15)
488
July
July 3-11: Workers replaced one of the Space Shuttle Discovery’s three engines as NASA reported that loose insulation on a super-cooled fuel line may have been a factor in the aborted liftoff of the Space Shuttle’s maiden flight. Officials said that the faulty insulation’s inability to insulate nitrogen gas from the cold may have turned the gas to liquid, and the liquid may have dripped on an engine valve, blocking it from opening.
Later, NASA announced that it was considering a plan to continue the 12th and 13th Space Shuttle missions as a way to avoid expensive delays that could push at least one mission scheduled for 1984 into 1985. The problem with combining missions was the inability to combine crews. Five crew members from the aborted flight or from the August flight would have to step down and wait for another turn. The possibility of combining missions arose when technicians at NASA’s engine test facility at Bay St. Louis, Miss., were unable to duplicate the failure of Discovery’s starboard engine that had aborted the flight. “No matter what we did, we were unable to duplicate the failure,” a NASA source said. “And until we understand what went wrong, we don’t want to fly.”
The failure of a rocket nozzle on a communications satellite during a test in St. Louis then further complicated NASA’s rescheduling decision. A final decision awaited analysis on the test of a Star^f8 solid-fuel rocket nozzle at the Astronautics Division of McDonnell Douglas Corporation in St. Louis. Star-48 rockets were on two communications satellites that would be part of the cargo on a combined mission.
On July 12 NASA announced that the next Space Shuttle flight would consist of payloads from flights 41-D and 41-F and would be launched from KSC no earlier than August 24. The mission aboard the orbiter Discovery would retain the designation 41-D. The cargo would remain essentially the same, except that the large format camera and spartan would be replaced with the Satellite Business Systems (SBS) and Telstar payloads then scheduled for launch in the same time frame. The crew for mission 41-D would be the six-member team of Commander Henry Hartsfield; pilot Michael Coats; mission specialists Judith Resnik, Steven Hawley, and Richard Mullane; and payload specialist Charles Walker. The crew of 41-F would be scheduled for a later flight. (NASA Release 84-95; WPost, July 3/84, A-12, July 10/84, A-5, July 11/84, A-6)
July 5: NASA announced that MSFC had awarded contracts to Martin Marietta Aerospace Company Denver, and Boeing Aerospace Company, Seattle, to study a space vehicle to move payloads from low Earth orbits to higher
489
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JULY 1984
orbits. The “parallel” studies, concurrent but independent studies in the same area of concentration, for an Orbital Transfer Vehicle (OTV) would run for 15 months at about $1 million each. The companies would conduct conceptual studies to examine the possibilities of both space-based and ground-based transfer vehicles. The space-based version would be maintained and refueled at the Space Station; the ground-based vehicle would be carried into space by the Space Shuttle for deployment.
The transfer vehicle, as it was conceived by Marshall engineers, would be an unmanned upper-stage in the beginning. The ultimate goal, however, would be to develop a manned vehicle capable of ferrying a crew capsule to geosynchronous orbit. The vehicle would then return the crew and capsule for other missions. (NASA Release 84-90)
July 16: ESA’s Director, R. Bonnet, and Director General of Arianespace C. Bigot signed a contract for the launch of ESA’s scientific spacecraft Giotto, which was designed for observations of Halley’s comet, aboard an Ariane 1 launcher. They scheduled the launch for the first day of the July 1985 launch window.
Giotto would go into a heliocentric transfer trajectory that would be very close to the ecliptic plane (the plane in which the planets orbit the Sun). During its flight, which would last eight months, Giotto would be under the command of the European Space Operations Centre in Darmstadt, Germany. Ground-based telescopes would track Giotto, and course corrections would be made with the on-board propulsion system to ensure that the spacecraft passed as close as possible to the comet nucleus during the encounter phase, planned to last four hours. It was expected that the most important data from the mission would come from 10 scientific experiments on board Giotto within a few minutes before and after Giotto’s closest approach to the comet’s nucleus. It would be during that period that the spacecraft’s camera would photograph the comet’s nucleus in color, resolving surface structure down to 50 meters (150 feet). (ESA Release, July 16/84)
—NASA and NOAA announced that the NOAA-8 environmental monitoring satellite appeared to have lost it latitude control system and was tumbling in orbit unable to relay its signal effectively to Earth. Launched board an Atlas E launch vehicle in 1983, the 1,700-kilometer (3,775-pound) satellite had six environmental monitoring instruments and a search-and-rescue payload, provided by Canada and France under an international cooperative space project with NASA known as SARSAT (search-and-rescue satellite-aided tracking).
Much of the environmental monitoring lost by NOAA-8 could be conducted by NOAA-6, launched in 1979. And although the SARSAT capability, which permitted the satellite to relay emergency signals from downed aircraft and ships in distress, was out of service, the SARSAT project would continue operations through use of three Soviet COSPAS search-and-rescue satellites in orbit.
NOAA-8 first showed signs of problems on June 12, when it experienced a
490
JULY 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
“clock interrupt” that caused the spacecraft’s gyros to desynchronize. Continued clock disturbances interfered with the meteorological instruments, preventing scientists and engineers from obtaining good data.
The satellite was the first in a series of three Advanced TIROS-N (ATN). NASA planned the next launch of a TIROS-N, NOAA-F, for October 1984. (NASA Release 84-93; NY Times, July 14/84, 46)
July 19: MSFC announced that it had awarded Ford Aerospace and Communications Corporation of Palo Alto, Calif., and Lockheed Missiles and Space Company of Sunnyvale, Calif., contracts for the conceptual study of geostationary platforms. Under the contracts, the two firms would envision platforms of the 1990s and report their findings to the MSFC. The platforms would revolve about the equator at the geostationary altitude of 22,300 miles, where they would be in synchronization with the Earth’s rotation.
Each contract was for approximately $550 and would run for 21 months. (MSFC Release 84-64)
July 24: NASA announced that it had selected LTV Aerospace and Defense Company, Dallas, Tex.; Martin Marietta Denver Aerospace, Denver, Colo.; and TRW Inc., Redondo Beach, Calif., for negotations leading to contracts for system definition studies of an Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle (OMV) to ferry satellites about in space. MSFC would manage the fixed-price contracts of approximately $5 million each. NASA anticipated that one of the three companies would likely construct the platform upon approval to proceed with the project.
The vehicle would supplement the Space Transportation System (STS), having the ability to retrieve satellites from high orbits and bring them to the Space Shuttle for maintenance and repair. The OMV would then place the repaired satellites in their operational orbits. The OMV would also serve as a means of reboosting satellites as their orbits decayed, thereby avoiding costly, dedicated Space Shuttle missions.
As envisioned, the OMV would be a remotely piloted, unmanned spacecraft approximately 3 meters (15 feet) in diameter and about 1 meter (3 feet) in length. (NASA Release 84-102)
July 25: Svetlana Savitskaya, a Soviet cosmonaut, today became the first woman to walk in space. Savitskaya, 36 years old, performed welding and soldering operations in the course of her walk in space, which lasted 3 hours and 35 minutes. She was also the first woman to make two spaceflights, her first being in August 1982 aboard the Soyuz T-7, which like the current flight linked with the Salyut 7 space station for a brief period.
Savitskaya went into space July 18 along with Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Igor Volk aboard Soyuz T-12 and linked with the Salyut-7 space station, where three other cosmonauts had been in orbit for more than five months. Tass said that the main goal of the space walk was to test a new general-purpose hand-
491
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JULY 1984
operated tool designed “to carry out complex technological operations.” Dzhanibekov accompanied her on the space walk.
Savitskaya, along with Dzhanibekov and Volk, returned to Earth July 29 aboard Soyuz T-12. They landed in an area 140 kilometers southeast of Dzhezkazgan. The three were reported to be feeling fine after landing. Remaining aboard Salyut 7 were cosmonauts Leonid Kisim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov.
Savistskaya was born in Moscow and graduated from the Sergo Ordzhonikidze Aviation Institute in Moscow. She had worked as an instructor pilot and, since 1976, had been a test pilot on 20 types of aircraft, Tass reported. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 17/84; FBIS, Tass in English, July 29/84; NY Times, July 26/84, A-24; W Post, July 26/84, A-31)
July 29: NOAA’s GOES-5 satellite failed at 8:39 p.m. today, blanking out weather pictures for parts of the eastern United States and the Altantic Ocean, just at the time of the year when hurricanes and severe storms were likely to form there. NOAA had not planned replacement of the satellite for another two years, but would move the satellite covering the western half of the country and the Pacific eastward as a stopgap measure during the hurricane season. It would station the operational satellite midway over the continental United States, leaving Hawaii, Alaska, and the western Pacific uncovered to the west, and half the Atlantic uncovered to the east.
The $100 million satellite, like its four predecessors, failed prematurely. It was intended to operate for five years but lasted only three. In testimony before a Senate subcommittee, NOAA’s John McF.lroy said that government experts and the system contractor, Hughes Aerospace, had calculated that the satellite expected a five-year lifetime, but that had proved optimistic, chiefly because one mechanical system, and in particular one specially made light bulb, kept having problems. Another official at NCAA said that the failure of the custom-made light bulb, which caused five of the six U.S. weather satellites to go blind prematurely, would cost Hughes millions of dollars in penalties. Because Hughes’s contract was linked to performance, it stood to lose as much as $3 million for the recent failure plus losses for earlier failures.
(W Post, July 31/84, A-l, Aug 3/84, A-3; W Times, Aug 3/84, 4A)
July 31: The Washington Post reported that, in testimony to a House subcom-mitte on space science and applications, NASA Administrator James M. Beggs said that he feared that an Air Force plan to make more use of large, unmanned rockets to launch Pentagon satellites would undermine NASA’s plans for the Space Shuttle program. “The Air Force has said they plan two flights a year starting in 1988 using expendable launch vehicles as an alternate to the shuttle, and if they stick to that it will have no real impact on us,” Beggs said. “But if they increase that rate to four or five flights a year, as some people suggest they might, it will have severe impact on us,” he pointed out.
Beggs went on to say that the Air Force had asked General Dynamics Cor-
492
JULY 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
poration and Martin Marietta Corporation to submit plans for increasing the lifting power of their Atlas-Centaur and Titan 34D booster rockets to launch into space large satellites that currently could be carried only by the Shuttle. He pointed out that NASA stood to lose much of the business of one of its main customers and also that, because he disagreed with the Air Force, having an alternate way of putting its satellite in orbit was an improvement in security. “All.. .that means is they’ll have another launch pad right on the ocean,” he said.
Beggs indicated that he was worried that the Air Force would acquire an alternate launch vehicle to use more frequently to make it cost effective. And he expressed concern that the winner of the Air Force contract to build the larger rocket would try to take commercial business away from the Space Shuttle. “Our commercial business has already begun to fall off a little because our commercial customers tended to overbook when we started to fly,” Beggs said. “Our traffic model for 1985 is already down about 10 percent.” (W Post, Aug 1/84, A-20)
During July: NASA announced the appointment of C. Robert Nysmith as associate administrator of management, effective August 26, 1984. He would succeed John Boyd, who would return to ARC to become associate director. Nysmith had served as assistant associate administrator for management since January 1984. Before that, he was assistant associate administrator for management support in the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. (NASA Release 84-107)
—NASA announced the appointment of Jesse W. Moore to associate administrator for space flight, effective August 1, 1984. Moore had been serving as the acting associate administrator for space flight since April 15, 1984. He was appointed deputy associate administrator for space flight in February 1983. Moore came to NASA Headquarters in 1978 as deputy director of the Solar Terrestrial Division in the Office of Space Science. In June 1979 he was appointed director of the Space Flight Division. He assumed the position of director, Earth and Planetary Exploration Division, in December 1981. Prior to these assignments he was employed at JPL. (NASA Release 84-105)
—Effective August 1, 1984, the Interim Space Station Program Office would become the permanent Office of Space Station (Code S), NASA announced. Philip E. Culbertson would be the associate administrator for space station and John D. Hodge would be the deputy associate administrator for space station. The Office of Space Station was responsible for developing the Space Station and conducting advanced development and technology activities, advanced planning, and other activities required to carry out President Reagan’s direction to NASA to develop a permanently manned Space Station within a decade. (NASA anno July 27/84; NASA Release 84-104)
493
astronautics and aeronautics
JULY 1984
—Intervia reported that Transpace Carriers Inc. (TCI) was challenging in the United States the pricing policies of the European multinational company Arianespace. TCI, a Washington-based firm, had earlier received the go-ahead to take over the Delta launcher following completion of existing NASA contracts and subject to the provision that TCI secured three new customers before October 1, 1984.
TCI lodged a complaint with the U.S. Trade Representative, alleging that Arianespace was practicing “predatory” pricing by offering users from non-ESA member countries (notably U.S. commercial satellite operators) rates that were up to 33 percent below launch fees quoted for European satellites. So far, both the Space Shuttle and Ariane were generally agreed to have been operating at unprofitable “introductory” prices; NASA had put Delta-class satellites into geostationary orbit for around $15 million, including the PAM-D upper stage. General Telephone & Electronics (GTE) reported paid Arianespace “under $25 million” for the Spacenet 1 launch.
The complaint raised by TCI applied only to contracts for launch after 1985, the earliest date it could begin operations. TCI President Tony L. Savoca said that his company would charge between $26 and $32 million, according to launch requirements. He claimed that he had heard of Arianespace bids as low as $22 million for the same time period and added that Arianespace “should be charging” around $64 million for a dual (SYLDA) launch on Ariane III. (Intervia, July 7/84, 643)
—George M. Low, president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and a driving force in the Apollo moon landing program, died July 17 of cancer. The White House announced that he would be awarded the President’s Medal of Freedom for his contributions to education and the nation’s space program.
In his 27 years with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), Low served as an. engineer and manager in the Mercury and Gemini programs and was put in charge of redesigning the Apollo spacecraft after a fire on the launching pad killed three astronauts in 1967. Later he became deputy administrator of NASA and acting administrator in the early 1970s when he negotiated the initial agreements leading to the joint American-Soviet mission in August 1975. (NY Times, July 18/84, B-8)
494
August
August 8-26: Soviet cosmonauts Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov completed on August 26 their 200th day of work on the Salyut 7 space station. During the day’s activities, there was an assessment of the reaction of the cardiovascular system of the cosmonauts to the initiation of hydrostatic pressure created by means of the vacuum suit “Chibis,” and the crew used hand-held cameras and spectrometers to study the natural resources and environment of Soviet territory.
Also on that day the Progess 23 cargo craft, launched August 14, undocked with the Space Station, following unloading of the cargo craft’s contents. Progress 23 was launched on August 14.
On August 8, Kizim and Solovyev made their sixth space walk. The cosmonauts removed part of the heat insulation cover on the back of the service module and shut off a pipe in the fuel line with a special device. This extravehicular activity lasted 5 hours and was the first time that cosmonauts had made six space walks, for a total of 22 hours and 50 minutes, in the course of one trip. (FBIS, Thss in English, Aug 9/84, Aug 14/84, Aug 16/84, Aug 20/84, Aug 24/84)
August 4: Arianespace launched at 10:32 a.m. local time the satellites ECS-2 and Telecom 1 aboard an Ariane vehicle from Kourou, French Guiana. The first data received from both satellites showed satisfactory behavior. They were injected into an orbit with provisional parameters of 199.02-kilometer perigee, 36,091.00-kilometer apogee, and 6.98° inclination.
This 10th Ariane launch was the first flight of an Ariane 3 version of the vehicle, whose main characteristics were a higher thrust of the Viking first and second stage, a stretched third stage; greater liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen tank capacities, leading to an increased flight time by approximately 30%; and the addition to the first stage of two strap-on rocket boosters.
Ariane 3 could carry 2,580 kilograms into geostationary transfer orbit. (ESA Release Aug 4/84)
August 10: NASA announced that it had awarded an industry team headed by RCA’s Astro-Electronics Division, Princeton, N.J., a $260.3 million contract for design, development, and fabrication of the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS). Other major participants in the team were TRW Electronics Systems Group, Space Communications Division, Redondo Beach, Calif.; Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp), Washington, D.C.; Motorola Inc., Government Electronics Group, Scottsdale,
495
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
AUGUST 1984
Ariz.; Hughes Aircraft Company’s Electron Dynamics Division, Torrance, Calif.; and Electromagnetic Sciences Inc., Norcross, Ga.
One of the primary goals of the ACTS program was to develop advanced satellite communications technologies, including satellite switching and processing techniques and multibeam satellite antennas, using the 20- and 30-gigahertz bands. These technologies would be needed for the increased satellite capacity for the mid-1990s.
The ACTS program results would make available to corporations, universities, and government agencies the ACTS spacecraft and ground systems capabilities for experimentation. Organizations that met specified requirements for space communications research would participate in such experiments during the flight phase of the program. NASA had received over 30 expressions of interest in experimental use of the new satellite system.
NASA had scheduled ACTS for launch by the Space Shuttle in 1989. (NASA Release 84-113; LeRC Release 84-54)
August 13: NASA signed an agreement with two insurance organizations, Merrett Syndicates Ltd. and International Underwriters (Intec), to retrieve the Palapa B-2 spacecraft February 6, 1984, for the government of Indonesia. However, it did not achieve the proper transfer orbit when the perigee kick motor failed.
The agreement called for NASA to retrieve the satellite on Space Shuttle mission 51-A, currently scheduled for launch November 2, 1984. The insurance underwriters would pay NASA for costs, not to exceed to $4.8 million, incurred in preparing for and executing the retrieval.
In the near future the parties would sign a standard Space Shuttle launch services agreement, which would contain details of the rescue plan and a commitment to relaunch the satellite in July 1985, should the underwriters request it. (NASA Release 84-116)
August 15: President Reagan approved today National Space Strategy intended to implement the National Space Policy, which was supplemented by the President’s 1984 state of the union address. Concerning the STS, the Strategy pointed out that the STS was a critical factor in maintaining U.S. space leadership, and, therefore, it was NASA’s first priority to make the STS fully operational and cost effective in providing routine access to space. The Strategy further noted that the STS was to be fully operational by 1988.
Regarding the civil space program, the Strategy indicated that NASA should develop a permanently manned Space Station within a decade and that the United States should seek agreements with friends and allies to participate in the development and use of the Space Station.
In the area of commercial space programs, the Strategy called for the United States to encourage and facilitate commercial expendable launch vehicle operations and minimize government regulation of these operations.
496
AUGUST 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Concerning national security space programs, it was mandated that the national security sector must pursue an improved assured launch capability to satisfy two specific requirements—“the need for launch system complementary to the STS to hedge against unforeseen technical and operational problems, and the need for a launch system suited for operations and crisis situations.” The Strategy further stated that to fulfill this requirement, the national security sector should pursue the use of a limited number of expendable launch vehicles to complement the STS. (National Space Strategy, WH Fact Sheet, App F-4, Aug 15/84, 137)
August 16: NASA launched the Active Magnetospheric Particle Tracer Explorers (AMPTE) aboard a three-stage Delta 3294 launch vehicle from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. AMPTE consisted of three satellites provided by the United States, Federal Republic of Germany (FRG), and the United Kingdom. The program was designed to supply knowledge about the transfer of mass from the solar wind to the magnetosphere and its further transport and energization within the magnetosphere.
Initial chemical releases in September by the FRG’s Ion Release Module (IRM) would be swept toward Earth’s magnetosphere by the solar wind. When the released ions reached the magnetosphere, it was expected that ions would spread out along this boundary region in all directions, but some of the ions would pierce the magnetosphere, as do some of the charged particles of the solar wind. These rare ions would act like a “dye” in the plasma of charged particles.
The manueverable United Kingdom subsatellite, located in close proximity to the IRM, and the IRM would acquire data from outside the boundary to the magnetosphere while the Charge Composition Explorer, provided by the United States, would study the activity from within the magnetosphere.
A second series of chemical releases in December would create an artificial comet forming inside the bow-shock region but outside of the magnetosphere, directly in the orbital path of Earth. The third series of chemical releases would occur in 1985 behind Earth in the magnetotail.
The three spacecraft would send data to ground stations at NASA’s Deep Space Network at JPL, the German Space Operations Center at Oberphaf-fenhofen, and the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory in Chilton, England. (NASA MOR E-846-84-01, Aug 2/84; NASA Release 84-109; NY Times, Aug 7/84, C-2)
August 17: NASA announced that it had selected United Space Boosters Inc. (USBI), Huntsville, Ala., to receive a $274 million cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to manufacture, assemble, and refurbish solid-fuel rocket boosters for the Space Shuttle. The approximately five-year contract would require USBI to manufacture, assemble, check out, and deliver 84 flight sets of solid-fuel rocket boosters and to refurbish them when returned to Earth after each launch. The contract, to be managed by MSFC, also launched two unpriced
497
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
AUGUST 1984
options, each for the delivery of 60 flight sets, covering a total additional period of performance of about five years.
Under a separate contract, USBI would build a new facility at KSC for booster assembly and refurbishment, at a cost of $21 million. In the past, refurbishment had taken place at Kennedy’s Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB), which was used to assemble the entire configuration of orbiter, boosters, and external tank. (NASA Release 84-118; MSFC Release 84-75)
August 23: The Far Eastern Economic Review was quoted as saying that the People’s Republic of China had asked the United States to allow a Chinese astronaut to be included in the Space Shuttle program. The Hong Kong-based weekly magazine also said that Beijing had asked the United States to consider providing a launcher for a Chinese manned space vehicle. It was reported that the Reagan administration was giving both requests “sympathetic” consideration (FBIS, Hong Kong AFP in English, Aug 23/84)
August 26: Spacelab 3 investigators, engineers, support personnel, and science crew members completed the first integrated Spacelab 3 mission simulation at MSFC. Mission participants would take part in several such simulations in preparation for the scheduled January 1985 mission. The payload and mission specialists were located at the Marshall Center Payload Crew Training Complex for the simulation. They communicated and worked with mission management and science team members in a simulated Payload Operations Control Center (POCC) at the Huntsville Operations Support Center (HOSC).
Spacelab 3 mission manager Joe Cremin said that the primary purpose of the simulation “was to train the principal investigator operation teams in the Phyload Operations Control Center procedures with the Marshall Center POCC cadre.” The simulation also provided the participants with communications experience in an operational environment.
An additional simulation would take place at Marshall in September, and in November the Marshall team would begin operations and simulations at the POCC at JSC. “Even then, the flight crew will be at Marshall to use the Payload Crew Training Complex and the HOSC will be active in providing support for the simulation,” Cremin said. (MSFC Release 84-70)
August 27: Speaking to 262 winners of the Secondary School Recognition Program and their teachers, President Reagan said that he had directed NASA to carry an elementary- or secondary-school teacher in orbit aboard the Space Shuttle as the nation’s first space passenger. “When the shuttle lifts off, all of America will be reminded of the crucial role teachers and education play in the life of our nation,” Reagan said in the announcement. This would be the first spaceflight of an American who was neither a scientist nor a trained astronaut. The only physical limitations were that the candidate be free of
498
AUGUST 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
debilitating disease, have good eyesight, and not have hearing loss or high blood pressure. No age limit was specified.
NASA had thought about the possibility of flying private citizens aboard the Space Shuttle more than a decade ago. The idea was a natural outgrowth of its legislative mandate that called for “the widest practicable and appropriate dissemination of information concerning NASA’s activities and the results thereof. ...”
NASA officials told reporters that they would begin a search for the most qualified teacher candidate and described a program in which each of the fifty states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and Guam would submit the names of two teachers. A peer-review panel would help pare the applicants to 10, to 5, and finally to a prime and backup candidate.
“When we decide on our final two candidates, we will give them eight weeks of preflight training at Houston’s Johnson Space Center right along with the astronaut crew they fly with,” said NASA Administrator James M. Beggs. “When the candidate’s flight is over, we will insist that he or she give a year of their time to NASA, visiting schools, talking to workshops, lecturing, and appearing on television and radio,” he said.
Beggs said that it was impossible to predict how many civilians would be able to fly on Space Shuttle, noting that it depended on how many Space Shuttle flights NASA could schedule. (NASA Release 84-122; NASA anno Aug 27/84; W Post, Aug 28/84, A-l)
August 30: The New York Times reported that space industry experts and government intelligence officials had said that U.S. Air Force satellite photographs of launching pads in central Asia showed that the Soviet Union was developing a booster rocket for a Soviet version of the Space Shuttle and a new family of big rockets similar to those used by the United States for the Apollo Moon program. A special feature of the new rockets was that they would use liquid hydrogen, a cryogenic (supercooled) type of fuel technology that had eluded Soviet space experts but had been mastered in the United States nearby 20 years ago.
The Pentagon had originally described the Soviet development of new booster rockets and a Space Shuttle in April. The new disclosures gave added detail of the Soviet program, including checkouts on the launching pad and the development of cryogenic fuels.
“It’s a major step to go to liquid hydrogen,” said James E. Oberg, an expert on Soviet space technology.” They’ve been using the same boosters for 20 years. Now they appear to be trying to build a new family.”
The Pentagon’s “Soviet Military Power 1984” had originally suggested the existence of a new family of Soviet booster rockets. The publication asserted that the biggest of the new Soviet rockets could lift payloads of up to 150 tons into low orbits around the Earth, about seven times more than the largest operational Soviet booster and five times more than the biggest U.S. booster, the Space Shuttle. The publication also said the Soviet Union’s space shuttle
499
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
AUGUST 1984
differed from the U.S. Shuttle only in the respect that the main engines were not on the orbiter. In addition, the publication published pictures of a small Soviet space plane that had undergone flight tests. (NY Times, Aug 30/84, B-13)
—NASA launched at 8:41 a.m. from KSC the Space Shuttle Discovery (STS 41-D) on its maiden voyage after three earlier postponements, another one-day postponement due to computer problems, and a last-minute delay to avoid possible collision with a private line. Discovery carried for mission 41-D a six-member crew of commander Henry Hartsfield; pilot Michael Coats; mission specialists Judith Resnick, Steven Hawley, and Richard Mullane; and payload specialist Charles Walker, a McDonnell Douglas engineer. It also carried the heaviest cargo flown in orbit aboard a Space Shuttle.
About eight hours after liftoff, three of the crew members deployed a U.S. communications satellite, SBS-4, which was owned by Satellite Business Systems, McLean, Va., and was designed to relay data, including telephone and television transmissions. About 45 minutes later its on-board engine ignited flawlessly to send it to a position 22,400 miles above the equator just west of South America. The successful launch helped dispel doubts about the solid-fuel rocket motor technology when two satellites last February did not reach orbit.
Also planned for launch from the Space Shuttle were the Leasat-2, owned by Hughes Communications Services, Inc., and leased by the U.S. Navy, and the Telestar 3-C of AT&T. On board would be NASA’s Office of Astronautics and Space Technology OASTOl, a collapsible solar array, and the Continuous Flow Electrophoresis System (CFES) of McDonnell Douglas.
On the same day as the liftoff, President Reagan visited GSFC and addressed several hundred of Goddard’s employees. In his remarks, Reagan said that “there is nothing that the United States of America cannot accomplish. If the doubting Thomases would just stand aside and get out of our way.” He went on to speak of the creation of new jobs, technologies, and medical breakthroughs as a result of the rigors of the space program. (NASA Release 84-112; NASA Press Kit June 84, August 84; WPost, Aug 31/84, A—1; W Times, Aug 31/84, 3A)
August 31: NASA announced the start of the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE), a new astronomy satellite project that would be launched into Earth orbit from the Space Shuttle in 1988. The purpose of the explorer was to make the first all-sky map in the extreme ultraviolet (EUV) band of the electromagnetic spectrum, a band between ultraviolet and X-ray light.
The EUVE, managed by JPL, with scientific instruments supplied by the University of California, Berkeley, was a true explorer in that it would conduct the first in-depth investigation of that critical band and was expected to discover stars and other celestial objects with unexpected characteristics. The EUVE would orbit Earth at an attitude of 340 statute miles and from that point
500
AUGUST 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
above the atmosphere would be able to scan the sky for emissions of extreme ultraviolet radiation. EUVE would use four 40-centimeter (15.7-inc.h) ultraviolet telescopes to conduct the all-sky survey and a spectrometer to carry out detailed observations of the new sources and stars expected to be discovered.
JPL was responsible for overall EUVE project responsibility. The UCB would supply the 1,100-pound science payload, consisting of the extreme ultraviolet telescopes and the spectrometer; and the university’s Space Sciences Laboratory would design and fabricate the payload. JPL would control flight operations, and the science operations center would be at the Space Sciences Laboratory at Berkeley. (NASA Release 84-125)
501
September
September 3-5: NASA officials were concerned that the buildup of two ice blocks, one about 30 by 18 inches and weighing between 8 and 20 pounds and another about 10 pounds, that covered an excess water-dump nozzle, might break off the Space Shuttle Discovery on mission 41-D (a combination of missions 41-D and 41-F) during its return to Earth, causing damage to the orbiter’s protective tiles. The agency said that they had three options for removing the ice, the last of which, a space walk, could delay reentry by at least a day. The crew continued their efforts to melt or shake loose the ice, and Discovery’s cabin pressure was lowered as a preliminary step in case a space walk was required, although NASA officials said that a space walk was the last option.
Discovery was oriented with the port side in direct sunlight, so when the crew awoke the next morning they found about half of the large ice block had melted. Then, astronaut Henry W. Hartsfield, Jr., switched on heaters in the pipes leading to the nozzle and fired the orbiter’s thrusters to see if the vibrations would shake the ice free. Next, Hartsfield, assisted by Judith Resnik, took the controls of the mechanical arm and following procedures outlined by Sally K. Ride on the ground knocked off with little difficulty all but about 5 inches of the ice chunk. The remaining ice apparently then melted in the warmth of the sunlight.
Discovery landed September 5 at Edwards Air Force Base, completing its six-day maiden flight. During the flight, crew deployed three communications satellites, LEASAT-1 (SYNCOM-1), Telestar-3, and SBS-D in the first three days of the flight; extended an experimental solar-powered array in a test for future Space Station construction; and processed a sample of a hormone that could lead to a commercial pharamaceutical product. Lt. Col. Richard M. Mullane, one of the astronauts on board, said that Discovery “performed superbly,” while NASA officials pointed out that all the mission’s objectives were accomplished. (W Post, Sept 4/84, A-6; NY Times, Sept 3/84, A-l, Sept 4/84, A-l, Sept 5/84, A-l; W Times, Sept 5/84, 4A)
September 5: Soviet cosmonauts Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov aboard Salyut 7 equaled the record of 211 days in space, set by cosmonauts Anatoliy Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev in December 1982. The increasingly long flights, coupled with Western intelligence reports that the Soviets were experimenting with rockets capable of lifting heavy payloads into orbit, indicated that the country was moving toward a goal of establishing a permanent, manned space station. Soviet reports said that the flight of Salyut 7 was proceeding normally and that there was no indication how long the flight would last.
tNiENTlONMBI
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT l&ldS§
FILMED
503
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
SEPTEMBER 1984
During the flight the cosmonauts had spent 22 hours and 50 minutes outside the craft in 6 space walks, breaking the U.S. record for a single mission by 29 minutes. The three have been visited by six other cosmonauts, including an Indian and the first woman to walk in space, Svetlana Savitskaya, who during her space walk used a welding machine that space analysts said could be used for building large Space Stations.
The three cosmonauts had focused on the psychology of long periods in space as well as carried out important repairs outside the craft, demonstrating the crew’s ability to maintain their spacecraft in an extended flight.
In a televised ceremony, Soviet leader Konstantin U. Chernenko honored the cosmonauts taking part in the flight and spoke of the great advances in knowledge and equipment since the first manned spaceflight by Yuri Gagarin, 23 years previously. “In the successes of cosmonautics we see a blend of the daring thinking of scientists, the remarkable skills of engineers, technicians and workers, and the great courage of cosmonauts,” he said. (FBIS, Moscow Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Sept 6/84; FBIS, Moscow Tass in Engligh, Sept 7/84; NY Times, Sept 6/84, B-10)
September 9: A working meeting, in Paris, of astronauts from the Soviet Union, the United States, and France concluded after participants expressed concern for mankind’s future and the need for cooperation, and they emphasized their desire to use their unique experience to promote space exploration and the use of space technology for the good of all people. Participating in the meeting were Soviet cosmonauts A. A. Leonov (Voskhod-2 and Soyuz Apollo), O.G. Makarov (Soyuz 12, Soyuz 27, Soyu T-3), and Yu.V. Romanenko (Soyuz 26, Soyuz 38); U.S. astronauts R. Schweickart (Apollo 9), E. Mitchell (Apollo 14), and D. Eisele (Apollo 7); and French astronaut J.L. Chretien.
The participants agreed to set up an organization of those who had traveled in space, with the aim of studying the potential and promoting the constructive use of space to improve living conditions on Earth, formulating positive prospects for future generations, and promoting the establishment of broad contacts among people who had been in space to identify opportunities for cooperation and issues of common concern. (FBIS, Moscow TRUD in Russian, Sept 12/84; FBIS Moscow Tass in English, Sept 11/84)
September 10: NASA and ESA changed the name of their International Solar Polar Mission to “Ulysses.” They made the change, proposed by ESA and concurred in by NASA, not only in reference to Flomer’s mythological hero but also for the Italian poet Dante’s description (in the 26th Canto of his “Inferno”) of Ulysses’s urge to explore “an uninhabited world behind the Sun.” The reference from the “Inferno” was appropriate because the mission would permit measurements to be made for the first time away from the ecliptic plane and over the poles of the Sun—the mission’s trajectory taking the spacecraft into the uncharted third dimension of the heliosphere. (NASA Release 84-127)
504
SEPTEMBER 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
September 14: NASA issued a Requet for Proposal (RFP) for definition and preliminary design of a permanently manned Space Station to be operational in low-Earth orbit early in the 1990s. Proposals were due by November 15. The Space Station would support scientific and commercial endeavors in space, stimulate new technologies, enhance space-based operational capabilities, and maintain U.S. leadership in space.
The RFP contained four “work packages” covering definition and preliminary design (Phase B) of Space Station elements. NASA planned to let competing contracts for each of the work packages and scheduled April 1, 1985, as the effective date of the contracts. (NASA Release 84-130)
September 16: U.S. balloonist Joe W. Kittinger crash-landed his 10-story balloon on a mountain in Savona, Italy, after completing the first solo balloon flight across the Atlantic. Kittinger also made the flight in four days, setting a speed-for-distance record. Six other people had tried the solor ocean crossing, but all failed, and two died in the attempt. A three-man U.S. crew of Max-ie Anderson, Ben Abruzzo, and Larry Newman was the first to cross the Atlantic by balloon in 1978. Kittinger said, before beginning his flight, that his next goal would be a solo crossing of the Pacific. (W Times, Sept 19/84, 1A, 6A)
September 21: NASA launched at 6:18 p.m. EDT the Hughes Communications, Inc., Galaxy-C communications satellite from the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) by Delta 3920 vehicle. The satellite would relay business communications throughout the United States. It was the third in a series, with Galaxy-A dedicated to cable television programming and Galaxy-B (along with Galaxy-C) relaying video, voice, data, and facsimile communications for large corporations, long-haul carriers, and broadcasters. (NASA MOR No. M-492-215-84-03 [prelaunch], Sept. 19/84, [postlaunch], Oct 15/84; NASA Release 84-128)
September 24: At the request of Switzerland and the Federal Republic of Germany, ESA reactivated the GOES-2 spacecraft. The two countries wanted use of the satellite to obtain data over a complete 11-year solar cycle and to support the Active Magnetospheric Particle Tracer Experiment (AMPTE) project. GOES-2, launched in June 1978, completed its planned scientific mission in July 1980. It resumed operations in 1981, continuing these until the end of 1983. In January 1984, GOES-2 was moved from the densely occupied geostationary orbit into a higher and slightly asynchronous orbit, where it was drifting at a rate of about 3.5° in longitude per day and becoming visible to the European Space Operations Center station at Michelstadt, Germany, for 4 weeks every 3 Vi months. (ESA Release, Sept 24/84)
September 20: The second and last of two lithium releases from the Federal Republic of Germany’s IRM was completed, part of the world’s first active
505
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
SEPTEMBER 1984
probe reaching beyond the Earth’s magnetosphere. Data from the first release on September 11 was being analyzed to determine if the U.S. satellite inside the Earth’s magnetosphere had detected the lithium released outside. NASA launched on August 16 the AMPTE satellites in a stack aboard a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. (NASA Release 84-140)
During September: NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced the establishment of the new position of assistant administrator for commercial programs, reporting directly to him, to provide a focus for and facilitate efforts within NASA to expand U.S. private-sector investment and involvement in civil space-related activities. Isaac T. Gillam IV, formerly assistant associate administrator, Office of Space Flight, would assume the new position with L.J. (Bud) Evans Jr., formerly assistant to the deputy associate administrator for commercialization, to serve as his deputy. In announcing the position, Beggs said, “In support of the President’s policy on commercial uses of space, the commercial programs office will be responsible for providing management direction within the agency for our efforts to establish new links with the private sector to stimulate the development of business in space. It will also be responsible for maintaining existing relationships with industry through the functions of industry affairs, technology utilization, and shuttle marketing.” (NASA Release 84-129)
— USA Today reported that 2,500 teachers had represented to NASA with requests to be the first observer to ride the Space Shuttle in 1985 or 1986—even though the agency was not yet taking applications. NASA would announce its application process shortly. Dale Boatright, a Chicago teacher, was told by the U.S. Department of Education that his request was the first received, nearly a month before. NASA was notifying the teachers that they would receive a formal application when plans were set. (USA Today, Sept 24/84, 1A)
—NASA had embarked on a new research program to show that a transport airplane’s metal skin and supporting structure could be replaced with metallic composite material to save weight and manufacturing costs and thereby increase fuel efficiency. Work in the program represented the first application of composite materials in the construction of primary wing and fuselage structures for transport-class aircraft. NASA’s long-range goal was to provide commercial air transport manufacturers with the technology to produce composite structures and apply them on new aircraft, or on derivatives of current aircraft, in substantial amounts by the early 1990s. Researchers at LaRC, where the new composites programs was managed, expected by the mid-1990s to see about 75% of the airframe structure of a transport to be made of composites. (LRC Release 84-69)
506
SEPTEMBER 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
—Dr. Jerome C. Hunsaker, an aviation pioneer who founded the first college course in aeronautical engineering at MIT and later designed the first aircraft to fly the Atlantic Ocean, died September 8 after a brief illness. He was 98 years old. He had established himself as one of the leading theorists of flight and aircraft design in a career in aviation engineering and air technology that spanned six decades. In addition to designing the flying boat NC-4, which flew from Newfoundland to Portugal and England in the first trans-Atlantic flight in May 1919, Hunsaker supervised the design of the dirigible Shenandoah, the first large rigid airship made in the United States that made its first flight in 1923. (NY Times, Sept 12/84, B-6)
507
October
October 2: Cosmonauts Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyev, and Oleg Atkov returned safely to Earth after 237 days in space. Soviet television broadcast the return, showing a parachute bearing the crew coming down about 500 miles northeast of Tashkent in Kazakhstan at 1:57 p.m. Moscow time. The three crew members had lived on the Salyut 7 orbiting space station since February 9. In television interviews, the cosmonauts said that they were glad to be back with friends on the “warm earth,” although one commented he was sad to leave the empty space station behind.
The Soviet media had indicated recently that the crew was growing weary and to save energy had their working day cut by one hour. However, a medical checkup given the day after their return found the three to be in good health. In an interview in the newspaper Socialist Industry, a medical specialist said that recent endurance flights showed humans could live in space a year or more.
The cosmonauts spent their last days on board transferring material to their Soyuz T-ll spacecraft and mothballing scientific equipment on the Salyut. The space station, launched in April 1982, would continue in orbit.
The Presidium of the Supreme Soviet awarded medals to the three cosmonauts; and Kizim, who headed a crew that linked up with an earlier space station in 1980, would be honored with a bronze bust, the Washington Post reported that Tass said. (W Post, Oct 3/84, A-23; FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, Oct 1/84, Oct 2/84; FBIS Moscow DomSvc in Russian, Oct 3/84)
October 3: The NASA Army Rotor Systems Research Aircraft (RSRA), a helicopter/airplane testbed in a fixed-wing mode, returned to Ames-Moffett Flight Research Facility following the flight testing of a new helicopter rotor system in a flight environment. The purpose of the flight tests was to demonstrate the fixed-wing capability of the research helicopter/airplane hybrid and to expand its flight envelope in that configuration. The evaluation included taxi tests, acoustic tests, control power/stability tests, and rotor hub drag investigation as well as takeoff and landing technique investigation and envelope development. A total of 13 flights expanded the RSRAs fixed-wing envelope capability to 262 knots (about 300 miles per hour) and its altitude to 10,000 feet. (ARC Release 84-23)
October 5-13: NASA launched on October 5 at 7:03 a.m. EDT from KSC the Space Shuttle Challenger on STS mission 41-G, the sixth flight of Challenger, with a crew consisting of Commander Robert L. Crippen; pilot Jon A. McBride; mission specialists Sally K. Ride, Kathryn D. Sullivan, and David
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED itN'TNTKIMAUg BLUB 509
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
OCTOBER 1984
C. Leestma; payload specialists Marc Garneau, a Canadian; and oceanographer Paul D. Scully-Power. It was the most crew members to fly on a Space Shuttle mission.
During the first day of flight, crew members deployed NASA’s Earth Radiation Budget Satellite (ERBS); however, the two solar panels that supplied electricity to the 5,000-pound satellite refused to unfold. Ride corrected the ERBS problem by using the Space Shuttle’s mechanical arm to place the satellite’s solar panels in the sunlight to thaw the hinges. It took almost three hours to get the panels warm enough to respond to commands to unlock. The satellite was placed in orbit off the west coast of Mexico, instead of south of Bermuda.
While trying to determine the source of the ERBS problem, Kathryn Sullivan deployed the Shuttle Imaging Radar-B (SIR-B), a 35-by-7-foot radar camera, which had difficulty stabilizing when only one of it two “leaves” was erected. The radar antenna would send out thousands of pulses every second, and the large number of echoes the radar antenna received allowed it to draw a photograph-like image of the part of Earth that its beams struck.
During the flight, a storm of cosmic rays apparently caused by sunspots knocked out for about 13 hours NASA’s TDRS, which affected the imaging radar system. Among the parts of the world that the radar had planned to map but would probably lose were the entire Amazon River basin, the islands that made up Indonesia, and the seas off the Cape of Good Hope. The radar was also to track the progress of tropical storm Josephine, southeast of Florida in the Atlantic Ocean, which would force Challenger’s landing from Cape Canaveral to Edwards Air Force Base.
An ice buildup on the exterior of the Space Shuttle’s water vents forced the crew to alter slightly the use of the ship’s water facilities. The buildup, caused by a slight malfunction of the backup cooling systems, posed only an inconvenience as the astronauts had to heat up the water vents to melt away the small accumulations of ice, raising the temperature inside the cabin to as high as 90°. Crippen corrected the craft’s air-conditioning system, and the temperature inside Challenger neared its norm of about 75 °
On October 11, Sullivan became the first American woman to walk in space when for 3 1/2 hours she performed tasks requiring a kind of patience, dexterity, stamina, and strength originally believed in the space program to be unique to men. She stepped into space at 11:44 a.m. EDT along with Leestma. With each held by a single tether, they worked in daylight and darkness to rehearse a critical fuel transfer, stow a troublesome antenna, and photograph their efforts for ground engineers.
Challenger landed at 12:27 p.m. EDT at KSC in the second of four attempts to land there instead of at California’s Edwards Air Base and the first in three missions that Crippen was not waved off a Florida landing by bad weather. Dr. Shelby Tilford, NASA director of space science, said that the mission was successful despite disappointments with the imaging radar. Tilford said that all other Challenger experiments worked perfectly. The space-borne mapping camera, carried on a Space Shuttle flight for the first time, took 2,300 frames
510
OCTOBER 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
of film in mapping parts of every continent. Challenger apparently returned to Earth in good condition, except for minor damage to the two rear engine parts suffered during ascent. (NASA MOR E-420-41-G-09 [prelaunch], Sept 28/84, [postlaunch], Oct 5/84; NASA Release 84-132; NASA Fact Sheet, Sept 84; NASA Press Kit, Oct 84; W Times, Oct 9/84, 2A, Oct 10/84, 5A, Oct 12/84, 3A; WPost, Oct 5/84, A-2, Oct 9/84, A-4, Oct 11/84, A-17, Oct 12/84, A-6, Oct 13/84, A-3, Oct 14/84, A-5; NY Times, Oct 11/84, A-18)
October 10: NASA announced that Dr. Richard J. Terrile of JPL and Dr. Bradford A. Smith of the University of Arizona, using a special electronic camera system at the Carnegie Institution’s Las Campanas Observatory in Chile, clearly photographed the rings of Uranus, showing them to be made of particles that were possibly the darkest found in the solar system. The camera used a charge-coupled device to record the image. Photographing the rings was difficult because they were darker than charcoal and very close to the much brighter Uranus. Special computer processing was performed on the images in order to make the rings visible. This processing created the false three-dimensional look of the images.
Analysis of the photographs showed that the rings reflected back only about 2% of the sunlight falling on them, making them possibly the darkest material found in the solar system. This raised the question as to what the rings were made of, and two possibilities were suggested. Evidence from meteorites and astronomical observations of asteroids suggested that dark organic materials were prevalent in the outer solar system and could comprise the rings. Another possibility was that the rings were made of frozen methane, another common material in the outer solar system. Studies of the rings were important because they would contribute to preparations for the Voyager 2 encounter with Uranus in January 1986, the first opportunity to view the rings close up. (NASA Release 84-145)
October 13: President Reagan established a National Commission on Space, to be composed of 15 members appointed or designated by the president; not more than 9 advisory, nonvoting members representing federal departments and agencies; 2 advisory, nonvoting members appointed by the president of the Senate Trom among the members of the Senate; and 2 advisory, nonvoting members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives from among mnembers of that body. The commission was directed to study existing and proposed U;S. space activities; formulate an agenda for the U.S. civilian space program; and identify long-range goals, opportunties, and policy options for civilian space activity for the next 20 years. It was to submit its plan and any recommendations for proposed legislation to the president and Congress within 12 months. (WH anno, Oct 13/84)
October 15: NASA announced that astronomers Dr. Bradford A. Smith of the University of Arizona, Tucson, and Dr. Richard J. Terrile of JPL had
511
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
OCTOBER 1984
photographed a vast swarm of solid particles, called a circumstellar disk, surrounding Beta Pictoris, a star 50 light years from Earth. The disk was the first of its kind to be seen clearly in astronomical photographs and could indicate a possible solar system around Beta Pictoris. To make the observations, the astronomers used a 100-inch telescope at the Las Campanas Observatory near La Serena, Chile, operated by the Carnegie Institution of Washington, D.C. A charged-coupled device electronic camera and a coronagraph were attached to the telescope.
The two astronomers had turned attention to Beta Pictoris because of an IRAS science team’s reports earlier in the year that stated that the star, and three others similiar to it, showed abnormal amounts of infrared radiation, implying the existence of solid material orbiting the stars.
Scientists believed that the circumstellar disk was made up of countless particles, ranging in size from tiny grains less than a thousandth of an inch (10 microns) in diameter to the nuclei of comets a few miles across, the most likely composition included ice, silicates, and carbonaceous (organic) compounds, the same materials from which the Earth and other planets of the solar system were believed to have formEd.
Questions to be answered were whether Beta Pictoris had existed long enough for planets to have formed and whether large planetary bodies would necessarily form, even when the required materials were present. (NASA Release 84-146)
October 17: NASA announced that Robert L. Crippen, commander of Space Shuttle mission 41-G earlier in the month, was named deputy director of Flight Crew Operations at JSC, Houston. He would serve as deputy to George
W.S. Abbey and remain an active astronaut.
Crippen was pilot on STS-1, the first Space Shuttle flight, and commanded STS-7 and 41-C, the Solar Maximum satellite rescue mission. He joined NASA in September 1969 after three-year assignment with the Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory program. (JSC Release 84-050)
October 21: The first Space Shuttle external fuel tank for use at Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, arrived there after a 5,000-mile journey, marking a major milestone in activation of the West Coast space launch complex. Plans called for the initial launch from the new complex in October 1985.
Most of the major faciliteis at Space Launch Complex-Six were completed, including the facility for storage and preparation of the external tank. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers had been responsible since 1979 for building and facility construction at the launch site, while Martin Marietta Aerospace had responsibility for design, procurement, installation, and checkout of Space Shuttle ground support systems. Space Shuttle missions from Vandenberg would carry both DOD and NASA payloads.
At the facility, the tank would undergo a thorough four-week inspection by the Air Force and its Shuttle processing contractors. Early in 1985, it would
512
OCTOBER 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
be mated with two inert solid-fuel rocket boosters and the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise for testing and compatibility between the Space Shuttle and ground facilities.
Martin Marietta Aerospace manufactured the tank at MSFC’s Michoud Assembly Facility. (MSFC Release 84-85)
October 25: MSFC announced that Morton Thiokol’s Wasatch Division near Brigham City, Utah; had successfully static-fired a new, lightweight version of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket booster at its northern Utah facility. Preliminary results from the two-minute firing indicated that all objectives were met and that the system operated as expected. The case of the new motor was made from a composite material of plastic reinforced with graphite fibers wound into a cylinder. Each of these filament-wound cases weighed about
30,000	pounds less than the current steel case that made up most of the length of the Space Shuttle’s solid-fuel focket booster. Use of the lighter cases could increase the Space Shuttle payload carrying capacity about 4,600 pounds.
Two more of the filament-wound booster motors would be test fired by Motron Thiokol in the spring and summer of 1985. Also in the spring of 1985, flight motor segments containing filament-wound cylinders would be shipped to Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, for use by NASA and the U.S. Air Force in the first Space Shuttle launch from Vandenberg planned for October 1985.
The test was conducted under the direction of MSFC, Huntsville, Ala. (MSFC Release 84-86; Marshall Star, Oct 31/84, 1)
During October: The astronauts of western Europe formed an Association of European Astronauts (AEA), to which all European astronauts who had flown or been selected to train for a specific mission were eligible to join. The group would hold its first meeting on October 5 and 6. The purpose of the association was to encourage get-togethers for the exchange of views on training experiences and the projects concerned. The AEA had seven members: three ESA astronauts, Claude Nicollier, Ulf Merbold, and Wubbo Ockels; two French astronauts, Patrick Baudry and Jean-Loup Chretien; and two German astronauts, Reinhard Furrer and Ernst Messerschmid. During meetings they planned to exchange experiences, compare USSR, U.S., and European approaches, and discuss future plans for Europe in manned spaceflight. (ESA Release, Sept 24/84)
—Dan Germany, crew systems manager at JSC, observed that, after five years and $12 million, the Space Shuttle toilet still did not work, with failures on 10 out of 11 missions. “It’s very disappointing,” he said. On one mission, Robert Gibson had to use a crowbar to free the toilet mechanism; Sally Ride and Fred Hauck employed a camera bracket. NASA would test a new solution in August 1985 in which a bag would fit inside the commode and be removed after every flight. This reminded observers that NASA once spent $1 million
513
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
OCTOBER 1984
to develop a pen to use in weightlessness. An engineer asked later, “Why didn’t you use a lead pencil?” (SF, Sept/Oct 84)
—A commemorative envelope sold in the gift shop at JSC gave details and drawings of a U.S. Navy space program so secret that its name could not be used on the telephone, the Washington Post reported Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine as saying. The publication said that the envelopes, called postal cover, carried the words “Project Whitecloud,” accurate drawings of a mother satellite, and drawings of three smaller spacecraft. The envelopes said that the satellite disperses the smaller craft to cover more ocean surface and that it used radar-frequency antennae to detect shipboard radar and communications signals. The Navy had no immediate comment. (W Post, Oct 23/84, A-15) It was later revealed that the information had been taken from the May 1976 issue of Aviation Week & Space Technology.
514
November
November 2: NASA announced that larger main parachutes, designed to slow the solid-fuel rocket boosters’ final rate of descent prior to impact into the ocean, would be part of the mission 51-A Space Shuttle flight scheduled for launch November 7 from KSC. The new parachutes would be 136 feet in diameter compared to previously used chutes of 115 feet in diameter. The larger chutes would reduce the velocity of the boosters at water impact from 88 feet per second, or 60 miles per hour, to 75 feet per second, or 51 miles per hour. The reduced velocity would relieve the structural loads on the boosters at impact by about 25 %; thus reducing the amount of impact damage sustained by the boosters. Following launch and separation from the Space Shuttle, the boosters were recovered from the ocean, refurbished, and used on a later flight.
According to Keith Henson, booster recovery subsystem manager in the Shuttle Projects Office at MSFC, the larger chutes were tested during mission 41-D in August on the Space Shuttle’s right booster. Beginning with mission 51-B, scheduled for January 1985, all future steel case boosters would have the larger chutes. Smaller main chutes would continue to be used on some Space Shuttle missions, including the 51-C mission in December and on missions where lighter-weight filament-wound booster motor segments were used. First use of those segments was planned for October 1985. Martin Marietta Corporation, Denver, Colo., under the direction of MSFC, designed the booster’s deceleration system. Pioneer Parachute Company, Manchester, Conn., provided the parachutes. (MSFC Release 64-90)
November 5: NASA announced the delay of the 51-C Space Shuttle mission originally scheduled for launch from KSC on December 8, 1984. The agency had decided to replace up 2,800 thermal protection tiles on the underside of the orb iter Challenger due to the degradation of the bonding material.
When Challenger returned from space on its last mission, a black tile from the left wing chine area just behind and below the crew door area was missing. About 100 tiles were removed from Challenger, and it was found that the adhesive substance known as “screed,” used to smooth irregularities in the surface of the orbiter, had softened. Screed was applied directly over the aluminum skin of the orbiter. All other areas were covered with a primer called red RTV-560 (room temperature vulcanizing), which was used as an adhesive for bonding the strain isolation pads (SIP) to the body and the tile to the SIP. The 51-C mission was the first completely dedicated DOD mission. The 51-A mission continued on schedule for launch November 7. (MSFC Release 84-91)
515
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
NOVEMBER 1984
November 8-16: NASA launched on November 8 from KSC the Space Shuttle Discovery on STS mission 51-A with a five-member crew consisting of commander Frederick H. Hauck; pilot David M. Walker; and mission specialists Anna L. Fisher, Dale A. Gardner, and Joseph P. Allen.
During the flight, the crew recovered the satellites Palapa B2 and Westar VI, which had not operated properly following their earlier deployment from the Space Shuttle. The Palapa B2 recovery was the first retrieval ever of a satellite from space, although astronauts previously had caught and repaired the Solar Maximum satellite. Astronauts Allen and Gardner had to move Palapa B2 into the Discovery’s cargo bay themselves when an unforeseen obstacle prevented use of the spacecraft’s mechanical arm. This resulted in some damage to the power-generating solar cells surrounding the seven-footwide satellite, but the damage was not expected to interfere with a successful relaunching of the satellite. Later in the flight the same two astronauts took 5 hours and 42 minutes to retrieve Westar VI, a 2,300-pound communications satellite, and bolt it down next to Palapa B2—possibly the shortest $35 million salvage operation ever undertaken, the Washington Post reported. Insurance companies had to pay the owners of the two satellites, the government of Indonesia (Palapa B2), and Western Union Telegraph Company (Westar VI) $180 million. The insurance brokers paid NASA $5.5 million for the satellites’ retrieval and Hughes Aircraft Company $5 million for technical help in the retrieval operation. Stephen Merrett, chairman of Merrett Syndicates, an affiliate of Lloyds of London, that helped underwrite the insurance on the satellites, said “I’m proud to be a part of the crowd that put this mission together in just six months.” He added, “We expect Palapa to be resold for between $30 and $40 million and Westar for $30 million, and we expect those sales to be concluded very soon.” Merrett declined to identify potential buyers of the two satellites.
In interviews later, Allen and Gardner noted that the task of retrieving the satellites was easier than dealing with small items such as tools and the tether wires that tied them to the Space Shuttle’s cargo bay. “As objects get smaller in space, they become more difficult to handle. It’s really extraordinary how much easier it is to move massive objects like satellites.” Allen pointed out that the only trouble they had in retrieving the satellites resulted from their tendency to grip the satellites too hard and move them too quickly in an effort to get them back and secured in the cargo bay in a limited amount of time. “Once you get over that difficult spot where you think you have to have the satellite in a death grip, things are a lot easier,” he said.
In addition to the salvage missions, the crew during the flight deployed the Canadian Telesat-H and Hughes Syncom-IV-1 communications satellites. The Radiation Monitor Experiment and the Aggregation of Red Blood Cells experiments were carried out in the orbiter’s middeck.
Discovery landed November 16 at 7 a.m. local time at KSC. “Two landings in a row at Kennedy, and this time with a cargo bay as full as it was when
516
NOVEMBER 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
it took off,” said Jesse W. Moore, NASA associate administrator for space flight. “It’s hard to believe those two satellites are sitting out there on the runway after being in space for more than eight months.” (NASA MOR E^f20-51-A-ll [prelaunch] Nov 8/84; NASA Release 84-144; MSFC Release
84-90; JSC Release 84-051; W Post, Nov 13/84, A—11 and D-l, Nov 14/84, A-l, Nov 17/84, A-10, Nov 18/84, A-19, Nov 28/84, A-18; NY Times, Nov 18/84, 3A; H Chron, Nov 11/84, 24)
November 8: In conjunction with the Council of Chief State School Officers, NASA released the Announcement of Opportunity (AO), specifying the eligibility and requirements for selection of a teacher in NASA’s Space Flight Participation Program. Through the program, NASA would extend Space Shuttle flight opportunities to a wide segment of private citizens with the purpose of communicating the experience of spaceflight to the public through educational and information programs. NASA intended eventually to fly various categories of space flight participants two to three times per year.
The AO was open to elementary and secondary level teachers in all public, private, and parochial schools in the United States and U.S. territories; in DOD overseas dependents’ schools; in Department of State overseas schools; and in the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Teachers applying for the flight opportunity would submit an application to illustrate their qualifications and excellence as an educator and demonstrate how they would share the experience with the public. Review panels would select two teachers’ nominees for each of the states and organizations identified above for forwarding to a National Review Panel. This panel would select 10 teachers as semifinalists, who would go to JSC for thorough medical examinations, in-depth briefings, and interviews. NASA would receive the names of five finalists and select the primary and backup candidates to undergo training for spaceflight. NASA’s goal was to fly the first teacher on a mission in early 1986. (NASA Release 84-155)
November 10: Arianespace launched at 1:14 a.m. GMT Ariane VII varying Spacenet 2, for the GTE’s Spacenet, and the second ESA European Space Agency maritime communications satellite, Marecs B-2. Marecs B-2 was placed in geostationary transfer orbit with a perigee of 199.9 kiometers and an apogee of 36,022 kilometers. Following firing on November 11 of its apogee boost motor, Marecs B-2 was injected into a near circular orbit at 135.5 °E with a perigee of 35,600 kilometers, apogee of 35,900 kilometers, and inclination of 3.190°E.
Ariane VII was the second flight of the more powerful version of the European launcer, Ariane 3, developed by ESA. Ariane 3 was 49 meters high and weighed about 237 tons at liftoof. It had three stages, the first povided with two strap-on boosters that ignited just after liftoff. Ariane 3 could place payload of up to 2,580 kilograms into geostationary transfer orbit. (ESA Release Nov 12/84)
517
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
NOVEMBER 1984
November 13: The congressional Office of Technology Assessment released a report, “Civilian Space Stations and the U.S. Future in Space,” which said that the kind of Space Station that NASA was planning could not be justified on scientific, economic, or military grounds. It went on to say that not just Congress, but the entire nation, ought to consider what the country wanted to do in the second quarter-century of the space era. The Space Station envisioned by NASA, the report said, “is only one alternative in a wide range of options.”
Thomas F. Rogers, director of the two-year study, said that the time had come for the general public to play a greater role in space program goals. “We’ve been spending $7.5 billion a year, every year; we can do anything want to do,” he said. “It’s great, it’s exciting, but we’re missing large numbers of important activities by allowing all this to go on under technological drive— not policy drive, economic drive, social drive, the way everything else is done in this country at that level of public expenditure.”
The report characterized the nation’s goals in space as shortsighted and narrow, reflecting the views only of the science and technology communities and not of the general public, which foots the bills. The study also said, “There is no compelling, objective, external case” for building a Space Station “to be used to support over 100 conceptual uses, few of which have been sharply defined or gained wide acceptance as important objectives of the space program.”
The report concluded by spelling out the “kinds” of goals the nation should set: increase the efficiency of space activities and reduce their costs; involve the public; reap scientific, economic, social, and political benefits; increase international cooperation; and “spread life, in a responsible fashion, throughout the solar system.” (Civilian Space Stations and the U.S. Future in Space, (D.C.: OTA, 1984; W Post, Nov 14/84, A.-4; NY Times, Nov 14/84, B-20)
November 17: NASA technicians today began preparing the Space Shuttle Discovery for a top-secret DOD flight in January 1985. Discovery was towed into a processing hangar just a few hours after the ship and its crew had recovered two satellites from useless orbits. Jesse Moore, director of the Shuttle program, reported that Discovery “looks like she’s in excellent shape,” and there should be little trouble getting it ready for the next mission scheduled to start January 21 or 22, 1985.
The Space Shuttle Challenger was originally scheduled to fly the secret DOD payload on December 8, but that spacecraft was undergoing extensive repairs to thermal tiles damaged in its last mission in October and would not be ready for several weeks. Because of the high priority the Pentagon placed on the mission, it was decided to shift Discovery to the assignment, and the Spacelab flight that Discovery originally had been scheduled to fly in January was being delayed.
Moore said that the retrieved satellites, Palapa B2 and Westar VI, would be
518
NOVEMBER 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
removed from Discovery’s cargo bay and taken to a nearby facility for servicing. Later in the month they would be flown to Hughes Aircraft Company plant in El Segundo, Calif., for refurbishing. (NY Times, Nov 18/83, A-3)
November 28: The White House approved a policy that would free the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to begin processing several applications from companies hoping to provide satellite telecommunications services, thereby breaking INTELSAT’s 20-year monopoly on such service. President Reagan signed a “finding” that it was in the national interest to have alternatives to INTELSAT. The announcement came after the State and Commerce departments had fought for months over who would define the new international telecommunications policies. And, of course, INTELSAT and its U.S. representative, ComSatCorp, tried to block entry of private competitors into the international market.
David Markey, assistant secretary of commerce for telecommunications and information policy, said that the new policy would not permit private satellite networks to mount full-fledged competition against INTELSAT. “It will be clear that [such networks] should be restricted to non-public switched voice services,” he added. (W Post, Nov 28/84, C-l)
During November: Upon the departure at the end of November of Dr. Donald P. Hearth from NASA, Richard H. Petersen will move from deputy director to director of LaRC. Hearth had been center director at Langley since September 1975. He joined NASA in 1962 and had held various agency positions, inlcuding deputy director of Planetary Programs at NASA Headquarters. Petersen had served as deputy center director at LaRC since July 1980. He began his career at ARC in 1957 and was chief of the Aerodynamics Division there from 1975 until he joined Langley. (NASA Release 84-163)
— USA Today reported that Miss Baker, the squirrel monkey that joined another monkey, Able, in the U.S.’s first spaceflight May 28, 1959, died November 27 of kidney failure. She was buried in the Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville, Ala. (USA Today, Nov 31/84, 3A)
519
December
December 1: A four-engine Boeing jetliner in a radio-controlled test of an aircraft fuel mixture called “antimisting kerosene” crashed on Rogers Dry Lake, California. A huge fireball engulfed three-fourths of the plane immediately after it crashed. The fireball lasted about six seconds and was followed by an outpouring of black smoke that often accompanies landing crashes. Flames from what officials called a “secondary fire” were visible through the smoke. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and NASA sponsored the $11.8 million crash primiarly to test the new fuel mixture, which was designed to prevent an explosive burst of flames in case of an accident. Safety specialists emphasized that it would take a long time to reconstruct precisely the sequence of events that left the Boeing 720 a much more devastated wreck than had been expected. An initial examination of the plane showed that the interior had been totally gutted by the fire that the crash produced. Despite the outcome, government and industry officials appeared willing to continue efforts to produce a practical way to minimize the fire risk from fuel spilled in accidents. (WPost, Dec 2/84, A—1; NY Times, Dec 3/84, A-21; Time, Dec 10/84, 32; WTimes, Dec 3/84, 3A)
December 12: NASA launched from the Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif., aboard an Air Force Atlas launch vehicle NOAA-9, a 3,775-pound Advanced Tiros-N spacecraft that also carried search-and-rescue equipment. The satellite was placed in a 540-statute-mile, circular, near-polar orbit with an inclination of 98.86° to the equator. Total orbital period was 102.12 minutes, with, an average of 72 minutes in sunlight and 30 minutes in the Earth’s shadow. Because the Earth rotated 25.59° beneath the orbiting spacecraft during each orbit, the satellite would observe a different portion of Earth’s surface with sufficient overlap from orbit to orbit. NOAA satellites collected meteorological readings and transmitted the data directly to users around the world for local weather analysis and forecasting. Information from the satellites was also used for hurricane tracking and warnings, agriculture, commercial fishing, forestry, maritime, and other industries. NOAA-9 was the latest in a series of RCA-built TIROS weather satellites dating back nearly 25 years to TIROS-1, launched on April 1, 1960. It was the 6th in the current series of 11 satellites developed to give scientists the most comprehensive meteorological and environmental information since the start of the nation’s space program. The satellite cost $43.5 million; launch vehicle costs were $11.4 million.
NOAA-9 also carried the second set of Earth Radiation Budget Experiment instruments, an atmospheric experiment that would increase knowledge of

PffiCEDIHG PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
C-0
521
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
DECEMBER 1984
Earth’s climate and weather systems, particularly how climiate was affected by radiation from the Sun. (NASA MOR E-615-84-05 [prelaunch], Nov 5/84, NASA Mission Summary, Nov 8/84; NASA Release 84-150; LaRC Release
84-89)
December 13: Grumman test pilot Chuck Sewell flew for its first flight the experimental X29 forward swept-wing jet over.Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. He kept the landing gear extended and held the plane to 270 miles per hour for the flight, which was intended to determine that everything worked properly, not to see how fast or high the plane could fly. The flight lasted 58 minutes and remained confined to an area around Edwards at an altitude of 15,000 feet.
The X29, which had the nose of an F5 fighter, would never fly as a fighter in its own right but was supposed to help the United States design fighter planes of the future. Not until space age materials like graphite became practical for aircraft construction could wings be built light enough and strong enough to reach into the oncoming flow of air as the plane sped along. It was hoped that the forward sweep would give the X29 and it successors advantages in maneuvering for the kill in a dogfight. (W Post, Dec/84, A-9)
December 15-21: The Soviet Union launched the automatic interplanetary station Vega-1 as part of a program for the exploration of outer space and planets of the solar system. The multipurpose flight provided for exploration of Venus and Halley’s comet. The first portion of the flight of Vega-1 would continue the study of the atmosphere, cloud layer, and surface of Venus by means of a descent module that would carry out new experiments with an aerostat probe. Scientists and technicians from Austria, Bulgaria, Hungary, the German Democratic Republic, Poland, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, and Czechoslovakia joined Soviet scientists, designers, engineers, and technicians to create the package of research equipment and apparatuses. The station was due to reach the vicinity of Venus in mid-June 1985 and pass near Halley’s comet in March 1986.
The Soviet Union launched December 21 Vega-2, which should, like Vega-1, reach the area of Venus in the middle of June 1985 and travel close to Halley’s comet in March 1986. The Vega-2 station should drop landing craft and balloons into the Venusian atmosphere. (FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 15/84; FBIS, Moscow DomSvc in Russian, Dec 21/84)
December 18: NASA announced that Administrator James M. Beggs and U.R. Rao, chairman of the Indian Space Reseach Organization (ISRO), signed a launch services agreement covering the reimbursable launch of the Indian National Satellite, INSAT 1C, scheduled for mid-1986 aboard the Space Shuttle. INSAT 1C was a multipurpose satellite that would provide communications and meteorological service to India. An ISRO scientist/engineer would serve as a payload specialist aboard the Space Shuttle during the INSAT 1C mission. Discussions were also held concerning experiments the Indian
522
DECEMBER 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
payload specialist would perform during the mission and concerning potential cooperation between NASA and ISRO in the areas of space applications and space science. (NASA Release 84-175)
December 19: The Soviet Union launched a scale model of what U.S. experts called a small, reusable, winged spaceplane. It orbited the Earth once, glided back into the atmosphere, and splashed down in the Black Sea. The apparently successful unmanned flight, the fourth in a new shuttle program, was seen.as further evidence of the growing competition among superpower countries to develop advanced instruments for using space for military as well as peaceful operations. U.S. intelligence analysts speculated that the Soviet spaceplanes, when fully developed and flown by pilots, could be used to deliver small payloads or to inspect or attack other satellites in low-Earth orbit. The Soviet Union was also reported to be close to conducting the first tests of a larger, manned space vehicle comparable to the U.S. Space Shuttle.
In what had become a characteristic of the space race between the Soviet Union and United States, one nation, the Soviet Union in this case, was trying to catch up with the other in developing the large shuttle but was also trying to move ahead with another technology, the small spaceplane. And equally characteristic, this had apparently prompted the other, in this case the United States, to step up its efforts to design a spaceplane of its own. (NY Times, Dec 19/84, A-l)
December 20: Scientists at the University of Chicago announced that a U.S. experiment to analyze the dust of Halley’s comet was riding aboard the Soviet Union’s Vega-1 spacecraft. It was the first known Soviet-U.S. cooperative space venture since the docking of the manned Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft in 1975. The cosmic dust analyzer—and a twin that would be launched aboard Vega-2—were built by university scientists under the leadership of John Simpson, one of the preeminent astrophysicists in the United States, who had designed, experiments for more than 30 space missions over the past 25 years. The joint project was bom at an international symposium in Holland in . September 1983, where Simpson outlined vastly improved comet dust measuring methods. About'a month later, he said, the Soviets surprised him by inviting him to put the analyzer aboard their Vega. Simpson received Reagan administration approval and about $300,000 in NASA funds, which touched off a frantic search for components. “We scoured the U.S. and within two weeks got all the pieces,” Simpson said.
Plugging U.S. electronics into a Soviet spacecraft required unusual cooperation. Moscow shared telemetry coding data, and Simpson was able to conduct high-speed computer analysis of Soviet rocket launch characteristics to aid in designing the dust analyzer so it could survive blastoff and flight. “On May 7, we walked into the Soviet space lab with working instruments,” which were then bolted aboard the Soviet spacecraft by U.S. scientists, he said. Simpson said that he had received computer tapes from the instrument during Soviet
523
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
DECEMBER 1984
tests of the device while it awaited launch from the Baykonur cosmodrome and added that the Soviets had invited him to br on hand in Moscow when the comet encounter would begin in March 1986. (W Post, Dec 21/84, A—1; NY Times, Dec 21/84, A-l)
December 21: NASA announced that a six-member team from GSFC was helping to establish the first satellite data link to the South Pole that would make possible real-time collection of scientific data from the pole, which was not possible in the past. The effort was in support of a joint program with the National Science Foundation; the Applied Research Laboratory of the University of Texas, Austin; NOAA; and a number of other government, private, and education institutions. To establish a real-time communications link by any means other than by satellite would cost as much as $35 million compared with approximately $250,000 via satellite, “The project could revolutionize communications in the region,” said Goddard engineer Michael Comberiate. “Currently, scientific data collected from the Pole during the winter months must be stored and shipped out by aircraft during Astral Summer” (November 1-February 1). The link would use existing polar-orbiting satellites to relay data from the pole to McMurdo Sound, which would retransmit the data to a geostationary satellite that, in turn, would transmit the information to the continental United States. This routing was necessary because signals from the transmitter at the Pole (90°S latitude) were too far below the horizon to be acquired by a geostationary satellite. The McMurdo station, however, was located on the edge of the Antarctic (77 °S) and was barely in view of the geostationary satellite. The link with polar orbiting Ixindsat 4 and Landsat 5, with Dynamics Explorer 1 (DE-1), and with Nimbus 7 would allow reliable transmission of routine, high-volume data from scientific investigations being conducted at the Pole by 20 different institutions. (NASA Release, Dec 21/84)
—A Titan 34-D rocket with a top-secret payload was launched at 7:02 p.m. local time from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in what might be the final military space mission of the year. An Air Force statement did not indicate whether the payload reached the planned orbit. The next announced DOD launching was scheduled for January 23, 1985, when the Space Shuttle would carry an intelligence satellite into orbit. (NY Times, Dec 23/84, A-14)
During December: NASA announced that a publication of infrared celestial objects, presented in a series of catalogs and maps of 96% of the entire sky, was completed by the international science team of the IRAS. This was a milestone in the history of astronomy and would provide a wealth of new information about the universe in a wavelength region that was nearly impossible to study from the Earth’s surface.
The IRAS catalogs printed nearly a quarter-million infrared sources—stars, galaxies, and newly forming stars—in addition to entirely new classes of ob-
524
DECEMBER 1984
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
jects. The catalogs and sky maps would be used for decades by astronomers investigating the nature of celestial objects that emitted much of their energy in infrared wavelengths as well as by astronomers seeking to understand objects at other wavelength regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. The catalog contained roughly 130,000 stars, 20,000 galaxies, 50,000 dense condensations within the infrared cirrus, and 40,000 objects of all types within the plane of the Milky Way galaxy. The catalogs were presented in several formats, including a five-volume book containing 5,000 pages of computer printout information on the location and infrared characteristics of 245,839 individual point sources found by the telescopes. The catalogs were also available on microfiche (24 cards) and magnetic tape comprising 60 megabytes of data.
IRAS was a joint project of the space agencies of the United States, United Kingdom, and the Netherlands. The telescope satellite was launched by January 25, 1983, and conducted a 10-month all-sky survey of infrared objects from Earth orbit until its supply of liquid helium coolant was depleted November 23, 1984. (NASA Release 84-169)
—Paul F. Holloway would become deputy director of LaRC, effective February 3, 1985, succeeding Richard H. Petersen. Holloway had been director for space at LaRC since May 1975 and had joined NASA in June 1960 as an aerospace research engineer. Since that time he had held various agency positions, including acting deputy associate administrator of the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology at NASA Headquarters and chief of the Space Systems Division at Langley. He received the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal in 1980 and the NASA Exceptional Service Medal in 1981. (NASA anno, Dec 10/84; LaRC Release 84-114)
—Krafft A. Ehricke, 67, father of the space-launched Centaur interplanetary vehicle and a leading space scientist for more than 40 years, died December 11 in La Jolla, Calif. Born in Berlin, Ehricke was brought to the United States with other members of the German V-2 rocket team after World War II to launch the U.S. space program. Ehricke worked briefly for Bell Aircraft Company in Buffalo, N.Y., after the war and later for Consolidated Vultee Corporation, which had a contract with the Air Force to develop the Atlas intercontinental ballistic missile. Vultee eventually became part of General Dynamics. The Atlas project produced the United State’s first ICMB, and versions of it were still flying as space boosters. (W Times, Dec 13/84, 8C; W Post, Dec 13/84, D-7; NY Times, Dec 13/84, D-30)
—Vladimir N. Chelomei, 70, a rocketry expert who designed the Soviet Union’s first jet engine, died December 8 in Moscow. Tass, which carried the news of his death, did not report the cause. His work was closely connected with the Soviet space program and aircraft design, and he is credited by The Great Soviet Encyclopedia with the 1942 design of the Soviet’s first jet engine. He had headed a major scientific research, design, and development organization for 29 years. (W Post, Dec 13/84, D-7)
525
Appendix A
SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE FLIGHT, 1979-1984
World space activity in the years 1979 through 1984 included 106 launches in 1979, 105 launches in 1980, 151 launches in 1981, 141 launches in 1982, 144 launches in 1983, and 147 launches in 1984.
Of the 106 launches (with 123 payloads) attemped in 1979, 86 (with 101 payloads) were for Soviet programs; 15 (with 17 payloads), one successful, were for U.S. programs; 2 were for Japanese; 1 each was from European Space Agency (ESA) (launched on an Ariane), India (launched by the Soviet Union), and the United Kingdom (launched by NASA). Of 83 USSR launches, 79 (with 97 payloads) were unmanned, and 4 were manned (3 Soyuz and
1	Soyuz-T). Of the 97 unmanned payloads, 79 were in the Cosmos series and 18 were of other types (5 Molniya, 3 Ekran, 3 Progress supply, 1 Raduga, 2 Horizont communications satellites, and 2 Intercosmos and 3 Meteor scientific satellites). Of the 14 successful U.S. launches, 7 (with 9 payloads) were Department of Defense (DoD), and 7, NASA. Japan had 1 launch, and ESA launched its Ariane carrying a test vehicle called CAT (capsule Ariane technologique) to monitor performance.
Of the 105 launches (with 127 payloads) attempted in 1980, 89 (with 110 payloads) were for Soviet programs; 13 (with 14 payloads) were from the United States; 2 were from Japan; and 1 was from India. Of 89 USSR launches, 79 (with 100 payloads) did not have crews and 10 had crews (4 Soyuz,
2	Soyuz-T, and 4 Progress supply ships). Of the 100 unmanned payloads, 89 were in the Cosmos series and 11 were of other types (4 Molniya, 1 Ekran,
1	Horizont, 2 Raduga communications satellites, 1 Prognoz, and 2 Meteor scientific satellites). Of the 13 U.S. launches, 6 (with 7 payloads) were by DOD, and NASA had 7 launches, including 2 for DOD. Japan had 3 launches, and India had 1 launch.
Of the 151 launches (with 168 payloads) attempted in 1981, 120 (with 143 payloads), 4 unsuccessful, were for Soviet programs; 19 (with 18 payloads),
2	unsuccessful, were for U.S. programs; 3 were for Japanese; 3 for the ESA (launched on an Ariane); 3 were by the People’s Republic of China; and 1, unsuccessful, was by India. Of USSR launches, 120 (with 141 payloads) were unmanned, and 3 were manned (Soyuz T-4, 39, and 40). Of the 122 unmanned payloads, 94 were in the Cosmos series and 28 were of other types (8 Molniya, 1 Ekran, 3 Raduga, 1 Progress, 2 Intercosmos, 2 Meteor, 2 Iskra, 1 Aureole, 2 Venera, and 6 Radio). Of the 19 U.S. launches, 15 (with 18 payloads) were successful unmanned launches; 2, unsuccessful unmanned NASA launches; and 2, manned launches. Japan launched 3 unmanned satellites, each with 1 payload; India tried unsuccessfully to launch one
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
iN'ninJNAU* BLAN&r
527
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
APPENDIX A
payload; the ESA had three launches with three payloads, 1 for India. The People’s Republic of China had 1 launch with three payloads.
Of the 141 launches (with 152 payloads) attempted in 1982, 119 (with 128 payloads), 2 unsuccessful, were for Soviet programs; 18 (with 22 payloads) were for U.S. programs; 1 was by the Japanese; 1 was by the People’s Republic of China. Of USSR launches, 114 (with 128 payloads) were unmanned, and 3 were manned (Soyuz T-5, T-6, and T-7). Of the unmanned payloads, 96 were in the Cosmos series and 18 were of other types (1 Salyut, 5 Molniya, 2 Hori-zont, 2 Ekran, 1 Raduga, 4 Progress, 2 Meteor, 1 Iskra). Of the 18 U.S. launches, 15 (with 18 payloads) were successful unmanned launches; 3 were manned launches. Japan launched 1 unmanned satellite; and the People’s Republic of China had 1 launch (with 1 payload).
Of the 144 launches (with 161 payloads) attempted in 1983, 115 (with 125 payloads) were for Soviet programs; 22 (with 33 payloads) were for U.S. programs; 3 were by the Japanese; 1 was by the People’s Republic of China; 1 was by India; 1 (with 2 payloads) was by ESA; and 1 was by ITSO. Of USSR launches, 114 (with 125 payloads) were unmanned, and 3 were manned (Soyuz T-5, T-6, and T-7). Of the unmanned payloads, 94 were in the Cosmos series, and 20 were of other types (7 Molniya, 2 Ekran, 2 Raduga, 2 Progress, 1 Meteor, 2 Horizont, 1 Prognoz, 2 Venera, and 1 Astron). Of the 22 U.S. launches, 18 (with 28 payloads) were successful unmanned launches, and 4 were manned launches. Japan launched 3 unmanned satellites; the People’s Republic of China, 1 launch (with 1 payload); India, 1 launch; ESA, 1 launch; and ITSO (Intelsat), 1 launch.
Of the 147 launches (with 152 payloads) attempted in 1984, 115 (with 115 payloads) were for Soviet programs; 18 (with 21 payloads) were for U.S. programs; 3 were by the Japanese; 3 were by the People’s Republic of China; 3 (with 4 payloads) were by ESA. Of USSR launches, 112 (with 112 payloads) were unmanned, and 3 were manned (Soyuz T-10, T-ll, and T-12). Of the unmanned payloads, 94 were in the Cosmos series, and 18 were of other types (4 Molniya, 2 Ekran, 2 Raduga, 5 Progress, 1 Meteor, 2 Horizont, and 2 Vega). Of the 23 U.S. launches, 18 (with 22 payloads) were successful unmanned launches, and 5 were manned launches. Japan launched 3 unmanned satellites; the People’s Republic of China, 3 launches; and ESA, 3 launches.
Data from the accompanying tables came from the United States National registry of spaceflights; the Satellite Situation Reports issued by Goddard Space Flight Center; press releases of NASA, DOD, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and other U.S. government agencies; and press releases from the Communications Satellite Corporation. Data on Soviet launches came from statements in the USSR press service, international news service reports, and announcements and briefings by Soviet officials. Data on satellites of other nations came from announcements by their governments and by international news services.
528
SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS, 1979
530
SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS, 1979
Launch
Dale
Spacecraft,
Country.
Int'l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee	Perigee	Period	Inclination
(kin)	(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
Jan. 11	Cosmos 1070 USSR 1979-1A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 5900 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	316	214	89.5	62.8	Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite: reentered Jan. 20, 1979
Jan. 13	Cosmos 107! USSR 1979-2A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6300 kg? Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	360	190	89.7	62.8	Probable military' photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Jan. 26. 1979
Jan. 16	Cosmos 1072 USSR 1979-3 A C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 650 kg? Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	1014	958	KM.8	82.9	Probable navsat. 3rd-gen. “B” type
Jan. 18	Molnixa 3-11 USSR 1979-4 A A-2-e Plesetsk	Total weight: 1890 kg? Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	39 382	972	717.8	64.1	Comsat; replacement for Molniya 3-8: carried TV and multichannel-radio transmission equipment
Jan, 25	Meteor 1-29 USSR 1979-5A A-l Baykonur- tyuratam	Total weight: 3475 kg? Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	646	581	97.0	97.7	Metesat; second USSR weathersat in retrograde sun-synchronous orbit
Jan. 30	Cosmos 1073 USSR 1979-6A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6300 kg? Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	350	187	89.6	62.8	Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Feb. 12, 1979
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS	APPENDIX A
SCATHA
u.s.
1979-7A
Della
ESMC
Total weight: 360 kg
Objective: investigate buildup of elec.
eharges. on s/c in magnetosphere Description: Cylinder, 2m long/wide;
5 booms for experiment deployment; 100m electric-field antenna
Jan. 31
Feb. 6
Feb. 8
Cosmos 1074 USSR 1979-8A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 7000 kg?
Objective: Test flight of prototype supply transport vehicle Description: Unavailable
ECS I (Ayame)	Total weight: 260 kg
Japan	Objective: Experimental	comsat
1979-9A
N-l	Description: Cylinder
Tanegashima
Cosmos 1075 USSR 1979-10A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 1000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Feb. 12 Cosmos 1076 USSR 1979-11A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 1000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Feb. 13 Cosmos 1077 USSR 1979-1A A-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2500 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Feb. 18 SAGE
U.S.
1979-13A
Scout
WFC
Total weight: 147 kg Objective: Study dust and liquid droplets in upper atmosphere; measure filtering effect on sunlight
Description: Hexagonal prism with booms
42 894	2 7 852	1415
258	203	88.8
34 583	190	607.16
516	172	94.5
622	594	96.9
589	583	96.4
532	470	94.6
4.3
Spacecraft Charging AT //igh altitudes
51.6	Probable manned-flight precursor (for Soyuz T); reentered April 1, 1979
24.1	Japan-built and -launched experimental communications satellite damaged by collision with last stage of launcher; no longer operating
65.8	Probable radar calibration satellite; reentered Oct. 19, 1981
82.5 Reported in press as Soviet environmental satellite to study oceans and assoc, physical processes
81.2	Possible meteorological mission (cf. 1979-5A)
54.9	Stratospheric /lerosol and Gas Experiment
-i
§
Z
>
c
-i
>
z
o
>
m
§
z
>
H
O
532
Spacecraft, i . .k	Country.
Inl'l Designation,	Payload Data
a L	Vehicle
Launch Site
Apogee Perigee (km) (km)
Feb. 21
Feb. 22
Corsa B Japan 1979-14A Mu-36 Kagoshima
Ekran J USSR 1979-15A D-l-C Baykonur-Tyuratam
Cosmos 1078 USSR 1979-16A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 100 kg Objective: Observe celestial X-ray
sources in the wideband range with short time resolution Description: Cylinder
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Feb. 24 Solwind U.S.
1979-17A Atlas F ESMC
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Study nature & extent of solar wind effects on earth's ionosphere and magnetosphere Description: Unavailable
Feb. 25
Sovuz 82 USSR 1979-18 A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 6600 kg?
Objective: Carry crew to occupy Salvut 6 orbital station Description: Unavailable
Feb. 27 Cosmos 1079 USSR 1979-19A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
323	313
36,402	35.152
306	180
541	515
283	244
337	171
Period	Inclination
(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
90.9	29.9 Japanese scientific satellite (nickname Hachuko, •’Swan")
earned 2 experiments, detecting soft X-rays from 0.1 to 2 Kev and from 1.5 to 30 Kev
1435.6	4.1 Domestic TV-relay satellite carried instruments for TV
transmission
89	72.9 Possible military maneuverable reconnaissance satellite.
Object separated from it Mar. 1 may have been the maneuvering engine. Reentered March 2
95.2	97.6 Air Force research satellite
89.6	51.6 Lt. Col. Vladimir Lyakhov, commander, and Valery
Ryumin, civilian flight engineer. dockedFeb. 26 and entered Saiyut 6 to begin reactivating station systems. Unmanned capsule recovered June 13
89.6
67.1
Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered March 11
879
Intercosmos 19 USSR 1979-20A C-1
Plesetsk
March 1 Meteor 2-4 USSR 1979-21A A-t
Plesetsk
March 12 Progress 5 USSR 1979-22A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
March 14 Cosmos 1080 USSR 1979-23A A-2
Plesetsk
March 15 Cosmos 1081 USSR' 1979-24A C-1
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1082 USSR 1979-24B C-1
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1083 USSR 1979-24C C-1
Plesetsk
Total weight: 550 kg?
Objective: Supplement ionosphere/
magnetosphere studies of Imercosmos 18 and Magion (1978-99A&C)
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2750 kg?
Objective: Cloudcover photography
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 7000 kg?
Objective: Carry food, fuel, equipment to crew aboard Salyut 6 Description: Unavailable
Total weight. 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
885
269
320
1463
1464
1464
483	98.4	74.0	Soviet international experimental satellite carrying equip-	>
inent from Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Poland, and USSR
m
z
2
x
>
832	102.1	81.2	Fourth launch of this 2d-generation Soviet weather satellite
configuration carried “meteorology electro-supply system”
191	88.8	51.6 Automatic unmanned cargo spacecraft docked March 14 at
aft port of Salyut 6. Supplies included TV receiver to pick up pictures from the ground. Reentered on command over Pacific April 5
180	89.2	72.9 Maneuverable reconnaissance satellite; 2 objects .separated
from it March 22, another upon its reentry March 28 and recovery
1402	114.5	74.0 Multiple launch (8 satellites) probably for Soviet military
communications
1421	114.7	74.0
1440	114.9	74.0
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
534
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int'I Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee (km) (km)
and
Cosmos 1084 USSR 1979-24D C-l
Plesetsk
and
Cosmos 1085 USSR 1979-24E C-l
Plesetsk
and
Cosmos 1086 USSR I979-24F C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1087 USSR 1979-24G C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1088 USSR 1979-24H C-1
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
1464	1460
1502	1464
1480	1464
1521	1464
1545	1464
Period	Inclination
(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
115.2	74.0
115.6	74.0
>
on
70
O
Z
>
c
n
on
Z
o
70
O
z
>
c
n
on
115.4	74.0
115.8	74.0
116.1	74.0
m
z
o
><
>
535
March 16
March 21
March 31
April 7
April 10
April 11
DOD satellite U.S.
1979-25A Titan 3D WSMC
DOD satellite U.S.
1979-25B Titan 3D WSMC
Cosmos 1089 USSR 1979-26A C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1090 USSR 1979-27A A-2
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1091 USSR 1979-28A C-l
Plesetsk
Soyuz 33 USSR 1979-29A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1092 USSR C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 13,300 fueled? Objective: Unavailable
Description: Cylinder?
Total weight: 13,330 fueled? Objective: Unavailable
Description: Cylinder?
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 5500 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6600 kg?
Objective: Ferry international crew to join commands aboard Salyut 6\ unsuccessful
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
245	159
245	159
998	966
329	201
1006	962
261	194
(354)	(289)
intended parameters
1002	961
88.6
88.6
104.7
89.9
104.8
89.0
(90.6)
104.7
96.4
96.4
83.0
72.9
82.9
51.6
Reconnaissance spacecraft with a ferret subsatellitc.	^
Reentered Sept. 22	^
Z
o
><
>
Probable navsat
Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Apr. 13
Probable navsat
Nikolai Rukavishnikov, commander, and Georgy Ivanov, the Bulgarian flight engineer, had problem April 11 with approach-maneuvering engine of Soyuz 33 and abandoned the plan to dock. Capsule landed safely April 12
H
70
O
Z
>
c
H
O
>
m
50
O
z
>
c
H
82.9
Probable navsat
Launch
Date
April 12
April 14
April 18
April 20
April 25
Spacecraft.
Country.
Int’l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee	Perigee	Period
(km) (km)	(min)
Mohuxa 1-43 USSR 1979-31A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: 1000 kg?
Objective: ‘‘Continuation of outer sp investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1093 USSR I979-32A A-1
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2500 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1094 USSR 1979-33 A F-l-m Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1095 USSR I979-34A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg'?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Raduya 5 USSR 1979-35A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Communications
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1096 USSR I979-36A F-l-m Baykonur-Tyuralani
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
38 543	1810	717.8
587	575	96.3
445	427	93.3
416	355	92.3
36 762	35 176	1445.5
444	430	93.3
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
64.9 Probable domestic comsat to rcplanc Mohuxa 1-32 (1976-6A)
81.2
>
in
H
73
O
z
>
c
H
>
z
o
>
m
73
o
t;
>
c
H
n
65.0	Probable ocean reconnaissance satellite like Cosmos 954 (nuclear-|Xi\vered craft that crashed in Canada). Cosmos 1094 carried microthrustcr for orbit adjustment and traveled about 200 km higher than Cosmos 954 did. Reentered Nov. 7
72.9 Reentered May 4
4.0	Geostationary comsat at Statsionar position (over the Indian Ocean)
65.0	Probable ocean reconnaissance satellite like Cosmos 1094	>
(see note): launched into same orbital plane but would	^
travel about 23 min. ahead of Cosmos 1094. Reentered	E
Nov. 24	~
X
>
April 27	Cosmos 1097 USSR 1979-37A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 5500 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	336	174	89.6
May 4	FltSatCom 2 u.s. '• 1979-38A Atlas Centaur ESMC	Total weight: 1884 kg fueled Objective: Military comsat for use by ships and field personnel Description: Hexagonal cylinder	36 320	35 255	1436.2
May 13	Progress 6 USSR 1979-39A A-2 Baykonur- Tyuratam	Total weight: 7000 kg? Objective: Carry food, fuel, materials to crew aboard Salyut 6 Description: Unavailable	247 (340)	190 (322)	88.8 (91.1)
May 15	Cosmos 1098 USSR 1979-40A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	356	168	89.8
May 17	Cosmos 1099 USSR 1979-41A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	233	208	89.0
May 22	Cosmos 1100	Total weight: 7000 kg?	210	195	88.5
USSR	Objective: ‘‘Continuation of outer space
1979-42 A	investigations”
D-l	Description: Unavailable
Baykonur-Tyuratam
and
Cosmos HOI USSR 1979-42B D-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
62.8
2.3
51.6
72.9
81.4
51.6
Recovered May 27, 1979 (per SSR)
Launched by NASA for USN; second in scries
>
2
x
>
Unmanned supply spacecraft docked May 15 with Salyut 6, undocked June 8; flew alongside during docking of unmanned Soyuz 34\ reentered over Pacific Ocean June 9
Reentered May 28
Maneuverable reconnaissance satellite carrying earth sources package; reentered May 30
Dual launch of spacecraft on single booster; recovered after one orbit (May 23)
H
B
z
>
c
H
n
>
m
73
o
;z; > c
538
Launch
Date
Spacecraft, Country, lnt'1 Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
May 25 Cosmos 1102 USSR 1979-43A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
May 28 DOD satellite U.S.
1979-44A Titan 3D WSMC
Total weight: 13,300 fueled? Objective: Unavailable
Description: Unavailable
May 31 Cosmos 1103 USSR 1979-45A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1104 USSR 1979-46A C-l
Plesetsk
June 2 Ariel 6
UK.
I979-47A Scout D WFC
June 5 Molniva 3-12 USSR I979-48A A-2-e
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 154 kg
Objective: High-energy astrophysics research: study celestial and cosmic X-rays
Description: Cylinder with dome and 4 solar-cell panels
Total weight: 1550 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
259
291
416
1006
567
39.058
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
211	89.3	8! .3 Reconnaissance satellite carrying an earth resources
package; reentered June 7
133	88.8	96.4
Reconnaissance satellite launched to work in conjunction with similar craft (1979-25A) launched March 16
325	92.01	62.8 Reentered June 14
954	104.7	82.9 Navsat
535	95.7	55.0 (Switched off Feb. 25. 1982. when pointing accuracy no
longer adequate.) NASA launched U.K.-built scisat carrying cosmic-ray and X-ray detectors plus 2 technological experiments to study solar-cell performance and space effects on semiconductors
1288
717.6
64.1
Domestic comsat, to replace Molniva 3-7
June 6 Soyuz34	Total weight: 6800 kg?	254	192	88.9
	USSR 1979-49A A-2 Baykonur- Tyuratam	Objective: Unmanned substitute to replace unsuccessful Soyuz 33 as ferry craft since Soyuz 32 had exceeded safe age for manned reentry Description:' Unavailable	(363)	(351)	(91.6)
	Arm 4 U.S. 1979-50A Thor Burner 2 WSMC	Total weight: 513 kg Objective: Unavailable Description: Unavailable	837	818	101.5
June 7	Bhaskara India 1979-51A C-l Kapustin Yar	Total weight: 360 kg Objective: Earth observation Description: 26-faced polyhedron	428	420	93.1
June 8	Cosmos 1105 USSR 1979-52A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	232	209	89.0
June 10	DOD satellite U.S. 1979-53A Titan 3C ESMC	Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed Description: Unavailable	35 858	35 729	1436.3
June 12	Cosmos 1106 USSR 1979-54A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	236	214	89.1
June 15	Cosmos 1107 USSR 1979-55A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	384	166	90.0
51.6	Unmanned Soyuz docked June 8 with Soyuz 6\ on June 14, crew undocked it from rear port and redocked it at forward port to make room for Progress 7 supply craft. Soyuz 34 was recovered Aug. 19; crew had flown for 175 days, 36 min
98.8 Advanced meteorological satellite as part of U.S. defense meteorological satellite program; craft resembled Tiros II and NOAA 6
>
*0
m
z
g
><
>
50.7	USSR-launched India-built satellite to work with backup Aryabhata craft
81.4 Reentered June 21
1.92 Geostationary orbit at 134°W
81.4 Reentered June 25
72.9 Reentered June 29
H
X
O
z
>
a
H
>
Z
a
>
m
73
o
z
>
a
H
n
Launch
Date
Spacecraft.
Country.
Int'l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
June 22 Cosmos H 08 USSR 1979-56A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective; “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
June 27 NOAA 6 U.S.
I979-57A Atlas F WSMC
Total weight: 723 kg
Objective: Meteorological observation
Description: Irregular box with solar
panel
Cosmos 1109 USSR 1979-58A A-2-c Plesetsk
Total weight: 1000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
June 28
June 29
Progress 7 USSR 1979-59 A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuraiam
Cosmos 1110 USSR 1979-60A C-2
Plesetsk
Cosmos lIII USSR 1979-61A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 7000 kg?
Objective; Carry food, fuel, supplies to crew aboard Salyut 6 IVscrini.ion: Unavailable
Total weight; 750 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations’"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
244
814
39 739
391
804
413
Perigee	Period
(km)	(min)
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
213	89.1	81.3 Reentered July 5
798	101.0	98.5 NASA launched second of latest metesat configuration lor
NOAA into orbit 90° longitude from twin craft Tiros II (1978-96A), doubling amount of data available to Natl. Meteorological Center
>
Co
H
TO
O
Z
>
a
n
(JO
>
z
o
>
m
70
O
z
>
c
n
(JO
627	718.0	62.9 Probable early warning satellite (antimissile)
353	91.6	51.6 Unmanned supply craft docked with Salxm 6 June 30.
Among items carried was a lOm-dia radio telescope installed outside to observe separation of Progress 7 on July 18. Progress 7 reentered over Pacific Ocean July 20
782	0.7	74.0
>
05
03
m
z
a
x
>
327
92.0
62.8
Reentered July 14
July 5
35 828	35 766	1436.7
July 6
July 10
July 11
July 13
July 20
July 25
Horizont 2	Total weight: 5000 kg?
USSR	Objective: Communications
1979-62A
D-l-E	Description: Unavailable
Baykonur-Tyuratam
Cosmos 1112 USSR 1979-63A C-l
Kapustin Yar
Total weight: 550 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1113 USSR 1979-64A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1114 USSR 1979-65A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 900 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1115 USSR 1979-66A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1116 USSR 1979-67A A-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2500 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1117 USSR 1979-68A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
544	345	93.4
351	167	89.7
550	504	95.2
221	220	89.0
583	544	95.9
324	179	89.5
3.2 Geostationary comsat at 14°W, the Statsionar 4 position,	>
after July 16
m
2
O
X
>
50.7	Reentered Jan. 21, 1980
65.0 Reentered July 23
74.0 Reentered Dec. 26
81.4 Reentered July 26
81.2 Military satellite, possibly an electronic ferret
H
8
2
>
C
H
>
2
a
>
pn
§
2
>
C
H
62.8
Reentered Aug. 7
■fc.
N>
Launch
Date
Spacecraft, Country, lnt'l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee	Perigee	Period
(km) (km)	(min)
July 27	Cosmos 1118 USSR I979-69A A-2 Plesetsk	ToUtl weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	246	211	89.1
July 31	Molniva 1-44 USSR 1979-70A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 1000 kg? Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	39 202	1 144	717.6
Aug. 3	Cosmos 1119 USSR 1979-71A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 5500 kg? Objective: Undisclosed Description: Unavailable	240	214	89.1
Aug. 10	We star 3 U.S. 1979-72A Delta HSMC	Total weight: 572 kg Objective: Commercial domestic comsat Description: Cylinder	35 789	35 784	1436.1
Aug. 11	Cosmos 1120 USSR 1979-73A A-2 Baykonur- Tyuratam	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	361	169	89.9
Aug. 14	Cosmos 1121 USSR I979-74A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	305	165	89.2
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
81.4 Reentered Aug. 9
63.8
81.1 Reentered Aug. 18
>
v:
H
70
o
z
>
c
n
C/5
§
z
>
c
n
c/>
0.0 Geostationary orbit at 91 °W. NASA-launched conisal. owned by Western Union Telegraph Co. and built by Hughes Aircraft, on a reimbursable basis
70.6 Maneuverable reconnaissance satellite; reentered Aug. 24
> -a "o tn Z
a
x
>
67.1
Reentered Scpi. 13
543
Aug. 17
238
Aug. 21
Aug. 28
Aug. 31
Sept. 5
Sept. 14
Sept. 20
Sept. 25
Cosmos 1122 USSR 1979-75A A-2
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1123 USSR 1979-76A A-2
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1124 USSR I979-77A A-2-e Plesetsk
Cosmos 1125 USSR 1979-78A C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1126 USSR 1979-79A A-2
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1127 USSR 1979-80A A-2
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1128 USSR 1979-81A A-2
Plesetsk
HEA0 3 U.S.
1979-82A Atlas Centaur ESMC
Cosmos 1129 USSR I979-83A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 5500 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 1000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 750 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 3150 kg Objective: High-energy astronomy
Description: Hexagonal cylinder
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: International cooperation in biological experiments Description: Unavailable
232
37 130
802
394
273
330
500
•377
212	89.1	81.3 Reconnaissance satellite carried an earth
resources package. Reentered on Aug. 30
210	89.0	81.4 Reentered Sept. 3
>
”T3
m
z
a
X
>
3186	717.0	65.5 Probable military early warning satellite
785	100.7	74.0
378	92.3	72.9 Reentered Sept. 14
262	90.0	81.3 Reentered Sept. 18
174	89.6	62.8 Rcenlered Sept. 27
484	94.4	43.6 Third and last of this scries would measure cosmic and gam-
ma radiation, instead of X-rays like its 2 predecessors; reentered Dec. 7
218	90.5	62.8 Recovered Oct. 15. Soviet inti, biosat carried experiments
from USSR and USA plus Czechoslovakia, France, GDR, Hungary, Romania, and Poland. Experiments were in radiation medicine and embryo development in weightlessness
>
un
H
73
O
z
>
c

n
>
z
a
>
m
73
o
z
>
c

*
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int'l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
Sept. 25 Cosmos 1130 USSR 1979-84A C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos U31 USSR I979-84B C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1132 USSR 1979-84C C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1133 USSR 1979-84 D C-l
Plesetsk
and
Cosmos 1134 USSR I979-84E C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
1477
1480
1480
1481
1482
Perigee
(km)
Period
(min)
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
1396	114.6	74.0 Multiple launch (8 satellites) probably for Soviet military
communications
1409	114.8	74.0
>
Co
H
73
o
z
>
c
n
C/-J
>
z
D
>
O
p:
>
o
1424 I 14.9	74.0
1437	115.1	74.0
1452	115.3	74.0
tn
Z
o
><
>
1491
1459
115.4
Oct. 1
Oct. 3
Oct. 5
Cosmos 1135 USSR 1979-84F C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1136 USSR 1979-84G C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1137 USSR 1979-84H C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1138 USSR 1979-85A A-2
Plesetsk
DOD satellite U.S.
1979-86A Titan 3-C ESMC
Ekran 4 USSR 1979-87A D-l-e Baykonur-Tyuratam
Cosmos 1139 USSR 1979-88A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations’-’
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2000 kg? Objective: Television relay
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
1495	1470	115.6
1513	1470	115.8
409	362	92.3
Elements not available
36 810	34 778	1436.5
333	201	89.5
72.9
Reentered Oct. 12
Probably an early warning mission
1.0 Domestic TV-rclay satellite, stationed at 99 °E
72.9
Reentered Oct. 18
546
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country.
Int'l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
Oct. 11 Cosmos 1140 USSR 1979-89A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 750 kg Objective: "Continuation ol outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Oct. 16 Cosmos INI USSR I979-90A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Oct. 20 Molnixa 1-45 USSR 1979-91A A-2-e
Total weight: 1000 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Unavailable
Oct. 22 Cosmos 1142 USSR 1979-92A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation ol outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Oct. 26 Cosmos 1145 USSR 1979-93A A-1
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2500 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Oct. 30 Mai’sat U.S.
1979-94A Scout G WSMC
Total weight: 181 kg Objective: Measure near-earth magnetic field and crustal anomalies Description: Octagonal prism with 4 solar panels and boom
794
1000
38 032
417
614
561
Perigee
(km)
Period
(min)
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
772	100.5	74.1
70
O
z
>
c
n
or>
952	104.6	82.9 Probable nnvsat
2320	717.7	64.7 Domestic eomsal
352	92.4	72.9 Reentered Nov. 4
592	96.8	81.2 Military satellite, probably an electronic ferret
354	93.8	96.8 NASA scientific satellite using parts left over from small
astronomical satellite (1975-37A) and designed for 4mo lifetime; reentered June II. 1980
AND AERONAUTICS	APPENDIX A
547
Oct. 31
882
864
102.4
Nov.
Nov.
Nov.
Nov.
Dec.
Meteor 2-5 USSR 1979-95A A-l ' Plesetsk
1	Intercosmos 20
USSR 1979-96A C-l • Plesetsk
2	Cosmos 1144
USSR 1979-97A A-2
Plesetsk
21	DOD satellite
U.S.
1979-98A Titan 3C ESMC
DOD satellite U.S.
1979-98B Titan 3C ESMC
27 Cosmos 1145 USSR 1979-99A A-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2750 kg?
Objective: Return meteorological data • and cloudeover photographs Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 500 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 550 each Objective: U.S. military comsals
Description: Cylindrical
Total weight: 2500 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations Description: Unavailable
5
Cosmos 1146 USSR 1979-100A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 1000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
510	465	94.4
357	167	89.8
35 792	35 780	1436.1
35 793	35 782	1436.2
597	586	96.5
494	444	94.0
81.2
Fifth of second-generation Soviet metesats
74.0
Eastern-bloc cooperative launch
of a scientific satellite, reentered March 5, 1981
>
*d
*d
m
z
2
x
>
67.2 Maneuverable reconnaissance satellite; reentered Dec. 4
2.0 Geostationary orbit
2.0
81.2 Probable electronic ferret
>
co
H
7S
O
z
>
c
H
n
>
z
o
50
o
H
n
00
65.9
Reentered Nov. 25, 1981
LA
OO
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int’l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
Dec. 7
RCA-Soia»n
U.S.
1979-101A
Delta
ESMC
Total weight: 895 kg
Objective: Commercial domestic comsat
Description: Box 1.2 x 1,2 x 1.6m carrying solar panels and antennas
Dee. 12 Cosmos H47 USSR 1979-102A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation ol outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
35 798
418
Dee. 16
Sovuz T USSR 1979- 103A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 7000 kg Objective: Test flight of recoverable transport craft for use with orbiting space stations Description: Unavailable
Dee. 24 CAT
ESA
1979 104
Arianc
Kourou
Total weight: 1602 kg (incl, ballusat) Objective: "Capsule Arianc Technologique" carrying instrumentation to measure Ariane performance Description: Cylinder
Dee. 28
Horizon! 3 USSR 1979-105 A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 3000 kg’ Objective: Communications
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1148 USSR I979-I06A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg’’
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
378
24 527
35 792
342
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
162	630	23.9 Launched by NASA tor Radio Corporation of America;
satellite lost when apogee motor fired to inject it into geostationary orbit
352	92.3	72.9 Reentered Dec. 26
>
C/5
H
73
o
z
>
c
H
n
Co
>
z
o
>
m
73
o
z
364	91.9	51.6 Soyuz 7'docked with Satyui 6 on Dec. 19. Previous tests of
similar craft were Cosmos 1001 and Cosmos 1074 (1978-36A and I979-8A). Recovered March 26. 1980
157	424.9	17.8
35 781	1436.1	3.4
Geostationary comsat to carry' TV relays of 1980 Olympic games in Moscow from Stalsionar 5 position at 58 °E
>
T
m
z
2
x
>
173
89.7
67.0
Maneuverable long-life reconnaissance satellite; reentered Jan. 10. 1980
1980
SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS,
550
SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS, 1980
Launch
Date
Spacecraft, Country, lnt'1 Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee	Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km) (km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
Jan. 9	Cosmos 1149 USSR 1980-1A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	418	353	92.3	72.9	Reentered Jan. 23
Jan. 1 1	Molnisa 1-46 USSR 1980-2A A-2-c Plesetsk	Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Communications Description: Unavailable	39 785	556	717.5	64.1	Domestic comsat
Jan. 14	Cosmos 1150 USSR 1980-3A C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 700 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	1012	964	104.9	82.9	Navsat
Jan. 18	FltSatCom 3 U.S. 1980-4A Atlas Centaur ESMC	Total weight: 1884 kg (including fuel) Objective: To provide links between small ground stations in 200 to 400 MHz band Description: Hexagonal cylinder	35 791	35 781	1436.1	2.0	Third of this series of military comsats, on station at I72°E: launched by NASA for DOD
Jan. 23	Cosmos 1151 USSR 1980-5A C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 700 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	641	613	97.3	82.5	Ocean survey satellite
Jan. 24	Cosmos 1152 USSR 1980-6A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	177	115	87.4	67.1	Reentered Feb. 6
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS	APPENDIX A
Jan. 25
1015
959
104.9
Cosmos 1153 USSR 1980-7A C-l
Plesetsk
Jan. 30 Cosmos 1154 USSR 1980-8A A-l
Plesetsk
Feb. 7	Cosmos 1155
USSR 1980-9A A-2
Plesetsk
DOD satellite U.S.
1980-10A Titan 3D WSMG
Feb. 9	NavStar 5
U.S.
3980-11A Atlas F WSMC
Feb. 11 Cosmos 1156 USSR 1980-12A C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1157 USSR I980-12B C-l
Plesetsk
TolaF weight: 700 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2500 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 13 300 kg (including fuel) Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Cylinder
Total weight: 433 kg?
Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Cylinder with 4 vanes
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
613	603
414	355
502	224
20 146	20 083
1473	1396
1475	1413
96.9
92.4
91.9
715.2
114.5
114.8
82.9
Probable navsat
81.2
72.9
97.0
63.7
74.0
74.0
Probable electronic reconnaissance satellite
o
><
>
Reentered Feb. 21
Maneuverable reconnaissance satellite; reentered Oct. 30, 1982
Navigation satellite
Multiple launch (8 satellites) probably for military communications
H
§
Z
>
c
H
>
Z
o
§
z
>
c
H
O
552
Launch
Date
Spacecraft.
Country.
Int'l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee (km) (km)
Cosmos 1158 USSR 1980-12C C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos ! 159 USSR 1980-12D C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1160 USSR 1980-12E C-l
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
1475	14?1
1476	1449
1480	1464
Cosmos 1161 USSR 1980-12 F C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
1500	1466
Period	Inclination
(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
115.0	74.0
115.2	74.0
>
H
§
Z
>
O
on
>
Z
D
>
m
x
o
z
>
c
H
n
CO
115.4	74.0
115.6	74.0
>
z
D
><
>
553
and
Feb.
Feb.
Feb.
Feb.
Cosmos 1162 USSR 1980-12G C-1
Plesetsk.
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations’’
Description: Spheroid?
1517
Cosmos 1163 USSR 1980-12H C-1
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
12 Cosmos 1164 USSR 1980-13A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: 1250 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
1541
40 858
14
17
20
SMM
u.s.
1980-14A
Delta
ESMC
Tansei 4 Japan 1980-15A Mu 35 Kagoshima
Ratluga 6 USSR 1980- I6A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 2315 kg	497
Objective: Observe the sun and solar corona during 1980-81 maximum of the sunspot cycle, to measure gamma-ray, X-ray, and ultraviolet emissions and the solar constant Description: Cylindrical box with 2 solar panels
Total weight: Unavailable	604
Objective: Scientific observations
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable	35 792
Objective: Communications relay
Description: Unavailable
1470
1469
435
496
518
35 748
115.8	74.0
m
z
o
><
>
116.1	74.0
736.9	62.8 Reentered Jan. 12, 1981
94.5	28.5 Solar Maximum Mission spacecraft designed for retrieval
from orbit by a Space Shuttle mission
95.8	36.7 Japan-built and-launched scisat; reentered May 12, 1983
H
73
O
Z
§
H
>
Z
o
>
m
73
o
z
>
c
H
1435.3
3.6 Geostationary comsal, at the Statsionar 2 position, 35°E
554
Launch
Date
Spacecraft.
Country,
Int’l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee (km) (km)
Feb. 21	Cosmos 1165 USSR 1980-17A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	350	155
Feb. 22	ECS 2 Ayame Japan 1980-18A Nu Tanegashima	Total weight: 260 kg Objective: Communications Description; Cylinder	35 592	213
March 3	DOD satellite U.S. I980-I9A Atlas F WSMC	Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed Description: Unavailable	1147	1060
March 4	Cosmos 1/66 USSR 1980-20A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” TViTrintinn' 1 Irntr-iil-iKla	430	356
March 14	Cosmos 1167 USSR 1980-21A F-l~m Baykonur-Tyuratam	Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	444	428
March 17	Cosmos 1168 USSR 1980-22A C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 700 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	1011	956
Period	Inclination
(min) (degrees)
Remarks
89.6	72.9 Reentered March 5
627.0	24.5 Japan-built and -launched experimental eomsat; contact lost
when apogee motor should have fired. ECS I (1979-19A) lost also
>
on
H
X
O
2
>
c
H
on
>
2
a
x
o
2
>
C
H
107.3	63.5
92.5	72.9 Reentered March 18
93.3	65.0 Probable ocean survey reconnaissance satellite; reentered
Oct. 1, 1981
tn
2
a
x
104.8
82.9
Probable nuvsat
March 27	Cosmos 1169	Total weight: Unavailable
USSR	Objective: Undisclosed
1980-23A
C-l	Description: Unavailable .	.
Plesetsk
Progress 8 USSR 1980-24A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
April 1	Cosmos 1170
USSR 1980-25A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
April 3	Cosmos 1171
USSR 1980-26A C-l
Plesetsk
April 9	Soyuz 35
USSR 1980-27A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
April 12	Cosmos 1172
USSR 1980-28A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: 7000 kg?'
Objective: Carry replacement parts and materials to Salyut 6 in preparation for visit of Soyuz 35 Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Descriptions: Unavailable
Total weight: 6500 kg?
Objective: Carry cosmonauts to orbiting space stations Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 1000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
April 17 Cosmos 1173 USSR 1980-29A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
515	476	945
354	338	914
345	89.7
1006	965	104.8
346	336	91.3
37 986	2409	718.6
355	155	89.6
65.8 Probable interception test or radar calibration target;
reentered March 3, 1983
51.6	Docked with Salyut 6 March 29; Progress 8 engine served to propel the Salyut/Progress complex to a higher orbit April 13. Undocked April 25, reentered atmosphere over the Pacific April 26
70.4	Reentered April 12
65.8 Probable target for Cosmos 1174 satellite interception test
51.6	Capsule carrying Lt. Col. Leonid Popov and Valery
Ryumin docked with Salyut 6 April 10 at forward airlock; crew transferred supplies from Progress 8. Soyuz 35 returned safely June 3 with Soyuz 36 crew
66.0 Probable early warning satellite
70.3
Reentered April 28
La
o\
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
lnt'l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee	Period
(km) (km)	(min)
April 18
April 26
Cosmos 1174 USSR 1980-30A F-l-m Baykonur-Tyuratam Cosmos 1175 USSR 1980-31A A-2-e Plesetsk NavStar U.S.
1980-32A Allas F WSMC
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Satellite intercept
Description: Unavailable
384
Total weight: 1500 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 450 kg?
Objective: Form pan of U.S. global positioning system
Description: Cylinder with four vanes
459	252
20 451	19 912
104.5
91.7
718.0
April 27 Progress 9 USSR 1980-33A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 7000 kg?
Objective: Unmanned vehicle carrying supplies to crew aboard Salyut 6 Description: Unavailable
April 29 Cosmos 1176 USSR 1980-34A F-l-m Baykonur-Tyuratain
Total weight: Unavailable Objective. Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
362	333	91.4
949	889	1Q3.4
Inclination
(degrees)
66.1
62.8
63.8
51.6
64.8
Remarks
Satellite-interception test using Cosmos 1171 (I980-26A) as primary target
on
H
70
O
z
>
c
H
on
Probable failed Molniya 3-type satellite; reentered May 28
U.S. navsat
Docked witb Salyut 6 (occupied by Popov and Rvumin April 29; undocked May 20. Reentered May 22 Pacific Ocean
Radar-equipped ocean survey satellite powered by a nuclear reactor: microthruster would assist orbit maneuvers
a
><
>
AND AERONAUTICS
557
341
May 7
May 14
May 15
May 20
May 23
May 26
Cosmos 1/77 USSR 1980-35A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1178 USSR 1980-36A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1179 USSR • 1980-37A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700jkg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1180 USSR 1980-38A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1181 USSR 1980-39A C-l • Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1182 USSR 1980-40A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Soyuz 36 USSR 1980-41A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight; 6600 kg?
Objective: Carry crew to orbiting space station Salyut 6 Description: Unavailable
413
1003
290
1002
250
354
165
89.6
67.2
Maneuverable reconnaissance satellite; reentered June 12
354	92.3	72.8 Reentered May 22
>
*0
*0
m
z;
o
£
>
281	97.6	82.9 Possibly part of a navsat system; positioned near Cosmos
1181 (1980-39A)
238	89.8	62.8 Reentered May 26
970	104.8	82.9 Probable navsat
210	89.1	82.4 Reentered June 5
333	91.4	51.6 Vehicle carrying Valery Kubasov, commander, and Ber-
talan Farkas of Hungary, flight engineer, docked at rear port of Salyui 6 May 27, to join Ryumin and Popov; Soyuz 36 crew returned to earth in Soyuz 35 capsule, landing June 3. (Soyuz 36 capsule was recovered July 31, with crew of Soyuz 37 aboard)
H
8
z
>
c
H
>
z;
o
>
m
50
O
z
>
c
o
Launch
Date
May 28
May 29
June 4
June 5
June 6
Spacecraft.
Country.
Int'l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Pavload Data	Apogee
"	(km)
Cosmos 1183 USSR 1980-42A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
415
NOAA H	Total weight: 1405 kg
U.S.	Objective: U.S. meteorological satellite
1980-43A
Atlas F	Description: Irregular box with solar panel
WSMC
Cosmos 1184 USSR I980-44A A-1
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2500 kg?
Objective; "Continuation of outer .space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
1447
616
Sovuz 12 USSR 1980-45A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyurutam
Cosmos 1185 USSR I980-46A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 7000 kg?
Objective: Manned test flight of modified
Soyuz vehicle; followup of unmanned tests Description: Unavailable (modifications announced were solar arrays, plus computerized docking system making cosmonauts independent of ground control)
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
348
283
Cosmos 1186 USSR 1980-47A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 550 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
518
Perigee
(km)
356
265
592
333
259
471
Period
(min)
92.3
102.1
96.8
91.3
90.0
Inclination
(degrees)	Remarks
72.9 Reentered June 11
03
H
o
>
C
3
o
<jn
Launched by NASA for NOAA, meicsat intended for an 87 km orbit at 99° inclination; booster failed to inject it into correct orbit; satellite inoperable; reentered Mav 3. 1981
81.2 Probable electronic ferret
51.6	1 he crew of Yuri Malyshev, commander, and Vladimir
Aksyonov, (light engineer, docked with aft airlock of Salyui 6 on June 6. New space suits tested, us well as new on-board systems. Reentry module soft-landed June 9
82.4 Probable earth resources satellite; reentered June 20
94.6
74.0
Reentered Jan. 1, 1982
AND AERONAUTICS	APPENDIX A
559
518
417
June 12
June 13
June 14
June 18
June 21
June 26
Cosmos 1187 USSR 1980-48A A-2
Plesetsk
Horizont 4 USSR 1980-49A D-l-E Baykonur-fyuratam
Cosmos 1188 USSR 1980-50A A-2-e Plesetsk
Meteor 1-30 USSR 1980-51A A-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
DOD satellite U.S.
1980-52A Titan 3D WSMC
DOD satellite U.S.
1980-52C Titan 3D WSMC
Molniya 1-47 USSR 1980-53A A-2-e Plesetsk
Cosmos 1189 USSR 1980-54A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 5000 kg?
Objective: Communications
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 1250 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2200 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 13 330 kg? Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Cylinder
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight; 1000 kg?
Objective: Communications
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
35 810
37 712
602
265
1331
38 916
331
35 765
2353
544
168
1330
1439
225
94.6
74.0
Reentered June 26
1436.2	3.0 Comsat intended for Statsionar 4 location at 14 °W
717.2	67.3 Probable early warning satellite
96.1	97.8
Combined earth resources and meteorological satellite
88.9	96.5 Maneuverable reconnaissance satellite carrying piggyback
payload with its own motor; reentered March 6, 1981
112.3	96.6
717.8	64.8 Domestic comsat
90.1
72.9
Reentered July 10
560
Launch Date	Spacecraft, Country, Int’l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site	Payload Data	Apogee (km)	Perigee (km)	Period (min)
June 29	Progress 10 USSR 1980-55A A-2 Baykonur- Tyurutam	Total weight: 7000 kg'? Objective: Unmanned craft carrying supplies to crew aboard manned space station Description: Unavailable	340	325	91.1
July 1	Cosmos 1 / 90 USSR I980-56A C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 750 kg? Objective: ‘Continuation of outer space investigations'' Description: Unavailable	779	783	100.7
July 2	Cosmos 119/ USSR I980-57A A-2-c Plesetsk	Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed Description: Unavailable	37 358	2953	716.9
July 9	Cosmos 1192 USSR 1980-58A C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Ellipsoid?	1474	1395	114.5
	and				
	Cosmos 1193 USSR I980-58B C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Ellipsoid?	1473	1411	114.7
	and				
	Cosmos 1194 USSR 1980-58C C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Ellipsoid?	1472	1430	114.9
Inclination
(degrees)
51.6
74.0
65.3
74.0
74.0
74.0
on
H
TO
Remarks	O
7,
>
a.
H
Vehicle docked with aft airlock of Salvut 6 Julv 1; deor-	^
bited July 19 over Pacific Ocean
Probable early warning satellite
Multiple launch (8 satellites) probably for military communications; launch announcement said remote sensing was included in mission, meaning possibly more than one type of payload
AND AERONAUTICS	APPENDIX A
Cosmos 1195 USSR 1980-58D C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1196 USSR 1980-58E C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1197 USSR 1980^58F C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1198 USSR 1980-58G C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1199 USSR 1980-58H C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1200 USSR 1980-59A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Ellipsoid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Ellipsoid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Ellipsoid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Ellipsoid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Ellipsoid?
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
1474
1474
1490
1506
1528
340
1447
115.1
74.0
>
-o
"V
CD
z
a
x
1465	115.3	74.0
1469	115.5	74.0
1472	115.7	74.0
1471	116.0	74.0
225	90.2	72.9 Reentered July 23
>
c
>
z
a
>
m
§
z
>
c
Launch
Date
Spacecraft, Country, lnt'l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee	Perigee	Period
(km) (km)	(min)
July 14
July 15
Ekran 5 USSR 1980-60A D-l-c Baykonur-Tyuratarn
Total weight: 2000 kg? Objective: Television relay
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1201 USSR 1980-61A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
July 18 Rohini I	Total weight: 40 kg
India	Objective: Test satellite launching
1980-62A
SLV-3	Description: Spheroid 0.5 dia.
Sriharikota Is.
Molniva 3-13 USSR I980-63A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: 1500 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Unavailable
July 23
July 24
Sovuz 37 USSR 1980-64A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 6500 kg?
Objective: Carry crew to orbiting space station Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1202 USSR 1980-65A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
69 711	1953	1438.4
246	211	89.1
919	306	96.9
38 265	2090	717.8
351	336	91.4
289	226	89.7
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
9.6 Domestic comsat to make television available to remote communities; on station at 99 ®E
82.3 Reentered July 28
>
to
73
O
>
C
n
to
>
Z
u
>
m
73
o
z
>
c
H
44.8 First India-built and -launched small satellite; booster also of India design and manufacture; reentered May 20. 1981
3.7
51.6 Vehicle carrying an Intercosmos crew of Viktor Gorbatko and Pham Tuan of Viet Nam docked with Salyut 6 on July 24. This crew returned to earth July 31 in Soyuz 36 vehicle. The Soyuz 37 capsule returned Oct. 11 bringing Popov and Ryumin back from flight of 184 days. 20 hr, 12 min.
72.8 Reentered Aug. 7	^
m
z
o
><
>
273
July 31
Aug. 12
Aug. 15
Aug. 22
Aug. 26
Sept. 23
Cosmos 1203 USSR 1980*66A A-2. Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: .“Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: U ^available ,
Cosmos 1204 USSR 1980-67A C-l
Kapustin Yar
Total weight: 550 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1205 USSR . 1980-68A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1206 USSR 1980-69A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2500 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations’’
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1207 USSR 1980-70A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations''
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1208 USSR 1980-71A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1211 USSR 1980-77A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 5500 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
538
293
606
228
336
240
259
89.9
82.3
Reentered Aug. 14
345	93.3	50.7 Reentered Feb. 23, 1981
>
m
z
o
X
>
225	89.7	72.8 Reentered Aug. 26
604	98.6	81.2 Probable electronic reconnaissance satellite
217	89.0	82.3 Reentered Sept. 4
171	89.6	67.1 Photo reconnaissance satellite;
reentered Sept. 24
215	89.1	82.4 Probable earth resources satellite;
reentered Oct. 4
H
§
Z
s
H
a
>
z
>
tn
§
Z
£
H
n
Launch
Date
Sept. 26
Sept. 28
Oct. 3
Oct. 5
Oct. 10
Oct. 14
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int'I Designation.	Payload Data	Apogee Perigee
Vehicle	(km) (km)
Launch Site
Cosmos 1212 USSR 1980-78A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Progress 11 USSR 1980-79A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1213 USSR I980-80A A-2
Plesetsk
Rcuhtga 7 USSR 1980-81A D-l-e Buykonur-Tyuratam
Cosmos 1214 USSR 1980-82A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 7000 kg?
Objective: Unmanned cargo craft carrying supplies to Salyut 6 Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 5000 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Una variable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1215 USSR I980-83A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 750 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
247	208
339	333
296	230
35 795	35 781
345	172
549	496
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
82.3
51.6
72.9
3.2
67.2
Possible earth resources satellite; orbit vet}' close to that of Cosmos }21); recovered Oct. 9
H
§
2
>
C
H
Supplies intended to extend orbital lifetime of Salx-ut 6 beyond recovery of Soyuz 37Oct. II: undocked from Salyui 6 Dec. 9; reentered over Indian Ocean Dec. 11
Reentered Oct. 17
First Soviet comsal positioned at the Statsionar 1 location 84 °E
Long-life maneuverable reconnaissance satellite; reentered Oct. 23
74.0
Reentered May 12, 1983
:S AND AERONAUTICS
415
354
Oct. 16
Oct. 24
Oct. 30
Oct. 31
Nov. 4
Nov. J2
Nov. 15
Cosmos 1216 USSR 1980-84A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations’'
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1217 USSR 1980-85A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: 1000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation or outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1218 USSR 1980-86A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
FltSatCom 4 U.S.
I980-87A Atlas Centaur ESMC
Total weight: 1884 (including fuel) Objective: Provide 2-way communications between small ground stations on 200 to 400 MHz frequencies
Cosmos 1219 USSR 1980-88A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1220 USSR 1980-89A F-l-m Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1221 USSR 1980-90A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
SBS1
U.S.
I980-91A
Delta
ESMC
Total weight: 550 kg
Objective: Establish commercial communications system covering continental U.S. Description: Cylinder 6.6m high,
2.2 dia
38 198	2131
354	171
35 797	35 777
321	237
864	571
414	356
35 790	35 782
92.3
72.9
Recovered Oct. 30
7.3
89.8
1436.2
90.1
99.2
92.3
1436.1
66.9 Probable early warning satellite
m
z
a
x
>
64.9 Reentered Dec. 12
1.2 Launched by NASA for DOD; military comsat stationed at 172 °E
72.9 Reentered Nov. 13
65.0 Reconnaissance satellite controlled by microthruster; working with Cosmos 1167 (1980 21-A); ground tracks repeating every 4 days lie precisely halfway between those of Cosmos 1167
72.9 Reentered Nov. 26
0.0 Launched by NASA, first of 3 for Satellite Business
Systems Inc.; first mission using solid-fuel Payload Assist Module instead of usual Delta third stage; satellite orbiting at 106 °W
H
§
Z
>
>
z
o
>
m
§
z
>
C
H
O
566
Launch
Date
Spacecraft.
Country,
Int'l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee	Period
(km) (km)	(min)
Nov. 16 Molniya 1-48 Total weight: 1000 kg?
USSR	Objective: Communications
1980-92A
A-2-e	Description: Unavailable
Plesetsk
Nov. 21 Cosmos 1222 USSR 1980-93 A A-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2500 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Nov. 27
Sovuz T3 USSR 19 80-94A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 6600 kg?
Objective: Carry 3-man crew to orbiting space station, refurbish Salyut Description: Standard Soyuz T design
Dec. 1
Dec. 5
Cosmos 1223 USSR 1980-95 A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: 1000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1224 USSR 1980-96A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1225 USSR 1980-97A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
38 256	2096	717.8
609	606	96.9
354	283	90.8
37 924	2445	718.1
415	355	92.3
1026	943	104.8
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
64.5 Domestic comsat
81.2 Probable electronic ferret
51.6 Second manned flight of Soyuz T craft, first to carry 3 cosmonauts since Soyuz il in 1971. Vehicle carrying Leonid Kizim, commander; Oleg Makarov, flight engineer; and Gennady Strckalov, research engineer. Docked with Salyut 6 Nov. 28
63.4 Probable early warning satellite
72.9	Reentered Dec. 15
92.9
Navsat
Dec. 6
Intelsat 5A-F2 U.S.
1980-98A Atlas Centaur ESMC
Total weight: 1065 Objective: Orbit latest model Intelsat, 3-axis-stabilized w/control thrusters Description: Box with 2 solar panels
Dec. 10 Cosmos 1226 USSR 1980-99A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Dec. 13
Dec. 16
DOD satellite U.S. military launch: no details U.S.	available
1980-100A (Vehicle & launch site unavailable)
Cosmos 1227 USSR 198O-101A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Dec. 23 Cosmos 1228 USSR 1980-102A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
and
Cosmos 1229 USSR 1980-102B C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheriod?
and
Cosmos 1230 USSR 1980-102C C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
35 801
1009
306
1462
1462
1461
35 774
959
227
1392
1413
1399
1436.2
0.0
Launched by NASA for INTELSAT; first launch of new Intelsat capable of 12,000 simultaneous telephone calls and 2 TV channels; stationed over Atlantic Ocean
104.8	82.9 Soviet navsat
>
m
z
a
x
>
89.9	72.8 Reentered Dec. 28
114.4	74.0 Multiple launch (8 satellites) probably for military
communications
114.6	74.0
114.5	74.0
H
§
Z
§
H
n
>
z
a
>
m
o
z
>
c
H
568
Launch
Dale
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int'l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee	Perigee	Period
(km) (km)	(min)
and
Cosmos 1231 USSR 1980-102D C-l
Pleset.sk
and
Cosmos 1232 USSR I980-102E C-l
Plesetsk
and
Cosmos 1233 USSR 1980-102F
C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1234 USSR 1980-1020 C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
1462	1405	114.5
1462	1411	114.6
1462	1417	114.7
1462	1408	114.6
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
74.0
74.0
H
73
c
z
>
a
H
o
>
tn
73
o
z
>
c
H
n
74.0
74.0
>
-o
-o
m
z
a
x
>
and
Cosmos 1235 USSR 1980-102H C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation .of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
Dec. 25 Prognoz 8	Total weight: 950 kg?
USSR	Objective: “Continuation of outer space
1980-103A	investigations”
A-2-e	Description: Unavailable
Baykonur-Tyuratam
Dec. 26
Ekran 6 USSR 1980-104A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1236 USSR 1980-105A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
1462
197
364
35 822
364
1412
978
35 780’
170
5687.8
65.8 High-altitude magnetospheric observatory
1436.9	3.0 Domestic comsat stationed at 99°E
90.0	67.1 Long-life recoverable reconnaissance satellite, reentered
Jan. 21, 1981
SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS,
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED •AhN!M)N*U£ Hi
SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS, 1981

Launch
Date
Spacecraft.
Country,
Int i Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee	Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
Jan. 6	Cosmos 1237 USSR 1981-1A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: ‘'Continuation of outer space Description: Unavailable	415	355	92.3	72.9	Reentered Jan. 20
Jan. 9	Molniva 3-14 USSR 1981-2 A A-2-e Plesetsk	Total weight: 2000 kg? Objective: Communications Description: Unavailable	39 325	1024	717.7	63.4	Comsat
Jan. 16	Cosmos 1238 USSR 1981-3A C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 550 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	1872	401	108.1	83.0	
	Cosmos 1239 USSR 1981-4A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 5500 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	234	213	89.0	82.3	Reentered Jan. 28
Jan. 20	Cosmos 1240 USSR 1981-5A A-2 Baykonur- Tyuratum	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	361	167	89.8	64.9	Reentered Feb. 17
Jan. 21	Cosmos 1241 USSR 1981-6A C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 700 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	1006	976	104.9	65.8	Target for Cosmos 1243 in test of satellite-interception system; later target for Cosmos 1258 (1981-24A)
IAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS	APPENDIX A
319
--j
Jan. 24
Jan. 27
Jan. 30
Feb. 2
Feb. 6
Progress 12 USSR 1981-7A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1242 USSR 1981-8A A-l
Plesetsk
Molniya 1-49 USSR 1981-9A A-2-e Plesetsk
Cosmos 1243 USSR 1981-lOA F-l-m Baykonur-Tyuratam
Intercosmos 21 USSR 1981-11A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 7000 kg?
Objective: Carrying supplies to orbiting space station Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2500 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 1800 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Test satellite-interception systems
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 550 kg?
Objective: Study surface of earth and its oceans
Description: Unavailable
Feb. 11
Feb. 12
Kiku 3	Total weight: 640
Japan	Objective: Test technical equipment
1981-12A
N-2	Description: Cylinder 2.8m long, 2.1 dia
Tanegashima
Cosmos 1244 USSR 1981-13A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
634
38 465
1015
514
31272
1005
294
90.6
51.6
Unmanned cargo vehicle docked with Salyut 6 on Jan. 26
m
z
D
s
611	97.2	81.2 Probable electronic ferret
1862	717.2	63.3 Comsat
296	97.9	65.8 Using Cosmos 1241 as target, Cosmos 1243 made intercept
at beginning of third orbit and moved into reentry trajectory
473	94.5	74.0 USSR-built and -launched scisat carrying instruments from
Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, and Romania, reentered July 7, 1982
265	546.7	28.4 Japan-built and-launched technical-experiment satellite car-
rying plasma engine and other test equipment
H
73
o
z
>
c
H
>
z
o
>
m
§
z
>
c
H
n
960
104.8
83.0
Navsat
574
Launch Date	Spacecraft, Country, Int’l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site	Payload Data	Apogee (kill)
Feb. 13	Cosmos 1245 USSR I981-I4A A *2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: '‘Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	415
Feb. 18	Cosmos 1246 USSR 1981-15A A-2 Baykonur- Tyuratam	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	265
Feh. 19	Cosmos 1247 USSR I98I-I6A A-2-e Plesetsk	Total weight: 1900 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	37 378
Fob. 21	Hinoiuri (Astro I) Japan I981-17A Mu-3S Kagoshima Is.	Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Solar studies Description: Cylinder 1m long, lm dia	594
	Comstar D-4 u.s. 198I-18A Atlas Centaur ESMC	Total weight: 1516 kg Objective: Communications Description: Cylinder 6. lm long, 2.4 dia	35 785
Feb. 28	DOD satellite U.S. 1981-19A Titan 3D WSMC	Total weight: Unavailable (13 330 kg?) Objective: Undisclosed Description: Cylinder 15m long, 3m dia	332
Perigee
(km)
354
195
2647
543
35 793
134
Period	Inclination
(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
92.3
89.1
71 1.1
96.0
1436.2
89.2
72.8 Reentered Feb. 27
64.9 Recoverable maneuverable reconnaissance satellite; reentered March 13
H
w
O
z
>
c
H
n
tri > z a > m
73
o
z
>
c
H
o

64.7 Probable first of new scries of early warning satellites
31.3 Japan seisat carrying X-ray telescope and spectrograph
0.1 launched by NASA for ComSatCorp; to he stationed at 127 °W
96.4 Reconnaissance satellite; reentered June 20
-o
m
z
c
x
>
345
March 5 Cosmos 1248 USSR 1981-20A A-2
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1249 USSR 1981-21A F-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
March 6 Cosmos 1250 USSR 1981-22A C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1251 USSR 1981-22B C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1252 USSR 1981-22C C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1253 USSR 1981-22D C-l
y,	Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Ocean survey
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
976
1469
1471
1470
1494
171
89.7
67.1
Maneuverable reconnaissance satellite; reentered April 4
>
-Q
-Q
tfl
2
a
907	103.9	65.0 Radar-carrying satellite powered by nuclear reactor; mis-
sion complete June 19; nuclear reactor boosted into higher orbit
1388	114.4	74.0 Multiple launch (8 satellites) of comsats
1401	114.6	74.0
1416	114.7	74.0
1466	115.6	74.0
H
30
o
2
>
C
H
n
vi
>
2
O
>
m
30
O
2
>
C
H
n
Launch
Date
Spacecraft.
Country,
Int'l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
P.yk„d Data	XT
Cosmos 1254 USSR I981-22E C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1255 USSR 1981-22F C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1256 USSR 1981-22G C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1257 USSR I981-22H C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Descrinfinn: Snheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg'? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
1471
1470
1475
1478
Perigee
(km)
Period	Inclination
(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
1429 I 14.9	74.0
1443	115.0	74.0
H
70
o
z
>
c
H
>
■z
o
>
m
73
O
z
>
c
H
n
1454	115.2	74.0
1466	115.4	74.0
>
m
o
x
>
March 12
350
338
91.4
March 14
March 16
March 17
March 18
March 20
Soyuz T-4	Total weight: 7000 kg?
USSR	Objective: Ferry crew to orbiting	space
1981-23A	station, preparing for further flights
A-2	of international crews
Baykonur-	Description: Unavailable
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1258	Total weight: Unavailable
USSR	Objective: Test satellite-intercept system
1981-24A
F-l-m	Description: Unavailable
Baykonur-Tyuratam
DOD satellite	Total weight: Unavailable
U.S.	Objective: Communications
1981-25A
Titan 3C	Description: Unavailable
ESMC
Cosmos 1259 USSR 1981-26A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuralam
Raduga 8 USSR 1981-27A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Cosmos 1260 USSR 1981-28A F-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2000 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
1024	301	98.0
Elements not available
415	348	92.2
48 604	31 012	1646.4
447	428	93.3
51.6 Vehicle carrying Col. Vladimir Kovalyonok and flight
engr. Viktor Savinikh docked at forward port of Salyut 6 March 13. Savinikh was world’s 100th space traveller: 50 earlier USSR cosmonauts; 43 U.S. astronauts; and l each from Czech., EGer., Pol., Hung., Bulg., Cuba, and Vietnam. T-4 crew returned safely May 26 in T-4 descent module.
65.8 Using Cosmos 1241 as target (previous attempt was Feb.
2) Cosmos 1258 used a radar seeker to intercept the vehicle. It exploded on orbit 2 and damaged the target. Third such test in 10 mo, but first operational test of homing device since 1977
>
"T3
m
z
a
x
>
Geostationary orbit at 71 °E
70.4 Reentered March 31
0.8 Comsat on station at StaLsionar 2 location, 35 6E
65.0 Reconnaissance satellite, possibly working Cosmos 1220 (l980-89A), reentered May 22, 1982
-4
§
z
£
-4
O
>
m
po
o
z
>
c
n
-J
00
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int'l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
March 22 Sovuz 39 USSR 1981-29A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 6500 kg?
Objective: Ferry' international crew to orbiting space station Description: Unavailable
March 24	Molniya 3-15	Total weight: 2000 kg?
USSR	Objective: Communications
1981-30A
A-2-e	Description: Unavailable
Plesetsk
March 31 Cosmos 1261 USSR 1981-31A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
April 7 Cosmos 1262 USSR 198!-32 A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
April 9 Cosmos 1263 USSR 1981-33A C-l
Plesetsk
Tout! weight: 700 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
350
39 616
36 663
324
1879
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
336	91.3	51.6 Vehicle carrying Vladimir Dzhanibekov and
Jugderdemidyn Gurrageha of Mongolia (8th non-Soviet cosmonaut) to dock with Salvut 6 March 23; recovered March 30
735	717.7	64.8
>
H
73
O
z
>
c
H
oo
>
Z
a
>
pn
73
o
z
>
c
H
n
2669	717.3	64.0 Probable early warning satellite
216	89.9	72.9 Reentered April 21
392	108.0	83.0
pn
Z
a
><
579
250
238
89.3
April 12
April 15
April 16
April 21
April 24
April 25
April 28
STS 1 US.
1981-34A
Columbia
KSC
Cosmos 1264 USSR 1981-35A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuralam
Cosmos 1265 USSR 1981-36A A-2
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1266 USSR 1981-37A F-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
DOD satellite US.
1981-38A Titan 3B/ Agena D WSMC
Cosmos 1267 USSR 1981-39A D-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1268 USSR 1981-40A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 68 800 kg?
Objective: Test flight of Space Transportation System Description: Unpowered flight vehicle 37m long, 24m span
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Communications (DOD’s satellite data system)
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 15 000 kg?
Objective: Test flight of “Star" space station module Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
416	362	92.4
356	224	90.4
965	891	103.6
No information available
260	192	89.0
282	224	89.6
40.4	Crew (astronauts John Young and Robert Crippen) landed	>
April 14 on dry lakebed at Edwards AFB, Calif.
cn
Z
o
X
70.4	Reentered April 29	^
72.8 Reentered April 28
64.8 Probable ocean survey satellite
Military comsat
51.6 Initial orbit plane 10°E of Salyui 6\ distance reduced gradually to permit docking at rear port of Salyut 6 June 19
H
§
Z
>
c
H
>
Z
a
>
tfl
§
Z
>
c
H
70.4
Reentered May 12
Launch
Dale
Spacecraft.
Country,
Int'l Designation,
Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
May 7 Cosmos 1269 USSR 1981 -41A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 750 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
May 14 Sovuz 40 USSR 1981 -42 A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuralam
Meteor 2-7 USSR 1981 -43 A A-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6800 kg Objective: Ferry international crew to orbiting space station Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2500 kg? Objective: Weather observations
Description: Unavailable
May 15 NOVA 1 U.S.
1981 -44 A
Scout
WSMC
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Test U.S. Navy's improved Transit navigation satellite Description: Unavailable
May 18
Cosmos 1270 USSR 1981 -45 A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratum
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
803
345
887
1203
348
Perigee
(km)
Period
(min)
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
788	100.8	74.1
331	91.2	51.6 Vehicle carrying commander Leonid Popov (on second
visit to Salyut 6) and (light engineer Dmitru Prunariu of Romania (last E. bloc country unrepresented) docked with rear port of Salyut 6 May 15; recovered May 22
847	102.3	81.3 Metesat
1173	109.2	90.0 NASA launched lirst of a series of advanced navigation
satellites, built for the Navy by RCA
173
89.7
64.9
Long-life maneuverable reconnaissance satellite, reentered June 17
632
611
97.1
May 19 Cosmos 1271 USSR 1981-46A A-1
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2500 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
May 21 Cosmos 1272 USSR 1981-47A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
May 22 Cosmos 1273 USSR 1981-48A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
GOES 5
u.s.
1981-49A
Delta
ESMC
Total weight: 400 kg Objective: Geostationary operational environmental satellite Description: Cylinder 3m long, 2 dia
May 23 Intelsat 5-2	Total weight: 1065 kg
INTELSAT Objective: Communications 1981-50A
Atlas Centaur Description: Box with 2 polar panels ESMC
May 31 Rohini 2	Total weight: 40 kg
India	Objective: Scientific satellite
1981 -51A
SLV-3	Description: Spheroid 0.5m dia
Sriharikota
June 3 Cosmos 1274 USSR 1981-52A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
415	360
249	211
35 788	35 780
35 800	35 778
418	187
353	170
92.4
89.2
1435.9
1436.2
90.5
89.8
81.2 Probable electronic ferret
70.4	Reentered June 4
w
z
o
82.3 Reentered June 4
0.1 Launched by NASA for NOAA into synchronous orbit at 75 °W
0.0 Internationally owned comsat launched by NASA for INTELSAT into synchronous orbit at 1 ®W; principal Atlantic com!ink (first Intelsat 5 launched Dec. 1980, encountering hardware problems)
46.3 India-built and -launched small satellite; failed to achieve intended orbit; reentered June 8
67.2 Long-life maneuverable reconnaissance satellite; reentered July 3
H
§
Z
>
c
>
Z
o
>
m
E
z
>
c
ft
go
Launch
Date
June 4
June 9
June 16
June 17
June 19
Spacecraft,
Country.
Int'l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
Cosmos 1275 USSR 1981 -53 A C-1
Plesetsk
Molnixa 3-16 USSR 1981 -54 A A-2-c Plesetsk
Cosmos 1276 USSR 1981-55 A A-2
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1277 USSR I98I-56A A-2
llaykoiiui-
Tyuratam
Meleosat 2 ESA
1981 -57 A
Arianc
Kourou
and
Apple
India
I981-57B
Arianc
Kourou
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2000 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 312.5 kg?
Objective: Weather research
Description: Cylinder 3.2m long. 2.4 dia
Total weight: 380 kg Objective: Communications
Description: Cylinder with nozzle, carrying 2 solar panels
1006
39 621
237
416
35 794
36 478
Perigee
(km)
959
730
214
360
35 781
35 548
Period
(min)
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
104.8
717.7
89.1
92.4
1436.1
1447.7
83.0 Navsat
63.4 Comsat
82.4 Reconnaissance satellite carrying an earth-resources package; reentered June 29
70.4 Reentered July I
0.1 European metesat launched June 20 into synchronous orbit over Greenwich meridian (0°) by EvSA's Ariane L03/apogee motor
0.8 India-built experimental comsat (an Ariane passenger-
payload experiment) launched by Ariane L03/apogee motor into synchronous orbit at 102 °E; one solar panel failed to deploy
June 23
June 24
June 25
July 1
July 2
Cosmos 1278 USSR 1981-58A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
NOAA 7 U.S.
1981-59A Atlas F WSMC
Molniya 1-50 USSR 1981-60A A-2-e Plesetsk
Ekran 7 USSR 1981-61A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Cosmos 1279 USSR 1981-62A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1280 USSR 1981-63A
A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 723 kg-(empty)
Objective:'Weather research, including cloudcover photography, other atmospheric data
Description: Irregular box 3.7m long,
1.9 dia, with solar panel
Total weight: 1800 kg?
Objective: Replacement or backup for Molniya 1-42 (1978-80A), providing telegraph and long-distance telephone services as well as Orbita system TV to remote areas
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: TV relay
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
38 527	1876
854	837
39 376	969
35 810	35 780
398	379
273	256
718.8
101.8
717.6
1436.6
92.3
89.9
66.1 Early warning satellite
99.1
64.8
2.6
70.4
82.3
Metesat launched by NASA for NOAA; in polar orbit
"T3
m
z
o
Comsat
Comsat in geostationary orbit at Statsionar T position, 99 °E
Military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered July 15
Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered July 15
H
50
O
z
£
H
>
Z
o
>
m
50
o
z
>
C
H
n
oo
Launch
Dale
July 7
July 10
juiy 15
July 17
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int'l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee (km) (km)
Cosmos 1281 USSR I98I-64A
A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Meteor Priroda USSR 1981-65 A A-1
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Iskru
USSR
1981-65C
A-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos i282 USSR 1981-66A A-2
Buykonur-
Tyuratani
Cosmos 1283 USSR I98I-67A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2200 kg?
Objective: Earth-resources and meteorology research using inullispcctral TV scanner and microwave radiometer, plus equipment from Bulgaria 1300 program
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
414	357
658	609
661	636
334	172
371	325
Period
(min)
92.3
97.4
97.8
89.6
91.6
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
72.8
97.8
98.0
64.9
82.4
Probable Soviet military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered July 21
Prirodn carried small maneuvering engine to ensure coverage ot‘specific targets
H
§
Z
>
c
H
>
Z
O
>
tn
§
Z
>
c
H
Piggyback payload on Meteor Priroda, built by student design office of Moscow Aviation Institute, reentered Oct. 7
Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; recovered Aug. 14
Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; recovered July 31
>
T>
m
7,
o
x
>
585
July 29
July 30
Aug. 3
Aug. 4
Cosmos 1284 USSR 1981-68A A-2
Plesetsk
Roduga 9 USSR 1981-69A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Dynamics Explorer 1 US.
1981-70A
Delta
WSMC
and
Dynamics Explorer 2 U.S.
1981-70B
Delta
WSMC
Cosmos 1285 USSR 1981-71A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?	370
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations’ ’
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2000 kg?	36 095
Objective: Communications relay providing 24 hr telephone and telegraph links plus color and monochrome TV from Central system (domestic TV network covering mid-USSR)
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 403 kg (105 kg instruments) 23 330 . Objective: Study energy coupling, plasmas, and electric fields and currents by simultaneous measurements from 2 spacecraft at different altitude Description: 16-sided polygonal cylinder covered with solar cells, 1.1m high and 1.4 dia
Total weight: 415 kg (1II kg instruments)	996
Objective: See Dynamics Explorer 1
Description: See Dynamics Explorer I
Total weight: 2000 kg?	38 192
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1286 USSR 1981-72A F-t
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
444
325
35 464
506
298
2612
431
91.5
1435.8
410.5
97.7
726.9
93.3
82.3 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; recovered	-5
Aug. 12	g
z
u
x
>
2.5 Comsat in geostationary orbit at Statsionar 2 position, 35 °E
89.7 Spacecraft built for NASA by RCA Astro-Electronics; launch vehicle second stage lacked 250 lb propellant because of ground error, resulting in orbits not as intended
90.0 Reentered Feb. 19, 1983
63.9 Probable part of early warning satellite system; reported not stabilized in mid-Nov.; possible failure
65.0 Probable ocean surveillance satellite to replace Cosmos 1220 (1980-89A) reentered Oct. 16, 1982
H
8
Z
>
c
H
>
Z
a
>
m
73
O
z
>
c
H
n
Launch
Date
Spacecraft, Country, lnt'l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
Aug. 6 FltSalComS	Total weight: 1000 kg	35 860
U.S.	Objective: Provide UHF and S-band eommu-
19X1-73A	nications between U.S. military forces
Atlas Centaur using small ground equipment ESMC	Description: Hexagonal cylinder 1.3m long,
2.3 dia; 2 solar panels; 3.8m helical antenna and 4.9 dia dish for UHF. plus horn antenna for S-band
Cosmos 1287	Total weight: 40 kg?
USSR	Objective: Communications
1981 -74A
C-l	Description: Spheroid?
Plesetsk
1511
Cosmo 1288 USSR I981-74B C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
1491
Cosmo 1289 USSR I98I-74C C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmo 1290 USSR 1981-74D C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
1462
1462
Perigee
(km)
Period
(min)
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
>
C/5
35 721
1462
1462
1424
1440
1436.3	4.5
Built for DOD by TRW; on station at 92 °W; last of 5 comsats in system replacing DOD-leased channels on civilian Marisat system
115.7	74.0 Multiple launch (8 spacecraft) for tactical military com-
munications, previous launch of this type. 1981-22A through H
8
>
c
>
z
a
>
m
73
o
z
>
C
H
n
115.5	74.0
114.7	74.0
114.9	74.0
V XlQNHddV
587
and
Aug. 7
Aug. 10
Cosmo 1291 USSR 1981-74E C-l
Plesetsk
and
Cosmo 1292 USSR 1981-74F C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
1462	1456
1475	1461
Cosmo 1293 USSR 1981-74G C-l
Plesetsk
and
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
1462	1408
Cosmo 1294	Total weight: 40 kg? •	1462	1391
USSR	Objective: Communications
1981-74H
C-l	Description: Spheroid?
Plesetsk
Intercosmos Bulgaria USSR 1981-75A A-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable	889	792
Objective: Study physical processes in
ionosphere and magnetosphere using UV and proton spectrometer and laser reflector Description: Unavailable
Himawari 2 Japan 1981-76A N-2
Tanegashima
Total weight: 340 kg
Objective: Develop metesat technology and improve domestic weather service Description: Spin-stabilized cylinder 4.4m long, 2.1 dia carrying despin antennas and meteorological sensors
35 791	35 788
115.1
115.3
114.6
114.4
101.7
1436.3
74.0
>
"0
"0
m
z
u
74.0
74.0
74.0
81.2 Second launch under Bulgaria 1300 program (see 1981-65A, Meteor Priroda)
1.0 Japanese metcsat on station at 140°E
•H
§
Z
>
c
•H
n
>
z
a
>
m
s
z
>
launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country.
Int'l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data	Apogee
(km)
Aug. 12 Cosmos 1295 USSR 1981 -77 A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg?	|Q 11
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Cylinder about 2m in dia and length, enclosed in drumlike solar array
Aug. 13 Cosmos 1296 USSR 1981-78 A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Aug. 18 Cosmos 1297 USSR 198I-79A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Aug. 21
Aug. 24
Cosmos 1298 USSR 1981-80A A-2
Baykontir-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1299 USSR 1981-81A F-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratain
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space
Description: Unavailable
353
247
330
971
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
944	104.7	82.9
Probable navsat to replace 1980-39A (Cosmos I!81)
171	89.8	67.1 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Sept. 13
223	89.3	72.8 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Aug. 30
172	89.6	65.0 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Oct. 2
919	104.0	65.1 Probable radar ocean surveillance satellite powered by
nuclear reactor; mission terminated Sept. 5 after boosting reactor to higher orbit
>
-a
-u
m
2
a
><
>
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
589
Aug. 27
Aug. 28
Sepl. 3
Sept. 4
Sept. 11
Cosmo 1300 USSR 1981-82A F-l
Plesetsk'
Cosmo 1301 USSR 1981-83A A-2
Plesetsk
Cosmo 1302 USSR 1981-84A C-l
Plesetsk
DOD satellite U.S.
1981-85A Titan 3D WSMC
Cosmos 1303 USSR 1981-86A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1304 USSR 1981-87A C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1305 USSR 1981-88A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 13 000 kg
Objective: Military photo reconnaissance, including real-time transmission of TV images
Description: Cylinder I5m long, 3m dia, with antennas and solar panels
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: Replacement or backup for 1978-48A {Molniya 3-12). Failed Description: Unavailable
651
271
804
525
415
975
13 670
625	97.5	82.5	Possible electronic ferret; orbit resembled those of	>
1979-11A (Cosmos 1076) and 1980-5A (Cosmos 1151),	"0
both ocean survey satellites	2
O
X
>
213	89.4	82.3	Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered
Sept. 10
777	100.7	74.0 Possible military comsat to replace or backup I98M1A
(Cosmos 1269)
242	92.3	97.0 Replaced 1978-60A which reentered Aug. 23, 1981
360	92.3	70.4 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered
Sept. 18
905	103.9	82.9 Possible navsat; orbit lower than normal for this applica-
tion (see 1981-77A, Cosmos 1295)
815	263.7	63.0
Premature shutdown of “e” stage resulted in orbit too low for spacecraft to do the intended comsat job. See
1981-105A
§
Z
>
c
H
>
Z
o
>
m
§
z
§
H
on
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int’l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee (km) (km)
Sept. 14 Cosmos 1306 USSR I981-89A F
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Sept, 15 Cosmos 1307 USSR 1981 -90A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight; 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Sept. 18 Cosmos 1308 USSR 1981-91A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: Navigation?
Description: Cylinder 2m long, 2m dia enclosed in drumlikc solar array
Cosmos 1309 USSR 1981 -92 A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 5500 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Sept. 19 China 9, 10, U PRC
1981 -93A, B, C
(No data on	Description: Octahedral prism (b) Im high,
vehicle)	1.2m dia with 4 rectangular solar panels
Shuang-Cbeng-Tse at one end: second satellite (C), a cone;
third, a balloon (A) linked by a wire to a metal ball (reentered Sept. 26). Cone reentered Nov. 22, 1981. Prism reentered Oct. 6, 1982
Total weight: Unavailable (3 payloads) Objective: Space physics experiments
442	430
417	354
1001	962
256	211
1600	390
Period	Inclination
(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
93.3
92.3
104.7
89.2
103.3
65.0 Probable ocean survey satellite working with
1981 -72A (Cosmos 1286) and replacing Cosmos 1260 (1981-28A); orbit initially incorrect, probably because of launch vehicle malfunction, but maneuvers corrected it within 8 days; reentered July 16, 1982
72.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Sept. 28
>
73
o
z
>
>
z
a
>
m
73
O
2:
>
c
n
00
82.9 Navsat replacing or backing up 1981-53A {Cosmos 1275) launched June 4
82.3 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Oct. 1
59.4 Research areas included magnetic Helds, IR and UV radiation, charged-particle measurements. X-ray detection, and atmospheric density- (the function of the balloon)
>
-o
"V
m
z
o
><
>
1912	401
Sept. 21
Sept. 23
Sept. 24
Sept. 28
Sept. 30
Oct. 1
Aureole (Oreol) 3 USSR 1981-94A F
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1310 USSR 1981-95A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 1000 kg (170 kg of experiments)
Objective: Ionospheric and magnetosphcric research using Soviet- and French-built instruments
Description: “Standard Soviet automatic • unified orbital station (AUOS)”—cylinder 2.5m long, lm dia, with 8 solar panels
Total weight: 1000 kg?	449
Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
SBS 2 U.S.
1981-96A
Delta
ESMC
Cosmos 1311 USSR 1981-97A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 550 kg (in orbit)	35 791
Objective: Provide commercial communications through Satellite Business Systems network
Description: Cylinder 2.8m long, 2.2 dia, covered in solar cells with extendable solar panel deployed after launch; spin-stabilized; despun aerial array
Total weight: Unavailable	557
Objective: Undisclosed (probably military)
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1312	Total weight: Unavailable
USSR	Objective: Undisclosed
1981-98A
F (?)	Description: Unavailable
Plesetsk
1501
Cosmos 1313 USSR 1981-99A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
279
413
35 785
465
1488
231
108;5
93.2
1436.2
94.5
115.9
89.6
£2.5 Onboard sensors included photometers, a magnetometer, spectrometers, an interferometer, and an electric-field instrument. French Arcad-3 would collect magnetospheric data at high latitudes over 6 mo lifetime
>
-o
-o
m
z
D
X
>
65.8 Probable military test vehicle
0.0 SBS 2, first to use commercially the 12 to 14 GHz
band, carried 10 transponders capable of relaying 480 million data bits/sec. Built by Hughes Aircraft; carried telephone, computer, electronic-mail, video links for business and industrial clients; stationed at 97 °W
83.0 Reentered Aug. 28, 1983
82.6 Probable geodetic satellite
70.4 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Oct. 15
H
s
Z
>
c
H
O
C/5
>
Z
O
>
m
§
z
>
G
H
Launch
Dale
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int'l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee	Period
(km)	(km)	(min)
Oct. 6
Oct. 9
Solar Mesophere Explorer U.S.
1981-100A
Delta
WSMC
and
UOSAT
U.K.
1981-100B
Delta
WSMC
Cosmos 1314 USSR 1981-101A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 437 kg
Objective: Study earth atmosphere at
altitudes between 20-80 km. csp. ozone formation and density Description: Cylinder 1.7m long. 1.25 dia. carrying 2.2ni dia solar array disk on one face: spin-stabilized to allow onboard instruments to scan atmosphere 5 timcs/sce
Total weight: 50 kg
Objective: Stimulate interest in space
science among students: serve as tool for radio amateurs to study ionosphere Description: Rectangular box 1m long, 0.5m square, carrying solar cells on larger faces
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
510	506	94.8
Sun-synchronous orbit
484	479	94.3
235	212	89.0
Raduga 10 USSR 1981 -102A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 2000 kg?	35 795	35 779	1436.1
Objective: Provide 24 hr radio and telegraph links in UHF band; relay TV to stations in Orbita network
Description: Cylinder carrying 2 solar panels; aerial array at one end
Oct. 13
Cosmos 1315 USSR 1981-103A A-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
650	614	97.4
Inclination
(degrees)
97.6
97.6
82.3
2.4
81.2
Remarks
Carried piggyback satellite, UOSAT
in
H
70
o
Z
>
c
H
O
tn
Built by Univ. of Surrey; onboard instruments included slow-scan TV camera with 500 km2 view of earth; amateur-radio band transmitted telemetry on 145.8 MHz. either as coded data or using a voice synthesizer
Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Oct. 22
Comsat on station at Statsionar 3 location, 84°F.
Probable electronic reconnaissance satellite; backup or replacement for 1980-8A (Cosmos 1154)
AND AERONAUTICS	APPENDIX A
Oct. 15
278
232
89.7
Oct. 17
Oct. 30
Oct. 31
Cosmos 1316 USSR 1981-104A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Molniya 3-17 USSR 1981-105A A-2-e Plesetsk
Venera 13 USSR 1981-106A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: ‘‘.Continuation of outer space investigations”, ’ .
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: Provide telegraph and long-distance telephone service; transmit Central TV programs to Orbita'stations both inside and outside USSR
Description: Cylinder 4m long, 1.6m dia housing instruments and topped with a conical motor section; powered by “windmill” of 6 solar panels
Total weight: 5000 kg?
Objective: Continue Venus exploration
program, probably with a surface lander
Description: Cylinder 2.7m long, 2.3 dia carrying 2 solar panels; experiments pkg at one end
DOD satellite U.S.
1981-107A Titan 3C ESMC
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Early warning satellite for missile launches Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1317	Total weight: Unavailable
USSR	Objective: Undisclosed
1981-108A
A-2-e	Description: Unavailable
Plesetsk
Nov. 3 Cosmos 1318 USSR 1981-109A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
38 753	1600	717.8
Heliocentric orbit
Elements not available
38 581	1849	719.3
352	171	89.8
70.3
Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Oct. 29
64.4	Comsat, to replace or backup 1979-48A (Molniya 3-/2); previous attempt on this mission failed (see 1981-88A, Cosmos 1305)
Venera 13 scheduled to arrive near Venus about March 1, 1982
62.9 Probable part of early warning satellite system
67.1
Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Dec. 4
e/>
sO
Launch
Date
Spacecraft.
Country,
Int’l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee	Perigee	Period
(kin) (km)	(min)
Nov. 4 Venera 14	Total weight: 5000 kg?	Heliocentric orbit
USSR	Objective: Continue Venus exploration
1981 -110A	program (see 1981-106A, Venera 13)
D-1-E	Description: See Venera 13)
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Nov. 12	STS 2	Total weight: Undisclosed	(2452 kg of expts) 265	255	89.6
U.S.	Objective: Second flight in STS orbital-test
1981-111A	program; test remote manipulator;
Columbia	evaluate craft as earth-observation
KSC	platform
Description: Reusable Shuttle craft with fixed experiment packages in payload bay
Nov. 13	Cosmos	1319 Total weight: 6000 kg?	415	349	92.2
USSR	Objective:	“Continuation of outer space
1981 -112 A	investigations"
A-2	Description: Unavailable
Baykonur-Tyuratam
Nov. 17	Molniva 1-51	Total weight: 1800 kg?	39 892	459	717.1
USSR.	Objective:	Provide telegraph and long-
1981-113A	distance links and broadcast Central TV
A-2-e	programs through	Orbita system to
Plesetsk	remote areas of USSR
Description: Cylinder 3.4m long, 1.6 dia, housing instruments and payload, carrying windmill of 6 solar panels
Nov. 20	RCA Satcom 3R	Total weight: 550 kg	35 794	35 779	1436.1
U.S.	Objective:	Distribute programs to cable
1981-114A	TV systems in U.S.
Delta	Description: Box 1.6x1.3xl.3m
ESMC	carying relay pkg and two 8.4m2 solar
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
Venera 14 scheduled to arrive near Venus about March 5. 1982. Both Venera spacecraft carried French- and Austrian-dcsign apparatus as well as Soviet
H
§
Z
>
c
H
38.0 Crew (USAF Col. Joe H. Engle as commander, Navy
Cdr. Richard H Truly as pilot) performed 5 experiments Irom OSTA-1 (Spacelab type pallet built by ESA), plus 2 in crew compartment. Problem with one of 3 onboard fuel cells shortened 5-day mission to 2 da, 6 hr. 13 min. Recovered Nov. 14
70.4	Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Nov. 27
63.4	Comsat to renlure Moiniva !-39 (launched 1978)
0.1 Commercial comsat on station 132 °W
AND AERONAUTICS	APPENDIX A
521
Bhaskara 2	Total weight: 436 kg
India	Objective: Earth observation, using 2 TV
1981-115A	cameras, 3 microwave radiometers;
C-1	solar-cell experiments plus study of
Kapustin Yar	thermal coating
Description: Polyhedron, 26 faces, 1.6m high, 1.7 dia
Nov. 28 Cosmos 1320 USSR 1981-116A C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1321 USSR 1981-116B C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1322 USSR 1981-116C C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1323 USSR 1981-116D C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1324 USSR 1981-116E C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Descriptions: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
1632
1629
1627
1622
1617
499	94.8	50.6 Designed and built by India Space Research
Org.; launched by USSR
>
“d
“0
m
z
o
x
>
1479	117.2	74.0 Multiple launch (8 satellites) to provide tactical comlinks
between field units; last previous launch, 1981-74A-H
1480	117.2	74.0
1479	117.2	74.0
1480	117.1	74.0
1480	117.1	74.0
H
S
z
>
c
H
n
>
z
a
>
m
yo
o
z
>
c
596
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int'l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
Dec. 3
Dee. 4
Cosmos 1325 USSR 1981-116F C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1326 USSR 1981-116G C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1327 USSR 1981-116H C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1328 USSR 1981-117A F
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1329 USSR 1981-118A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratum
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
1614
1609
1601
653
288
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
1480 *	117.0	74.0
1479	117.0	74.0
>
50
O
Z
>
c
>
z
a
>
m
50
O
Z
£
1480	116.9	74.0
626	97.5	82.5 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite
231	89.7	65.0 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered
Dec. 18
m
z
D
X
35 801	35 772
LT\
sO
-o
Dec. 15
Dec. 17
Intelsat 5 F-3 Total weight: 1870 kg (incl. fuel)
U.S.	Objective: Provide 12 000 two-way
1981-119A	telephone channels and 2 color TV
Atlas Centaur	channels using 4 to 6 GHz for wide-
ESMC	area coverage and 11 to 12 GHz for
narrow-base coverage Description: Box carrying earth-pointed antenna array, 3-axis-stabilized in geostationary orbit
Radio 3	Total weight: 40 kg?.
USSR	Objective: Communications
1981-120A
C-l	Descriptions: Unavailable
Plesetsk
Radio 4 USSR 1981-120D C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Unavailable
and
Radio 5	Total weight: 40 kg?
USSR	Objective: Communications
1981-120C
C-l •	Description: Unavailable
Plesetsk
and
Radio 6 USSR 1981-120F C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Unavailable
and
Radio 7	Total weight: 40 kg?
USSR	Objective: Communications
1981-120E
C-l	Description: Unavailable
Plesetsk
1655
1663
1664
1657
1657
1563
1633
1646
1578
1621
1436.1	0.0	INTELSAT-owned commercial comsat launched by
NASA, on station at 15 °E; designed for Shuttle, Ariane, or Atlas Centaur (this launch the last scheduled for the lat-	2
ter). INTELSAT’s 200 ground stations worldwide would	O
cany 60% of trans-Atlantic and -Pacific communications	><
>
118.4	83.0 Multiple launch (6 satellites) to provide radio amateurs
with space-borne links, rebroadcasting in the 29 MHz amateur band a signal transmitted 145 MHz; Radio 5 and 7 could transmit telemetry data on demand
119.3	83.0
119.4	83.0
118.6	83.0
119.1	83.0
H
& :Z > c
H
>
Z
o
>
tfl
§
z
>
c
H
Lft
<3
launch
Date
Spacecraft, Country, lnt'1 Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee	Perigee	Period
(km) (km)	(min)
and
Radio 8	Total weight: 40 kg?
USSR	Objective: Communications
I981-I20B
C-l	Description: Unavailable
Plesetsk
Dee. 19
Cosmos 1330 USSR 1981-121A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight; 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
1681	1648	119.6
379	167	90.0
Dec. 20
Dec. 23
Marecs I ESA
1981 -122A
Ariane
Kourou
Total weight: 1006 kg (at launch) Objective: Provide high-quality voice and data transmission between ships and shore stations; last Ariane-booster test
Description: Hexagonal prism 2.5m high. 2m across, with 2 solar panels
38 805	35 771
Molnixa 1-52 USSR 1981-I23A A-2-e Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 1800 kg?
Objective: Provide telegraph and longdistance telephone lines, and broadcast Central TV programs to remote areas of USSR
Description: Cylinder 3.4m long, 1.6m dia. topped by conical motor and carrying a windmill of 6 solar panels
38 430
1923
1436.1
717.8
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
83.0
70.4	Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Jan. 19. 1982. First long-life recoverable satellite launched at Tyuratum to fly at other than 65.0° inclination
0.9 Stabilized in position at 26°W on Jan. 2, 1982; serving as Atlantic comlink in global network operated by Inti. Maritime Satellite Org., successor to MARISAT as of Feb. 82. Arianc carried 3 other payloads: a 4th Ariane technology capsule (CAT), a vibration isolator device (V1D), and a Paris youth club experiment (Thesee) to measure ionosphere plasma density.
63.2 First Molniya launched from Tyuratani since Molniya 1-37 (June 1977)
SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS,
	SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES		, AND MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS, 1982					> on
Launch Date	Spacecraft. Country. Int'l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site	Payload Data	Apogee (km)	Perigee (km)	Period (min)	Inclination (degrees)	Remarks	E Z > c H n on
Jan. 7	Cosmos 1331 USSR 1982-1A C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 700 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations'' Description: Unavailable	810	773	100.7	74.1	Probable military comsat	> Z o > m §
Jan. 12	Cosmos 1332 USSR 1982-2A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6500 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	248	210	89.1	82.3	Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite: reentered Jan. 25	> c H n on
Jan. 14	Cosmos 1333 USSR I982-3A C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 700 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Cylinder 2m in length and dia enclosed in cylindrical solar array	1013	965	104.9	82.9	Probable navsat to replace or back up Cosmos 1150 (1980-3A)	
Jan. 16	RCA Satcom 4 US. 1982-4A Delta ESMC	Total weight: 1082 (inti, apogee motor) Objective: Provide U.S. with commercial services; support cable TV on 24 channels Description: Box 1.6x 1.3 x 1.3m containing eommunications-rclay package; 3-axis-stabilizcd	35 795	35 781	1436.2	0.0	Commercial comsat launched hy NASA for RCA; on station at 83 °W by Jan. 28	
Jan. 20	Cosmos 1334 USSR 1982-5 A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	289	226	89.4	72.9	Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Feb. 3	
Jan. 21	Ops 2849 U.S. I982-6A Titan 3B VamJenberg AFB	Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed Description: Unavailable	641	630	97.4	97.2	Military reconnaissance satellite; reentered May 23	APPENDIX
>
Jan. 29
402
385
Cosmos 1335 USSR
1981-	7A C-l
Plesetsk
Jan. 30	Cosmos 1336
USSR
1982-	8A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuralam
Feb. 5	Ekran 8
USSR
1982-9A
D-l-E
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Feb. 11	Cosmos 1337
USSR 1982-10A F-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Feb. 16	Cosmos 1338
USSR 1982-11A A-2
Plesetsk
Feb. 17	Cosmos 1339
USSR 1982-12A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?	356
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2000 kg?	36 783
Objective: Transmit Central TV programs to collective receivers in remote areas of USSR
Description: Cylinder 5m long, 2m dia, carrying boom-mounted solar panels and transmitting-antenna array
Total weight: Unavailable	446
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?	414
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 700 kg?	1012
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Cylinder 2m in length and dia
169
34 796
428
357
950
Os
O
92.4
74.0
Probable military radar calibration satellite
89.8
1440.9
93.3
92.3
104.7
70.3 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Feb. 26
>
O
><
>
1.9 Comsat in geostationary orbit at Statsionar T location, 99 °E
65.0 Probable ocean survey satellite working with 1981-22A (Cosmos 1286) and 1981-89A (Cosmos 7306); reentered July 25
72.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered March 2
82.9
H
73
O
z
5
H
>
tn
73
O
5
H
n
C/3
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country.
Int'l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Fayload Data
Apogee
(km)
Feb. 19 Cosmos 1340 USSR I982-I3A A-l
Plesetsk
Feb. 26 We$tar 4 U.S.
1982-14A
Della
ESMC
Molniva 1-53 USSR I982-I5A A-2-e Plesetsk
March 3 Cosmos 1341 USSR I982-16A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: 2000 kg?	640
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations’*
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 585 kg	35 794
Objective: Providing commercial communications over 24 transponder channels for Western Union Telegraph Co.
Description: Cylinder 2.2 dia. 2.7 high, covered with solar cells; cylindrical solar panel deployed alter launch: spin-stabilized, with despun antenna array
Total weight: 1800 kg?	39 985
Objective: Provide telegraph and longdistance telephone communications; transmit Central TV programs to Orbita network stations in remote areas of USSR Description: Cylinder 3.6m long, 1.6 dia, with conical motor section, carrying windmill of six solar panels
Total weight: 2000 kg?	38 277
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
March 5
Intelsat 5 F-4 Total weight: 1870 kg (at launch)?	35 800
U.S.	Objective: Provide telephone and TV
I982-I7A	communications for INTELSAT customers
Atlas Centaur Description: Box with 16m-wide solar ESMC	array, spin-stabilized
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
620	97.3	81.2 Probable electronic ferret
35 779	1436.1	0.0 Hughes Aircraft Co.-built eomsat, initially
on station at 79 °W for systems checks; to be located at 99°W when operating; replacement for Westar I
>
C
H
n
1364	717.7	63.8 Comsat to replace or back up 1980-53A
(Molniya 1-47)
2085	718.0	64.6 Probably part of early warning system,
replacing or backing up 198I-16A (Cosmos 1247)
>
“T3
“O
m
■z
o
><
>
35 774	1436.1
0.0
Positioned at 63°E in May 1982; to serve Indian Ocean region
603
288
227
89.7
March 6
March 15
March 17
March 22
March 24
Cosmos 1342 USSR 1982-18A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations’’
Description: Unavailable
DOD satellite	Total weight: Unavailable
U.S.	Objective: Undisclosed
1982-19A
Atlas Centaur Description: 'Unavailable ESMC
Elements not available
Horizont 5 USSR 1982-20A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 2000 kg?	35 790	35 778	1436.3
Objective: Provide telephone, telegraph, and TV co ml inks both inside and outside USSR
Description: Cylinder 5m long, 2 dia, carrying a pair of solar panels; array of hom and reflector antennas at one end
Cosmos 1343 USSR 1982-21A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations’’
Description: Unavailable
328
STS 3 U.S.
1982-22A
Columbia
KSC
Molniya 3-18 USSR 1982-23A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: 2,031,619 kg	255
(incl. 9659 cargo)
Objective: Third flight in STS orbital-test program; test remote manipulator, measure orbiter’s thermal response to long periods of constant attitude with respect to the sun
Description: Reusable Shuttle craft carrying OSS experiment package in payload bay and in crew compartment
Total weight: 2000 kg?	39 734
Objective: Provide telegraphic and longdistance telephone co ml inks, and broadcast Central TV programs to Orbita network stations inside and outside USSR
Description: Cylinder 4m long, 1.6 dia, topped by conical motor; carrying windmill of six solar panels
222	90.0
244	89.4
614	717.7
72.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered March 19
Early warning satellite for missile launches
>
■n
TJ
tn
Z
o
X
>
l .9 Relay comsat in geostationary orbit at Statsionar 5 position, 54 °E
72.8 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered March 31
38.0 Crew (astronauts USMC Col. Jack R.
Lousma, commander, and USAF Col. Charles Gordon Fullerton, pilot) landed the Columbia at White Sands, N.M., instead of Edwards AFB because heavy rains had softened the planned lakebed landing area. Flight time, 8da 4h 49min
64.7 Comsat to replace or back up 1981-30A {Molniya 3-15)
E
z
>
>
z
o
>
tn
E
z
§
H
Launch
Date
Spacecraft.
Country.
Int'l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee (km) (km)
	Cosmos 1344 USSR 1982-24A C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 700 kg? Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	1008	965
March 25	Meteor 2-8 USSR 1982-25A F? Plesetsk	Total weight: 2200 kg? Objective: Weather and earth-resources research: return eloudeover and other meteorological data through scanning radiometers etc Description: Cylinder 5m long. 1.5 dia. carrying 2 sun-seeking solar panels	958	936
March 31	Cosmos 1345 USSR 1982-26A C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed Description: Unavailable	501	468
	Cosmos 1346 USSR 1982-27A A-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 2000 kg? Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	652	613
April 2	Cosmos 1347 USSR 1982-28A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	340	172
April 7	Cosmos 1348 USSR 1982-29A A-2-e Plesetsk	Total weight: Unavailable Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	39 082	1325
Period (min)	Inclination (degrees)	Remarks	> (SI H 70 O Z > c H
104.8	82.9	Probable navsat to replace or back up	(Si
104.0	82.5	1981 -13 A (Cosmos 1224) Usually an A-l launch: this orbit slightly	> Z > m 70 o z
94.3	74.0	higher than previous Meteor 2 craft (usually about 900km) Probable military satellite for radar	c H n (Si
97.4	81.2	calibration Probable electronic ferret: bark up or	
89.7	70.4	replacement for 1980-93A (Cosmos 1222) Probable military photo reconnaissance	
718.9	62.8	satellite: reentered May 21 Probable part of early warning svstem.	> -a
		replacing or backing up 1980-28A (Cosmos 1172),	m z a X >
1011
962
April 8
April 10
April 15
April 19
April 21
April 23
§
Cosmos 1349 USSR 1982-30A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Jnsat IA India 1982-31A Delta ESMC
Cosmos 1350 USSR 1982-32A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 1152 (incl. fuel)
Objective: Provide channels for uplink and downlink communications and for direct TV transmission to small ground stations; for radio-program distribution; and for disaster warning Description: Box 1.6mxl.4x2.2 carrying a solar panel balanced by a solar sail
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Sal\ut 7*
' USSR 1982-33A D-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 19T
Objective: Serve as manned orbiting space laboratory
Description: Cylinder 15m long, 4 dia, with 3 large solar panels; docking unit at each end
Cosmos 1351	Total weight: 550 kg?
USSR	Objective: Undisclosed
1982-34A
C-l	Description: Unavailable
Kapustin Yar
Cosmos 1352 USSR 1982-35A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1353 USSR I982-36A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
35 936
357
369
547
349
241
35 562
171
365
348
415
211
*Scc May 17, Nov. 18
104.8
1434.2
89.8
91.9
93.5
92.2
89.1
82.9 Probable navsat to replace or back up 1980-7A (Cosmos 1153)
0.1 First of two Indian National Satellites built by Ford Aerospace for govt, of India; launched by NASA into geostationary orbit; at 74 °E
>
-o
-o
m
Z
O
X
>
67.2 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered May 16
51.6 Maneuvered into 340km orbit for manned occupation (Salyut (5’s operating altitude)
50.7 Reentered March 14, 1983
70.4 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered May 5
82.4 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered May 6
H
s
Z
£
H
>
Z
o
>
tn
s
Z
>
c
H
n
Launch
Date
Spacecraft, Country, lnt’l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Dan
Apogee Perigee (km) (km)
April 28 Cosmos 1354 USSR 1982-37A
C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
April 29
Cosmos 1355	Total weight: Unavailable
USSR	Objective: Undisclosed
1982-38A
F-l	Description: Unavailable
Baykonur-Tyuratam
May 3
Cosmos 1356 USSR 1982-39A A-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2300 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
May 6
Cosmos 1357	Total weight: 40 kg?
USSR	Objective: Communications
198240 A
C-i	Description: Spheroid?
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1358 USSR 198240B C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
804	789
446	428
660 626
1476	1399
1479	1414
Period
(min)
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
100.8	74.0 Probable military eomsat using store-and-
durnp technique
93.3	65.1 Probable ocean surveillance satellite;
reentered March 7. 1984
H
70
O
z
>
c
H
U
>
m
§
z
>
c
H
O
97.6	81.2 Probable electronic ferret
114.6	74.0 Multiple launch (8 satellites) probably for
tactical military communications
114.8	74.0
m
z
o
><
and
o>
o
-J
Cosmos 1359 USSR 1982-40C C-l
Pleselsk
and
Cosmos 1360 USSR 1982-40D C-l
Plesetsk
and
Cosmos 1361 USSR 1982-40E C-l
Plesetsk
and
Cosmos 1362 USSR 1982-40F C-l
Plesetsk
and
Cosmos 1363 USSR 1982-40G C-l
Pleselsk
and
Cosmos 1364 USSR 1982-40H C-l
Pleselsk
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
1478
1480
1482
1494
1503
1522
1431
115.0
74.0
>
*o
'~0
m
2:
2
><
1444	115.2	74.0
1459	115.3	74.0
1464	115.5	74.0
1471	115.7	74.0
1471	115.9	74.0
H
TO
o
z
£
H
>
Z
o
>
m
70
o
z
>
c
H
c/)
608
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int’l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee (km) (km)
May 11 DOD satellite U.S.
1982-41A Titan 3D WSMC
and
Total weight: 13 000 kg?
Objective: Military photo reconnaissance
Description: Cylinder 15m long, 3 dia,
carrying antennas and solar panels, and containing reentry capsules for film recovery'
DOD satellite	Total weight: Unavailable
U.S.	Objective: Undisclosed
198-41C
Titan 3D	Description: Unavailable
WSMC
May 13
Soyuz T-5 USSR 1982-42A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 6500 kg?
Objective: Carry' crew to orbiting space station Salyut 7 < 1982-33A) Description: Near-spherical module 7.5m long, 2.2 dia; conical reentry module; cylindrical instrument unit
May 14 Cosmos 1365 USSR 1982-43A F-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
May 17 Iskra 2*
USSR 1982-33C Salvui 7 (in orbit)
Total weight: 28 kg?
Objective: Amateur-radio delay
Description: Spheroid 0.5 dia, covered with solar cells
262	177
707	701
356	343
984	878
342	336
Period	Inclination
(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
>
on
90.0
98.9
91.4
103.7
91.3
96.4 Reentered Dec. 5
96.0 Piggyback payload launched with I982-41A; prohable electronic ferret
§
Z
>
C
>
z
o
>
m
§
z
>
c
n
on
51.6 Crew (Anatoly Berezovoi and Valentin Lebedev) docked with Salyut 7 May 14
65.1 Probable military photo reconnaisance
satellite using radar powered by a nuclear reactor
51.6 Launched from an airlock on orbiting Salyut 7* (see April 19. 1982-33A);
reentered July 9	>
"O
m
z
D
><
>
609
35 818	35 754	1436.1
May 20
May 21
May 23
May 25
May 28
Cosmos 1366 USSR 1982-44A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Cosmos 1367 USSR 1982-45A A-2-e Plesetsk
Cosmos 1368 USSR 1982-46A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Progress 13 USSR 1982-47A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1369 USSR 1982-48A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: Experimental comsat, forerunner of planned new series ••
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 7000 kg?
Objective: Carry supplies to crew in orbiting Salyut 7 and equipment for upcoming Soyuz T6 mission experiments Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1370 USSR 1982-49A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Molniya 1-54 USSR 1982-50A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 1800 kg?
Objective: Provide telegraph and longdistance telephone communications and broadcast Central TV programs to Orbita receivers in remote areas of USSR Description: Cylinder 3.6m long, 1.6 dia topped by conical motor, carrying windmill arrangement of 6 solar panels
39 210	1195	18.8
341	211	90.0
278	191	88.9
(initial orbit)
276	269	90.0
275	197	89.2
39 872	476	717.7
1.6
Comsat on station at 90 °E
63.4 Probably part of an early warning satellite system
70.4 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered June 3
51.6 Docked with rear part of Salyut 7 on May 25; undocked June 4; reentered June 6 after retrofiring
82.3 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite,
carrying earth resources package; recovered June 8
64.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered July 11
64.3
Comsat
610
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
lnt’l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
June 1 Cosmos 137!
USSR
1982-51A
C-I
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg? Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
June 2 Cosmos !372 USSR 1982-52A F-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1373 USSR 1982-53A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
June 3 Cosmos 1374 USSR 1982-54A C-l
Kapustin Yar
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations’*
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 1000 kg? Objective: Reentry test
Description: Unavailable
June 6 Cosmos 1375 USSR 1982-55A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Serve as target for satellite-interceptor test Description: Unavailable
June 8 Cosmos 1376 USSR 1982-56A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
808
976
347
225
1009
274
Perigee
(km)
Period
(min)
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
787	100.8
74.0 Probable military comsat using data storc-and-dump technique
909	103.9	64.9 Probable military reconnaissance satellite
using radar powered by a nuclear reactor
O
z
>
c
H
>
z
u
>
m
50
O
z
>
c
H
O
210	90.1	70.4 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite: reentered June 16
225
50.7
Recovered over (or in) water at the end of one orbit
979
105.0
65.8
261	89.9	82.3 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite.
carrying earth resources package; reentered June 22
X
>
363
173
Cosmos 1377 USSR 1982-57A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
June 9	Wes tar 5
US.
1982-58A
Delta
ESMC
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”.
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 1100 kg?	35 796	3 5 783
Objective: U.S. commercial domestic comsat
Description: Cylinder 3m long, 2m dia
June 10 Cosmos 1378 USSR 1982-59A F
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?	656	625
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
June 18 Cosmos 1379 USSR 1982-6QA F-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: Unavailable	1021	540
Objective: Test of satellite interceptor system, using Cosmos 1375 (1982-55A) as target
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1380 USSR 1982-61A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg?	657	146
Objective: “Continuation of outer space	(intended orbit altitude,
investigations”
Description: Cylinder 2x2m with domed ends, enclosed in drum-shape solar array
Cosmos 1381 USSR 1982-62A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
450	372
89.9
64.9
Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered July 22
1436.3
97.5
100.4
92.6
1000 km)
92.7
>
*0
tn
Z
a
S
0.0 Launched by NASA for Western Union Telegraph Co., to replace Westar 2 at 123 when operational
82.5
Probable electronic ferret
65.8 “De-oribited same day as launch”
82.9 Probable navsat; early shutdown of final rocket stage prevented successful operation; craft reentered because of air drag after 9 days (June 27)
70.4 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered July 1
H
E
Z
>
a
H
n
co
>
Z
o
>
m
E
z
>
a
H
612
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int'l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
June 24	Soyuz T-6
USSR 1982-63A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratani
June 25	Cosmos 1382
USSR I982-64A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: 6500 kg?
Objective: Ferry crew to join group aboard orbiting space station Description: Standard Soyuz T design
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
233
38 307
June 27	575 4
US.
1982-65A
Columbia
KSC
Total weight: 2.033.437 kg	301
Objective: Fourth flight in SI’S orbital-
test program: completion of test program Description: Reusable shuttle craft
June 29 Cosmos 1383 USSR 1982-66A C 1
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg?	1024
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
June 30	Cosmos 1384
USSR 1982-67A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
July 6	Cosmos 1385
USSR 1982-68A
m
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
354
236
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
189
2091
88.7	51.6 Visiting crew (Vladimir Dzhanibekov. Aleksandr
lvanchenkov, and France's Jean-Loup Chretien) docked with Salyitt 7 June 25, 14 min ahead of schedule because of a computer problem; returned in same spacecraft July 2
718.7	62.8 Probable part of early warning system
H
§
Z
>
c
H
n
>
Z
o
>
m
70
O
z
>
c
296	90.3	28.5 Crew (Ken Mattingly and Henry Hartslicld)
landed July 4 at Edwards AFB, Calif. First DOD payload
986	105.2	82.9 Probable test of SARSAT (search-and-
rcscuc satellite) system to pinpoint transmissions from ships or planes in distress
89.8
67.2
Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered July 30
186	88.8	82.3 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite
carrying earth resources instruments; reentered July 20
u
><
>
Si
July 7
July 10
July 13
July 16
July 21
Cosmos 1386 USSR 1982-69A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: See Cosmos 1380 (1982-61A)
Progress 14 USSR 1982-7QA A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Carry consumables and experiment material to crew of orbiting space station Description: Like Soyuz T vehicle except that reentry module is replaced by conical nonrecoverable container for supplies
Cosmos 1387 USSR I982-71A F (?) Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Landsat 4 US.
1982-72A
Delta
Vandenberg AFB
Total weight: 2000 kg Objective: Earth-resources reconnaissance using a variety of scanners for different parts of the spectrum Description: Irregularly shape container 6m long, 2 dia, with 2 solar panels
Cosmos 1388 USSR 1982-73A C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1389 USSR 1982-73B C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1390 USSR 1982-73C C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
1006
326
234
700
1473
1474
1473
949
104.7
83.0
Probable navsat
300
212
699
1390
1407
1424
90.7	51.6 Docked with rear port of Salyui 7 on
July 12; undocked Aug. 10; reentered Aug. 13 over Pacific
ffl
Z
D
><
89.1	82.3 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite
carrying earth resources package; reentered July 26
98.8	98.2 Supplement and improve remote sensing
data availability to civilian users relying on aging Landsat 3 sensing system
114.5	74.0 Multiple launch (8 satellites) probably for
tactical military communications
114.7	74.0
114.9	74.0
H
§
Z
>
c
H
>
Z
o
>
cn
8
Z
>
c
H
n
614
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country.
Int’l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee (km) (km)
Cosmos 1391 USSR I982-73D C-l
Plesct.sk
Cosmos 1392 USSR 1982-73E C-l
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
and
Cosmos 1393 USSR I982-73F C-l
Plesetsk
and
Cosmos 1394 USSR 1982-73G C-l
Plesetsk
and
Cosmos 1395 USSR 1982-73H C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
1474	1440
1473	1458
1481	1468
1493	1473
1513	1472
Period
(min)
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
115.0
74.0
115.2	74.0
>
H
73
c
2
>
C
H
n
>
z
>
w
PS
o
z
>
c
H
n
C/)
115.4	74.0
115.6	74.0
115.8	74.0
2
O
X
>
July 27
July 29
Aug. 3
Aug. 4
Aug. 5
Aug. 19
o\
Molniya /-55 USSR 1982-74A A-2-e Plesetsk
Cosmos 1396 USSR I982-75A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 1800 kg?
Objective: Provide telegraph and longdistance telephone service, and broadcast Central TV programs through Orbita system to remote areas of USSR Description: Cylinder 4.2m long, 1.6 dia with conical motor section, carrying windmill of 6 solar panels
Ibtal weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1397	Total weight: Unavailable
USSR	Objective: Undisclosed
1982-76A
C-l	Description: Unavailable
Kapustin Yar
Cosmos 1398 USSR I982-77A F?
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1399 USSR 1982-78A Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1400 USSR 1982-79A A-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Soyuz T-7 USSR 1982-8QA A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 6500 kg?
Objective: Replacement ferry for resident crew of orbiting space station Description: Standard Soyut T design
39 723
298
541
234
345
643
299
624
717.7
64.7
Comsat
"V
tn
Z
o
X
>
198	89.5	72.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Aug. 10
343	93.4	50.7 Probable radar calibration mission,
reentered May 18, 1983
216	89.0	82.4 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite,
carrying earth-resources package; reentered Aug. 13
170	89.7	64.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Sept. 16
621	97.4	81.2 Probable electronic ferret
289	90.3	51.6 Crew (Leonid Popov, Aleksandr Serebrov,
and #2 female cosmonaut Svetlana Savitskaya) docked with Salyui 7 Aug. 20; returned to earth Aug. 27 in Soyuz T-5 (1982-42A) that brought Bcrczovoi and Lebedev May 14
H
8
Z
>
c
H
n
CO
>
Z
D
§
Z
>
c
H
ON
O'
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int’l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee (km) (km)
Aug. 20 Cosmos 1401	Total weight: 6000 kg?
USSR	Objective: “Continuation of outer space
1982 -81A	i nvest igations’'
F (?)	Description: Unavailable
Plesetsk
Aug. 26 Anik 0-1 (Telesat G) Total weight: 1200 kg
Canada	Objective: Canadian domestic conisat
1982-82A
Delta/PAM	Description: Cylinder 6.7m long, 2m dia
ESMC
Aug. 27 Molniva 3-19 USSR 1982-83A A-2-e Plesetsk
Sept. I Cosmos 1402 USSR 1982-84A F-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1403 USSR 1982-85A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: Provide telephone and
telegraph communications, broadcast Central TV programs to Orbila stations inside and outside USSR Description: Cylinder 4m long, 1.6 dia, topped by conical motor section and carrying a windmill of 6 solar panels
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
274	261
35 791	35 783
38 870	I486
264	251
416	354
Period	Inclination
(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
>
to
H
Z
>
C
H
89.9	82.3 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite
carrying earth resources package; reentered Sept. 3
1436.1	0.0 Launched into geostationary orbit by
NASA for Tclcsat Canada; first use of Delta with payload-assist niixlule (PAM)
717.8	63.1 Comsat
89.7	65.0 Prohahle. military reconnaissance satellite
using radar; reentered Jan. 23, 1983
92.3	70.4 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Sept. 15
>
Tl
“TJ
m
z
D
X
>
414
Sept. 3
Sept. 4
Sept. 8
Sept. 9
Sept. 15
Sept. 16
On
Cosmos 1404 USSR 1982-8&
A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Kiku 4 Japan 1982-87A N-l
Tanegashima
Cosmos 1405 USSR 1982-88A F-l
Baykonur*
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1406 USSR 1982-89A
F (?) Plesetsk
Total weight: 385
Objective: Technical experiments
governing future satellite development: attitude and thermal control, operation of solar array, earth imagery Description: Box 0.85 x0.85x2.1m with 6m solar panels, 3-axis-stabilized using reaction wheels
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
China 12	Total weight: Unavailable
PRC	Objective: Satellite development
1982-9QA	techniques including recovery test
Long March 2	Description: Unavailable
Shuang-Cheng-Tse
Cosmos 1407 USSR 1982-91A A-2
Plesetsk
Tbtal weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1408	Tbtal weight: Unavailable
USSR	Objective: Undisclosed
1982-92A
F (?)	Description: Unavailable
Plesetsk
1229
444
220
384
340
661
358
967
430
212
175
174
92.3	72.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Sept. 15
107.2	44.6 Japan-built and -launched
>
-a
m
z
a
><
>
93.3	65.0 Probable ocean surveillance
satellite doing electronic reconnaissance; reentered Feb. 5, 1984
88.8	82.3 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite,
carrying earth-resources package; reentered Sept. 21
90.1	63.0 F^rt of satellite recovered Sept. 13
89.6	67.2 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite: reentered Oct. 16
H
TO
o
z
>
c
H
>
z
D
>
m
to
O
z
§
H
624
97.6
82.6
Probable electronic ferret
ON
oc
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int'l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee (km) (km)
Ekmn 9 USSR I982-93A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 2000 kg?	36 695	34 873
Objective: Transmit Central TV programs to collective receivers in remote ureas of USSR Description: Cylinder 5m long, 2m diu,
carrying boom-mounted solar panels and transmitting antenna array
Sept. 18	Progress 15
USSR I982-94A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Sept. 22	Cosmos 1409
USSR 1982-95A A-2-c Plesetsk
Total weight: 1000 kg Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
326	302
39 158	1199
Sept. 24 Cosmos 1410 USSR 1982-96A F (?) Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
1498	1491
Sept. 28 Intelsat 5 F-5 US.
1982-97A Atlas Centaur ESMC
Sept. 30 Cosmos 1411 USSR I982-98A A-2
Plesetsk
Tbtal weight: 1000 kg
Objective: International communications plus maritime subsystem for lease to Inti. Maritime Satellite Org. (INMARSAT)
Description: Box with antenna array and 16m — span solar panels
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
35 801	35 773
357	198
Period	Inclination
(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
1436.0	1.5 Soviet domestic conisat on station at
Statsionar T location (99 °E)
90.8	51.6 Unmanned cargo vehicle docked with rear
port of Saiyui 7 Sept. 20: undocked Oct. 14; reentered over Pacific after retrollre Oct. 16
717.8	64.4 Probably part of early warning system
115.9	82.6 Possible geodetic-measurements satellite
1436.1	0.0 INMARSAT had lost Marecs-B satellite
in failure of Ariane 5 launch vehicle delayed from May to Sept. 10. when third stage malfunctioned
90.1
72.9
Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Oct. 14
Oct. 2
985
901
Oct. 12
Oct. 14
Oct. 19
o\
o
Cosmos 1412 USSR 1982-99A F-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1413 USSR 1982-10QA D-l-H Baykonur-Tyuratam
and
Cosmos 1414 USSR 1982-100D D-l-B Baykonur-Tyuratam
Cosmos 1415 USSR 1982-100F D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Cosmos 1416 USSR 1982-101A A-2
Baykonur-
TVuratam
Cosmos 1417 USSR 1982-102A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 700 kg?	19 072
Objective: Establish global navigation system for USSR
Description: Cylinder 2m in length and dia
Total weight: 700 kg?	19 153
Objective: Establish global navigation . system for USSR
Description: Cylinder 2m in length and dia
Total weight: 700 kg?	19 076
Objective: Establish global navigation system for USSR •
Description: Cylinder 2m in length and dia
Total weight: 6000 kg?	278
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 700 kg?	1006
Objective: Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Cylinder 2m in length and dia, enclosed in drum-shape solar array
19 065
19 105
19 069
231
957
103.9	64.8 Probable ocean-survey satellite using
nuclear-powered radar
>
-a
-o
m
2
O
><
>
673.3	64.7 First launch in USSR’s global navigation
satellite system (GLONASS)
675.7	64.6
673.5	64.7
89.6	70.4 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Oct. 28
H
TO
o
z
>
c
H
n
C/5
>
2
a
>
m
§
2
>
C
H
104.7
83.0
Probable navsat
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Inf! Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
■N
Oct. 20 Horizont 6 USSR I982-I03A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyu ratam
Oct. 21	Cosmos 1418
USSR 1982-104A C-l
Kapustin Yar
Oct. 27	RCA Satcom 5
U.S.
1982-I05A
Delta
KSMC
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: Provide telephone, telegraph,
and TV relay through ‘‘Moscow’* system inside and outside USSR
Description: Cylinder 5m long, 2ni dia, 3-axis-slahilizcd. carrying array of horn and reflector antennas at earthpointing end
Total weight: Unavailable
Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 600 kg
Objective: Provide U.S. domestic and
international commercial communications Description: Box 1.4x1.6x1.8m carrying solar panels
36 795
414
35 792
Oct. 30 Dscs 15 U.S.
I982-106A Titan 3D ESMC
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Put DOD comsaLs into geosynchronous orbit Description: Unavailable
35 789
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(kin)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
35 778	1436.1	1.1 Comsat on location at Suttsionar 6
position. 90aE
370	50.7	92.3 Probable radar calibration mission;
reentered Sep. 30. 1983
H
50
o
z
§
H
n
>
z
o
>
m
70
o
z
>
c
35 783	1436.2	00 Commercial comsat on legation at 143 °W
to provide services to Alaska
35 783	1436.1	0.6 Two defense comsals. first in series of
uprated satellites; first use of Titan 3D with inertial upper stage to launch spacecraft
>
”0
”0
m
z
o
x
>
and
Dscs 16 U.S.
1982-106B Titan 3D ESMC
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Put DOD comsats into geosynchronous orbit Description: Unavailable
Oct. 31 Progress 16 USSR 1982-107A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Carry consumables and experiment materials to orbiting space station
Description: See 1982-7QA
Nov. 2	Cosmos 1419
USSR 1982-108A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Nov. 11	Cosmos 1420
USSR 1982-109A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: TOO kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Sri'S 5
U.S.
1982-1JQA
Columbia
KSC
Total weight: 2 306 010 kg Objective: First operational flight of
Space Transportation Systems; deploy 2 commercial comsats Description: Unavailable
35 797
362
285
807
317
and
SBS 3 U.S.
1982-HOB Columbia (in orbit)
Total weight: 580 kg	35 790
Objective: Business communications
Description: Cylinder 6m long, 2m dia
35 775
353
228
775
294
35 782
1436.1
0.0
>
m
2
2
2
91.6	51.6 Docked at rear port of Salyut 7 Nov. 2;
undocked Dec. 13; reentered earth atmosphere on command Dec. 14
89.6	70.3 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Nov. 16
100.7	74.0 Probable military comsat using data
store-and-dump technique
90.5	28.5 First launch of 4-man crew (Vance Brand, Robert
Ovcrmycr, Joseph Allen, William Lenoir) landed at Edwards AFB, Calif., Nov. 16 Satellite payloads (SBS 3, Anik C3) released from cargo bay to seek geostationary orbit. Spacewalks canceled because of problems with 2 space suits.
H
§
2
>
>
2
O
>
w
s
2
>
C
H
CSi
14361
0.0
Geostationary orbit
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
lnt’l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee (km) (km)
Nov. 17
Nov. 18
Nov. 26
Dec. 3
Telesat 6 (Anik C-3) Canada 1982-110C Columbia (in orbit)
DOD satellite USSR 1982-lUA Titan 3D WSMC
Cosmos 1421 USSR 1982-112 A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Iskra 3*
USSR 1982-33D Solyut 7 (in orbit)
Riidugu II USSR 1982-1 DA D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Cosmos 1422 USSR I982-U4A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2100 kg (including fuel) Objective: Canadian government comsat
Description: Cylinder 2m long, 1.5 dia
Total weight: 13 000 kg Objective: U.S. military reconnaissance using TV transmission system Description: Cylinder 15m long, 3 dia
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Experimental amateur-radio relay
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: Provide 24hr radio and
telegraph communications in UHF band, relay Central TV programs to Orbita network stations
Description: Cylinder 5m long, 2 dia, carrying a pair of solar panels; aerial array at one end
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
35 793	35 789
518	281
280	230
365	350
35 794	35 789
288 228
Period	Inclination
(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
1436.1	0.0 Geostationary orbit at 117.5^
92.6	97.0
73
O
>
C
>
z
a
>
tn
§
z
>
c
89.6	70.3 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Dec. 2
91.5	51.6 Launched from Salyut 7* (sec May 17,
1982-33C); reentered Dec. 16
1436.4	0.6 Comsat on station at 35 °E
>
-O
tn
89.7
729
Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Dec. 17
D
X
>
429	330
Dec. 8 Cosmos 1423 USSR 1982-115A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Dec. 14 Meteor 2-9 USSR 1982-1164 A-l
Plesetsk
Dec. 16 Cosmos 1424 USSR 1982-117A • A-2 Baykonur-Tyuratam
Dec. 21	DOD satellite
US.
1982-118A Thor Burner 2 W5MC
Dec. 23	Cosmos 1425
USSR 1982-119A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Dec. 28	Cosmos 1426
USSR 1982-1204 A-2
Baykonur-
fyufatam
Dec. 29	Cosmos 1427
USSR 1982-121A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2200 kg?
Objective: Scan doudcover and return images and data on earth surface and weather
Description: Cylinder 5m long, 1.5 dia, with 2 sun-seeking solar panels
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
886 806
349	171
822 810
415	348
351	205
476	422
92.2	62.8 Probable comsat; final rocket stage seemed
to explode on ignition; orbit figures given for largest fragment
101.9	81.2 Metesat
89.7	64.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Jan. 28, 1983
101.2	98.7 Probable military weather satellite
92.2	70.0 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Jan. 6, 1983
90.0	50.5
Probable photo reconnaissance satellite.
possibly doing parallel studies currently unmanned Salyut 7; March 5, 1983
with the reentered
93.6
65.8
Probable military radar calibration satellite
SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS,
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
626
SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS, 1983
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int'l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee	Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Cosmos 1428 USSR 1983-1A C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 700 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Cylinder 2tn in length and dia enclosed in cylindrical solar array	1003	949	164.6	82.9	Probable navsat
Cosmos 1429 USSR 1983-2A C-l Plesetsk and	Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications Description: Spheroid?	1517	1464	115.8	74.0	Multiple launch (8 satellites) probably for tactical military communications
Cosmos 1430 USSR 1983-2 B C-l Plesetsk and	Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications .Description: Spheroid?	1497	1464	115.6	74.0	
Cosmos 1431 USSR 1983-2C Plesetsk and	Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications Description: Spheroid?	1482	1463	115.4	74.0	
Cosmos 1432 USSR I983-2D C-l Plesetsk and	Total weight: 40 kg? Ohjcctivc: Communications Description: Spheroid?	1466	1461	115.2	74.0	
Cosmos 1433 USSR I983-2E C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications Description: Spheroid?	1465	1444	115.0	74.0	
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS	APPENDIX A
and
Cosmos 1434 USSR 1983-2F C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1435 USSR 1983-2G
C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1436 USSR 1983-2H C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1437 . USSR 1983-3A A-l
Plesetsk
Jan. 26	IRAS
US.
I983-4A
Delta
WSMC
Jan. 27	Cosmos 1438
USSR 1983-5A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 2000 kg? Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 1000 kg Objective: Joint mission of U.S., U.K. and Netherlands to study infrared sources in space
Description: Cylinder 3.6m long, 2 dia
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective; “Continuation of outer space investigations ”
Description: Unavailable
1465
1465
1464
650
910
293
1429
1413
1397
622
889
175
114.8
114.7
114.5
97.5
103.0
89.2
74.0
74.0
T3
tn
Z
a
74.0
81.2 Probable electronic ferret
99.1 Satellite ceased operation Nov. 21
70.4 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Feb. 7
H
s
Z
>
c
H
>
Z
D
>
m
8
z
>
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int’l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
Feb, 4 Sakura 2A Japan 1983-6A N-l 1
Tancgushima
Feb. 6	Cosmos 1439
USSR 1983-7A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Feb. 9	DOD satellites
U.S. 1983-8A 8B 8C 8D 8E 8F 8G 8H
Allas
WSMC
Feb. 10 Cosmos 1440 USSR 1983-9A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 670 (including fuel) Objective: Japanese domestic comsat to provide telephone, TV, and data links on K-band and C-band Description: Cylinder 3.3m long including despun antenna, 2.2 diu, enclosed in drum-shape solar panel; spin-stabilized
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Feb. 16 Cosmos 1441 USSR 1983-10A A-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
35 792
295
1156
1171
1152
1150
1156
1156
1159
1155
275
635
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
35 789	1436.2	0.1
Geostationary orbital 130°E
Z
>
C
H
>
a
160
89.1	70.4 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Feb. 22
m
x
O
z
H
n
Multiple launch; probable ocean surveillance system using radar; orbital
1059	107.4	63.4	records not maintained
1054	107.5	63.4	
1064	107.4	63.4	
1067	107.5	63.4	
1060	107.4	63.4	
1060	107.4	A	
1044	107.3	63A	
1061	107.4	63.4	
260	89.9	82.3	Probable photo reconnaissance satellite
carrying earth resources package; reentered Feb. 24
97.3	81.1
>
x
X
m
z
□
>
623
Probable electronic ferret
629
Feb. 20	Tenrna Japan 1983-11A Mu3S Kagoshima	Total weight: Unavailable Objective: X-ray observation of stars and galaxies using monitors, detectors, a collimator, and a proportional eounter Description: Unavailable	473	462
Feb. 25	Cosmos 1442 USSR ' 1983-12A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer spaee investigations” Description: Unavailable	360	169
March 2	Cosmos 1443 USSR 1983-13A D-l Baykonur- Tyuratam	Total weight: 20 T? Objective: To enlarge orbiting space station, and to carry consumables and experiment equipment for use by following crews’ Description: See Salyut 7(1982-33A)	235	195
	Cosmos 1444 USSR 1983-14A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	416	358
March 11	Molniya 3-20 USSR 1983-15A A-2-e Plesetsk	Total weight: 2000 kg? Objective: Transmit telephone, telegraph and TV through Orbita system to the USSR and abroad Description: Cylinder 4m long, 1.6 dia, with conical motor and windmill of 6 solar panels	39 114	1241
March 12	Ekran 10 USSR 1983-16A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam	Total weight: 2000 kg? Objective: Transmit Central TV programs to collective receivers in remote areas of USSR Description: Cylinder 5m long, 2 dia, with boom-mounted solar panels and transmitting array	35 800	35 775
March 15	Cosmos 1445 USSR 1983-17A C-l Kapustin Yar	Total weight: 1000 kg? Objective: Reentry and recovery test Description: D-wing vehicle 3m long, 2m acrosswings	225	200
March 16	Cosmos 1446 USSR 1983-18A A-2 Baykonur- Tyuratam	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” Description: Unavailable	241	222
94.0
31.5 Eighth of Japanese scisats (Astro-B series) carried 5 sets of instruments
89.8	67.2 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered April 11
>
-o
ro
z
o
><
>
88.7	51.6 Maneuvered to meet Salyut and docked
with it March 4; module would allow expanded manned operations; undocked Aug. 14; reentry module returned Aug. 23
92.3	72.8 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered March 16; orbit maintained by low-thrust motor
717.8	63.2 Orbit adjusted to ensure daily repeat of
ground tracks
1436.2	0.6 Geostationary orbit at 99°E
88.0	50.7 Reentered in less than 2 hr
E
z
g
H
O
C/5
>
Z
a
>
tn
E
z
>
89.1
69.9
Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered March 30
Launch
Date
Spacecraft. Country, lnt'1 Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
	Molnim 1-56 USSR I983-19A A-2-e Plesetsk	Total weight: 1800 kg? Objective: Internal Soviet communications Description: Similar to Molniva 3-20 (1983-I5A)	39 485
March 23	Astron USSR I983-20A D-1-E Baykonur- Tyuratam	Total weight: 3900 kg? Objective: Astronomical research on faint objects, using X-ray and UV telescopes Description: Vehicle resembling interplanetary Venera. 3m long, 2.5 dia, with a pair of solar panels	181 927
March 24	Cosmos 1447 USSR 1983-21A C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 700 kg? Objective: Navigation satellite combining mission with COSPAS search-and-rescue mission Description: Cylinder 2m in length and dia. with domed ends enclosed in cylindrical solar array	1010
March 28	NOAA 8 U.S. 1983-22A Atlas WSMC	Total weight: 2000 kg Objective: Meteorological satellite, carrying SARSAT search-and-rescue package like that on Cosmos 1447 (1983-2IA) Description: Box 4m long, 2 dia	825
March 30	Cosmos 1448 USSR 1983-23A C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 700 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Cylinder 2m in length and dia, enclosed in cylindrical solar array	1001
March 31	Cosmos 1149 USSR 1983-24A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	417
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min) (degrees)
Remarks
864
22 156
956
802
958
356
717.7
63.4
Orbit adjusted to ensure daily repeat of ground tracks
H
PC
O
z
>
H
n
>
Z
o
5921.4	58.4 Spacecraft equipped with X-ray
spectrometers and 5m-long UV telescope; main mirrors, 800mm diameter
pc
O
z
>
c
H
n
104.8	82.9 (COSPAS: Cosmos payload for signal-
receiving. position-fixing, data-rclay mission/scarch and rescue: designed for compatibility with SARSAT system developed jointly by France. Canada, and U.S.)
101.2	98 7
164.7	83.0
(S.ARSAT: search-and-rescue sateiiire:
outgrowth of France’s Arogs program for
satellite acq. of mcteorology/occanography
data from drifting buoys); orbit unstable
after separation from launcher, stabilized by April 21
Probable nuvsat
	> -o
Probable military photo reconnaissance	■o m
satellite; reentered April 15; maintained	z
orbg by use of low-thrust motor	2
	X
	>
April 2
April 4
April 5
April 6
April 8
April 11
Molniya 1-57 USSR 1983-25A A-2-e
Plesetsk
Total weight: 1800 kg?
Objective: Internal Soviet communcations
(Description: Similar to Molniya 3-20 (1983- 15A) .
39 249	1102
STS6
U.S.
1983-26A
Challenger
KSC
Total weight: 69T
Objective: To orbit Challenger for. first time;
launch TDRS; do various experiments Description: Standard Shuttle craft (see I98I-34A)
290	280
TDRSJ
U.S.
1983-26B Challenger (in orbit)
Cosmos 1450 USSR 1983-27A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 1500 (in orbit)	35 788	35 782
Objective: Provide improved space-to-ground communications for U.S.-launched satellites (link Spacelab mision with ground control)
Description: Irregular box 6m long, 2 dia. carrying aerial and solar array
Total weight: Unavailable	500	455
Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Raduga 12 USSR 1983-28A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 2000 kg?	35 902	35 685
Objective: Provide 24 hr radio, telegraph, and TV communications within the USSR Description: Cylinder 5m long, 2 dia, with bdom-mounted solar panels and antenna array
Cosmos 145] USSR 1983-29A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
RCA Satcom 6	Total weight: 1000 kg
U.S.	Objective: Commercial communications
1983-30A
Delta	Description: Unavailable
ESMC
323	227
35 794	35 779
717.7
90.0
1436.0
94.2
1436.5
90.0
1436.1
63.1 Orbit adjusted to ensure daily repeat of ground track
28.5 Crew (Paul Weitz, Karol Bobko, Donald Peterson, Story Musgrave) launched TDRS J; landed Edwards AFB April 9
0.8 Second-stage malfunction put tracking and data relay satellite into orbit lower than intended; small onboard thrusters raised it to operating altitude; arrived at station 41 °W on Oct. 17
65.8 Probable military mission
0.3 Domestic comsat in geostationary orbit
82.4 Probable photo reconnaisance satellite; reentered April 22
0.0 Launched by NASA for RCA; in geostationary orbit at 128 °W
Launch
Date
April 12
April 15
April 17
April 19
April 20
April 22
Spacecraft,
Country.
Int’l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee (km) (km)
Cosmos 1452	Total weight: 700 kg?
USSR	Objective: “Continuation of	outer space
1983-31A	investigations"
C-l	Description: Unavailable
Plesetsk
DOD satellite	Total weight: 3T
U S.	Objective: Undisclosed
1983-32A
Titan 3R-Atjena D Description: Cylinder 8m long, 1.5 dia WSMC
Rohini 3 India 1983-33A vSLV-3 Sriharikota
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1453 USSR I983-34A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Soyuz T-8 USSR 1983-35A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 7000 kg?
Objective: Carry 3-man crew to orbiting Salyut 7/Cosrnos 1443 complex Description: Near-sphcrical orbital craft 7.5tti long. 2.2 dia; conical reentry module, cylindrical instrument section with solar panels
Cosmos 1454 USSR I983-36A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
806	780
298	135
808	385
488	449
228 180
343	170
Period	Inclination
(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
100.7
88.9
96.6
94.0
88.5
89.6
74.1 Probable military comsat using data store-and-dump technique
96.5 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; maneuverable; reentered Aug. 21
>
c/i
§
Z
>
c
n
>
m
»
O
z
n

46.6 India-built and -launched spacecraft
74.0 Probable military mission
51.6 Mission failed before docking because of malfunction in rendezvous system; crew (Vladimir Titov, Gennady Strekalov, Aleksandr Serebrov) recovered April 22, later reported that Soyuz antenna failed to deploy
67.1 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite: reentered May 22
>
m
z
o
X
>
661
April 23 Cosmos 1455	Total weight: Unavailable
	USSR 1983-37A F Plesetsk	Objective: Undisclosed Description: Unavailable	
April 25	Cosmos 1456 USSR 1983*38A A-2-e. . Plesetsk	Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	39 179
April 26	Cosmos 1457 USSR 1983-39A A-2 Baykonur- Tyuratam'	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	350
April 28	Cosmos 1458 USSR 1983-40A A-2 Plesetsk	Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	245
	GOES 6 U.S. 1983-41A Delta ESMC	Total weight: 800 (inch fuel) Objective: Return meteorological data from geostationary orbit Description: Spin-stabilized drum 3m long, 2 dia	35 850
May 6	Cosmos 1459 USSR 1983-42A C-l Plesetsk	Total weight: 700 kg? Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable	1016
	Cosmos 1460 USSR 1983-43A A-2 Baykonur-	Total weight: 6000 kg Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations" Description: Unavailable.	416
Tyuratam
629
97.6
82.5
Probable electronic ferret
1141	717.1	65.5 Probably part of early warning system;
orbit adjusted to ensure daily repeat of ground track
171	89.7	70.4 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered June 8
212	89.1	82.3 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite
carrying earth resources package; reentered May 11
35 728	1436.2	0.1 Geostationary Gperatonal Environmental
Satellite aimed at location 135°W
940	104.6	83.0 Probable navsat
350
92.2
70.3
Probable military photo reconnaisance satellite; reentered May 20
Launch
Date
Spacecraft, Country, lnt'1 Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
May 7	Cosmos	1461
USSR 1983-44A F-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
May 17	Cosmos	1462
USSR 1983-45A A-2
Plesetsk
May 19	Cosmos	1463
USSR 1983-46A C-l
Plesetsk
Intelsat 5 F-6 U.S.
1983-47A Atlas Centaur ESMC
May 24	Cosmos	1464
USSR 1983-48A C-l
Plesetsk
May 26 Cosmos 1465 USSR 1983-49A C-1
Kapustin Yar
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 700 kg? Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 1000 kg
Objective: Communications
Description: Bex-shaped vehicle with I6m-span solar array
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations
Description: Cylinder 2m in length and dia, domed ends; enclosed in drum-shaped solar array
Total weight: Unavailable
Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
886
277
1461
35 802
1011
283
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
566
259
297
35 773
968
249
99.3	65.0 Probable electronic reconnaissance,
directed at ship movements
89.9	82.3 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite
carrying earth resources package: reentered May 31
H
70
O
z
>
c
H
>
Z
u
>
§
z
>
c
H
102.5	82.9 Probable geodetic satellite
1436.1	0.0
104.9	82.9 Probable navsat
89.8	50.6 Spacecraft used either as radar lest target,
or tor electronic rcconniassance
O
X
>
Cosmos 1466 USSR 1983-50A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Exosat
ESA
1983-51A
Delta
WSMC
May 31 Cosmos 1467 USSR 1983-52A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: .Unavailable.
Total weight: 510 kg (incl 120 kg scientific instruments)
Objective: X-ray spectroscopy; locating
new sources; use of telescopes to observe occultations of sources by the moon; mapping low-energy extended sources Description: Box 1.4 high, 2.1 across containing instruments, control equipment, and payload, with single 1.9 solar panel
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
June 2 Venera 15 USSR 1983-53A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 4000 kg?
Objective: Study Venus from orbit, mapping planet surface by radar Description: Cylinder 3m long; 2.5 dia, with pair of solar panels; instrument package at one end
June 7 Venera 16 USSR 1983-54A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Cosmos 1468 USSR 1983-55A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: See Venera 15 Objective: See Venera 15
Description: See Venera 15
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
&■

345 174 89.7 64.9	Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered July 6
187 645 4498 5438.9 71.3	European X-ray Observatory Satellite launched by NASA for ESA
417 357 92.3 72.9	Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered June 12
Launched toward circumvenerean orbit	Venus encounter predicted for October, carrying radar mapping instruments; entered Venus orbit Oct. 10; Venera 16 arrived there Oct. 14
Launched toward circumvenerean orbit	
277 252 89.9 82.3 t	Probable photo reconnaissance satellite carrying earth resources package; reentered June 21
APPENDIX A	ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
636
Launch
Date
Spacecraft.
Country.
Int'I Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
June 10
DOD satellite
(OPS 6432) 1983-56A 56C 56D
Atlas
WSMC
June 14	Cosmos 1469
USSR 1983-47A A-2
Plesetsk
June 16	ecs j
ESA
1983-58A Arianc L-6 Kourtm
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Ocean surveillance
Description: Unavailable .
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 1043 kg (incl. fuel) Objective: Provide international telephone circuits covering Europe, the Middle Hast, and North Africa: distribute TV programs in the same area Description: Box 2.4m high, 2.2 dia, carrying a 13,8 span solar array
1165
342
35 799
and
June lg
Oscar JO (Amsat P3B) Total weight: 130 kg (90 after maneuvers)
ESA	Objective: Provide communications over
I983-58B	large areas of So. America using
Arianc L-6	inexpensive equipment; demonstrate use of
Kourou	microprocessor for monitoring operations
Description: Three pointed star, 1.3m wide 0.4 high
STS 7 U.S.
I983-59A
Challenger
KSC
Total weight: 69T
Objective: Orbit the Challenger; launch various objects; test retrieval system Description: Standard Shuttle (see I98I-84A)
35 431
320
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
1065	107.4	63.4 Three payloads
231	90.3	72.8 Probahlc military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered June 24
35 777	1436.1	0.0 Geosynchronous orbit at 10°l7.
4203	699.6	25.9 Third-generation German-built amateur
radio comsat
295	90.5	28.5 Second flight of Challenger; crew (Crippen.
Hauck. Fabian, Ride, Thagard) launch Pakipa 3 and Telesat 7; tested remote manipulator for spacecraft rcleasc/rctricval using Spas 01 pallet carrying payload. Landed June 24 at Edwards AFB in Calil. because of had weather at KSC
637
June 20
June 23
and
Telesar 7 (Anik C-2) Total weight: 1238 (including fuel)
Canada	Objective: Provide domestic telephone and
1983-59B	TV channels to Canada
Challenger	Description: Spin-stabilized cylinder 2.8m
(in orbit)	long, extended to 6.7m with solar array
deployed
Palapa 3 (B-l) Indonesia 1983-59C Challenger (in orbit)
and
Total weight: 550 kg?
Objective: Part of Indonesian domestic comsat system Description: Not available
Spas 0J U.S.
1983-59F Challenger (remote
manipulator arm)
DOD satellite	Total weight: 13 000 kg
(OPS 0721)	Objective: Military reconnaissance
U.S.
1983-60A	Description: Cylinder 15m long, 3 dia
Titan 3D
WSMC
Total weight: 1500 kg Objective: Test satellite release and
retrieval using Shuttle’s manipulator arm
Description: Standard Spacelab pallet
and
Subsatellite
U.S.
1983-60C Titan 3D WSMC
Cosmos 1470 USSR 1983-61A F
Plesetsk
Total 'weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
35 796	35 779	1436.1
35 794	35 780	1436.1
(Same as Challenger’s)
220	165	88.4
1290	1290	111.4
663	629	97.7
0.0 Released June 18 in Challenger orbit;
payload assist module maneuvered it to location
>
2
><
>
0.0 Released June 19 in Challenger orbit;
payload-assist module maneuvered it to location
Initial capture performed immediately after release; pallet was released and retrieved 4 times over 10 hr, separated from orbiter as far as 300m
Carried film return capsules	> C/3 H 30 o
	
	£
	Ch H
Piggyback payload on DOD satellite	O V)
launch; probable military electronic	>
reconnaissance	Z o > m 30
Probable electronic ferret	O Z
	>
	
	IA
o\
oo
Launch
Date
Spacecraft.
Country,
Int'l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
June 27 Sovuz T-9 USSR 1983-62A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 700 kg?	337
Objective: Ferry crew to Salyut 7-Cosmos 1443 orbiting laboratory Description: Near-sphere orbital compartment,
7.5m long, 2.2 dia; conical reentry module: cylindrical instrument unit carrying solar panels
Hilat
U.S.
1983-63A
Scout
WSMC
Total weight: 113 kg Objective: USAF ionospheric research at high latitudes
Description: Octagonal cylinder l in long, 0.5 dia
June 28 Cosmos 1471 USSR 1983-64A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Galaxy 1 U.S.
1983-65A
Delta
EMSC
July 1 Horizon! 7 USSR 1983-66A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 698 kg Objective: Commercial comsat with 12 channels available for sale or iease Description: Spin-stabilized cylinder 2.8m long, extended to 6.7m with solar aray deployed
Total weight: 200 kg (in orbit)
Objective: Provide telephone, telegraph, and TV-rclay links through “Moscow” system inside and outside USSR Description: Cylinder 5m long, 2m dia. with array of aerials and pair of solar panels at one end
835
344
35 793
35 827
Perigee (km)	Period (min)	Inclination (degrees)	Remarks	> H pa O 2 §
325	91.1	51.6	Crew (Vladimir Lyakhov and Aleksandr	n
			Aleksandrov) docked at rear port of	>
			Salyut 7 June 28; unloaded cargo from	2
			Cosmos 1443, which undocked Aug. 14	
			and returned capsule to earth with 500 kg	>
			ot cargo from station. Crew undocked	5
			Sovuz T-9 Aug. 16 and redocked at	O
			forward port	>
				C
765	100.9	82.0	Spacecraft similar to Transit navsal	
				rjn
185	89.8	67.2	Probable military photo reconnaissance	
satellite; reentered July 27
35 787	1436.2	0.0 Geostationary orbit at 134 °W; built and
launched by divisions of il'ic Hughes organization
35 748	1436.2	0.1
>
-a
-a
cn
a
X
>
Progrtoz 9 USSR 1983-67A A-2-e Baykonur-Tyuratam
July 5	Cosmos 1472
USSR 1983-68A A-2
Plesetsk
July 6	Cosmos 1473
. USSR 1983-69A C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1474 USSR 1983-69B C-l
Plesetsk
and
Cosmos 1475 USSR 1983-69C C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1476 USSR 1983-69D C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 1000 kg?	720
Objective: Ionosphere and magnetosphere studies, esp. research and residual radio emissions from “Big Bang"
Description: Cylinder 2m in length and dia, carrying 4 solar panels.
Total weight: 6000'kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
000
362
1461
1461
1460
1461
380	38 448.0
Scisat carrying apparatus from	>
Czechoslovakia and France as well	■'O ■6
as USSR	m 2
	O
	H
	>
338	91.6	82.4 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite
carrying earth resources package; reentered July 19
1392	114.4	74.0 Multiple launch (8 satellites) probably for
military communications
1410
114.6
74.0
1427
114.8
74.0
1444
114.9
74.0
H
§
Z
>
>
z
o
>
m
§
z
>
c
H
n
Launch
Date
Spacecraft.
Country.
Int i Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(kin)
July 8
Cosmos 1477 USSR 1983-69E
C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1478 USSR 1983-69F C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1479 USSR 1983-69G C-i
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1480 USSR 1983-69H C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1481 USSR 1983-70A A-2-c Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: ‘ ‘Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid"?
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
1463
1480
1498
1518
38 465
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
1459	115.1	74.0
1461	115.3	74.0
1460	115.5	74.0
1460	115.8	74.0
1370
707.3
63.9
Probable part of early warning system
>
RONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
413
July 13 Cosmos 1482 USSR 1983-71A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
July 14	Navstar 8
U.S.
1983-72A Atlas F ESMC
July 19	Molniya 1-58
USSR 1983-73A A-2-e Plesetsk
July 20* Cosmos 1484 USSR 1983-74A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 800 kg Objective: Operational Block 1 satellite in U.S. global positioning system Description: Box 2m on a side carrying 2 solar panels
Total weight: 1800 kg?
Objective: Provide telegraph and longdistance telephone links; relay Central TV programs to Orbita receivers in remote areas of USSR Description: Cylinder 3.4m long, 1.6 dia, carrying windmill of 6 solar panels
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
July 25 Cosmos 1483 USSR 1983-75A A-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 2200 kg?
Objective: Earth resources sensing; testing new remote equipment Description: Cylinder 5m long, 1.5 dia, carrying 2 sun-seeking solar panels; sensing equipment at one end
July 26 Cosmos 1485 USSR 1983-76A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2200 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
20 461
39 933
275
656
415
* This and following launch were numbered/reported out of sequence
£
352
92.2
70.0
Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered July 27
19 903	718.0	62.8 Previous navsat launch Dec. 18,
1982, failed when launcher malfunctioned at liftoff. Navstar 8 would be 7th in system to reach orbit
414	717.7	63.1 Comsat
260	89.9	82.3 Probable earth resources photo
reconnaissance satellite; reentered Aug. 3
587	97.1	97.9 Sensors resemble those on Meteor 2
spacecraft
358
92.3
72.9
Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Aug. 9
Launch
Date
Spacecraft. Country, lnt'l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee	Perigee	Period
(km) (km)	(min)
July 28
July 31
Aug. 3
Aug. 5
Telsiar 3A	Total weight: 1225 kg (inch fuel)
U.S.	Objective: Provide commercial
1983-77A	communications	channels for AT&T
Delta	Description: Cylinder 2.8m long, 2.2	dia,
ESMC	extending to 6.8	after deployment of
drum-shaped solar array
DOD satellite	Total weight: Unavailable
U.S.	Objective: Military communications	e.sp.
1983-78A	in polar regions
Titan 3B-	Description: Unavailable
Agcna D (launch site not given)
Cosmos 1486 USSR 1983-79A C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1487 USSR 1983-80A A-2
Plesetsk
Sakura 2B Japan 1983-81A Nil
Tanegashima
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: ‘'Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2200 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 670 kg (including fuel)
Objective: Provide telephone, TV, and data links for Japanese mainland and remote islands
Description: Spin-stabilized cylinder 2.1m long, 2.2 dia (3.3m long incl. antenna) enclosed in drum-shaped solar panel, with despun antenna and deflector
35 794	35 782	1436.2
Information not available
801	781	100.7
275	261	89.9
35 789	35 785	1436.1
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
0.05
74.1
82.3
0.0
First of a series of three comsats to replace the Comstars leased by AT&T front ConiSatCorp; stationed at 66°W for testing, later at 96 °W for operations
DOD comsat
Probable military comsat using data store-and-dump technique
Probable photo reconnaissance satellite carrying earth resources package; reentered Aug. 19
Geosynchronous orbit at 135 °E; carried uplinks in 27.5-29.3 GHz range and downlinks in 17.7 and 19.5 GHz range, plus C-band channels
£
Aug. 9	Cosmos 1488
USSR 1983-82A A-2
Plesetsk
Aug. 10	Cosmos 1489
USSR 1983-83A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1490 USSR 1983-84A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
and
Cosmos 1491 USSR 1983-84B
Cosmos 1492 USSR 1983-84C
Total weight: 2200 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Aug. 17 Progress 17 USSR 1983-85A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Carry consumables and experiment materials to crew aboard orbiting Salyut 7 Description: Unavailable
Aug. 19
China 13
DDf
1983-86A Long March 2 Shuan-Cheng-Tse
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Satellite development, including recovery techniques Description: Unavailable
415	356
365	171
19 172	19 086
19 509	18 938
19 161	19 152
339	319
382	173
92.3
72.9
Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Aug. 23
89.9	64.7 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Sept. 23
675.7	64.8 Multiple launch (3 satellites) probably to
form part of USSR navigation system (GLONASS); second launch of three
679.5	64.8
676.8	64.8
91.1	51.6 Docked at rear port of Salyut 7 Aug. 19;
undocked and reentered earth’s atmosphere Sept. 18
90.1
63.3
Reentered Sept. 3
Launch
Date
Aug. 23
Aug. 25
Aug. 30
Spacecraft. Country, lnt'1 Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee (km) (km)
Cosmos 1493 USSR I983-87A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
414	360
Radu\>a 13 USSR 1983-88A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
STS 8 U.S.
1983-H9A
Challenger
KSC
Insut IB India 19H3-89B Challenger (in orbit)
Total weight: 2000 kg (in orbit)	35 789	35 783
Objective: Provide 24 hr radio, TV, and
telegraph communications with the USSR Description: Cylinder 5m long, 2 dia, carrying a pair of solar panels and an aerial array at one end
Total weight: 69 T (not incl. cargo &. exp.)	301	294
Objective: Carry 5-man crew with scientific and technical payload into orbit; launch satellite for India
Description: Delta-wing recoverable spacecraft 37m long, 24m wingspan
Total weight: 1152 kg (incl. fuel)	35 939	35 636
Objective: Provide communications and meteorological service to India Description: Box 1.6x 1.4x2.2m carrying single solar panel and balancing “sail"
Molniya 3-21 USSR 1983-90A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: 2000 kg?	39 209	1144
Objective: Transmit telephone and TV signals via Orbita system inside and outside the USSR
Description: Cylinder 4m long, 1.6 dia. with conical motor, carrying a 6-solar-pancl windmill
Period	Inclination
(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
92.3	72.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Sept. 6
1436.1	0.2
H
70
o
z
>
c
H
a
>
m
70
O
z
>
c
90.3	28.5 Crew (Truly. Brandenstein. Thornton,
Bluford, Gardner) launched Indian comsat into geosynchronous orbit; landed Sept. 5 at Edwards AFB, Calif. First nighttime launch and landing
1436.2	0.2	Launched from Challenger cargo bay
Aug. 31 as replacement for Insat A, which
ceased to operate soon after launch in
April 1982; on station at 74 °E over
equator south of India; film from STS 8 showed hit
by unidentified object
717.8	63.0
>
“O
U
m
o
x
>
Aug. 31
Sept. 3
Sept. 7
Sept. 8
Sept. 9
Sept. 14
Sept. 17
Cosmos 1494 USSR 1983-91A C-l:
Kapustin Yar
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
r,	•	.	. •
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1495 USSR 1983-92A A-2 • Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1496 USSR 1983-93A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
RCA Saicom 7 U.S.
1983-94A
Delta
ESMC
Total weight: 600 kg (not mcl. fuel) Objective: Commercial communications
Description: Box measuring 1.5m per side* 2 solar panels on booms
Cosmos 1497 USSR I983-95A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1498 USSR 1983-96A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1499 USSR 1983-97A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”.
Description: Unavailable
309
91.8
50.7 Described in press as “minor military support mission”
215	89.0	82.3 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite
carrying earth resources package; reentered Sept. 16
>
"0
cn
Z
O
><
170
89.6
67.2 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Oct. 19
35 779	1436.2	0.0 Third of series of comsats launched by
NASA for RCA, replacing Satcom 2 launched in 1976; on station at 72 °W
357	90.3	72.8 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Sept. 23
261	89.9	82.3 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite
carrying earth-resources package; reentered Sept. 29
H
§
Z
>
>
z
D
>
cn
§
Z
>
a
H
357
90.2
72.9
Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Oct. 1
646
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int’l Designation, Vehicle
Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
Sept. 22 Galaxy 2 U.S.
I983-98A
Delta
ESMC
Sept. 28	Cosmos 1500
USSR 1983-99A F
Plesetsk
Sept. 29	Ekrcmll
USSR 1983-100A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Sept. 30	Cosmos	1501
USSR 1983-101A C-l
Plesetsk
Oct. 5	Cosmos	1502
USSR 1983-102A C-l
Plesetsk
Oct. 12	Cosmos	1503
USSR 1983-I03A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 1218 kg (incl. fuel)	35 792
Objective: Commercial comsat carrying 12 channels lor sale or lease Description: Cylinder 2.2m dia; 2,8 long extending to 6.7 with solar array deployed
Total weight: Unavailable	661
Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2000 kg (in orbit)	35 795
Objective: Transmit programs of USSR Central TV to collective receiving stations in remote areas Description: Cylinder 5m long. 2 dia.
with pair of boom-mounted solar panels, carrying flat aerial array at one end
Total weight: 700 kg?	494
Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable	327
Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 700 kg?	806
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
35 789	1436.2	0.0 Hughes-built and -managed spacecraft;
geostationary orbit at 74 °W
629	97.6	82.5 Probable earth resources mission;
described in press as ocean scanncr/iccberg dctector/test of new optical radar system
>
uO
H
33
35 778	1436.1	0.2 Geosynchronous orbit at 99 °E
450	94.1	82.9 Described in press as "military monitor”
314	90.0	65.8 Described in press as an "anti-satellite
space interceptor target”; inclination "seldom used by Soviet satellites”
m
2
2
><
786
74.0
100.8
Probable military comsat using data store-and-dump technique
647
Oct. 14
306
Oct. 19
Oct. 20
Oct. 21
Oct. 26
Oct. 28
Oct. 29
Cosmos 1504 USSR 1983-104A
A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Intelsat 5 F-7 ITSO 1983-105A Ariane Kourou
Total weight; 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 1012 kg (in orbit)
Objective: Commercial communications
Description: Box 1.7*2.0x1.8m; span . across solar panels 16m, 4m aerial mast
Progress 18 USSR 1983-106A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight:. 7000 kg?
Objective: Deliver supplies to crew on orbiting Salyut 7
Description: Near spherical; conical fuel module; cylindrical instrument.unit; overall length 7.5m, 2.2 dia
Cosmos 1505 USSR 1983-107A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: ‘‘Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1506 USSR 1983-108A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: Navigation
Description: Cylinder 2m in length and dia, enclosed in drum-shaped solar array
Meteor 2-10 USSR 1983-109A A-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2200 kg?
Objective: Obtain scanning-radiometer images of earth surface and cloudover Description: Cylinder 5m long, 1.5 dia, canning 2 sun-seeking solar panels
Cosmos 1507 USSR 1983-110A F-l
Baykonur-
Tvuratam
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
35 800
357
414
1011
886
452
171	64.9	88.7 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Nov. 6
35 778	1436.2	0.0 First of Intelsat series to carry
maritime communications package
m
z
a
s
318	91.2	51.6 Docked at rear port of Salyut 70ct. 22;
separated Nov. 13; burned up on reentry Nov. 16
356	92.3	72.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Nov. 4
947	104.7	82.9
747	101.2	81.2 Metesat
415	93.3	65. L Probable military intelligence, electronic
monitoring, ocean surveillance satellite; normally used to check on communications among naval task force ships
H
§
Z
>
>
z
o
>
m
90
O
z
>
c
H
n
on
648
Launch
Dale
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int'I Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
Nov. 11 Cosmos 150# USSR 1983-11IA C-l
Plesetsk
Nov. 17 Cosmos 1509 USSR 1983-112A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
1950
290
Nov. 18 DOD satellite US.
1983-113A Atlas F WSMC
Total weight: 750 kg
Objective: USAF meteorological satellite
Description: Irregular cylinder 6m long. 2ni dia with solar panel
828
Molniya 1-59 USSR 1983-114A A-2-e Plesetsk
Nov. 24 Cosmos 1510 USSR 1983-115A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 1800 kg?	39 324
Objective: Provide telegraph and long-distance telephone links; broadcasat Central TV programs to Orbita sations in remote USSR areas
Description: Cylinder topped with conical motor, 3.4m long, 1.6 dia, carrying ‘‘windmill” of 6 solar panels
Total weight: Unavailable	1521
Objective; Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
394	108.8	82.9 Possible ionospheric research satellite
225	89.7	72.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Dec. 1
810	101.3	98.7
1031	717.8	62.9
1479
116.0
73.6
Possible geodetic satellite
254
Nov. 28 STS 9
U.S.
1983-116A
Columbia
KSC
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Cany ESA Spacelab on its first mission
Description: Standard Shuttle
Nov. 30 Cosmos 1511 USSR 1983-117A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?)
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Horizon t 8
USSR 1983-118A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: Unspecified (comsat)
Description: Cylinder 5m long, 2 dia, carrying pair of solar panels; an aerial anay at one end
Dec. 7 Cosmos 1512 USSR 1983-119A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Dec. 8 Cosmos 1513 USSR 1983-120A C-l
Plesetsk
Dec. 14 Cosmos 1514 USSR 1983-12lA A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: Navigation
Description: Cylinder 2m in length and dia wi domed ends, enclosed in drum-shaped solar array
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: Biosat, carrying 2 monkeys,
18 rats, other specimens Description: Unavailable
£
325
35 793
416
1013
259
89.4
57.0 Carried 2-shift crew to permit 24 hr operation
of experiments: John Young, pilot, with Dr. Robert Parker (mission specialist and West Germany’s Dr. Ulf Merbold (payload specialist); Brewster Shaw, pilot, with Dr. Owen Garriott (mission specialist) and Dr. Byron Lichtenberg (payload specialist). Mission extended to 10 da while in flight; computer fault delayed actual landing by 7 hr. Landed Dec. 8 at Edwards AFB, Calif. First non-U.S. citizen on U.S. space mission
89.6	67.1 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Jan. 13, 1984
1436.1	0.5 Geosynchronous orbit at 90°E
92.3	72.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Dec. 21
104.8	82.9
82.3 Reentered Dec. 19
89.3
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country.
Int'l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
Dec. 15 Cosmos 1515 USSR 1983-122A F
Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Dec. 21 Molniya 3-22 USSR 1983-I23A A-2-c Plesetsk
Dee. 27 Cosmos 1516 USSR 1983-124A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1517 USSR I9$r*-!25A
C-l
Kapustin Yar
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: Provide telephone, telegraph and TV relays through Orbita system Description: Cylinder 4m long, 1.6 dia. with conical motor section; carrying “windmill" of 6 solar panels
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 1000 kg?
Objective: Reentry and recovery test
Description: Delta-winged reentry vehicle 3m long, 2 across
661
39 884
276
221
Dee. 28 Cosmos 1518 USSR 1983-I26A A-2-c Plesetsk
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: .“Continuation of outer space investigations' ’
Description: Unavailable
39 268
Perigee	Perkxl	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
630	97.6	82.5 Probable electronic ferret
464	717.7	63.5
H
73
O
z
>
c
>
z
□
>
m
73
O
Z
>
a
H
1%	89.2	64.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Feb. 9. 1984
181	88.5	50.7	Craft landed in the Black Sea near the
end of the first orbit, press described it as “Space Shuttle prototype," third of a scaled-down series; first 2 (Cosmos 1374 and 1445) recovered from Indian Ocean in 1982 and 1983
907	714.1	64.4	Probable early warning satellite
□
X
>
19 156	19 102
Cosmos 1519 USSR 1983-127A
Cosmos 1520 USSrR 1983-127B
Cosmos 1521 USSR 1983-127C D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Navigation; test elements of experimental system for locating USSR civil aviation plus merchant marine and fishing ships Description: Unavailable
19 177
19 141
19 081
19 000
675.7
675.7
673.4
Multiple launch (3 navsats) to complete	>
Soviet GLONASS system of 9 with	"0
Cosmos 1413-1415 (launched Oct. 1982)	W 2
and Cosmos 1490-1492 (launched	O
Aug. 1983)	>< >
64.9
64.9
§
Z
>
C
H
O
oo
>
Z
o
>
m
§
z
>
a
SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS, 1984
PRECEDING PAGE MUNTK)MMi.y HlANft
BLANK NOT FILMED
SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND MANNED SPACE FLIGHTS, 1984
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Lnt’l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee	Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(km)	(mm)	(degrees)
Remarks
Cosmos 1522 USSR 1984-1A and	Total weight: 40 kg'? Objective: Communications Description: Spheroid?	1490	1460	115.4	74.0	Multiple launch (8 spacecraft) probably for military communications among Held units
Cosmos 1523 USSR 1984-IB and	Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications Description: Spheroid?	1460	1393	114.4	74.0	
Cosmos 1524 USSR 1984-1C and	Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications Description: Spheroid?	1461	1409	114.6	74.0	
Cosmos 1525 USSR 1984-ID arid	Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications Description: Spheroid?	1460	1425	l 14.7	74.0	
Cosmos 1526 USSR 1984-1E and	Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications Description: Spheroid?	1461	1440	L 14.9	74.0	
Cosmos 1527 USSR 1984-IF	Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications Description: Spheroid?	1461	1456	115.1	74.0	
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS	APPENDIX A
and
Cosmos 1528 USSR 1984-1G
and
Cosmos 1529 USSR 1984-1H C-l
Plesetsk
Jan. 11 Cosmos 1530 USSR 1984-2A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg? Objective: Communications ’ Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
1474
1508
415
Cosmos 1531 USSR 1984-3A C-l
Plesetsk
Jan. 14	Cosmos 1532
USSR 1984-4A A-2
Plesetsk
Jan. 23	Bs-2A
Japan 1984-5A N-ll
Tanegashima
Jan. 26 Cosmos 1533 USSR I984-6A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg?	1007
Objective: Navigation
Description: Cylinder 2m in length and dia, with domed ends, enclosed in drum-shaped solar array
Total weight: 6000 kg?	355
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations''
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable	35 801
Objective: Provide TV links on K-band frequencies to remote areas of Japan Description: Cylinder 2m long, 1.3 dia, carrying dish aerial and 9m-span solar array
Total weight: 6000 kg?	414
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
1460	115.3	74.0
1461	115.6	74.0
tfl
Z
o
X
>
356	92.3	72.8 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Jan. 25
978	105.0	82.9
167	89.8	67.1 Probable military photo reconnaisance
satellite; reentered Feb. 26
35 777	1436.3	0.0 Broadcast Satellite 2A, geostationary
orbital 100 °E
H
8
Z
>
>
z
u
>
ffl
8
z
>
c
H
n
348
92.2
70.4
Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Feb. 9
ON
Crt
O'
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country.
Int'l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee	Perigee	Period
(km)	(km)	(min)
Cosmos 1534 USSR 1984-7A C-l
Plesetsk
Jan. 29	China 14
PRC 1984-8A Long March 3 (New site)
Jan. 31	DOD satellite
U.S.
1984-9A Titan 34 D ESMC
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Feb. 1 Cosmos 1535 USSR 1984-1OA C-l
Plesetsk
Feb. 3 STS 4IB U.S.
1984-11A Challenger KSC
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: Navigation
Description: Cylinder 2m in length and
dia with domed ends, enclosed in drumshaped solar army
Total weight: 70T
Objective: Launch 2 commercial satellites; carry out tests before Solar Maximum repair mission in April
Description: Delta wing orbiler 37m long. 24m wingspan
506	465	94.3
6586	460	163.4
Elements not available
1015	951	104.8
322	306	90.6
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
65.8 Probable cletronic ferret
36.2 Possible instrumented rocket stage for testing new launch facility or booster design: multiple orbit adjustments indicated test of apogee motor system
>
co
H
:c
O
Z
>
c
H
n
in
>
z
O
>
m
73
o
7.
>
C
H
Military launch for either early warning or communications use
83.0
28.5 Manned maneuvering unit tests successful. Crew (Vance Brand, commander: Bruce McCandlcss, Robert Stewart. Robert Gibson, Ron McNair) landed Feb. 11 at KSC. first orbiter to do so; 2 launches unsuccessful; robot arm failed in retrieval test
>
X
X
m
7,
o
x
>
657
and
Feb. 5
Feb. 8
Westar 6 U.S.
1984-1 IB Challenger (in orbit)
1RT
U.S.
-1984-11C Challenger (in orbit)
Palapa B2 Indonesia 1984-1 ID Challenger (in orbit)
DOD satellite U.S.
1984-12A (No information on vehicle) WSMC
Cosmos 1536 USSR 1984-13A F
Plesetsk
Soyuz T-10 USSR 1984-14A A-2
Baykonur-
fyuratam
Total weight: 1200kg(incl. fuel) Objective: Provide commlinks for use by Western Union
Description: module; reentered Nov. 16
Total weight: 234 kg Objective: Orbital testing of Shuttle’s' ’1 rendezvous techniques and capabilities Description: Spherical ballon
Total weight: 1200 kg (incl. fuel)
Objective: Provide domestic communications for Indonesian govt.
Description: Cylinder 2.8m long, 2.5m dia
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 7000 kg?
Objective: Carry long-stay crew to orbiting space station Salyut 7 Description: Near-spherical with conical
reentry module and cylindrical instrument unit carrying solar panels: 7.5m long, 22m dia
>
-o
1216	303	99.8	27.7 Hughes-built satellite failed to reach	2:
intended geostationary orbit probably	D
because of failure in payload-assist	X
module; reentered Nov. 16	>
Similar to Challenger	/ntegrated Rendezvous Target ballon
exploded while inflating after deployment
1186	277	99.2	28.5 Hughes-built satellite failed to reach
intended geostationary orbit probably because of failure in payload-assist module; reentered Nov. 16
Elements not available
Possible triple payload to perform radar surveillance
661	630	97.6	82.5
Probable electronic ferret
297	289	90.3	51.6 Crew (Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyev,
Oleg Atkov) docked at Salyut 7 forward port Feb. 9; vehicle returned Apr. 11 with crew of Soyuz T-ll (1984-32A)
H
S
Z
>
c
H
n
on
>
Z
D
>
tn
50
O
z
>
d
H
n
(orbit after docking)
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int’l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
Feb, 14 Ohzora
Japan 1984-15A M-35
Tancgashima
Feb. 15 Raduga 14 USSR 1984-16A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 180 kg
Objective: Study atmosphere between 10-130 km, also ionosphere in relation to South Altantic magnetic anomaly
Description: Cuboid Im to a side, carrying 4 solar panels
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: Provide 24 hr radio, TV and
telegraph links throughout USSR through Orbita system
Description: Cylinder 5m long, 2m dia, carrying solar panels, with aerial array at one end
Feb. 16 Cosmos 1537 USSR 1984-17A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations Description: Unavailable
Feb. 21 Progress 19 USSR I984-I8A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 7000 kg?
Objective: Carrying supplies and equipment to crew on orbiting Satyuf 7 Description: Like standard Soyuz T (see 1984-14A) except for nonrecoverablc cargo module instead of reentry module
Cosmos 1538 USSR I984-I9A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
776
35 786
273
311
807
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
346	95.9	74.6 Aeronomy satellite, part of Middle
Atmosphere Program, carried optical sensors
35 784	1436.0	0.5
Circular orbit at 85 °E
259	89.9	82.4 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite
carrying earth resources package; reentered March 1
306	90.6	51.6 Docked at rear port of Salyut 7 Feb. 23;
undocked March 31; fired retrorockef Apr. 1 for destructive reentry over Pacific Ocean
775	100.7	74.0 Probable military comsat using data
storc-and-dump technique
Feb. 28
March 1
March 2
March 5
March 6
March 7
•o
Cosmos 1539 USSR 1984-20A Plesetsk
Tola) weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Landsat
U.S.
1984-21A
Delta
WSMC
Total weight: 2000 kg Objective: Remote sensing of earth resources
Description: Cylindrical, 4m long, 2 dia, carrying solar panel; dish aerial at one end
241
700
and
Uosat 2 U.K. 1984-2 IB Delta WSMC
Cosmos 1540 USSR • 1984-22A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Intelsat 5 F-8 ITSO 1984-23A Ariane V8 Kourou
Cosmos 1541 USSR 1984-24A A-2-e Plesetsk
Cosmos 1542 USSR 1984-25A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 50 kg	694
Objective: Continue Uosat 1 ’s space
science education and space engineering; provide amateur radio users access to random memory for messages Description: Cuboid measuring 0.8x0.3x03
Total weight: 2000 kg?	35 816
Objective: Experimental communications relay
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 1072 kg (in orbit)	35 795
Objective: INTELSAT communications
Description: Box 1.7x2.Ox 1.8m with 4m mast, 15.9m solar panel width
Total weight: Unavailable	39 570
Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?	414
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
169
699
673
35 750
35 777
784
348
89.6
98.8
98.4
1435.9
1436.1
717.8
92.2
67.2 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Apr. 9
98.2 In circular, near-polar, sun-synchronous orbit, replacing disfunctioning Landsat 4 (1982-72A)
98.2 Piggyback payload was an educational spacecraft for scientific research, built and operated by Surrey Univ., launched by NASA for U.K.
1.1 Circular orbit at 80 °E; probably related to development of “Luch” satellite series
0.0 Launched by ESA for ITSO
63.4 Probable early warning satellite
70.4 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered March 21
099
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int'l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
March 10 Cosmos 1543 USSR I984-26A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
March 15 Cosmos 1544 USSR 1984-27 A F
Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
March 16 Eknu i 12 USSR I984-28A D-l-E Baykonur-Tytirutam
Molnixa 1-60 USSR 1984-29A A-2-e Plesetsk
March 21 Cosmos 1545 USSR 1984-30A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2000 kg? (in orbit)
Objective: Transmit programs of Central TV to collective stations in remote areas of USSR
Description: Cylinder 5m long, 2m dia. with boom-mounted solar panels, carrying aerial array at one end
Total weight: 1800 kg'?
Objective: Provide telephone, telegraph, and TV signals through Orbita system
Description: Cylinder 3.4m long. 1.6m dia, housing payload and instruments, topped by conical motor, carrying windmill of 6 solar panels
Total weight: 6000 kg'?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
394
662
35 818
39 855
415
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
216	90.6	62.8 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Apr. 5
628	97.6	82.5 Probable electronic ferret
>
H
70
O
z
>
c
H
o
\si
>
Z
D
>
m
§
z
>
c
35 776	1436.6	0.7 Circular orbit at 99°
491	717.6	63.4
m
z
a
x
356
92.3
72.8
Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Apr. 5
March 29 Cosmos 1546 USSR 1984-31A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
April 3 Soyuz T-ll USSR 1984-32A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 7000 kg?
Objective: Carrying visiting crew to orbiting Salyux 1
Description: Near-spherical, 7.5m long, 2.2 dia, conical reentry module, cylindrical instrument unit with solar panels
April 4 Cosmos 1547 USSR 1984-33A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: 1800 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
April 6	575 41-C
U.S. 1984-34A Challenger KSC
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Capture and repair Solar
Maximum Mission satellite (1980-14A); launch long-duration exposure facility Description: Standard Shuttle orbiter.
and
April 7
LDEF
U.S.
1984-34B Challenger Cargo bay
Total weight: 9707 kg Objective: Long Duration Exposure
Facility, designed to exposure samples of materials* electronic systems, scientific packages to prolonged period of space conditions
Description: Twelve-sided prism 9.1m long 4.3 dia
35 783	1436.2
0.6 Geostationary of 23 °W; possibly part of development of Luch comsat series
284	90.3	51.6	Crew (Yuri Malyshev, Gennady Strekalov,
India cosmonaut Rakesh Sharma) docked Apr. 4 at rear port of Salyui 7; returned to earth Apr. 11 in Soyuz T-10 vehicle. Resident crew undocked T-ll Apr. 13, redocked at forward port to permit Progress docking
1034	717.9	63.0	Probable early warning satellite
ro
2
o
><
>
493	94.3	28.5	11th Shuttle flight (crew, Robert Crippen,
Francis ScObee, Terry Hart, George Nelson, James van Hoften) launched LDEF Apr. 7. Captured SMM Apr. 10, using remote manipulator, brought it to bay for Nelson and van Hoften to repair during EVA Apr. 12 and return it to orbit that day. Challenger landed at Edwards AFB, Calif., because of weather at KSC
477	94.2	28.5 Launched Apr. 7 from Challenger in
orbit; due for retrieval by STS mission early in 1985
H
TO
O
n
cr> > 2 O > m po O 2 > C H O
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int'l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee (km) (km)
April 8	China 15
PRC
1984-35A Long March 3 (new site)
April 10 Cosmos 1548 USSR 1984-36A A-2
Plesetsk
April 14	DOD satellite
U.S.
1984-37A Titan 34D ESMC
April 15 Progress 20 'USSR 1984-38A A-2
Baykonur-
April 17 DOD satellite U.S.
1984-39A Titan 3B-Agena D (?) WSMC
April 19 Cosmos 1549 USSR I984-40A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Test of eomsat
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Deliver consumables and other material to crew aboard orbiting Solym 7
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
35 793	35 784
334	167
Elements not ;
326	284
311	127
415	356
Period	Inclination
(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
1436.2
89.5
available
90.6
88.9
92.3
1.1 Geostationary at 125 °E
67.2 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered May 25
>
oo
70
O
Z
>
c
n
oo
>
Z
o
>
tn
§
Z
>
c
H
n
Probable military early warning satellite
51.6 Docked at rear port of Salyut 7 Apr. 17, undocked May 6 after unloading; reentered atmosphere on command May 7
96.4 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Aug. 13
72.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered May 3	^
m
z
a
><
>
April 22
May 7
May 11
May 14
May 17
May 19
Horizont 9 USSR 1984-41A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: Provide telephone, telegraph, and TV communications inside and outside USSR Description: Unavailable
Progress 21 USSR 1984-42A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Deliver consumables including propellants and equipment to crew aboard orbiting Salyut 7 Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1550 USSR I984-43A C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1551 USSR 1984-44A A-2< Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: Navigation
Description: Cylinder with domed ends, 2m in length and dia, enclosed in drum-shaped solar array
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1552 USSR 1984-45A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1553 USSR 1984-46A C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1554 USSR 1984-47A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: Navigation
Description: Cylinder with domed ends, 2m in length and dia, enclosed in drum-shaped solar array
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: Navigation Description: Unavailable
35 910
316
1010
279
322
1007
19 173
35 668
276
971
196
182
958
19 085
1436.3
0.8
Geosynchronous at 53 aE
>
-o
-o
m
z
a
90.4	51.6 Docked at rear port of Salyut 7 May 10,
undocked May 26 after unloading; reentered atmosphere on command same day
104.9	83.0
89.3	72.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered May 23
89.5	64.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Nov. 3
104.7	82.9
675.7	64.9 Multiple launch (3 spacecraft) as part
of GLONASS navsat program
H
30
O
z
>
c
H
>
z
o
>
m
30
o
z
>
c
H
C/5
2
Launch
Date
May 22
May 23
May 25
May 28
Spacecraft,
Country',
Int’l Designation,	Payload Data
Vehicle Launch Site
Cosmos 1555 USSR I984-47B
Cosmos 1556 USSR I984-47C
Cosmos 1557 USSR 1984-48A A-2
Plesetsk
Spacenet 1 ESA
1984-49A Ariane I Kourou
Cosmos 1558 USSR 1984-50A A-2
Plesetsk
Progress 22 USSR 1984-51A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 6000 kg? Objective: Navigation
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: Navigation
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: ''Continuation of outer space investigations’*
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 705 kg (in orbit)
Objective: Comsat, owned by GTE (U.S.)
Description; Box with 2 solar panels
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 7000 kg?
Objective: Deliver fuel, scientific
equipment, maintenance materials to crew on orbiting Salyut 7 Description: Near-sphcrical supply compartment, conical fuel tank, cylindrical instrument unit; 7.5m long, 2.2m diu
Apogee
(km)
19 149
19 157
247
35 790
294
358
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
19 109	675.7	64.9
19 131	676.3	64.9
H
70
o
z
>
c
H
n
>
z
o
>
TO
70
O
z
>
C
H
211	89.2	82.3 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite
carrying earth resources package: recovered June 4
35 784	1436.1	0.0 Geosynchronous at 120°W
168	89.1	67.2 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered July 8
334	91.4	51.6 Docked at rear port of Salyut 7 May 30;
reentered July 15	^
TJ
rn
z
o
><
>
1509
Cosmos 1559 USSR 1984-52A C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1560 USSR 1984-52B
Cosmos 1561 USSR 1984-52C
Cosmos 1562 USSR 1984-52D
and
Cosmos 1563 USSR 1984-52E
Cosmos 1564 USSR 1984-52F
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid? :
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Spheroid?
1491
1484
1475
1475
1473
1467
115.7
1468
1459
1451
1435
1422
74.0 Multiple launch (8 spacecraft), probable military comsats
115.5	74.0
>
*0
T
tn
Z
o
><
115.4	74.0
115.2	74.0
115.0	74.0
114.8	74.0
H
5
Z
6
H
>
Z
O
>
tn
w
O
z
>
c
H
n
666
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country.
Int’l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
and
Cosmos 1565 USSR 1984-52G
and
Cosmos 1566 USSR 1984-S2H
Mav 30
June l
June 6
Cosmos 1567 USSR 1984-53A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1568 USSR 1984-54 A A-2
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1569 USSR 1984-55A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: 40 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations'*
Description: Spheroid?
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Tota! weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
1475
1472
441
414
39 589
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
1406	114.7	74.0
1392	114.5	74.0
>
on
H
70
o
z
>
c
H
n
on
>
z
O
>
m
70
O
z
>
a
H
n
on
426	93.3	65.0 Probable electronic ferret, over ocean areas
356	92.3	72.8 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered June 14
>
-o
-o
m
z
Q
X
>
759
717.7
63.7
Probable early warning satellite
June 8
807
Cosmos 1570 USSR 1984-56A C-l
Plesetsk
June 9 Intelsat 5 F-9 •USSR 1984-57A Atlas Centaur ESMC
June 11	Cosmos 1571
USSR 1984-58A A-2
Baykonur-
lyufatam
June 13	Navsutr 9
U.S.
1984-59A
Atlas
WSMC
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Tdtalweight: 1091 kg Objective: Comsat
Description: Box 1.7x2.Ox 1.8m with 4m mast as aerial, 1.5m-wide solar array (npt deployed)
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 800 kg Objective: Navigation
Description: Box 2m each side, carrying 2 solar panels
June 15 Cosmos 1572 USSR 1984-60A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
June 19 Cosmos 1573 USSR 1984-61A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
June 21 Cosmos 1574 USSR 1984-62A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: Navigation (also carried
COSPAS-SARSAT radio receiver to monitor inti, distress-signal frequencies) Description: Unavailable
1215
415
20 333
272
309
1006
787
100.8
74.1
Probable military comsat using, data store-and-dump technique
176	98.5	29.2 Spacecraft lost when Centaur stage began
tumble after premature shutdown; reentered Oct. 24
348	92.2	70.0 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered June 26
20 029	718.0	62.6
259	89.9	82.4 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite
carrying earth resources package; reentered June 29
231	90.0	72.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered June 28
964
104.8
83.0
Instrumented for search-and-rescue use
Launch
Date
June 22
June 25
June 26
June 27
Spacecraft,
Country.
Int'l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
A{x>gec	Perigee	Period
(km) (km)	(min)
Rcuiuqa 15 USSR 1984-63A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Cosmos 1575 USSR 1984-64A A-2
Plesetsk
DOD satellite U.S.
1984-65A Titan 3D WSMC
DOD satellite U.S.
i984-65B
Cosmos 1576 USSR 1984-66A A-2
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1577 USSR 1984-67A
C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: Soviet domestic coinsat
Description: Cylinder 5ni long. 2m dia with solar panels, aerial array at one end
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 13 000 kg Objective: Military' photo reconnaissance using film-return capsules Description: Cylinder 15m long. 3 dia
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 700 kg? Objective: Navigation
Description: Unavailable
35 803	35 772	1436.2
275	261	89.9
Elements not available
Elements not available
351	170	89.8
1009	954	104.7
Inclination
(degrees)
Remarks
0.8 Circular orbit at I28°W
82.3 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite carrying earth resources package; reentered July 7
>
on
E
Z
>
C
n
on
>
Z
D
>
m
o
z
£
n
on
Carried electronic ferret as piggyback payload; reentered Oct. 18
67.1 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Aug. 24
>
-a
"V
m
Z
U
X
>
83.0
669
June 28
June 29
July 3
July 5
July 17
July 19
Cosmos 1578 USSR 1984-68A C-l
Kapustin Yar
Cosmos 1579 USSR 1984-69A F-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1580 USSR 1984-70A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Ocean reconnaissance
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1581 USSR 1984-71A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Meteor 2-11 USSR 1984-72 A F (?) Plesetsk
Soyuz T-12 USSR I984-73A A*2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1582 USSR 1984-74A
A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 2200 kg?
Objective: Remote sensing and visible and infrared imagery of earth’s surface and cloudcover Description: Cylinder 5m long, 2 dia with 2 sun-seeking solar panels
Total weight: 7000 kg?
Objective: Carry visiting crew to orbiting space station Salyut 7 and return Description: Near-spherical, 7.5m long and 2.2 dia, conical reentry module and cylindrical instrument unit with solar panels
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
1622
981
347
39 419
958
354
279
104.3
50.7
Probable military mission
103.9
90.4
718.0
104.0
91.4
89.5
65.1 Radar monitoring satellite powered by nuclear reactor
62.8 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered July 13
62.9 Probable early warning satellite
82.5
51.6 Crew (Vladimir Dzhanibekov, Svetlana Savitskaya, Igor Volk) docked with rear port of Salyui 7 July 18; first EVA by female July 25; crew returned to earth July 29 in T-12
82.4 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite carrying earth resources package; entered Aug. 2
670
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country,
Int’l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
July 24	Cosmos 1583
USSR 1984-75A A-2
Plesetsk
Julv 27	Cosmos 1584
USSR I984-76A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
July 31	Cosmos 1585
USSR 1984-77A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Aug, 1	Horizont 10
USSR I984-78A D-l-E Baykonur-tyuratam
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigtions”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: Provide telephone, telegraph, and TV relay links inside and outside USSR
Description: Cylinder 5m long, 2m dia, with 2 solar panels, aerial array at one end
Aug. 2 Cosmos 1586 USSR 1984-79A A-2-e Plesetsk
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
416
365
302
35 812
39 659
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
356	92.3	72.9 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite;
reentered Aug. 8
180	90.0	82.4 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite
carrying earth resources package; reentered Aug. 10
174	89.3	64.7 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite: reentered Sept. 28
35 760	1436.1	1.1 Geosynchronous at 80 °E
704
718.0
63.4
Probable early warning satellite
AUg. 4
Aug. 6
Aug. 7
Aug. 8
GMS 3 (Himawari 3) USSR 1984-80A N-11
Tanegashima
Total weight: 303 kg (incl. fuel)
Objective: Provide meteorological imagery in 4 visible and 1 infrared spectral band; procure .data on proton, electron, and alpha-particle fluxes nearsatellite De$cnption: Cylinder 4.4m.high, 2.2 dia covered with solar.cells; spin-stabilizedwith despun aerial array
ECS 2 ESA
1984-81A Ariane 3 Kourou
Total weight: 700 kg
Objective: Provide telephone and TV links between member countries of European Post & Telecommunications Conference and the European Broadcasting Union Description: Box 2.4x2.2x2.2m with earth-pointing aerial array, 13.8m-span solar array, 3-axis-stabilized
and
Telecom l A France 1984-8 IB
Total weight: 690 kg Objective: Provide nad. business communications, overseas TV and telephone, military point-to-point communications Description: Box 2xl.4xl 4m with
earth-pointing aerial array, 3-axis-stabilized
Cosmos 1587 USSR 1984-82A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations’'
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1588 USSR 1984-83A F-l
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1589 USSR 1984-84A.
F (?)	•
Plesetsk
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Ocean reconnaissance
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable ■ Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
35 7%
36 826
35 792
416
441
1499
35 783
34 749
35 782
356
427
1491
1436.3
1.5 Geosynchronous at 140°E
1436.2	0.2 Geostationary at 7°E; 7yr design life
1436.1	0.0 Launch of French piggyback payload
of ESA’s ECS 2; first of three; Geosynchronous at 8 ®W
92.3	72.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Aug. 31
93.3	65.0 Cf. Cosmos 1579, 1567
115.9
82.6
Cf. Cosmos 1463 (1983-46A); possible geodetic satellite
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country.
Int’l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
Aug. 10 Molniva 1-61 USSR 1984-85A A-2-c Plesetsk
Aug. 14 Progress 23 USSR 1984-86A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Aug. 16 Cosmos 1590 USSR 1984-87A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Ample l (CCE) US.
I984-88A
Delta
EMSC
Ample 2 (IKM) FRG I984-88B
Total weight: 1800 kg?	38 700
Objective: Provide telephone, telegraph.
and TV links through Orbita system Description: Cylinder 3.4m long, 1.6 dia with conical motor, windmill of 6 solar panels
Total weight: Unavailable	369
Objective: Carry food, fuel, mail, and scientific and technical equipment and materials to crew on orbiting Salyut 7 Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?	266
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 242 kg	49 663
Objective: Active magnclospheric particle explorer iu ueiect tracer ions released by German satellite
Description: Octagonal prism 2m dia. Im high, with solar panels on alternate sides
Total weight: 605 kg	113 741
Objective: Release clouds of lithium/barium ions to interact with magnetosphere, for detection by U.S. and U.K. satellites Description: Irregular cylinder 2m in length and dia
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(kin)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
>
C/i
H
TO
O
Z
>
e
651	717.7	62.9
341	91.6	51.6 Docked with rear port of Salyut Aug. 16
undocked Aug. 26: destroyed upon reentry Aug. 28
210	89.3	82.4 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite
carrying earth resources package: reentered Aug. 30
1130	939.5	5.1 Three-spacecraft mission (U.S. Charge
Composition Explorer, FRC Ion-Release Mission. U.K. Satellite)
553	2655.7	28.7 Formed artificial comet in solar wind;
first performance of such an experiment
O
X
>
673
and
Aug. 24
Aug. 25
Aug. 28
Aug. 30
Ample 3 (UKS)	Total weight: 77 kg
U.K.	Objective: Fly in formation with Ample 2,
1984-88C	measure disturbances during ion-cloud
release
Description: Multifacet prism 1.5m dia, 0.5 long
Molniya 1-62 USSR 1984-89A A-2-e Plesetsk
Ekran 13 USSR 1984-90A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 1800 kg?
Objective: Provide-teTephone, telegraph, and TV links through Orbita system
Description: Cylinder 3.4m long, 1.6 dia, with conical motor at one end windmill of 6 solar panels
Total weight: 2000 kg
Objective: Transmit programs of Central TV to collective receivers in remote areas of USSR
Description: Cylinder 5m Ions, 2m dia with 2 boom-mounted solar panels, flat aerial array
DOD satellite U.S.
1984-91A Titan 3B-Agena
Vandenberg AFB
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1591 USSR 1984-92A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
STS 41D U.S.
1984-93 A Discovery KSC
Total weight: 70 T (not incl. payload) Objective: Fly Discovery orbiter for first first time; launch 3 comsats Description: Delta-wing vehicle 37m long, 24m span
39 927
35 804
39 315
263
314
See Ampte 2
421
35 767
380
209
297
>
no
no
CTI
z
c
><
>
717.7	63.0
1436.0	0.75	Geostationary at 99 °E
703.8	63.3 Possible DOD Satellite Data Systems
(SDS) spacecraft; 300th Titan launch, 126th success in 129 operational launches
89.3	82.3 Probable photo reconnaissance satellite
satellite; reentered Sept. 13
90.4	28.5 Crew (Henry Hartsfield, Michael Coats,
Steven Hawley, Richard Mullane, Judith Resnik, Charles Walker) launched 3 comsats; tested operation of an expandable 31m solar array; processed pharmaceuticals; landed Sept. 5 at Edwards AFB
H
TO
O
z
>
c
H
>
z
o
>
m
TO
o
z
>
c
H
n
Launch
Date
Spacecraft, Country, lnt’l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
and
SBS 4 U.S.
1984-93 B Discovery (in orbit)
Aug. 31	Syncom 4-2
U.S.
1984-93C Discovery (in orbit)
and
Sept. 1	Telestar 3C
U.S.
1984-93D
Discovery (in orbit)
Sept. 4	Cosmos 1592
USSR 1984-94A A-2
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1593 USSR 1984-95A D-l-Ee I Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 1117 kg (including fuel) Objective: Commercial comsat (Satellite Business Systems)
Description: Cylinder 2.8m long, 2.2 dia: 6.7 long with solar array extended
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: U.S. Navy communications
Description: Cylinder 3m long, 4.2 dia
Total weight: 653 kg Objective: Communications
Description: Cylinder 2.8 long, 2.2 dia: 6.8 long with solar array extended
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 700 kg? Objective: Navigation
Description: Cylinder?
35 796
35 798
35 790
Z.O /
19 165
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
25 111	1436.1	0.3 Geosynchronous over 101 °W
35 776	1436.1	3.2 Geosynchronous over 105°W
35 785	1436.1	0.0 Geosynchronous above 125 °W
25	89.7
/2.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance satellite; reentered Sept. 18
19 093	675.7
64.8 Triple launch of satellites to form part of Soviet GLONASS Navigation system
675
and
Sept. 7
Sept. 8
Sept. 12
Sept. 13
Cosmos 1594 USSR 1984-95B
Cosmos 1595 USSR 1984-95C
Cosmos 1596 USSR 1984-96A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg? Objective: Navigation
Description: Cylinder?
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: Navigation
Description: Cylinder?
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Navstar 10 U.S.
1984-97A Atlas
Vandenberg AFB
Total weight: 800 Objective: Navigation
Description: Box 2m per side, carrying 2 solar panels
China 16
D Df
1984-98A
FB-1
Shuang-Cheng-
Tse
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1597 USSR 1984-99A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1598 USSR 1984-100A C-l
Plesetsk
Total weight: 700 kg? Objective: Navigation
Description: Unavailable
19 193	19 139
19 172	19 086
39 557	789
20 410	19 954
400	174
244	211
1014	965
677.2	64.7
675.7	64.7
717.6	62.9 Probable early warning satellite
718.0	63.3
m
z
o
X
90.3	67.9 Probable remote sensing or photo
reconnaissance mission; capsule apparently recovered; upon Sept. 28 reentry
89.1	82.3
H
8
Z
>
c
n
on
>
Z
o
>
m
§
z
>
c
H
104.9
82.9
Probable photo reconnaissance satellite carrying earth resources package; reentered Sept. 26
676
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country.
Int'l Designation. Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee Perigee (km) (km)
Sept. 21	Galarv .?
U.S.
1984-101A
Delta
ESMC
Sept. 25	Cosmos 1599
USSR 1984-102A A-2
Plesetsk
Sept. 27	Cosmos 1600
USSR 1984-103A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 160! USSR 1984-I04A C-l
Plesetsk
Sept. 28 Cosmos 1602 USSR 1984-105A F-2
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1603 USSR 1984-106A D-l-E Baykonur-Tyuratam
Total weight: 520 kg Objective: Commercial comsat
Description: Cylinder 2.8m long, 2.2 dia: 6.7m long with solar array extended
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation ol outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: Remote sensing over ocean areas
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
35 795	35 783
327	180
416	349
518	465
664	629
853	848
Period	Inclination
(min) (degrees)
Remarks
1436.2	0.0 Geosynchronous over 93.5 °W
89.6	67.1 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite: reentered Nov. 20
92.2	69.0 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Oct. 11
94.4	65.8 Possible military' radar calibration satellite
97.7	82.5
101.9
71.0
Probable launch vehicle engineering test
677
39 677
Oct. 4	Cosmos 1604
USSR 1984- 107A A-2-e Plesetsk
Oct. 5	STS41G
U.S.
1984-108A
Challenger
KSC
ERBS
U.S.
1984-108B Challenger (in orbit)
Oct. 11 Cosmos 1605 USSR 1984-109A C-l
Plesetsk
Oct. 12 Novo 3 U.S.
1984-110A
Scout
WSMC
Total weight: 2000 kg? Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 70 T (not incl. payload) Objective: Fly crew of 7 to make observations of ocean and earth surface; launch ERBS; simulate refueling of a satellite; obtain high-resolution terrain imagery . with SIR-B (shuttle imaging radar) Description: Delta-wing vehicle 37m long 24m wingspan
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Study interaction of earth as radiator and as receiver of solar radiation
Description: Designed to fit Shuttle payload bay; triangular, 4.6m base, 3.8 height,
1.5 deep, carrying pair of solar panels
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: Navigation
Description: Cylinder 2m in length and
dia with domed ends; enclosed in drum-shaped solar array
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: U.S. Navy navigation
Description: Unavailable
Oct. 18 Cosmos 1606 USSR 1984-111A F (?) Plesetsk
Total weight: 2000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
359
608
1018
1198
663
689
346
598
946
1152
718.0	62.9 Possible early warning comsat
91.6	57.0 Crew: Robert Crippen, Jon McBride,
David Leestma, Kathryn Sullivan, Sally Ride, Paul Scully-Power, and Canada’s Marc Garneau. First EVA by American woman; Sullivan and Leestma performed refueling simulation to prepare for Landsat 4 aid in 1987. Landed Oct. 13 at KSC
•v
m
Z
a
><
96.8
57.0
£arth Radiation budget Satellite, released by remote manipulator arm of Challenger
104.7
82.9
108.9
90.1
H
73
O
z
>
c
H
>
z
u
>
m
73
O
z
5
H
O
626
97.6
82.5
Probable electronic ferret
678
Launch
Date
Spacecraft.
Country,
Im’l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
Oct. 31	Cosmos 1607
USSR 1984-112A F-l
Baykonur
Tyuratam
Nov . 8	STS 51A
US.
1984-113A
Discovery
KSC
Nov. 9
anil
Anik D2 Canada 1984-113B Discovery (in orbit)
and
Nov. 10 Syncom IV-3 US.
1984-113C Discovery (in orbit)
Spacenet 2 ESA
1984-111A Ariane 3 Kourou
Total weight: Unavailable	261
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 70 T (not incl. payload)	370
Objective: Fly crew of 5 to launch 2 satellites: retrieve 2 satellites left in unusable orbits by faulty rocket stages after STS 41B (1984-11 A)
Description: Sec 1984-I08A
Total weight: 110 kg (incl. fuel)	35 800
Objective: Domestic Canadian conisat to be stored in orbit for 2 yr Description: Cylinder 2.8m long, 2.2 dia;
6.7m long with solar array deployed
Total weight: Unavailable	35 847
Ohjective: U.S. Navy communications
Description: Cylinder 3m long, 4.2 dia
Total weight: 705 kg (in orbit, incl. fuel)	35 789
Objective: Commercial comsat covering U.S., using C-band and K-Band Description: Box 1.6m x 1.3 XI, carying 14.3m wide 2-panel solar array
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
249
353
35 772
35 727
89.6	65.0 Probable military ocean surveillance
satellite using radar
91.6	28.5 Crew: Frederick Hauck, David Walker,
Anna Fisher, Joseph Allen, Dale Gardner. Palapa B2 recovered Nov. 12; Weslar recovered Nov. 14. Challenger landed Nov. 16 at KSC
>
c/i
H
73
O
z
>
c
H
>
z
a
>
m
73
O
z
>
c
H
1436.0	1.8 Geosynchronous at lll .5°W
1436.2	3.4 Geostationary above South America
at 111.5°W
>
'V
'V
m
z
o
><
>
35 784	1436.1
0.0
Geosynchronous at 69 °W
679
and
Nov. 14
Nov. 15
Nov. 21
Marecs B2
ESA
1984-114B
NATO 3D NATO 1984-115A Delta ESMC
Cosmos 1608 USSR 1984-116A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Cosmos 1609 USSR 1984-117A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 536 kg (in orbit, incl. fuel)
Objective: Replace first Marecs B, lost Sept. 2, 1982,, in malfiinction of launch vehicle; maritime comsat using C-band and L-band to link satellite to.ground, ships to satellite
Description: Hexagonal prism 2m across, 2.5m long, carrying. 13.8m span 2-panel solar array -V '
Total weight: 320 kg (in orbit)
Objective:~Military comsat v
Description: Spin-stabilized cylinder 2.2m in length and dia
Total weight: 6000 kg? .
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations” •
Description: Unavailable
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
Cosmos 1610 USSR 1984-118A C-l
Plesetsk
Cosmos 1611 USSR 1984-119A A-2
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Total weight: 700 kg?
Objective: Navigation
Description: Cylinder 2m in length and dia with domed ends, enclosed in a drum-shaped solar array
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: “Continuation of outer space investigations”
Description: Unavailable
35 802
35 612
250
414
I0U
299
3.0
35 779	1436.2
Geosynchronous at 177.5°E; carried maritime package leased from ESA by INMARSAT, also an emrgency search-and-rescue beacon locator
>
"0
"0
m
z
a
x
>
35 571	1426.2	5.9 Geosynchronous at 50°W; 4th of NATO 3
series, replacing one of earlier 3; launched by NASA for NATO
195	89.0	70.0 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Dec. 17
356	92.3	72.9 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Nov. 28
963	104.9	82.9
173	89.2	64.7 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite
H
§
Z
>
c
H
O
on
>
Z
o
>
m
§
z
>
c
H
n
Launch
Date
Spacecraft,
Country.
Int’l Designation, Vehicle Launch Site
Payload Data
Apogee
(km)
Nov. 27 Cosmos 1612	Total weight: 2200 kg?
USSR	Objective: Undisclosed
1984-120A
F (?)	Description: Unavailable
Plesetsk
Nov. 29 Cosmos 1613 USSR 1984-121A A-2
Plesetsk
Total weight: 6000 kg?
Objective: "Continuation of outer space investigations"
Description: Unavailable
Dec. 3 DOD satellite U.S.
1984-122 A Titan 3D WSMC
Total weight: 13 (XX) kg Objective: Reconnaissance, using TV imaging
Description: Cylinder 15m long, 3 dia
Dec. 12 NOAA 9 U.S.
I984-I23A
’Atlas
WSMC
Total weight: 1700 kg Objective: Meteorology
Description: Box 4m long, 2 dia, single solar panel at one end
Dec. 14 Moinivu 1-63 USSR 1984-124A A-2-e
Total weight: 1800 kg?
Objective: Comsat, providing telephone, telegraph, and TV links through Orbita system
Description: Cylinder 3.4m long, 1.6 dia, conical motor at one end, carrying windmill of 6 solar panels
808
414
862
39 888
Perigee	Period	Inclination
(km)	(min)	(degrees)
Remarks
132	94.0	82.6 Probably launched to replace Meteor 2-8
(1982-25A); failure of booster to shut down prevented achievement of designated 950km circular orbit
356	92.3	72.8 Probable military photo reconnaissance
satellite; reentered Dec. 24
H
7:
O
z
>
c
H
>
z
o
>
m
E
z
>
c
H
Elements not availahle
841	102.0	98.9
461	717.7	62.8
>
■v
■v
tn
z
a
x
>
Dec. 15 Vega 1
USSR 1984-125A
D-l-E
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Dec. 19 Cosmos 1614 USSR 1984-126A C-l
Kapustin Yar
Dec. 20 Cosmos 1615 USSR 1984-127A C-l
Plesetsk
Dec. 21	Vega 2
USSR
1984-128A
D-l-E
Baykonur-
Tyuratam
Dec. 22	DOD satellite
U.S.
1984-129A Titan 34D ESMC
Total weight: 4000 kg?
Objective: Venus lander by June 1985; Halley’s comet flyby, March 1986
Description: Cylinder 3m long, 2.5 dia; one end carried aeroshell containing Venus lander and balloon package; other end had movable scan platform for comet observations
Total weight: 1000 kg?
Objective: Recovery test of Soviet “Shuttle” prototype
Description: Delta-wing vehicle 3.5m long, 7.5 wing span
Total weight: Unavailable
Objective: Undisclosed
Description: Unavailable
Total weight, objective, description — Sec Vega 1 (1984-125A)
Total weight: Unavailable Objective: Undisclosed synchronous Description: Unavailable
Heliocentric orbit
176	88.4
438	94.0
Heliocentric orbit
At Venus encounter aeroshell would release Soviet-built lander into planet atmosphere, and French-built balloon (4m dia) to return meteorological data from attached probe
50.7 Space plane landed in Black Sea after 1 orbit (mission time, 110 min)
65.8 Probable military radar calibration mission
Elements not available
Probable military comsat
Appendix B
MAJOR NASA LAUNCHES, 1979-1984
The following table lists payloads launched in 1979 through 1984 by NASA or under NASA direction on vehicles larger than sounding rockets.
During 1979, NASA launched 8 spacecraft (with 8 payloads), only 3 for its own programs: the stratospheric gas and aerosol experiment (SAGE), the third high-energy astronomy observatory Heao 3, and Magsat. The 5 launches for others in 1979 included 2 for DOD, SCATHA for the U.S. Air Force and FltSat-Com 2 for the Navy; Ariel 6 for the United Kingdom; Westar 3 for Western Union; and RCA Satcom for RCA; the last mentioned was the only failure.
During 1980, NASA launched 7 spacecraft, only 1 for its own programs, the solar-maximum mission (SMM). The other 6 were FltSatComs Jand 4 for DOD; 2 for NOAA, NOAA-B (which proved inoperable when its booster sent it to the wrong altitude) and Goes 4; Sbs 1 for Satellite Business Systems; and Intelsat 5 for INTELSAT.
During 1981 NASA launched 13 spacecraft with 15 payloads, including 4 for its own programs, the manned STS-1 and STS-2 launches and unmanned Dynamics Explorer 1 and 2 (a dual payload launch) and Solar Mesosphere Explorer and UOSAT(also a dual payload launch). NASA launched Comstar D-4 for Comsat General Corp.; NOVA 1 for the U.S. Navy; Goes 5 and NOAA 7 for NOAA; Intelsat 5B-F1 and Intelsat 5 f-3 for INTELSAT; FltSatCom 5 for DOD; SBS 2 for Satellite Business Systems; and RCA Satcom 3R for RCA.
During 1982 NASA launched 12 spacecraft with 13 payloads, including 4 for its own programs, the manned STS-3, STS-4, and STS-5 and unmanned Landsat 4. NASA launched RCA Satcom 4 and 5 for RCA, Westar 4 and 5 for Western Union Telegraph Company, Intelsat 5 F-4 and Intelsat 5 F-5 for INTELSAT, Insat 1A for the Indian Department of Space, Anik D-l and Anik C-3 (from STS-5) for Telesat Canada, and SBS 3 (from STS-5) for Satellite Business Systems.
During 1983 NASA launched 15 spacecraft with 19 payloads, including 7 for its own programs, the manned STS-6, STS-7, and STS-8 and the Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS, a joint program with the United Kingdom and the Netherlands), TDRS I, NOAA 8 (a search and rescue satellite), and EXOSAlT. NASA launched RCA Satcom 6 and 7 for RCA, Goes 6 for NOAA, Intelsat 5 F-6 for INTELSAT, Anik C-2 (from STS 7) for Telesat Canada, Palapa B-l (from STS 7) for Indonesia, Spas 01 (from STS 7) for MBB of Munich, West Germany, HILAT for the U.S. Air Force, Galaxy 1 and 2 for the Hughes Aircraft Co., Telestar 3A for AT&T, Insat IB (from STS 8) for India.
During 1984 NASA launched 11 spacecraft with 24 payloads (3 unsuccessful), including 10 for its own programs, the manned STS-41B, STS-41C, STS-41D, STS-41G, and STS-51A and IRT (from STS-41B, a balloon that
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
mmi	683
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
APPENDIX B
exploded during inflation), Landsat 5, Long Duration Exposure Facility (from STS-41C), Charge Composition Explorer (from STS-41C as part of AMPTE), and Earth Radiation Budget Satellite (from STS-41G). NASA launched Westar 6 (from STS-41B for Western Union, unsuccessful), Palapa B2 (from STS-41B for Indonesia, unsuccessful), UOSAT 2 (a piggyback on Landsat 5 for U.K. amateur radio operators), Intelsat 5 F-9 for INTELSAT, Ion Release Module (built by West Germany as part of AMPTE), AMPTE 3 (third AMPTE satellite built by U.K.), Syncom 4-2 for U.S. Navy, Telestar 3C for AT&T, Galaxy 3 for Hughes, NOVA 3 for the U.S. Navy, Anik D2 (from STS-51A) for Telesat Canada, Syncom IV-I (from STS-51A) for the U.S. Navy, NATO 3D for the U.S. Air Force, and NOAA 9 for NOAA.
Further information on these launches appears in Appendix A and in the indexed entries in the text.
684
1979-1984
MAJOR NASA LAUNCHES, 1979-1984
Launch Date	Spacecraft lnt'l Designation	General Mission	Liiunch Vehicle	Performance		Remarks
			Site	Vehicle	Payload	
1979						
Jan. 30	SCATHA 1979-7A	To place the USAF satellite into elliptical orbit in order to identify and measure sources of electrical charge buildup which have disabled or affected high-altitude satellites	Delta ESMC	S	S	Spacecraft Charging AT //igh Altitudes. 11 of the 3 NASA and 9 DOD experiments operated successfully
Feb. 18	SAGE (AEM B) I979-I3A	To obtain a global data base for stratospheric aerosols and ozone	Scout-D WSMC	S	S	Stratospheric Aerosol and Gas Experiment
May 4	FltSalCom 2 I979-38A	To provide communication capability for the USAF with narrowband and wideband channels and for the USN for fleet relay and fleet broadcast channels	Atlat-Ccntaur ESMC	S	S	Second of 5 planned satellites. May 6 successful Firing of the apogee kick motor placed spacecraft in geosynchronous orbit over the Atlantic at 23 °W
June 2	Ariel 6 (UK6) 1979-47A	To conduct high-energy astrophysics research into cosmic radiation	Scout D WSMC	S	S	Sixth satellite in axiperativc US/UK program. 100th launch of Scout booster. Turned over to the United Kingdom on June 2
June 27	NOAA 6 1979-57A	To acquire quantitative data of the global atmosphere for use in numerical models to extend and improve long-range weather forecasting ability	Atlas F WSMC	S	S	Second of latest metesat configurations launched for NOAA into near-polar orbit; twin of TIROS-11 (1979-96A). Turned over to NOAA for operation on July 16
Aug. iu	Westar 3 1979-72A	To launch into synchronous orbit a general purpose telecommunications satellite designed to provide transmission throughout the continental U.S., Alaska, Hawaii and Puerto Rico	Delta ESMC	S	S	NASA launched comsat, owned by Western Union Telegraph Co. and built by Hughes Aircraft, on a reimbursable basis
Sept. 20	HEA0 3 1979-82A	To measure the spectrum and intensity of sources of gamma radiation and the composition of primary basic radiation	Atlas-Centaur ESMC	S	S	//igh Energy Astronmical Observatory. Last Spacecraft in series; first two concentrated on x-ray sources
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS	APPENDIX B
Oct. 30 Magsat (AEM C) 1979-94A
To measure the near-Earth magnetic field and to map crustal anomalies
Dec. 7 RCA-Satcom 1979-101A
To provide commercial communications services throughout the U.S.
1980
Jan. 18 FltSatCom 3 1980-4A
To provide two-way communications in the 240 to 400 MHz frequency band, serving Adantic area users
Feb. 14 SMM
1980-14A
May 29 NOAA B 1980-43A
To observe the sun and solar corona during 1980-81 maximum of the sunspot cycle and to measure gamma ray, X-ray, and ultraviolet emissions and the solar constant
To provide systematic global meteorological observations
Sept. 9 GOES 4 1980-74A
Oct. 31 FltSatCom 4 1980-87A
Nov. 15 SBS l
1980-91A
To provide near-continuous monitoring of atmospheric water vapor and temperatures in order to analyze storms and the weather phenomena they produce
To provide 23 ultra" high frequency channels and 1 super high frequency channel to enable communications between naval aircraft, ships, submarines, ground stations, and presidential command networks
To establish commercial communications system covering continental U.S.
Scout G WSMC	S	s	Magnetic Field Sarellite. Third in a series of low-cost modular design Applications Explorer Missions
Delta ESMC	s	u	Launched by NASA on a reimbursable basis for Radio Corporation of America. Satellite lost when apogee motor fired to inject it into geostationary orbit; subsequent attempts to locate spacecraft have failed
Atlas-Centaur ESMC	s	s	Third of this series of comsats launched by NASA for DOD; in synchronous orbit at 23 °W. This enabled FltSaiCom 2 to be moved to:a station at 75 °E to carry Indian Ocean traffic
Delta ESMC	s	s	Solar Maximum Mission spacecraft designed for retrieval from orbit by a Space Shuttle mission
Atlas F WSMC	u	u	Launched by NASA for NOAA, mission failed when booster failed to inject the metesat into the intended orbit. Spacecraft inoperable; reentered May 3, 1981
Delta ESMC	s	s	Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite launched by NASA for NOAA, located at 90 °W
Atlas-Centaur ESMC	s	s	Military comsat launched by NASA for DOD, stationed at 172°E
Delta ESMC	S	s	First of 3 similar satellites launched by NASA for Satellite business Systems Inc.; first mission using
solid fuel Payload Assisi Module instead of usual Delta third stage; satellite orbiting at 106®W
Launch
Date
Spacecraft lnt'1 Designation
General Mission
Dec. 6	Intelsat 5 I'-2 1980-98A	1 o orbit the first of a new scries of Intelsat com-sats designed to provide communications relay for commercial television and telephone, with double the capability of Intelsat eomsuts
mi		
Feb. 21	Comstar D-4 1981-18A	To provide domestic commercial communications for the U.S. mainland. Hawaii. Alaska and Puerto Rico
April 12	STS I 1981-34A	To (light test Space Transportation System
May 15	NOVA 1 198I-44A	To enable Navy to provide worldwide positional data to military and commercial users
May 22	GOES 5 1981-49A	To provide near-continuous, high resolution imaging over North and South America and surrounding oceans for meteorological forecasting
May 23	Intelsat 5B-F1 198I-50A	To orbit the second in a series of new Intelsat comsats for service between North America and Europe
June 23	NOAA 7 198I-59A	To launch spacecraft into sun-synchronous orbit of sufficient accuracy to enable it to make dependable daytime and nighttime meteorological observations of the Earth
Performance
Launch Vehicle Site
Vehicle
Payload
Remarks
Atlas-Centaur ESMC	S	S	Inserted into synchronous orbit at 21,5°W to serve as Intelsat's primary Atlantic Ocean satellite. The new senes built for Intelsat by Ford Aerospace
Atlas-Centaur ESMC	s	s	Last in series of 4 domestic comsats launched for Comsat General Corp.; leased to AT&T. Became operational May 5 on station at 127°W.
Columbia KSC	S	s	First Right of Space Shuttle in orbit and first landing from orbit of reusable spacecraft. Astronauts John Young and Robert Crippen landed April 14 at Edwards AFB. Calif.
Scout WSMC	s	S	First of series of improved satellites to substitute for the Navy's earlier navigation satellites (Transits)
Delta ESMC	s	s	Launched for NOAA. Second of 3 satellites to replace initial 3 operational satellites. Turned over to NOAA July 2; became operational Aug. 5
Atlas-v^Cutaui ESMC	s	s	Operational July 14 after placement at 24.5 °W. Became Atlantic area primary' satellite when Intelsat 5A (1980-98A) developed hardware problems
Atlas F WSMC	s	s	Third in a series of operational environment monitoring satellites, joined NOAA 6 in orbit as pan of two-satellite operating system. Turned over to NOAA July 13, became operational Aug. 24
>
50
O
z
>
n
>
z
c
35
C
z
>
n
CO
>
-o
“O
m
z
o
x
03
Aug. 3	Dynamics Explorer 1 (DE 1) 1981-70A	To study interaction between Earth’s magnetosphere, ionosphere and atmosphere in higher region than DE 2
	Dynamics Explorer 2 (DE 2) 1981-70B	Same as Dynamics Explorer 1
Aug. 6	FltSaiCom 5 1981-73A	To assist USAF narrow band and wide band communications and USN fleet relay and broadcast channels
Sept. 24	SBS2 1981-96a	To provide integral, all-digital, interference-free transmission of telephone computer, electronic mail and video teleconferencing to SBS clients
Oct. 6	Solar Mesosphere Explorer (SME) 1981-100A	To study reactions between sunlight, ozone and other chemicals in the atmosphere and how concentrations of ozone are transported in the region from 30- to 90- km altitude
	UOSAT 1981-100B	To provide radio amateurs and school's with operational satellite requiring minimal ground sta-
tion support for studying ionosphere and radio propagation conditions
Thor-Delta WSMC	S	S	Dual launch placed NASA’s DE 1 and DE 2 in polar, coplanar orbits. Minimum scientific lifetime of 1 yr planned for both craft. Mission success relied on correlative sets of measurements from 2 satellites. Final orbits somewhat lower than intended, but suitable to fulfill scientific mission. Returned first color views from space of auroras at North and South Poles
Same as DE 1	S	S	See above
Atlas-Centaur ESMC	S	S	Last of 5 comsats in series replacing DOD-leased channels on civilian Marisat system. Slight structural damage to satellite occurred during orbital insertion, limiting communications ability
Thor-DelUi ESMC	S	S	Second of 4 domestic comsats built by Hughes Aircraft for Satellite Business Systems. Located at 97 °W. Commercial operations began Dec. 15
Thor-Dclta WSMC	S	S	Dual launch orbited NASA’s SME and UOSAT (below). Instruments returning data for first comprehensive global study of creation and destruction of ozone
Same as SME	S	S	U.K. amateur scisat, launched by NASA for secondary payload with SME
Launch Dale	Spacecraft Int’l Designation	General Mission
Nov. 12	STS 2 1981-111A	To demonstrate reusability of orbitcr; launch in-orbit and entry performance under more demanding conditions than for STS 1. l est orbitcr capability to support scientific and applications research with attached payload, and test remote manipulator system (RMS)
Nov. 20	RCA Satcom 3R 1981-114A	To provide domestic TV, voice channel and highspeed data transmission and video programming to cable TV systems throughout the U.S.
Dec. 15	Intelsat 5 F-3 1981-119A	To provide 12 000 two-way voice circuits plus 2 color TV channels simultaneously
1982		
Jan. 16	RCA Satcom 4 I982-4A	To transmit television, voice channels and highspeed data to the entire U.S. and to provide video programming for CATV (cable television) systems throughout the U.S.
heb. 26	Westar 4 I982-I4A	To transmit television, voice, and facsimile data over 24 channels to entire U.S.
Launch Vehicle Site
Performance Vehicle Payload
Remarks
Columbia	S	S	Second of 4 planned orbital flight tests of Space
KSC	Transportation System, carrying astronauts Joe H.
Engle and Richard H. Truly. After entering orbit, fuel cell problems reduced planned 5 day journey to minimal mission of 36 orbits. Package of OSTA scientific experiments returned good data. RMS performed well except that it would not be cradled in backup mode. Columbia landed at Edwards AFB on Nov. 14 after flight of 2 da. 6 hr. 13 min
Thor-Dclia ESMC	S	S	Fourth in a series of RCA commercial comsats; situated at 132°W. Replaced RCA Satcom 3 which was lost in space (see 1979-101AJ
Atlas-Centaur ESMC	S	S	World’s largest commercial coinsat, third in scries of 9. launched by NASA for Intelsat
Thor-Delta ESMC	S	S	Fifth in a series of RCA commercial domestic comsats; in geosynchronous orbit at 83 °W
Thor-Delta ESMC	S	S	First in a scries of 2nd-gcneration satellites built by Hughes Aircraft for Western Union Telegraph Co. Placed in synchronous orbit at 99 °W as replacement for Westar 1 (1974-22A)
March 5	Intelsat 5 F-4 1982-17A	To provide 12 000 voice circuits and 2 color TV channels simultaneously for telephone and TV communications among Europe, Middle East and Far East
March 22	STS 3 1982-22A	To evaluate ascent, in-orbit, and entry performance under more exacting conditions than in STS 2; test remote manipulator; examine orbiter’s response to long duration exposure to the sun; and conduct series of scientific and applications research with on-board Office of Space Science payload (OSS 1)
April 10	/nvaf IA 1982-31A	To provide domestic communications, direct broadcast television and weather monitoring services for India
June 9	H'ettar 5 1982-58A	To relay voice, data, video, and facsimile communications throughout U.S.
June 27	STS 4 1982-65A	To evaluate ascent, in-orbit, and entry performance under more exacting conditions than in STS 3; conduct long duration thermal-soak tests; and conduct scientific and applications research with varied onboard experiments
July 16	Landsat 4 1982-72A	To obtain multispectral imagery using improved remote sensing and Earth resources techniques and equipment
Atlas-Centaur ESMC	s	s	Fourth in a series of 9 comsats launched by NASA for Intelsat. Placed in synchronous orbit over Indian Ocean at 63 °E
Columbia KSC	s	s	Third of 4 planned flight tests of STS. Columbia was put through extensive thermal testing at various altitudes. OSS 1 package and remote manipulator operated successfully. Crew (Jack R. Lousma and C. Gordon Fullerton) landed orbiter at White Sands, N.M., instead of Edwards AFB because of flooding produced by heavy rains at Edwards. Right time: 8 da 4 hr 49 min
Delta ESMC	s	u	First of 2 comsats built by Ford Aerospace for the India Dept, of Space; positioned at 74 °E. Problems occurred with release of C-band uplink antenna and solar sail. Satellite failed in September as a result of insufficient attitude control system propellant.
Delta ESMC	s	s	Second in series of second-generation comsats built by Hughes Aircraft for Western Union; replaced Westar 2. On station at 123 °W.
Columbia KSC	s	s	Last flight of Shuttle orbital test flight programs. Crew (Ken Mattingly and Henry Harlsfield) landed July 4 at Edwards AFB. Solid rocket boosters were not recovered from the Atlantic Ocean. Shuttle bay contained first get-away special and first DOD payload
Delta WSMC	s	s	Launched into near-polar sun-synchronous orbit. Multispectral scanner was activated July 19 and the new thematic mapper sensing system began transmitting data July 20
tn
Z
a
S
w
H
§
Z
>
C/5
AND AERONAUTICS
Launch Date	Spacecraft Inl'l Designation	General Mission	Launch Vehicle Site
Aug. 26	Anik D-I (Telesat G) 1982-82A	To provide expanded Canadian television, cable and long-distance telephone service	Della ESMC
Sept. 28	Intelsat 5 F-5 1982-97A	To provide international telecommunications services to Europe, Africa, and Indian Ocean hasiti and. under lease agreement with Inmarsat, for maritime services for shipping	Atlas-Centaur ESMC
Oct. 27	RCA Satcom 5 1982-105A	To provide long-distance telecommunications within Alaska and between Alaska and continental US.	Della ESMC
Nov. 11	S'fS 5 1982-110A	To conduct first operational flight of Space Transportation System: to deploy 2 commercial comsats; to demonstrate extravehicular activity capability	Columbia KSC
	SBS 3 1982-110B	To provide business communications for Satellite Business Systems clients	Columbia (in orbil)
	Anik C-3 (Telesat 5) 1982-110C	To provide voice and television communications to a trans-Canada network of Earth stations	Columbia (in orbit)
Performance Vehicle Payload
Remarks
S	S	Launched for Tclesal Canada into geosynchronous
orbit 104 °W; first use of Delta with payload assist module (PAM)
S	S	Geosynchronous orbit at 63 °E
S
S
S
S
S	Advanced RCA Sateom using solid stale power
amplifiers instead of traveling wave tubes: on location at I43°W
S	First launch of 4-man crew (astronauts Vance
Brand and Robert Overmyer: mission specialists Joseph Allen and William Lenoir. SBS 3 and Anik C-3 comsats launched from cargo bay. EVA canceled because of problems with both spacesuits. Columbia landed at Edwards AFB Nov. 16 after flight of 5 da 2 hr 14 min
S	First satellite launch from STS cargo bay. Payload
assist module (PAM-D) boosted satellite into geosynchronous orbit at 94 °W
S	Launched from STS cargo bay 7 min after SBS 3.
PAM-D carried satellite into geosynchronous orbit at 117.5 DW
>
un
H
TO
O
Z
>
C
n
(SI
>
Z
u
>
m
70
o
z
>
c
n
<S)
O
X
CD
Jan. 26	Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) 1983-4A	To conduct atmospheric survey of objects that emit infrared radiation and prepare a catalog of infrared sources and an infrared sky map
March 28	NOAA 8 1983-22A	To provide systematic global weather observations; to assist in search-and-resciie operations using the on-board SARSAT instrumentation package
April 4	STS 6 1983-26A	To deploy Tracking and Data /?elay Satellite 1 (TDRS 1) comsat; engage in EVA; conduct a variety of scientific experiments; test vehicle performance
April 5	TDRS 1 1983-26B	To provide improved tracking and data acquisition services to U.S. satellites
April 11	RCA SatCom 6 1983-30A	To provide TV, telephone and data transmission services throughout the U.S.
April 28	GOES 6 1983^11 A	To provide near-continuous, high resolution visual and infrared imaging over North and South America and surrounding oceans
May 19	Intelsat 5 F-6 1983^7A	To provide 12 000 voice circuits and 2 color TV channels simultaneously
Della WSMC	S	s	Co-operative U.S.-Netherlands-U.K. venture
Atlas E WSMC	S	s	Search-/?escue Satellite. First-of Advanced Tiros-N spacecraft. Initial attitude control problems were rectified April 18; became operational June 20
Challenger KSC	s	s	Second operational flight of Space Transportation System; first flight of Challenger. Crew (Paul Weitz, Karol Bobko, Donald Peterson, Story Musgrave) launched TDRS 1 with IUS booster. Musgrave and Peterson engaged in spacewalk in and around open cargo by April 7; first American EVA since 1974. Orbiter landed at Edwards AFB April 9 after flight of 5 day 24 min
Challenger (in orbit)	u	s	Launched on first Shuttle-bome inertial upper stage (IUS-1). Second stage malfunction put satellite into lower than intended orbit. Subsequent firings of on-board thrusters maneuvered TDRS 1 to operational location at 41 °W by Oct. 17
Delta ESMC	s	s	Second in series of advanced RCA comsats; to replace RCA-Satcom 1. Geostationary orbit at 128 °W.
Delta ESMC	s	s	NOAA spacecraft joined GOES 5 (1981-49A) as part of dual operational system. Positioned May 12 at 135 °W; became operational June 1
Atlas-Centaur ESMC	s	s	Placed in geosynchronous orbit over Atlantic Ocean
Launch
Date
Spacecraft Int'l Designation
General Mission
May 26	Exosar 1983-51A	To conduct detailed studies of the precise position and structure, spectral and temporal characteristics of known x-ray sources and to search for new ones
June 18	SIS 7 1983-59A	To launch Anik C-2 and Rilapa B-I comsats; to test remote manipulator retrieval system in deployment and retrieval of the West German-made Shuttle pallet satellite (SFAS 01): to conduct several scientific experiments
	Anik C-2 (Tulesat 7) 1983-59B	To provide for domestic Canadian TV and telephone communications
	Paiapa H-l 1983-59C	To provide for domestic Indonesian telecommunications
	SPAS 01 1983-59F	To test the operation of a reusable satellite
June 27	HILAT 1983-63A	To conduct atmospheric research
June 28	Galaxy 1 1983-65A	To relay TV programming to capable systems throughout the U.S. with 24 transponders available for sale nr lease
July 28	Telstar 3A I983-77A	To provide commercial communications channels for AT&T
Aug. 30	STS 8 1983-89A	To deploy lnsat IB and conduct various scientific experiments
‘ Performance
>
C/>
Launch Vehicle
Site	Vehicle
Payload
Remarks
Delta WSMC	S	S	Highly elliptical orbit above the North Pole designed for maximum observation
Challenger KSC	S	S	Crew of Robert Crippen, Frederick Hauck. John Fabian, Sally Ride (first U.S. woman astronaut) and Dr. Norman Thagard deployed both comsats and SPAS 01. Landed at Edwards AFB after flight of 6 da 2 hr 24 min
Challenger (in orbit)	S	S	Tclcsat Canada comsat launched from orbitcr's cargo bay into geosynchronous orbit at ll.5°W
Challenger (in orbit)	S	S	Indonesian comsat launched from orbitcr's cargo bay into geosynchronous orbit over that country’
Challenger (in orbit)	S	S	First shuttle cargo financed by a foreign commercial group (MBB of Munich): first time the remote manipulator arm had released and retrieved a payload
Scout WSMC	S	S	NASA launched USAF modified TRANSIT satellite
Delta	S	S	Owned by Hughes Aircraft Co.: positioned at 134°E
ESMC			
Della	S	S	Geostationary orbit at £7°W
ESMC			
Challenger KSC	S	S	First night launch of Shuttle. Crew (Richard Truly, Daniel Brandenstein, Dale Gardner, Guion Bluford and Dr. William Thornton) flew for 6 da 1 hr 9 min. landing Sept. 5 at Edwards AFB
73
O
Z
>
c
>
z
c
>
m
73
o
z
>
c
o
m
z
c
><
lnsat IB 1983-89B
To provide meteorological and communications service to India
Sept. 8	RCA Satcom 7 1983-94A	To provide commercial communications services throughout the U.S.
Sept. 22	Galaxy 2 1983-98A	To relay business communications
Nov. 28	S759 1983-116A	To carry the ESA Spacelab on its first mission, with over 70 experiments in 5 areas of scientific research
1984		
Feb. 3	STS41B 1984-UA	To deploy two comsats, test Shuttle rendezvous capabilities using the IKT, test the Manned Maneuvering Unit (MMU) and conduct several scientific experiments
	Westar 6	To provide telecommunications services to
	1984-11B	domestic, users
Feb. 5	IKT	To act as target vehicle in test of Shuttle’s
	1984-11C	rendezvous techniques and capabilities
Feb. 6	Palapa B2	To provide for domestic Indonesian
	1984-11D	communications
s
S Launched from orbiter bay Aug. 31 to station above equator at 74 °E
S	S	Third in series of advanced comsats; to replace	O
RCA-Satcom 2 (1976-29A). On station at 72 °W.	><
03
S	S	Second in series; stationed in 74 °W
S	S Crew included the first foreign astronaut on a US.
flight (payload specialist Ulf Merbold of West Germany) and the first payload specialists (Merbold and Dr. Byron .Lichtenberg); other crewmembers were John Young, Brewster Shaw, Owen Garriott and Robert Parker. Mission was extended to 10 days while in flight; computer fault delayed landing by 7 hours and 47 minutes
S	S First Shuttle flight under new numbering system.
Crew (Vance Brand, Robert Gibson, Bruce McCandless, Ronald McNair and Robert Stewart) deployed Westar 6 and Palapa B2 comsats; both unsuccessful due to IAM-D failure. First use of MMU in space. Challenger became the first Shuttle to land at KSC, on Feb. 11 after flight of 7 da 23 hr 16 min
u	u	PAM-D booster failure placed comsat in unusable low orbit. Satellite retrieved from space for refurbishment by Shuttle Discovery Nov, 14
u	u	Balloon exploded while inflating after deployment
u	u	PAM-D booster failure placed comsat in unusuable
low orbit. Satellite retrieved from space for refurbishment by Shuttle Discovery Nov. 14
>
LO
E
>
c
n
cn
>
>
m
E
>
c
n
cn
Launch Date	Spacecraft Int’l (Designation	General Mission
March 1	Landsal 5 1984-21A	To continue remote sensing program
	DOS A! 2 1984-2 IB	To provide communications relay for UK. amateur radio operators
April 6	575 4IC I984-34A	To deploy the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF-1) and retrieve, repair, and redeploy the Solar Maximum Mission (SMM) satellite
April 7	Lung Duration Exposure FucUitv (LDEF) I984-34B	To expose scientific, applications and technology experiments to space conditions for an extended period
June 9	Imcrsat 5 h-9 1984-57A	To provide 12 000 voice circuits and 2 color TV channels simultaneously
Aug. 16	Charge Compos it ioi i Explorer (CCE) (AMPTE 1) I984-8HA	To detect I nicer ions in Earth's magnetosphere released by AMPTE 2
	Ion Release Module (IRM) (AMPTE 2) 1984-88B	To release clouds of lithium/barium ions to internet with magnetosphere
	United Kingdom Satellite (AMPTE 1) 1984-88C	To fly in formation with IRM, measuring disturbances during ion cloud release
Aug. 30	5/5 41D 1984-93A	To launch 3 comsats and conduct several scientific experiments
launch Vehicle	Performance		Remarks	> oo H TO o 2:
Site	Vehicle	Payload		
Della WSMC	S	S	In circular, near-polar, sun-synchronous orbit, replacing disfunctioning Landsat 4 (1982-72A)	> c H n
Della WSMC	S	S	Piggyback payload on Landsat 5	> "Z o
Challenger KSC	S	S	Crew (Robert Crippen, Francis Seobec, Terry Han, George Nelson, and James van Hot ten) launched LDEF Apr. 7. SMM retrieved from orbit Apr. 10, repaired, and redeployed Apr. 12. Challenger landed Apr. 13 at Edwards AFB after flight of 6 da 23 hr 41 min	> m TO o z > c H n on
Challenger (in orbil)	S	S	Due for retrieval by STS mission in 1983	
Atlas-Centaur ESMC	u	U	Launch vehicle failed to boost comsat to desired orbit; reentered Oct. 24	
Delta ESMC	s	S	One of 3 satellites comprising /tetive Afagnetospheric ftirticle Tracer Explorers mission; all three launched together	
see above	s	S	Second of 3 AMPTE satellites; built by West Germany	
see above	s	s	Third of 3 AMPTE satellites; built by U.K.	
Discovery KSC	s	s	First flight of orhiter Discovery. Crew (Henry Hartsficld, Michael Coats, Steven Hawley, Richard Mullunc, Judith Rcsnik and Charles Walker) returned Sept 5 to Edwards AFB after (light of 6 da 56 min	APPENDIX B
	SBS 4 1984-93B	To provide commercial telecommunications for Satellite Business Systems
Aug. 31 ,	Syncom 4-2 (Leasat 2) 1984-93C	To provide for U.S. Navy communications under lease from Hughes Communication Service, Inc.
Sept. 1	Telestar 3C 1984-93D	To provide domestic communications for AT&T
Sept. 21	Galaxy 3 1984-101A	To relay business communications
Oct. 5	STS 4IG 1984-108A	To launch ERBS satellite and conduct several scientific experiments
	Earth Radiation Budget Satellite (ERBS) 1984-108B	To make global measurements of the Sun's radiation reflected and absorbed by Earth
Oct. 12	NOVA 3 1984-11QA	To enable US. Navy to provide worldwide positional data to military and commercial users
Nov. 8	STS 51A 1984-113A	To launch 2 comsals and retrieve the inoperable Palapa B2 and Westar 6 comsats from space for return to Earth for repair; to conduct several scien-
tific experiments
Discovery (in orbit)	S	S	Comsat placed in geosynchronous orbit at 101°W
Discovery (in orbit)	S	S	Comsat placed in geosynchronous orbit at 105'’W
Discovery (in orbit)	S	S	Comsat placed in geosynchronous orbit at 125^
Delta ESMC	S	S	On station over equator at 93.5 °W
Challenger KSC	S	S	First 7-person crew included Robert Crippen, Jon McBride, David Leestma, Kathryn Sullivan, Sally
Ride, Paul Scully-Power and Marc Gameau. Scully-Power and Gameau were first Canadian astronauts. First EVA by an American woman. Challenger landed Oct. 13 at KSC after flight of 8 da 5 hr 24 min
Challenger (in orbit)	S	S	Released by Shuttle’s remote manipulator arm. Partner with NOAA9 (1984-123A) and NOAA G (to be launched in 1985) in Earth Radiation Budget Experiment Research Program
Scout WSMC	S	S	Second in series of improved satellites to substitute for the Navy's earlier navsals (Transits)
Discovery KSC	S	S	Crew of Frederick Hauck, David Walker, Joseph Allen, Anna Fisher and Dale Gardner landed at KSC Nov. 16 after flight of 7 da 23 hr 45 min
Launch
Date
Spacecraft Int’l Designation
General Mission
Nov. 9	Anik D2 1984-113B
Nov. 10	Svucom IV-l I984-II3C
Nov. 14	NATO 3D 1984-115A
Dec. 12	NOAA 9 1984-123A
To provide domestic Canadian communications
To provide for U S. Navy communications under lease from Hughes Communication Services, Inc.
To provide for NATO military communications
To replace NOAA 7 as afternoon metesat on NOAA's two polar satellite systems; to perform radiation measurements as part of ERBE program
Launch Vehicle	Performance		Remarks	> CO H
Site	Vehicle	Payload		TO O
Discovers'	S	S	Delivered into synchronous orbit at lll.5°W	> a
(in orbit) Discovers'	S	S	Second of 4 satellites leased by Navy to replace	n CO >
(in orbit) Delta	s	s	EltSatCom spacecraft for worldwide UHF communications; placed at 111.5 °W Fourth and last NATO 3 comsat launched by	■z o > m TO
ESMC Atlas E	s	s	NASA on a fee basis for the USAF as agents for NATO; positioned at 50 °W Fifth in Tiros-N series; in sun-synchronous orbit	O z. £ H n CO
WSMC				
>
-o
-o
m
a
><
CO
Appendix C
ABBREVIATIONS OF REFERENCES
Listed here are the abbreviations used for citing sources in the text. Not all the sources are listed, only those that are abbreviated.
AAAS
A&A
ABC
AEC Release A/D
Aero Mag AFHF Newsletter AFJ
AFSC Newsreview AFSC Release ALA Release
AIA/PG&E/ARC
ALAA Facts
AIAA Release
AIP Newsletter AP
ARC anno ARC Astrogram ARC Release Astro joum
Atlanta JC AvWk B News B Sun
Bull Atom Sci Bus Wk
American Association for the Advancement of Science’s AAAS Bulletin American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics’ magazine, Astronautics & Aeronautics
American Broadcasting Company Atomic Energy Commission Aerospace Daily newsletter Air Force Association’s Air Force Magazine Air Force Historical Foundation Newsletter Armed Forces Journal magazine Air Force Systems Command’s Newsreview Air Force Systems Command news release Aerospace Industries Association of America news release
American Institute and Architects, Pacific Gas & Electric, and NASA’s Ames Research Center Announcement
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics’ Facts
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics news release American Institute of Physics’ Newsletter Associated Press news service NASA Ames Research Center announcement NASA Ames Research Center’s Astrogram NASA Ames Research Center news release American Astronomical Society’s Astrophysical Journal
Atlanta Journal Constitution newspaper Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine Birmingham News newspaper Baltimore Sun newspaper Education Foundation for Nuclear Science’s Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists Business Week magazine
699
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
APPENDIX C
C Daily News C Trib Can Press CBS
C&E News Cl PD Cl Press Columbia J Rev ComSatCorp Release
ComSat Gnl Release
CQ
CR
CSM
CTNS
D/SBD
D/SD
D News
D Post
DASA Release DfDly
DFRC Release
DJ
DOC PIO
DOC Release DOD Release Dscvr
DOT Release Dtln Gd
EOP Release ESA anno ESA Info Bltn ESA Release
ESA/CNES Release ESA Info FAA Release FBIS-Sov
FRC Release FRC X-Press
Chicago Daily News newspaper Chicago Tribune newspaper Canadian Press news release Columbia Broadcasting System Chemical & Engineering News Magazine Cleveland Plain Dealer newspaper Cleveland Press newspaper Columbia Journalism Review magazine Communications Satellite Corporation news release
ComSat General news release Congressional Quarterly Congressional Record Christian Science Monitor newspaper Chicago Tribune News Service Defense/Space Business Daily newspaper Defense Space Daily newsletter Detroit News newspaper Denver Post newspaper Defense Atomic Support Agency news release Defense Daily newsletter Dryden Flight Research Center news release. Prior to 8 January 1976, Flight Research Center
Dow Jones news service Department of Commerce Public Information Office
Department of Commerce news release Department of Defense news release Discover magazine
Department of Transportation news release NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Dateline Goddard
Executive Office of the President news release European Space Agency announcement European Space Agency Information Bulletin European Space Agency news release, used dated (not numbered)
European Space Agency Information Federal Aviation Administration news release Foreign Broadcast Information Service, Soviet number See DFRC
NASA Flight Research Center’s X-Press
700
APPENDIX C
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Goddard News
GSFC Release
GSFC SSR
GSFC/WFF Release
GT&E Release House anno H Comm Sci
H Rept Release H Chron H Post Htsvl Tms
INTELSAT Release
Intervia
JA
JPL anno JPL Lab-Oratory JPL Release JPL Universe JPRS
JSC Release JSC Roundup JSR
KC Star KSC Release
LA Her-Exam LA Star News LA Times
Langley Researcher
LaRC anno LaRC Release LATNS
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Goddard News
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center news release
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Satellite Situation Report
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center’s Wallops Flight Facility Release
General Telephone & Electronics news release U.S. House of Representatives announcement U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology
U.S. House of Representatives news release Houston Chronicle newspaper Houston Post newspaper Huntsville Times newspaper International Telecommunications Satellite Organization news release Intervia magazine Journal of Aircraft magazine Jet Propulsion Laboratory announcement Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Lab-Oratory Jet Propulsion Laboratory news release Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Universe Department of Commerce Joint Publications Research Service
NASA Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center news release
NASA Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center’s Space News Roundup
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautic’s Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets magazine Kansas City Star newspaper NASA John F. Kennedy Space Center news release
Los Angeles Herald-Examiner newspaper Los Angeles Star News newspaper Los Angeles Times newspaper NASA Langley Research Center’s Langley Researcher
NASA Langley Research Center announcement NASA Langley Research Center news release Los Angeles Times News Service
701
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
APPENDIX C
LC/S&T
LeRC Release Lewis News MiHrld M News M Trib Marshall Star
MJ
MSR
MSFC Release
N Hav Reg N News N Va Sun NAA nsltr NAA News NAA Record Book
NAA Release NAC Release NAE Release NANA NAS Release NAS-NRC Release
NAS-NRC-NAE-Nws
Rpt
NASA Actv NASA Actv Rpt NASA anno NASA Dly Actv Rept NASA GMR
NASA Hist Off NASA Hq Mgmt Suppt Office NASA Hq WB NASA Int Aff NASA Leg Off NASA MSR
Library of Congress Science and Technology Division’s Alerts
NASA Lewis Research Center news release NASA Lewis Research Center’s Lewis News Miami Herald newspaper Miami News newspaper Minneapolis Tribune newspaper NASA George C. Marshall Space Flight Center’s Marshall Star Milwaukee Journal newspaper See NASA Monthly Status Report NASA George C. Marshall Space Flight Center news release
New Haven Register newspaper Newark News newspaper Northern Virginia Sun newspaper National Aeronautic Association’s newsletter National Aeronautic Association’s News National Aeronautic Association’s World and U.S.A. National World Aviation-Space Records National Aeronautic Association news release National Aviation Club news release National Academy of Engineering news release North American Newspaper Alliance National Academy of Sciences news release National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council news release National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council-National Academy of Engineering’s News Report NASA Activities NASA Activities Report NASA announcement NASA Daily Activities Report NASA Headquarters “General Management Review Report”
NASA History Office
NASA Headquarters Management Support Office release
NASA Headquarters Weekly Bulletin NASA Office of International Affairs NASA Office of Legislative Affairs NASA Monthly Status Report
702
APPENDIX C
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
NASA MOR
NASA prog off
NASA Release NASA Rpt SRL NASA spl anno NASA wkly SSR Natl Obs Nature NBC
NGS Release
NMI
NN
NOAA Release
NRC News Rpt NRL Release NSC Release NSC News NSC Letter NSF Highlights
NSF Release NSTL Release
Ntl Sp Clb bllton Nswk NY News NY Times NYTNS O Sen Star Oakland Trib Omaha W-H ONR Rev
OST Policy Release P Bull
P Inq
PAO
PD
PIO
NASA Headquarters Mission Operations Report, preliminary launch and postlaunch report series (information may be revised and refined before publication)
NASA program office (for the program reported)
NASA Headquarters news release NASA report of sounding rocket launching NASA special announcement NASA Satellite Situation Report National Observer magazine Nature Physical Science magazine National Broadcasting Company National Geographic Society news release NASA Management Instruction NASA Notice
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration news release
National Research Council’s News Report Naval Research Laboratory news release National Space Club news release National Space Club’s News National Space Club’s Letter National Science Foundation’s Science Resources Studies Highlights
National Science Foundation new release NASA National Space Technology Laboratories news release
National Space Club’s Bulletin Newsweek magazine New York Daily News newspaper New York Times newspaper New York Times News Service Orlando Sentinel Star newspaper Oakland Tribune newspaper Omaha World-Herald newspaper Navy’s Office of Naval Research’s Reviews Office of Science and Technology Policy Release Philadelphia Evening and Sunday Bulletin newspaper
Philadelphia Inquirer newspaper Public Affairs Office
National Archives and Records Service’s Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents Public Information Office
703
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
APPENDIX C
PMR Missile PMR Release Rockwell Release SAO Release
Sen Cte Comm
Science
Sci Amer
Sci & Govt Rpt
SciServ
SD
SD Union SET Manpower Comments SF
SF Chron SF Exam Sov Aero Sov Rpt
SP
Spaceport News
Spacewam
SP anno SR list SSN
SSR
St. Louis G-D St. L P/Dsp T-Picayune Tech Rev
Time
Today
testimony
text
transcript UA rept
USN Pacific Missile Range’s Missile USN Pacific Missile Range news release Rockwell International news release Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory news release
Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation report Science magazine Scientific American magazine Science & Government Report, independent bulletin of science policy Science Service News service Science Digest magazine San Diego Union newspaper Scientific Manpower Commission’s Scientific, Engineering, Technical Manpower Comments British Interplanetary Society’s Spaceflight magazine
San Francisco Chronicle newspaper San Francisco Examiner newspaper Soviet Aerospace newsletter Center for Foreign Technology’s Soviet Report (translation)
Space Propulsion newsletter NASA John F. Kennedy Space Center’s Spaceport News
IUWDS World Data Center A for Rockets and Satellite’s Spacewam Bulletin Sept. 1, 19S2, and During Sept.
NASA compendium of sounding rocket launches Soviet Sciences in the News, publications of Electro-Optical Systems, Inc.
See NASA wkly SSR St. Louis Globe-Democrat newspaper St. Louis Post-Dispatch, newspaper News Orleans Times-Picayune newspaper Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Technology Review Time magazine Today newspaper
Congressional testimony, prepared statement Prepared report or speech text Official transcript of news conference or congressional hearing United Airlines report
704
APPENDIX C
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
UN Reg UPI
USA Today USGS Release USPS W Post W Star W Times WFC Release WH anno WH Release WhHs remarks WJT
Wore Sndy Tig WSJ
United Nations Public Registry of Space Flight
United Press International news service
USA Today newspaper
U.S. Geological Survey news release
U.S. Postal Service news release
Wxshington Post newspaper
Washington Star newspaper
Washington Times newspaper
NASA Wallops Flight Center news release
White House announcement
White House news release
White House remarks
World Journal Tribune newspaper
Worcester (Mass) Sunday Telegraph
Wall Street Journal newspaper
705
Index
A-l (test stand), 154 A-2 (test stand), 154 Aaron, John W., 475 Abbey, George W.S., 512 Abingdon, Eng., 16 aborted flights, 80, 137, 141, 489 simulated, 38, 119, 132, 142
Abrahamson, James A., 303, 340-342, 371, 379, 394, 399, 403, 408, 432 440, 441,459, 471, 472
Abrazzo, Ben, 420, 505
accidents, space-related, 283, 292, 299, 378, 391, 417, 420, 424, 432 484 Acton, Loren W., 16 acoustic levitation, 230
Active Magnetospheric Particle Tracer Explorer (AMPTE), 497, 505, 506 Adams, Brock, 24 Adams, J.B., 120
Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS), 394, 404, 495, 496 Advanced Technology Display House, 117 Aero Club, 202
aerodynamics, 71, 132, 137, 141, 209, 298, 299, 307 numerical aerodynamic simulator (NAS), 198, 250, 394 Aeroflot, 117, 475
Aerojet General Corporation, 215, 312 Aerojet Liquid Rocket Company, 127, 214 aeronautical experiments, 255, 285, 290, 298, 299 AEROS Data Corporation, 433 aerosol climate effects (ACE), 184 aerosols, 208, 305, 313, 340, 357 Aerospace Corporation, 143, 195, 221, 328, 351 Aerospatiale, 64, 310, 481
Aetna Life & Casualty Insurance Company, 229, 300, 376 Afghanistan, 104, 117, 142
Agency for International Development (AID), 6, 112 Aggregation of Red Blood Cells, 516 Agnew, Harold M., 328
agricultural resources inventory survey through aerospace remote sensing (AgRISTARS), 112, 251, 260, 292 A’Hearn, Michael, 483 Ainslie, Michael, 413
Air and Space Museum. See National Air and Space Museum.
Air Force, U.S., 5, 8, 28, 44, 45, 53, 79, 91, 92, 105, 125-127, 132 134, 142, 157, 194, 197, 198, 205, 215, 238, 249, 250, 259, 266, 269 284, 287, 288, 303, 327, 328, 341, 351,
370, 372, 407, 417, 418, 449 461, 492, 493, 499 Academy, 408 Avionics Laboratory, 91 budget, 141
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED <ifc~ 2&L.‘NT«n0IWU». KkAwT
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
communications, 25
Defense Satellite Communications, 104
engineers, 40!
Flight Dynamics Laboratory, 71, 88 Geophysics Laboratory, 10, 16, 233, 483 Manned Orbiting Laboratory Program, 512 research, 73 Reserve, 203
Space Division, 262, 291,409
Air Force Systems Command (AFSC), 71, 73, 92, 98, 125, 146, 287, 303 311, 373, 378, 409 Ballistic Missile Office (BMO), 73 Space Service Division (SSD), 73 airbus, 123
A-300 (French/German), 123
aircraft, 71, 79, 96, 117, 132, 142, 243, 292, 349, 375, 500 A-9A, 189 A-10, 134 AD-1, 95 AN-2, 473 AN-22, 474
Antonov 400 (AN 400, Condor), 453 AV-8B, 154 B-l, 44, 156
B-52, 44, 71, 179, 375, 399 B-57B, 280
Boeing B17 bomber, 440 Boeing 707, 64, 440 Boeing 720, 522 Boeing 727, 183, 440 Boeing 737, 183
Boeing 747, 13-16, 22, 79, 169, 267, 311,417, 440, 464, 466
Boeing 757, 104
C-5A, 197, 198
C-8 Buffalo, 189
C-8A Buffalo, 249
C-141 Starlifter, 340
civilian/commercial, 53, 76, 93, 133, 298 DC-9, 64, 183
DC-10, 35, 108, 109, 175, 176, 298
efficiency, 21
Electra, 357
experimental, 99
F-5, 523
F-15, 91, 92
F-16, 91, 92
F-18, 171
F-86, 203
F-106, 194
F-106B, 194
FB- 111, 157
Gulfstream III, 298, 337, 466 hypersonic, 132
708
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
11-18 (Soviet), 126
jet, 165, 182, 189, 193, 314, 334, 348, 377
JT8D, 183
KC-10, 466
KC-135, 45, 466
U011, 169
Learjet 55, 298
military, 53, 76, 194, 203, 351 NASA 747 Shuttle Carrier Aircraft, 466 Orion P-3, 184
research, 48, 95, 242, 249, 290, 314
solar-powered, 239
supersonic, 141
survey, 239
T-38, 54, 256, 335
turbine, 21
U-2, 184, 240, 334, 357
widebody jets, 25, 123, 169, 298
X-15, 132, 133
X-29, 523
XV-15, 48, 193
XV-15A, 193
aircraft-to-satellite data relay (ASDAR), 25 Airline Passengers Association, 35 Airline Pilots Association (APA), 109, 249 airports, 84, 169, 259 advisory activities, 170 Curtiss Field, 222 Dulles International, 117, 439, 440 Kennedy International, 117 Lambert Field, 67 LeBourget, 222 Logan International, 64,-65 Naha, 259 Novosibirsk, 466 O’Hare, 65
Washington (D.C.) National, 466 AiResearch Manufacturing Company, 115 Akron, Ohio, 96
Aksyonov, Vladimir V., 18, 166, 169, 178, 234
Alascom, Inc., 221
Alaska, 221, 254
Albuquerque, N.M., 144, 153
Aldrin, Edwin E., Jr., 44, 274
Aleksandrov, Aleksandr, 421, 423, 434, 438, 439, 446, 452 Alexander & Alexander (insurance brokerage), 465 Algeria, 220
Algol 111A Scout (rocket motor), 127 Allen, Bryan, 35, 128, 155 Allen, David T., 472
Alien, Joseph P, 331, 376, 377, 383, 398, 460, 516 Allen, Leon B., 405
709
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Allen, Lew, Ir., 92, 104, 105
Allen Hills area, 131
Aller, Robert O., 312, 412, 413, 449
Allnutt, Robert F., 312
alloys, 323
Al-Mashat, Ali, 379
Alpha, 24
Alter, Dave, 460
altitude control, 273
Amalthea (Jupiter moon), 150
American Airlines, 64, 65, 109, 175. 339
American Association for the Advancement of Science, 104, 328
American Association of Engineering Societies, 214
American Astronomical Society, 106, 174, 462, 485
American Broadcasting Corporation (ABC), 66
American Communications, Inc., 238
American Geophysical Union, 28, 29, 92
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), 125, 251 348, 462
American Institute of Architects (AIA), 117, 208
American Monument Association, 120
American Newspaper Publishers Association (ANPA). 146
American Satellite Corporation, (AmSatCorp), 46, 129
American Science and Technology, 433
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 348
American Telephone and Telegraph Company (AT&T), 46, 121, 122, 129 135, 143, 228, 237, 238,425	’
Ames Dryden Flight Research Facility (ADFRF), 482, 488 Ames Flight Operations Directorate, 488 Ames Industrial Company, 96
Ames Research Center (ARC), 56, 59, 61, 62, 78. 88, 95. 189. 208, 219 232, 235, 239, 240, 299, 314, 322, 332, 334, 340, 348, 357. 359, 383 386. 393, 405, 411,417, 425, 428, 432, 451,462, 467, 488, 493, 509 Airborne Instrumentation Research Project, 482 Biomedical Research Division, 451
consolidation with Dryden Flight Research Center, 270, 290, 304
facilities, 117, 315
human research, 137, 138, 194
people, 55, 124, 269
programs, 22, 25, 48, 123, 130, 137, 142, 184, 198, 230, 244, 249, 267, 333 Space Missions Branch, 123 testing, 193
Ames Research Laboratory, 483
Anchorage, Alaska, 182, 221
Anders, William A., 274
Anderson, Jack, 157
Anderson. Kris, 153, 420
Anderson, Maxie, 68, 153, 192, 420, 505
Anderson, Pattie, 192
Andover, Me, 182
Andrews Air force Base,, 287, 303
Andromeda (nebula), 442
Andrus, Cecil D., 201
710
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Angelo, Wendy A., 273 Anik (communications satellite)
Anik A, 360 Anik C, 348 Anik C-i, 463 Anik C-2, 418 Anik D, 348, 360 AnikD-I, 360
animals, 62, 105, 160, 168, 369 Able (squirrel monkey), 519 “astrorats,” 431,432, 453 Diane (turtle), 193, 194
experiments and studies, 75, 180, 244, 273, 453 Fat Albert (alligator), 185, 186 Ham (chimpanzee), 392, 393 Laika (Soviet dog), 395 Miss Baker (squirrel monkey), 519 Miss Sam (rhesus monkey), 180 Sam (rhesus monkey), 180 weightlessness, 87, 268 Annexstad, John, 131 Antarctic, 121, 131, 524
antennas, 8, 58, 63, 95, 96, 128, 140, 180, 225, 228, 235, 241,261 290, 304, 306, 329, 339, 363,395,397,411,431,448	’
communications, 229, 333, 365, 398 ground-based, 240 imaging-radar, 65 space-based, 253 torus, 182
antisatellite weapons (ASAT), 105, 142, 218
Antonov, Oleg, 473
apogee kick motor (AKM), 459
Apollo, 14, 31, 57, 112, 125, 131, 196, 234, 240, 267, 274, 341, 342 370, 373, 437, 494 Apollo 4, 125 Apollo 8, 125, 274, 369 Apollo 9, 44, 48
Apollo 11, 44, 45, 57, 106, 133, 274
Apollo 12, 44, 284, 376	1
Apollo 13, 30
Apollo 15, 44
Apollo 16, 331
Apollo 17, 44
Apollo-Soyuz, 39, 88, 284, 328, 331, 341, 347, 350-352 launch-tower demolition, 400, 401, 415 Apple (payload experiment), 260, 283 applications explorer mission (AEM), 68 AEM-C, 68
Applications Technology Satellite (ATS), 38, 51, 321 ATS 1, 321 ATS 3
ATS-6, 38, 39, 51 Applied Research Laboratory, 525
711
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Applied Solar Engergy Corporation, 151 Arabsat (communications satellite), 139. 310, 379 Arctic, 7
Arecibo observatory, 24, 111 Argentina, 110, 209
Ariane, 8, 28, 39, 46, 64, 87, 97, 107, 128, 145, 159, 172, 179, 239 260, 275, 276, 283, 299, 316,326,364,418,494,495	’	’
Ariane 1, 326, 480 Ariane 3, 326, 495 Ariane 4, 326 Ariane 5, 46 Ariane 7,517 Ariane 8, 441 Ariane L01,98
Anane L02, 158, 172-174, 188, 217, 253 Ariane L03, 260 Ariane L04, 77 Ariane L5, 345
Arianespace, 112, 480, 481.490, 494, 495, 517 Arizona State University, 485 Arkalyk, 411
Arms Export Control Act, 311 Armstrong, Neil A., 36, 44, 99, 132, 274 Army, U.S., 5, 19, 48, 193, 219, 315, 339, 369, 395 Aeromechanics Laboratory, 462 Corps of Engineers, 98, 512 Research & Technology Laboratories, 48 Rotor Systems Research Aircraft (RSRA), 509 Tilt Rotor Research Aircraft, 219 Army Ballistic Missile Agency (ABMA), 174 Development Operations Division, 174 Arnold Engineering Development Center, 146 Ascension Island, 83, 87, 280, 364 Asian Games, 363 Associated Press (AP), 43, 146 Associated Universities, Inc. (AUI), 86 Association of European Astronauts (AEA), 513 Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), 22, 241 Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA), 86, 250 asteroids, 211,445, 446 Astrain, Santiago, 261 Astro program, 405, 485 Astro Halley Science Team, 485 Astrobee D (rocket), 118
astronauts, 30, 44, 45, 94, 133, 265, 266, 268, 274, 290, 308, 323 328, 419, 449, 510 Apollo, 131 black, 161, 429 civilian, 161, 498, 499 Hispanic, 161 Mercury, 113, 120 Mercury Seven, 328 in orbit, 255
712
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
reaction to weightlessness, 268
selection of, 3, 21, 51, 132, 152, 161, 284, 331, 370, 419, 470, 498, 499, 506, 517
TFNG (thirty-five new guys), 419
training, 105, 179, 196, 297, 359
Voyager, 133
women, 161
astronomers, 155, 191,227, 271, 303, 348, 357, 371,401,445, 446, 526
astronomy, 151, 161, 227, 271, 346, 369, 405, 440, 445, 483
astrophysics, 161, 222, 271, 358, 369
Atkinson, Richard, 219
Atkov, Oleg, 465, 479, 492, 495, 503, 509
Atlanta University, 231
Atlantic (orbiter 104), 7
Atlantic Ocean, 5, 7, 41, 43, 83, 108, 231,240, 254, 259, 316, 345 420, 434, 492 Atlantis (orbiter), 7, 332, 333, 380 Atlas, 87, 262, 280, 414, 418, 522 Atlas E, 410, 490 Atlas F, 129, 153, 160, 206, 284
Atlas Centaur, 5, 25, 65, 84, 106, 179, 206, 209, 221, 238, 240, 255 275, 291, 316, 333, 364, 366, 414, 484, 493 Atmosphere Explorer 5, 280 Atmospheric Cloud Physics Laboratory, 118 Atmospheric Sciences Laboratory (Army), 10
atmospheric studies, 10, 24, 28, 38, 46, 52, 53, 65, 86, 131, 151, 174 191, 195, 225, 252, 263, 280, 282, 284, 293, 303, 331, 334, 337, 342 357, 375, 406, 417 disturbances, 119, 225, 279, 280 solar, 333 soundings, 213 Titan, 232
upper-atmosphere, 292, 314 Venus, 232, 235, 323
attitude control, 51, 84, 113, 150, 172, 180, 271, 279, 322, 326, 410413 Austin 1982G (comet), 357
Australia, 16, 25, 42, 43, 55, 56, 64, 75, 110, 124, 146, 169, 209 232, 304, 342 Austria, 78, 228, 523 Auter, Henry F., 203 Automation Industries, Inc., 141 Autry, Larry D., 470 auxiliary power-unit (APU), 308 AVCO Corporation, 78 Aviation Hall of Fame, 189 Aviation Pbwer Supply Company, 47 avionics systems, 132, 149 awards and medals, 63, 71, 81, 124, 509 Bendix Trophy, 203
Collier Trophy, 21, 125, 130, 146, 155, 277, 338 Distinguished Service Medal, 81, 124, 125, 274, 456 Excalibur, 88
Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal, 81, 125 Exceptional Service Medal, 81, 112, 125, 187, 450, 462, 526 Goddard Trophy, 133 Guggenheim Medal for Aeronautics, 373
713
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Kremer prize, 35 Lawrence Sperry Award, 462 National Business Aircraft Association Award, 125 National Medal of Science. 125 Nobel Peace Prize, 175, 452 Order of Lenin, 71 Order of the Gold Star, 71 Outstanding Leadership Medal, 450, 526 “Pilot Cosmonaut of the USSR," 71 Presidential Citizens Medal, 175, 287 Presidential Medal of Freedom, 494 Presidential Medal of Merit, 373, 387 Royal Aeronautical Society Trophy, 288 Space Medal of Honor, 274 Sylvanus Albert Reed Award, 125 Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy, 125, 146 Ayame (Ecs, Iris), 9, 122, 188, 418 Ayame 2 (Ecs 2), 122, 170, 495 backpack, 167, 192, 378 jet, 65, 73 life-support, 168 backup procedures, 336 Bagian, James P., 161,463 Baja, Calif., 232 Baker, Maurice, 98
Ball Aerospace Division, 174, 232, 433 Ballhaus, William F., Jr., 462, 488 Balloon Intercomparison Campaign, 412
balloons, 4, 23, 38, 66, 67, 152, 153, 192, 194, 195, 233, 292, 353 391, 412, 420, 421,430, 464,473,485,486,505 scientific, 369 Baltic Sea, 10 Baltimore, Md., 86 Banana River, 160, 168 Bangalore, India, 231 Bangladesh, 228 Barany, Robert, 452 Bardeen, John, 328 Barrios and Associates, 154 Barsukov, Valery, 146 Bartoe, John-David F., 16, 152, 483 batteries, 340, 397. 398, 406, 439, 474 capacity, 305 lightweight, 281 problems, 340
Baudry, Patrick, 341, 350, 513 Bauer, Siegfried, 184 Bay of Bengal, 54, 183 Bay St. Louis, Miss., 3, 119
Baykonur, 10, 147, 233, 261, 273, 384, 404, 411,438, 439 BDM Corporation, 137 Bean, Alan L., 284
714
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Beggs, James Montgomery, 269, 285, 287, 290, 293, 300, 312, 327, 338 340, 345, 348, 349, 358, 372, 375, 379, 394, 406, 425, 434, 448, 460 467, 469, 472, 479, 492, 493, 499, 506, 523
Beijing, 27, 104, 110, 127, 156, 498 Belgium, 56, 203, 228 Bell Aerosystems Company, 188, 238 Bell Helicopter Textron, 48, 193, 219 Bell Laboratories, 328, 480 Military and Government Systems Division, 480 Beilonte, Maurice, 222 Beltsville, Md., 221
Bendix Advanced Technology Center, 461 Bendix Field Engineering Corporation, 306, 461 Berezovoy, Anatoliy, 347, 350, 355, 359, 360, 377, 384, 385, 428, 503 Bergman, Jules, 45, 271 Bergstrom Air Force Base, 311 Berkeley, Calif., 3, 105 Beta Pictoris (star), 24, 512 Betelguese (star), 446 Bhaskara, 34, 311 Bhaskara 2, 311
“Bicentennial of Air and Space Flight,” 391 “Big Bang” theory, 225, 226, 442 Bignier, Michael, 283 Bigot, C.,, 490 biofeedback, 273 Bird, Peter, 232 Birmingham, Eng., 16 Bittner, Ffeter C., 281 Black Brant (rocket), 118 black holes, 5, 252, 279 Cyg X-l, 252 Black Sea, 10, 123 Blagov, Victor, 424 Blaha, John E., 161 Blamont, Jacques, 24, 210 Bleriot, Louis, 130 Block 5D, 34 Block Island, R.I., 37
Blue Ridge Electric Cooperative System, 209
Bluford, Guion, Jr., 386, 429, 431,432
Blunt Probe, 195
Boatright, Dale, 506
Bobko, Karol J., 332, 407, 408
Boeing Aerospace Company, 65, 104, 115, 141, 156, 159, 165, 189, 197 209, 249, 255, 305, 306, 358, 365, 376, 378, 407, 418, 489, 421 Commercial Aircraft Company, 104 Military Aircraft Company, 104 Bogota, 173, 179 Bohemic, N.Y., 96 Bolden, Charles F., Jr., 161 Boldt, Elihu, 106
715
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Bond, Langhome, 35, 36, 109 Bonnet, R., 490 Bonneville Power System, 209
boosters, 8, 34, 35, 38, 127, 168, 211, 215, 219, 255, 262, 275, 294 297, 305, 326, 360, 363, 364, 397, 398, 406, 439, 474 reusable, 271
Bootes (constellation), 303 Borman, Frank, 274 Bostich, Dennis N., 470 Boston University, 288 Boulder, Colo., 66, 105, 123, 185 Bova, Ben, 121
Boyd, John W., 88, 222, 425, 493
Boyne, Walter, 440
Bradfield (comet), 108
Bradley, Ann P., 302
Brand, Vance D., 331, 376, 397, 463
Brandenstein, Daniel C., 388, 429, 441
Brandcs, Richard, 464
Brandt, John, 485
Braun, F., 120
Brazil, 56, 64, 87, 110, 169, 209, 385 Bremen, Germany, 41,325 Brence, William A., 317 Breton, George, 106 Brevard County, Fla., 160 Brezhnev, Leonid, 71, 150, 361 Bridges, Roy D., Jr., 161 Brighton, England, 44
British Aerospace Dynamics Corporation, 77, 91, 146, 418, 481
British Air Force Auxiliary, 203
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), 438
British Interplanetary Society. 146, 201
Bromley, Allan, 328
Brown, Harold, 104, 105, 116, 142
Brown, Janice, 192, 236
Brown University, 30
Browning, Ron, 410
Brownsville, Tex., 193
Brueckner, Guenter E., 151, 152
BTM (Belgium company), 91
Buchli, James F., 370, 467
Buchsbaum, Solomon J., 328
Budapest, 159
Buhl, David, 281
Bulgaria, 39, 75, 257, 273, 292, 523 cosmonauts, 40 Burbank, Calif., 47 Burch, Randy, 66 Burr, Peter, 116 Burroughs Corporation, 198 Burton, John L., 35, 36
716
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Busse, Jon, 184
Bush, George, 309, 325, 408, 432 C-band (radar system), 141 Cable News Network (CNN), 127, 128, 452 California, 48, 54, 110, 240, 241, 267, 304, 328 Department of Forestry, 239
California Institute of Technology (CalTech), 29, 61,76, 106, 262 288, 312, 339, 366, 371, 427	•	‘
Callisto (Jupiter satellite), 13,42, 174 Calio, Anthony J., 109 Calvin, Melvin, 145 Camacho, Carlos, 215 Cambridge, Mass., 16, 149, 241 Campbell, Thomas F., 312
Canada, 3, 4, 52, 56, 75, 93, 110, 123, 154, 169, 209, 228, 254, 281 375, 416, 516 CTS satellite, 52, 479 Department of Communications, 63, 448 National Research Council (NRC), 10, 140, 152, 311, 317, 375 search and rescue, 167 Canadian Astronautics, Ltd., 167 Canadian Commercial Corporation, 140 Canberra, Australia, 55, 280, 306, 397 Canoga Park, Calif., 181 Cap Gris Nez, France, 35, 155
Cape Canaveral, 25, 31, 34, 60, 81, 93, 96, 106, 119, 120, 165, 226 238, 253, 267, 275, 280, 307, 309, 328, 333, 366, 369, 372, 378, 403 414, 424, 429, 487, 497, 506, 510 Air Force Station, 8, 47, 65, 73, 168, 261, 399, 497, 525 Cape Perry, N.W.T., 311 capsule communicator (CAPCOM), 21, 309 carbon dioxide, 331 carbon epoxy material, 440 carbon monoxide, 380 Carden, Huey D., 186 cargo-bay doors, 336
cargo-integration test equipment (CITE), 428 Carlin, John, 67 Carnegie Institution, 511
Las Campanas Observatory, 511, 512 Carnes, Peter, 486 Carpenter, M. Scott, 120, 274 Carr, Gerald, 216, 377, 385, 408 Carr, Robert, 157 Carretto, Joseph A.,, 470
Carter, Jimmy, 7, 9, 27, 44, 45, 68, 83, 86, 93, 104, 109, 111, 128 133, 139, 140, 142, 185, 214, 225, 392 Casey, William J., 460 Cash, Webster, 105 Cassady, William, 131 Castor IV (motors), 181 CCS-3 (PRC missile), 127 Centaur, 250, 260, 276, 279, 280, 311 Centaur G, 476
717
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Centaur G-Prime, 476
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 111, 460
Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES), 15, 46, 63, 64, 172, 283 326, 441
Centre National d'Exploitation des Oceans, 468
Cepheus (constallation), 116
Ceman, Eugene, 131
CESAR (consortium), 203
Challenger (orbiter), 7, 236, 239, 308, 332, 378, 386, 392, 394, 395 398, 399, 403, 404, 407, 408, 413, 419-421,423, 424, 429, 431,432 441,474, 509-511 delays, 403, 461 Chang, Franklin R., 161 Charge Composition Explorer, 497 Charles, Philip, 105 Charlesworth, Clifford E., 57, 415 Charyk, Joseph V., 27, 52, 210, 215, 217 Chelomei, Vladimir, 526
chemical elements and studies, 174, 196, 198, 211, 233, 313, 314, 330 331, 334, 349, 450
Chernenko, Konstantin U.. 473, 504
Cheyenne Mountain, 125
Chicago, 111., 16, 62, 86, 144, 175
Chilton, England, 427
Chin, Gordon, 281
China Lake, Calif., 233
chlorofluorocarbons, 303
Chretien, Jean-Loup, 341, 350, 377, 504, 513
chronopharmacology, 359
circuits, defective, 353
civilian and commercial programs, 7, 9, 46, 51,64, 83, 133, 165, 192 262, 271, 280, 325, 345, 351, 364, 412, 418, 424, 434, 461,480, 498 499, 505 laser applications, 282 Clark, William R, 409 Clark Air Force Base, 98 Clarksburg, Md., 261 Cleave, Mary L., 161,463 Cline, Thomas L., 162
cloud formations, 205, 225, 235, 238, 263, 275, 293, 323, 334
Coast Guard, U.S., 5, 47, 150, 167, 289
Coats, Michael L., 398, 487, 489, 500
Cochran, Jacqueline, 203
Cofer, Wesley R., Jr., 210
Colladay, Raymond S., 415
Collier, Robert J., 155
Collins, Michael, 44, 106, 274
Colombo, Giuseppe, 210
Colonna, Richard A., 383
Colorado, 125
Colorado Springs, Colo., 209
Columbia (OV-102),7, 13-16, 23, 27, 38, 39, 53, 70, 76, 80, 84, 87, 94 96, 97, 107, 149, 154, 155, 157, 167, 171, 181, 202, 226, 231, 237 242-244, 253-255, 259, 265-267, 269-271, 277, 287, 289, 297-300 307-309, 313, 332, 334, 335, 350, 351, 376, 378, 380, 383, 386, 395 407, 408, 428, 441,448, 451,455, 459 See also Space Shuttle
718
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Columbia (explorer ship-1792), 7 Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS), 93 Columbia University, 89, 214, 337 Columbine II, 192 Comberiate, Michael, 525
comets, 211, 294, 357, 372, 454, 483, 484, 512, 525
command systems(?), 310
Committee to Save the Hughes Flying Boat, 173
communications, 4, 8, 18, 22, 25, 27, 28, 39, 44, 51, 62, 80, 83, 93 95, 135, 139, 150, 151, 177, 209, 243, 250, 275, 345, 380, 381,404 business, 505 commercial, 43, 46, 238
data, 348, 360, 409, 425, 434, 439, 448, 480, 500 digital, 409
global, 143, 216, 310, 407, 418 links, 28, 29, 39, 213, 408, 525 military, 106, 142 national security, 373 problems, 72 radio, 123 remote, 386 ship-to-shore, 414, 445
telephone, 425, 480, 500	■
television, 163, 360, 425, 434, 439, 480, 484, 500 video, 348, 409
voice, 348, 360, 409, 434, 439, 484
with crews, 10, 18
See also satellites, television
Communications Satellite Corporation (ComSatCorp), 3, 27, 28, 44, 52 106, 143-145, 173, 177,182,209,210,215-217,225,238,376,495 519	’	’
Comsat], 13, 135 Comsat Laboratories, 143, 216 World Systems Division, 210 competition with other nations, 120, 159, 349
competition with the Soviet Union, 104, 105, 120, 142, 201,216, 294 369, 370, 454, 484, 524
Complex 14, 120
Compton, Dale, 393
Compton telescope, 261
Computational Fluid Dynamics Branch, 462
computer developments, 96, 256, 265, 325, 359, 376, 384, 441, 451, 455 459, 487, 500, 523 flight simulator, 256 on-board, 239, 307, 397, 430 system intruders, 441, 442 Computer Science Corporation, 107, .125
Comsat General Corporation, 44, 128, 143, 145, 206, 216, 221, 238, 255, 300, 324, 376 Comstar, 46, 123, 128, 255 Comstar C, 5
Comstar-D (Comstar 4), 255 Comstar D2, 128 Concorde, 440
Congress, U.S., 95, 124, 144, 345, 389, 394, 442, 469, 471 budget, 6, 24, 33, 109, 133, 141, 176, 285, 421,425
719
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Congressional observers, 133
House Appropriations Committee. 406
House Armed Services Committee, 134, 157
House Committee on Science and Technology, 43, 45, 57, 110, 166, 171, 185, 213. 328
House of Representatives, 33, 35, 76, 111, 133, 285, 394, 403, 421,442, 492, 511
House Select Committee, 43
House-Senate Joint Economic Committee, 197
Senate, 7, 33, 62, 111, 142, 146, 187, 202, 244, 285, 288, 492
Senate Armed Services Committee, 92
Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, 45, 116 Senate Foreign Affairs Committee, 310, 311 Conde, Mamady Lamine, 182 Conestoga I, 363, 364 Conrad, Charles (Pete), Jr.i, 189, 284, 376 Continental Airlines, 189 Continental Telephone Corporation, 238 Control Data Corporation, 198 Convair, 30
Cooper, L. Gordon, 120, 274 Cooper, Robert S., 30, 88
cooperation with other nations, 16, 25, 27, 33, 41,54, 56, 63, 67, 73 75, 93, 104, 107, 154, 201, 226, 236, 251, 256, 281, 323, 325, 341 350, 359, 366, 372, 375, 379, 383, 394, 405, 412, 418, 437, 445, 453 463, 472, 476, 526 See also European Space Agency
cooperation with the People’s Republic of China, 110, 200, 392. 463 498 cooperation with the Soviet Union, 22, 39, 62, 77, 107, 200, 201, 268 284, 341. 349, 350, 372, 463, 481, 494, 504
Copernicus. See Orbiting Astronomical Observatory
Cormeilles-en-Vexin, 287
Cornell University, 45, 195, 404
Coming Glass Works, 282
Corpus Christi, Tex., 289, 363
Cos B, 110, 203
COSMAC (microprocessor), 195
cosmic ray activities, 51,65, 107, 153, 217, 415, 510
cosmonautics, 74
cosmonauts, 11,72,98, 147, 148, 158. 159, 163, 164, 166, 169, 178 185,234,261,268, 273, 280, 294, 340, 347, 354, 369, 411,424, 428 504, 509 diet, 222
exercises, 31, 58, 223 experiments, 39, 47, 58, 163, 177, 189 problems, 58, 428, 438, 439, 446 reaction to weightlessness, 19, 147, 268
record-breaking flights, 58, 147, 148. 177. 203, 204, 208, 213-216, 273, 377, 384, 509 repair and maintenance, 239 Cosmos, 62, 268, 301,423 Cosmos 379 Cosmos 382 Cosmos 398 Cosmos 434 Cosmos 549, 210 Cosmos 869, 98
720
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Cosmos 954, 145
Cosmos 100!, 98
Cosmos 1024, 61
Cosmos 1074, 98
Cosmos 1109, 61
Cosmos 1124, 61
Cosmos 1129, 75 , 87, 267, 268
Cosmos 1171, 142
Cosmos 1174, 142
Cosmos 1176, 145, 149
Cosmos 1267, 281
Cosmos 1345, 345
Cosmos 1346, 345
Cosmos 1347, 345
Cosmos 1351, 345
Cosmos 1352, 345
Cosmos 1354, 345
Cosmos 1374, 347
Cosmos 1402, 391, 400
Cosmos 1443, 404, 411,421, 423, 424, 430, 435 Cosmos 1514, 453
Cospas (Soviet search-and-rescue satellite), 372, 490 Cospas 1, 365 Cospas/SARSAT, 372 Costa Rica, 334 Coste, Dieudonne, 222 countdown, 307, 308, 335 Cowan, George A., 328 Cowings, Patricia, 162, 163 Crawford, Keith E.,'470 Cremin, Joe, 498
Crippen, Robert L., 16, 94, 107, 255, 256, 265, 266, 269, 270, 274 309, 386, 400, 418, 419, 474, 509, 510, 512	’	’
Cronkite, Walter, 93 crop growth predictions, 251 Crossfield, Scott, 132 Crouch, Tom, 486
cryogenic devices, 77, 146, 329, 335 crystallography) 314
CS-B (Japanese communications satellite), 122 CSSX-4 (rocket), 85 Cuba, 273
cosmonauts, 208, 213 Culbertson, Philip E., 312, 346, 475, 493 Curtiss, Glenn, 277	.
Cygnus, Great Rift of (the Northern Cross), 105, 106 cylinders, 329
Czechoslovakia, 11, 66, 75, 273, 523 cosmonauts, 11
Daedalus (multispectral scanner), 240 Dahlgren, Va., 434 Dakar, Senegal, 403
C-2
721
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Dallas, Tex., 127 Danbury, Conn., 229, 282 Danielson, C. Edward, 76, 371 Dartmouth College, 208 data, 215, 227, 317 collection, 91, 292, 322 Earth resources, 4, 94, 104 energy, 313 micrometeoroid, 75 ozone, 75 processing, 292 transmission, 316 volcanic, 305 Daunton, Nancy, 451 David, Edward E., 329 DaVinci TransAmerica, 66, 67, 68 Davis, EskerK., 263, 293 Dayton, Ohio, 189 Dearing, Ron, 173 Debus, Kurt, 442 Decampli, William M., 470 Deep Space Network, 55, 304, 306, 371, 397, 497 Deere & Company, 480
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), 210, 214 Defense Mapping Agency (U.S.), 64 defense meteorological satellite (DMSP), 34 Defense Nuclear Agency (U.S.), 5
Defense Satellite Communications System (DSCS), 372, 373 Deimos (Mars satellite), 117
Delta, 8, 18, 53, 110, 116, 118, 1 19, 144, 157, 158, 181, 206, 221 229, 232, 291, 298, 303, 310, 317, 347, 348, 353, 372, 409, 412, 414 415, 421, 425, 434, 494, 506 Delta 3294, 497 Delta 3920, 505 Deming, Drake,, 281 Deng Xiaoping, 27, 104 Denmark, 15, 98, 203, 228 Denning, Peter J., 383, 405 Denoyer, John, 77 Denver, Colo., 227, 280 Department of Agriculture, U.S., 6, 112
Department of Commerce, U.S. (DOC), 5, 6, 86, 93, 112, 144, 193, 201 205, 206, 254, 519 Maritime Administration, 47
Department of Defense, U.S. (DOD, 5, 15, 28, 30, 34, 44, 53, 70, 83 87, 92, 93, 98, 104, 110, 125, 127, 129, 133, 142, 157, 165, 166 171, 179, 184, 206, 262, 266, 274, 291, 329, 345, 370, 391,404, 429 461,471, 512, 518, 525 budget, 116, 134, 135, 139, 346 Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), 484 “Soviet Military Power 1984,” 499 Department of Education, 506
Department of Energy, U.S. (DOE), 5, 37, 85, 93, 115, 188, 209, 229 404, 471 Department of Housing and Urban Development, U.S. (HUD), 117 Department of the Interior, U.S. 5, 6, 112. 201, 215
722
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Bureau of Indian Affairs, 517 Department of Justice, U.S., 129 Department of Labor, U.S., 302
Department of State, U.S., 5, 27, 111, 117, 150, 182, 311, 345, 481 517, 519 Department of Transportation, U.S, (DOT), 5, 24, 93, 269, 302, 462 design, 72, 77, 154, 187, 290, 298, 305, 339, 367, 486, 505, 523 aircraft, 298 engineering, 280 problems, 175 spacecraft, 152 deuterium, 222, 323 Dhawan, Satish, 183, 231, 363 Didcot, U.K., 120 Dione (Saturn moon), 228, 263	-
Discovery (orbiter 103), 7, 304, 332, 333, 399, 487, 488, 500, 503 516, 518, 519
Dodd, Lamar, 202
Donahue, Thomas M., 460
Donegan, James J., 112
Donn, Bertram, 485
Doradus (cloud), 401
Dorking, England, 16
Domberger, Walter R., 188
Domier System, 73, 134, 160
Dotts, Robert, 274
Double Eagle II, 67, 68, 153, 192, 420
Douglas Aircraft Company, 146
Dow Chemical, 251
Dozier, Jan D., 470
drag reduction, 33
drainage systems, 381
Draper, Charles Stark, 149
Draper Laboratory, 149
Draughon, Harold, 353, 431
Drexel University, 208
drones for aerodynamic and structural testing (DAST), 170, 375 DAST 1,375
Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC), 13, 14, 54, 95, 170, 202, 249 267, 299, 311, 341, 462,488	’	’	’
consolidation with Ames Research Center, 270, 290, 304 contracts, 71
people, 30, 57, 88, 242, 301 programs, 81, 193, 194 testing, 45, 79, 128, 130, 137, 169 Dryden Flight Research Facility (DFRF), 367, 375, 399, 432 Duberg, John E., 125 Dublin, Ireland, 120 Duke, Charles, 44 Dunbar, Bonnie J., 161 DuPont, 287
Dynamic Engineering, Inc., 215
dynamic velocity taper, 439
Dynamics Explorer A (DE-I), 291, 298, 525
723
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Dynamics Explorer B (DE-2), 291, 298 Dyson, Freeman, 210
Dzhanibekov, Vladimir, 261,276, 341,350, 491,492 Dzhezkazgan, 177, 178, 190, 215, 384 Eagle I (balloon), 430
Early Bird. See International Telecommunications Satellite Organization early-warning radar devices, 172 Earth, 91, 215, 227 data, 13, 27, 38, 68, 96 environment monitoring, 196, 298 magnetic field, 77, 291 observation satellite, 34, 151, 161, 226 orbiting missions, 14,51, 173,215,237,284, 290, 299,315
resources, 4, 37, 57, 66, 92, 94, 104, 107, 108, 129, 130, 138-140, 142, 196, 239, 251, 311 surface, 38, 241 Earth-based observations, 157 Earth-imaging devices, 172
Earth Radiation-Budget Satellite (ERBS), 232, 510, 522 Earth resources technology satellite (Ens 1), 375 earthquakes, 64, 92, 241,427 East Germany, See German Democratic Republic
Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC), 73, 118, 144, 207, 229, 238 275, 300, 310, 316, 321, 339, 347, 360, 409, 412, 414, 421,425, 433 434, 505 Eastern Test Range (ETR), 5, 84, 221 Ecs. See Ayame; European Communications Satellite Ecuador, 46
Edelson, Burton I., 324, 338, 379 educational programs, 38, 39, 196, 405, 498, 506, 517 Announcement of Opportunity (AO), 517 carpenter ant experiment, 419, 424, 440 Secondary School Recognition Program, 498 Space Flight Participation Program, 517
student participation, 153, 154, 191, 192, 195, 196, 273, 314, 353, 377, 419, 424, 440, 463 Edwards, Calif., 290
Edwards Air Force Base, 14, 71, 193, 256, 266, 280, 309, 314, 327, 328 334, 335, 378, 408, 419, 420, 429, 43f, 448, 451,459, 474, 488, 503 510 EG&G Corporation, 483 Eglin Air Force Base, 134, 238 Egypt, 64
Ehricke, Krafft, 526
Einstein observatory. See high-energy astronomy observatory Eisele, D., 504 Eisenhower, Dwight D., 175 ejection seats, 354, 395, 407, 438 nonejectable seats, 354, 355 El Chicon (volcano), 357, 412 electrical and electronic systems, 266, 307, 308, 336 electrodynamics, 375 electromagnetic radiation, 154, 526 Electromagnetic Sciences, Inc., 496 electromagnetic waves, 249 electronic mail, 441
724
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
electrophoresis research, 424 electrostatic discharge, 345 Elektrotropgraf, 447 Elephant moraines, 131 elevons, 266, 292, 307 Elkins, W. Va., 217 Ellington Air Force Base, 309
emergency conditions and provisions, 330, 335, 386, 395, 403, 438 Empresa Hondurena de Telecomunicaciones (HONDUTEL), 150 Enceladus (Saturn satellite), 263 Encke, Johann, 484 Encke (comet), 483, 484
energy, 14, 229, 230, 243, 259, 282, 313, 329, 363 Energy Research Corporation, 229 Engelmann, Rudolph J., 66, 67 engineering, 193, 196, 280, 308, 327 test satellite, 254
engines, 23, 26, 27, 34, 35, 38, 41, 47, 74, 80, 85, 88, 92,97, 104 119, 123, 137, 142, 143, 154, 162, 171-173, 180, 183, 189, 217, 235 251,314, 335, 360, 380, 386 advanced turbine, 21, 22 fanjet, 21 F100, 91, 92 F101X, 92 LE5, 262
nozzles, 36, 84, 86, 105, 149, 251, 307 Pegasus, 154
problems, 3, 159, 188, 403, 487 RL10-3-3A, 279 rocket, 53, 57, 76, 279, 307, 464 seals, 42
test, 124, 132, 140, 181, 348
turbine, 37
turbofan, 78
valves, 149
YF-102 , 249
England, Anthony W., 400
England. See United Kingdom
Engle, Joe, 94, 97, 107, 132, 242, 307, 342
English Channel, 35, 81,96, 128, 130, 137, 155, 287
Enterprise, 4, 7, 22, 23, 53, 202, 237, 313, 367, 417, 440, 513
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 57, 93, 249
Environmental Quality Projects Office (EQPO), 142
Environmental Research & Technologies, Inc., 143
environmental studies, 138, 143, 171, 185, 214, 297, 307, 321, 336 430, 490 gypsy-moth infestation, 216, 217 near-space, 280 Venus, 323 Erb, Bryan, 251 Eridan (sounding rocket), 87
ERNO (West German company), 41, 112, 221, 313, 325 Espenak, Fred, 281 Esperance, 54
725
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Eskite, Wilbur H., Jr., 9, 144 d’Estaing, Valery Giscard, 350 Estess, Roy S.,
Etam, W. Va., 182
Els 4 (Kiku 3), 254. See also Japan
Europa, 42, 174
European Communications Satellite (ECS), 22, 188 European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), 120 European retrievable carrier, 340
European Space Agency (ESA), 4, 8, 15, 39, 48, 51,64, 76, 78, 79, 85 97, 108, 110, 120, 130, 160. 179, 226, 228, 233, 234, 239, 256, 271 283, 289, 313, 316, 323, 325, 326, 340, 359, 364, 378, 408, 428, 437 441,445, 448, 461,467, 468, 485, 504, 505, 513, 517
budget, 134
contracts, 41,48, 91, 112, 134, 161
ERS-1, 467
experiments, 4
Large Satellite, 91
LSat, 145
people, 17, 98, 154, 179 problems, 159, 253 programs, 128, 18] testing, 28, 87, 107, 174 tracking station, 77 training, 236, 297
X-ray observatory (Exosat), 188, 415 See also Spacelab
European Space Operations Center (ESOC), 316, 445, 490. 505 European Space Research Organization (ESRO), 203 European Space Technology Center (ESTEC), 3 responsibility, 17 Evans, L.J. (Bud), Jr., 506 Evans, Ron, 44 Evans, Stuart J., 338 exobiology system, 145 Explorer, 369 Explorer 1, 395
explosions and fires, 111, 152, 167, 168, 175, 181-183, 187, 239, 240 283, 295, 370, 437-439, 446, 452, 455, 464, 487, 488, 522
external propellant tank, 53, 74, 88, 119, 127, 132, 146, 165, 176 214, 230, 231, 235-237, 241, 243, 253, 255, 265, 276, 292, 299, 301 307, 308, 322, 327, 332, 365, 403 extragalactic activities, 271 Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE), 500, 501 Fabian, John M., 386, 418, 419, 463 facilities, 98, 110, 117, 285
facsimile transmissions (FAX), 215, 225, 228, 229, 434 Fairchild Industries, 104, 134, 238, 240, 433 Falkland Islands, 345 Fanti, Piero, 222
Farkas, Bertalan, 158, 164, 166, 177 Federal Airport Act, 146
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), 35, 36, 37, 53, 62, 67, 75, 79 108, 169, 175, 182,
726
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
183, 186, 244, 249, 288, 289, 353, 522 Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 442
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 46, 52, 96, 106, 129, 135 143, 145, 177, 182, ,210, 216, 217, 237, 380, 519 Federation Aeronautique International (FA1), 11, 277 Feldman, Dennis, 183
Feoktistov, Konstantin, 72, 97, 148, 177, 280, 385, 452 Fermilab National Accelerator Laboratory, 86, 191 Figueiredo, Joao, 383 Fiji, 156
filament-wound case, 332, 346, 513 filters, 308
Fimmel, Richard, 411 Fink, Daniel J., 338 Finlayson, Ray, 43 Firefly, 47
Fisher, Anna L., 161, 516 Fisher, William F., 161 Fishman, Gerald, 217 Fitts, Jerry, 276 Flachi, Charles,, 379, 380 flame-resistant materials, 240, 301 Flanagan, William A., 470 flaps, body and rudder, 307 Fleet Satellite Communications, 106 Fleming, Rex, 5 flight simulators, 117 flight-readiness firings, 392, 394, 400 Florida, 118, 128, 238, 266, 267 Florida Flistoric Preservation Society, 400 FltSatCom, 87 FltSatCom I, 25
FltSatCom 2 (FltSatCom B), 25, 84 FltSatCom 5 (FltSatCom E), 291 FltSatCom D, 221 Fokker, Anthony H.G., 189 Fokker Aircraft Company (German firm), 53, 189 Folkestone, 35 Ford, Gerald, 244
Ford Aerospace and Communications Corporation, 160, 209, 238, 310, 333 414, 432, 481, 491 Foreign Broadcast Information Service (FB1S), 9, 17, 31, 39, 47, 49 58, 105, 127, 259 Fomalhaut (star), 456	■
Ft. Bliss, Tex., 187 Ft. Davis, Tex., 241 Ft. Worth, Tex., 193
forward-looking infrared sensor (FLIR), 91
France, 15, 54, 56, 64, 75, 93, 107, 124, 130, 144, 145, 154, 159, 169 201, 203, 227, 228, 238, 256, 283, 349, 504, 523 Council of Ministers, 46 search and rescue, 167 Franklin Institute, 96 Frederickson, Donald S., 329
727
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
French Guiana, 172, 364, 418 Frieman, Edward, 328
Frosch, Robert A., 4, 6, 13, 17, 22, 27, 30, 64, 74, 81, 83, 88, 109 110, 111, 128, 131, 133, 134, 153, 187, 208, 214, 218, 219, 225, 231 242, 244, 249, 250, 269, 287 Frost, Kenneth J., 116 Frutkin, Arnold W., 9, 39, 57 Fucino, Italy, 240, 316 fuels, 214, 229, 287, 363, 438, 487 efficiency, 298, 375 on-board supply, 321 tanks, 267, 298, 305, 307 valves, 487-489 See also propellants fuselage, 266, 274, 353, 373 Fullerton, C. Gordon, 313, 323, 334, 335 Fuqua, Don, 43, 57, 128, 166, 185, 213, 394 Furrer, Reinhard, 513 Gagarin, Yuri, 261, 369, 504 Galapagos Islands, 46 galactic dusters, 337, 346, 348, 404 exploding galaxies, 279 Galaxy, 421, 434 Galaxy 7, 421 Galaxy A, 505 Galaxy B, 434, 505 Galaxy C, 505
Galileo, 6, 42, 76, 128, 222, 230, 233, 260, 276, 280, 304, 327, 358 476 Galileo II, 25 Galveston, Tex., 194 Gama, Jaime, 472
gamma-ray activities, 65, 107, 110, 124, 153, 154, 162, 203,217, 235 255,259-261 gamma radiation, 31 Gamma-Ray Observatory, 260 Ganapathy, R., 203 Gandhi, Indira, 183, 363, 410, 472 Ganymede (Jupiter satellite). 13, 42, 174, 263 Gardner, Dale A., 386, 429, 431, 516 Gardner, Guy S., 161 Garmire, Gordon, 106 Gameau, Marc, 510 Garrett AiResearch, 78 Garriott, Owen, 157, 314, 447, 448 gaseous iodide, 243 Gaspe peninsula, 152 Gates Learjet, 298 Gay, Charles D., 283 gearboxes, 308
Gemini, 31, 57, 112, 125, 196, 215, 274, 335, 339, 351,494 Geminid (stream of meteoroids), 446 General Accounting Office (GAO), 120, 171, 345 General Atomic Company, 328 General Atomic Laboratory, 210
728
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
General Dynamics Corporation, 269, 279, 287, 358, 365, 476, 492, 493 Convair, 37, 175, 219, 476
General Electric, 65, 81, 92, 115, 118, 124, 139, 209, 338, 376, 377 386, 409 Space Division, 85, 179 General Motors, 229, 308, 376 General Services Administration (GSA), 129 General Telephone & Electronics (GTE), 238 GTE Satellite Corporation, 46 GTE Spacenet Corporation, 480, 517 generators, 115 Geneva, Italy, 120, 210 Genoa, Italy, geodesy, 241
geological applications program (GAP), 250, 259 geomagnetic storms, 184
George C. Marshall Space Flight Center. See Marshall Space Flight Center geosciences, 150, 156 geospace system, 94
Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES), 181, 199 205 GOES-A (Goes 7), 205 GOES-B (Goes 2), 205, 254, 505 GOES-C (Goes 3), 98, 205, 254 GOES-D (Goes 4), 199, 205, 254, 275 GOES E (Goes 5), 205, 275, 492 GOES F, 205, 412 Goes East, 236, 275 Goes West, 236 , 254 , 380, 412
German Democratic Republic (GDR; East Germany), 75, 124, 273, 423, 523 cosmonauts, 11 Germantown, Md., 104 Germany, Dan, 513
Germany Federal Republic of (FRG; West Germany), 3, 15, 56, 64, 93 107, 112, 130, 145, 156, 160, 162, 203, 228, 238, 241,271,280, 283 349, 358, 371,406, 418, 420, 497, 505,523
Ion Release Module (IRM), 497 Space Operations Center, 497 Getaway Special experiment, 463 Giacobini-Zimmer (comet), 454 Gianopulos, George, 397 Gibson, Edward G., 216, 221, 377, 387, 408 Gibson, Robert L., 355, 398, 463, 513 Gibson, Roy, 17, 76, 98, 120 Gillett, Fred, 427 Gillette, Aaron K., 273 Gillam IV, Isaac T., 242, 301, 506 Gilruth, Robert, 339 Giotto (mission), 181, 182,490 Glaser, Harold, 63, 115, 116 glass, ultra-low-expansion, 282 Glenn, John H., Jr., 120, 121, 133, 274, 348, 349, 369 glider, hypersonic, 46
Global Atmospheric Research Program (GARP), 4, 153
729
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
global positioning system (GPS), 409 Global Weather Experiment (GWE), 4, 5, 25 goals, 200
Goddard, Esther C. Kisk, 347 Goddard, Robert H., 133, 347, 370
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), 8, 27, 51, 56. 86, 103, 144, 160 184, 199, 233, 240, 241, 250, 252, 288, 321, 340, 353, 355, 357, 366 369, 372, 397, 405, 410, 422, 434, 454, 467, 471,473-475, 486, 500 525 consolidation with Wallops Flights Center, 270, 290, 301 contracts, 110, 167, 284
Laboratory for Astronomy and Solar Physics, 167 missions, 94, 298
Operations Support Computing Division, 112
people, 29, 30, 77, 84, 88, 106, 116, 145, 155, 172, 222, 231, 281,413 programs, 119, 124, 142, 162, 179, 185, 282, 310 Goelz, Alexander, 381 Goetz, Robert C., 415 Goldschmidt, Neil E., 62, 109, 175 Goldstein, Irving, 173 Goldstone, Calif., 92 Goody, Richard, 210 Goodyear Aerospace Corporation, 96 Goonhilly, England, 261 Gorbatko, Viktor, 185, 189, 203, 204 Gordon, Richard F. (Dick). 44, 284 Gordon Bennett race, 420
Gossamer Albatross, 35, 96, 128, 130, 137, 155, 287 Gossamer Albatross 2, 81, 155 Gossamer Condor, 35, 130, 155, 287 Gossamer Penguin, 192, 193 Government Printing Office (GPO), 442 Grabe, Ronald J., 161 Grand Canyon,
gravitational forces and data, 77, 268, 340, 375, 385, 452, 480
Gray, Paul E., 329
Gray, Robert, 7, 171
Graz, Austria, 120
Great Britain. See United Kingdom
Great March 3 rocket (or Mach?),
Grechko, Georgiy M., 58, 163 Greece, 64
Green Bank, W. Va., 241
Greenbelt, Md., 290
greenhouse effect, 323
Greenland, 169
Gregory, Frederick D., 400
Griffin, Gerald D., 188, 341, 360, 467
Grindlay, Jonathan, 29
Grissom, Virgil I. (Gus), 274
Groenigen University, 3
Gruene, Hans, 81
Grumman, Leroy R., 373
730
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Grumman Aerospace, 30, 173, 249, 298, 358 GTI Corporation, 323 Guam, 177
Guastafeiro, Angelo, 76, 218, 222 Guggenheim Aeronautical Laboratory, 312 Guinea, 182
Gulf of Mexico, 16, 193, 209, 236, 238, 291
Gulfport, Miss., 193
Gumett, Donald, 279
Gurragcha, Jugderdemidyn, 261,276
Guyana, 158, 159
gyroscopes, 213, 214
habitat modules, 330
Hackes, Peter, 155
Haig, Alexander, 311,345
Haise, Fred W., Jr., 30
Hale, Wendy S., 470
Hale Observatory, 86
Hall, Bruce, 271
Hall, Charles, 59, 61, 124
Hall, Warren, 314
Halley, Edmond, 371
Halley (comet), 14, 85, 181, 182, 256, 304, 357, 371,485, 523, 524 Hamburg, Germany, 120
Hamilton Standard. See United Technologies Corporation
Hampton, Va., 30
Hampton Technical Center, 127
Hannah, David, 289, 364
Hardy, George, 35
Harris, Hugh, 267
Harris, Pritchett A., 273
Harris Corporation, 173
Hart, Teny J., 400, 474, 480, 481
Hartebeesthoek, 208
Hartsfield, Henry W., Jr., 313, 331, 350, 351, 398, 487, 500, 503
Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, 29
Hasselmann, Klaus, 210
Hauck, Frederick H., 386, 418, 419, 513, 516
Hauersperger, Karla R., 273
Haunschild, Hans-Hilger, 271
Hawaii, 177, 183, 209, 254, 266
Hawaiian Airlines, 183
Hawley, Steven A., 355, 399, 420, 487, 489, 500 Haystack observatory, 241
Heacock, Ray, 42, 218, 220	■
health programs and studies, 38, 44, 85, 109, 121, 137, 138, 147, 148 162, 163, 244, 249, 251,252, 268, 359, 384-386, 428, 429, 449, 495 cancer research, 322 glaucoma research, 322 Hearth, Donald P., 519
heat-capacity mapping mission (HCMM), 305, 371 Heckman, Gary, 123
731
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Heldenfels, Richard R., 93, 125 helicopters, 48, 314, 339, 384 Helios, 280 Helios /, 306 Helios 2, 162 heliosphere, 333
helium, liquid, 321, 393, 405, 445 Henize, Karl G., 400 Henry, Richard, 262 Henson, Keith, 515 Hercules Inc., 346 Hermann, Robert J., 91,92 Hermes (French project), 46 Hewlett Packard, 329 High-Altitude Observatory, 342
high-energy astronomy observatory (Heao), 5, 6, 65, 271, 280, 337 Heao /, 5, 65, 105, 106, 107, 110, 116, 271, 337 Heao 2 (Einstein), 29, 65, 94, 106, 116, 174, 213, 271. 337 Heao 3, 65, 107, 153, 279
highly maneuverable aircraft technology (HiMAT), 71, 170, 219 HiLat, 420	'
Hildner, Ernie, 413 Hilmers, David C., 161 Himalayas, 54
Hinncrs, Noel W., 14, 45, 342 Hinotori (Firebird), 255 Hipparcos (satellite), 128 Hodge, John D., 346, 475, 493 Holloman Aerospace Medical Center, 393 Holloway, Paul F., 526 Holmes. Allen, 472 Honduras, 150
Honest John-Orion (rocket), 191 Honeywell Inc., 433 Hoover Institute, 329 Horsford, Cyril, 201 Hosenball, S. Neil, 131, 300 Hotz, Robert, 47 Houck, James, 404, 405
House of Representatives, U.S. See Congress, U.S.
Houston, Tex., 4, 30, 88, 266, 267 Howell, Jack D., 109 Hubble, Edwin R, 442 Edwin P. Hubble Space Telescope, 442 Hubble’s Constant, 443 Hubble’s Law, 443 Hudson, Gary C., 289 Huffstetler, Elena, 449 Hughes, Howard R., Jr., 158, 173, 176, 202 Hughes Aerospace, 492
Hughes Aircraft Company 28,46, 53, 135, 139, 158, 166, 201, 221, 229 230, 255, 275, 300, 330, 420, 464, 465, 481,496, 516, 519
732
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Hughes Airwest, 176
Space and Communications Group, 95, 238, 434 Hughes Communications Services, Inc., 500, 505 Hull, Quebec, 140 Humes, Donald H., 60 Hungary, 39, 75, 273 cosmonauts, 158, 164, 166, 177, 213 Hunsaker, Jerome C., 507 Hunter, Charles M., 434 Hunter, Robert O., 329 Huntsville, Ala., 4, 55, 187, 280 Huntsville Operations Support Center (HOSC), 498 Hurd, Fteter, 202 Hurricane Frederick, 236 Hutchinson, Neil B., 107, 308, 309, 475, 476 Hyde, Fred, 66 hydraulics systems, 266, 307 hydrazine, 308
hydroelectric power projects, 282 hydrogen, 323, 365 clouds, 401
gaseous, 309, 386, 392 leak, 392, 395
liquid, 38, 41, 79, 81, 85, 86, 146, 165, 220, 236, 253, 262, 308 hypersonic operations, 46, 462 ice buildup, 146, 376, 377, 503 Ida, Don, 192, 420, 421 lies du Salut, 172 Ilyushin 86 (II 86), 123 11-18,
image-sensing autoprocessor, 91 imaging facilities, 65, 91, 358 imaging radar antenna, 65, 409 India, 54, 56, 75, 107, 110, 154, 209, 232, 283, 311 Department of Space, 231, 232, 339 India national satellite (INSAT), 430, 432, 523 Insat-1, 363, 433 lnsat-1 A, 220, 232, 339 Insat-IB, 220, 232, 430-432 Insat-lC, 523
Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO), 34, 183, 363, 430, 432, 523, 524 Rohini satellite, 410
Indian Ocean, 42, 43, 55, 95, 119, 140, 182, 231, 259, 265, 266, 316 333, 347, 391,430 Indonesia, 22, 158, 220, 241, 398, 465 inertial upper stage (IUS), 250, 276, 372, 380, 407, 423, 461 infrared activities, 154, 239, 240, 281,348, 349, 351,401, 405, 525 instruments, 26, 29, 156, 340 lasers, 281 problems, 26, 293
Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS), 393, 401,404, 405, 427, 429 445, 446, 456, 485, 512, 525, 526
infrared imagery of Shuttle (IRIS), 340
733
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Institute for Defense Analyses, 461 Institute of Geochemistry, 146 instrument pointing system (IPS), insulation, 332, 333 interceptor vehicle, 218
Intercosmos (program), 11, 166, 177, 189, 208, 257, 273, 292 intercontinental continental ballistic missile (ICBM), 85, 127, 475 interest in space program, 47, 121,432, 440, 496, 518 waning, 44, 45
Interim European Telecommunications Satellite (Eutelsat), 48, 220 International Association of Machinists, 255 International Astronomical Union (IAU), 159
International Business Machines (IBM), 229, 300, 376, 434. 451,456 459 International Cometary Explorer,
International Council of Scientific Unions, 4 International Geophysical Year (IGY), 39, 395 International Harvester, 240 International Institute of Communications (IIC), 209 International Institute of Space Law, 201
International Maritime Satellite Organization (INMARSAT), 44, 48, 144 210, 231, 233, 259.
316,317,345,366,445,481 International Solar Maximum Year, 186, 237 International Solar-Polar Mission (ISPM), 73, 256, 476, 504 International Sun-Earth Explorer (ISEE), 63, 454 I see I, 63 I see 2,63
Isee 3 (International Cometary Explorer), 63, 162, 454, 455 International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT), 3 22, 28, 41, 124, 130, 139, 140, 144, 150, 173, 179, 182, 206, 207 209, 210, 215, 220, 222, 225, 231. 238, 240, 242, 259, 261,276, 310 316, 333, 363, 381,484, 519 Intelsat 1 (Early Bird), 43, 106 Intelsat 3, 43, 95 Intelsat 3 F3, 95 Intelsat 5, 484 Intelsat 5 F, 414 Intelsat 5 FI, 316 Intelsat 5 F4, 333 Intelsat 5 F7 (Payload), 441 Intelsat 5A F2, 238, 240 Intelsat 5C F3, 316 Intelsat IV-A, 140, 276
Intelsat V, 8, 41, 179, 188, 207. 209, 243, 259, 261, 275, 333 Intelsat V-A, 179, 242, 276 Intelsat VI. 179, 207, 276
International Telephone and Telegraph (ITT), 125, 217 WorldCom, 217
international ultraviolet explorer (/ue), 55, 108, 154, 155, 227, 357 interplanetary spacecraft, 417 Intersputnik, 220
Io (Jupiter’s moon), 29, 42, 150, 174
ionosphere, 10, 174, 194, 195, 292, 336 Iowa City, Iowa, 16
Iowa State University of Science and Technology,
734
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Ireland, 228 Iskra 3, 377 isotopic studies, 211 Isparitel apparatus, 189, 204 Issel, Michelle A,, 273
Italy, 15, 56, 93, 107, 110, 203, 209, 228, 238, 375 National Research Council (CNR), 469, 470, 476 National Space Plan Office, 476 Ivanchenkov, Aleksandr, 58, 341,350 Ivanov, Georgy, 40 lzquierdo, Rosario M., 470 Jacobson, David H., 208 Jagoda, Barry, 44 Jakarta, 241 Jamesburg, Calif, 182 Janus (moon), 60
Japan, 54, 56, 68, 75, 76, 85, 93, 107, 110, 120, 122, 124, 154, 177 201,209, 220, 238, 251, 255, 259, 349, 427, 485 Asahi Shimbun (newspaper), 408 Bs2A, 459
Cs2A (Sakura 2A), 398 Cs2B (Sakura 2B), 427 engineering test satellite (ETS), 254 GMS-2 metesat system, 220 H-l rocket, 262 LE5 engine, 262 N-l vehicle, 255 N-2 vehicle, 254
National Space Development Agency, 9, 122, 254, 262, 314 Science and Technology Agency, 122 Space Development Council, 170 tracking station, 77 Jeffs, George, 45 Jen Xin-min, 4, 27 Jenkins, Harriet G., 338
jet lag, 244	,	•	'
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), 13, 85, 92, 225, 241, 293, 325, 330 342, 346, 371, 393, 397, 404, 409, 415, 427, 428, 456, 467, 479, 483 485, 497, 511 contractors, 51 contracts, 95
missions, 42, 96, 279, 306
people, 14, 26, 117, 150, 193, 206, 210, 228, 263, 293, 312 responsibility, 17, 115 Jewitt, David C., 76, 371 Jilin (PRC province), 127 Johannes, Robert P., 88 Johannesburg, 208
Johns Hopkins University, 86, 118, 191,250 Homewood campus, 250 Johnson, Lyndon B., 370 Johnson, Thomas H., 329 Johnson & Johnson, 251
735
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Johnson Space Center (JSC), 4, 15, 21, 65, 88, 112, 143, 145, 156, 270 307, 309, 328, 329, 335, 336, 341, 343, 348, 351, 353, 359, 360, 377 383, 385, 408, 415, 420, 424, 425, 431, 449, 451, 452, 460, 467, 471 475, 47, 486, 487, 499, 512-514, 517 Biomedical Research Institute, 449, 451 contracts, 9, 41, 104, 108, 140, 149, 151, 154 costs, 104
missions, 107, 132, 281 people, 7, 9, 30, 39, 57, 70, 155, 297 programs, 139, 142 responsibility, 17
Spacecraft Software Division, 476 testing. 94, 152, 168 training, 51
White Sands Test Facility, 292 Johnston, Donald J., 463 Johnston, Mary Helen, 483 Jones, J.M., 55 Josephine (tropical storm)
Jupiter (orbiter), 6, 187, 233 Jupiter C, 395
Jupiter (planet), 13, 17, 29, 38, 41,42, 43, 49, 51, 56, 59, 76, 123 128, 133, 150, 157, 174, 206, 220, 230, 235, 243, 260, 263, 277, 279 280, 315, 325, 327, 333. 445 Kadena Air Force Base, 259 Kagoshima, 255 Kalgoorlie, 43 Kaluga, 377 Kapryan, Walter J., 31 Kapustin Yar cosmodrome, 34, 347 Kazakhstan, 166, 239, 276 Keating, David, 198 Keegan, Sara, 455 Keller, Samuel W., 310 Kennedy, John F., 188, 369, 370
Kennedy Space Center (KSC). 9, 13-16, 23, 27, 49, 53, 54, 70, 84, 94 112, 149. 157, 180, 196, 211, 243, 254, 262, 267, 269, 271,281, 283 289, 307, 308, 315, 321, 322, 335, 340, 350-352, 364, 365, 370, 375 385, 386, 394, 399, 407, 408, 415, 419, 420, 424, 429, 432, 442, 448 463, 464, 467, 474, 487, 489, 509, 510, 515, 516 aft-compartment accident, 283 contracts, 9
facilities, 80, 155, 181, 231, 241, 244, 265, 297, 298, 305, 334, 401,418, 428, 485, 498. 500
missions, 119, 132, 252, 291 people, 31. 57, 81, 188, 254 programs, 39, 144, 234 rescue training, 185, 186 services, 80 testing. 242, 299, 378 Kentron International, Inc., 127 Kenya, 118
Kerman, Arthur K., 329 kerosene, 438
Kerrebrock, Jack L., 221, 288
736
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Kerwin, Larkin, 375
Kettering satellite-monitoring group, 411
Kevlar-fiber struts. 287
Keyworth, George A., 328, 329, 425
KH-11 (reconnaissance vehicle), 15
Kilgore, Edwin C., 301, 302, 317
Kings Canyon National Park, 239
Kissin, Ken, 184
Kistiakowsky, George B., 389
Kitt Peak National Observatory, 282, 303, 425
Kittinger, Joe W., 503
Kitty Hawk (transcontinental balloon), 152, 153 Kitty Hawk, N.C., 153
Kizim, Leonid, 233, 239, 341,465, 479, 492, 495, 503, 509
Kleinknecht, Kenneth S., 39
Klineberg, John M., 57
Klutznick, Philip M., 201
Knapp, Brooke, 466
Knox, Fred D., Jr., 470
Knutson, Martin A., 488
Kochendorfer, Fred D., 55
Kodiak, Alaska, 167
Kohl, Helmut, 451
Koller, Albert, 297
Komfeld, Dale, 317
Kosmahl, Henry G., 439
Kostiuk, Theodore, 281
Kourou, French Guiana, 39, 64, 87, 182, 260, 283, 316, 418, 441, 495 Kovalenok, Vladimir, 18, 58, 260, 261, 273, 276 Kozu, N., 76
Kraft, Christopher C., Jr., 65, 165, 168, 309, 339-341, 360, 369
Kramer, James J., 71, 221, 288
Kranz, Eugene F., 266, 336
Krebs, Thomas H., 484
Kremer, Henry, 35
Kristall (equipment), 19, 31, 49, 204 Kroll, Gustav A., 187 Kubasov, Valery, 158, 164, 177 Kuettner, Joachim, 25 Kuiper airborne observatory, 340, 348 Kukowski, James, 404 Kurth, William, 279 Kusske, Amy M., 273 La Soufriere (volcano), 26 LaCrosse, Wise., 192 Lake Placid, N.Y., 117, 124 Lambert Reid (St. Louis),
Lampton, Michael L., 3, 156, 297, 314 Lancaster, Calif. 14 lander, 52, 55, 331
Lander 1 (Mutch Memorial Station), 326, 327, 397, 409, 480 Lander 2, 326, 409
737
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
landing gears, 189, 266 landing preparations, 335
Landsat, 4, 86, 104, 108, 110, 138, 140, 171. 172, 201, 206. 208, 209, 216, 227, 338, 355. 392, 397, 412, 421,469 Landsat / , 84, 108, 397 Landsat 2, 27, 84, 108, 172, 397 Landsat 3. 27, 84, 108, 139, 140, 172, 292, 397, 525 Landsat 4 (Landsat D), 139, 140, 201, 397, 409, 475 Landsat 5, 475, 525 Lane, Arthur L.,
Langel, Robert A., 77, 169
Langley Memorial Aeronautical Laboratory (NACA), 31, 124, 125
Langley Research Center (LaRC), 13,88,93, 128, 142, 249.290, 299 305,334,340,351, 357, 375, 404, 415, 467, 506, 526 contracts, 107, 117, 215, 227 crash test, 37 design study, 137 experiments, 26, 85, 194 people, 45, 57, 88, 125. 184, 208, 317, 425 programs, 81, 127, 180, 186, 211, 243, 298 Space Systems Division, 526 testing, 128 Lanham, Md., 357
Large-Area Crop-Inventory Experiment (LACIE), 251, 292 Large Magellanic Cloud, 162, 401, 405 Large Space Telescope. See Space Telescope LaRocque, Gene, 218 Las Vegas, Nev., 44
laser developments and systems, 56, 64, 77, 142, 281,282, 471 propulsion study, 210, 243 radar soundings, 207
Laser Geodynamics Satellite (Lageos), 56 Lageos-1.469, 470 Lageos-2, 469, 470 latex reactor, 322, 336 Launch Complex 36, 221
Launch Complex 39, 23, 214, 242, 243, 267, 292, 335 launch pad rental, 414 launches, 119, 176, 199, 292 schedules, 91,94, 155, 291, 308 scientific, 80 simulated, 107 technical, 80
launch vehicles, 5, 110, 127, 132, 160, 179, 181, 188, 279, 310, 437 522 expendable, 74, 118, 144, 188, 206, 418, 496 mobile platform, 119 Law of the Sea conference, 201 Le Havre, 64
Leasat 1 (SYNCOM-1), 503 Leasat 2. 500 Leasecraft, 433
Lebedev, Valentin, 148, 347, 355, 359, 360, 377, 384, 385, 428, 503
738
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Lederberg, Joshua, 145 Lee, Chester M., 180 Lee, J.H., 243 Lee, Thomas J. (Jack), 234 Leestma, David C., 161, 509, 510 legal aspects, 442, 460, 465 procedures in space, 131, 201,202 Legate, A.B. Virkler, 302 Lenoir, William B., 331, 376, 377, 385, 398, 460 Leonov, Alexey A., 347, 385, 504 Levin, Carl, 462 Levy, Eugene, 211 Lewis, Chuck, 107
Lewis Research Center (LeRC), 21, 83, 88, 299, 337, 348, 376, 377, 392 414, 439, 467, 486 contracts, 115, 166, 229, 279, 476 grants, 231 missions people
programs, 209, 291 testing, 78
Library of Congress, 44, 46 Science and Technology Division, 46 Libya, 379
Lichtenberg, Byron K., 3-4, 156, 297, 314, 366, 447, 448 lidar (light-intensification detection and ranging), 249, 357 life science studies, 151, 271, 340, 371 life-support systems, 143, 336, 383 lifting bodies, 304, 462 HL10, 304 M-2, 304 X-24A, 304 X-24B, 304 liftoff, 335
lighter-tban-air craft, 150, 369 Lilly, William F., 301, 312 Lind, Don L., 400 Lindstrom, Robert E,, 119 Ling Temco Vought, 127 lithium, 506 Little Joe (booster), 180 Littlefield, Robert C., 31 Lloyds of London, 94, 516 locator beacon, 233
Lockheed Corporation, 15, 16, 141, 169, 197, 249, 333, 340, 425
Lockheed Missiles and Space Company, 179, 282,.357, 358, 367, 491
Lockheed Palo Alto Research Laboratory, 483
Lockheed-Georgia Company, 197, 231
Loening Brothers company, 373
Loewenthal, Stuart H., 52
London, 209
Long Beach, Calif., Port of, 158, 202, 353 Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF), 463, 474
739
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Longanecker, Gerald W., 410
Longuet-Higgins, Michael, 210
Lop Nor (nuclear-arms test area), 156
Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, 111, 1 18, 328, 329, 389
Los Angeles, 77
Louisiana Pacific, 66
Lounge, John M., 161
Lousma, Jack R., 313, 323, 334, 335, 434, 462
Lovelace, AlanM., 13,68, 88, 109, 244, 259, 260, 271, 275, 287
Lovell, James A., Jr, 274
Low, Frank, 446
Low. G. David, 470
Low, George M., 175, 494
Lowell Observatory, 6, 485
LTV Aerospace and Defense Company, 491
lubrication systems, 364
Lucas, William R., 234
Luna 16, 147
lunar activities, 121, 146, 349,350,369,373,428,453,499 landing, 36, 188, 216, 234, 294, 376, 395 mining, 187, 197 missions, 64, 167, 342, 373 “moon treaty,” 201 Moon walk, 36, 43, 44, 57, 132, 189 resources, 202	-
samples, 131, 146 Lunar and Planetary Institute, 156 Lundberg, Olof, 233 Lunney, Glynn S,, 88, 377, 466 Lutz, Barry, 485 Luxsat, 145
Lyakhov, Vladimir, 11, 17, 18, 31,49, 58, 71,421,423, 434, 438, 439 446, 452
Lycoming YF-102 (engine), 249
McBride, Jon A., 509
McCall, Robert T., 202
McCandless, Bruce, 62,398, 441, 463, 464
McCarthy, John F., 337, 338
McCormick, M. Patrick, 357
MacCready, Paul, 35, 96, 130, 155, 192, 236, 239, 287
McCrary, Mary, 35
McCulley, Michael J., 470
McDivitt, James, 44
McDonald, Frank B., 366, 381
McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Corporation, 36, 53, 65, 108, 109, 141 144, 150, 229, 249, 283, 298, 303, 358, 376, 424, 465, 470, 471, 479 487, 500 Astronautics Division, 489
Continuous Flow Electrophoresis System (CFES), 500 Technical Services Company, 199 McElroy John, 492 Mackey, Skip, 484 McLean, Va., 66, 137 McLucas, John L., 210
740
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
McMahon, Franklin, 202 McMath solar telescope, 282 McMurdo Sound, 525 McMurtry, Thomas C., 95, 375 McNair, Ronald E., 398, 463 Madras, 54
Madrid, 61, 62, 108, 227, 251, 306 Madura, Dave D., 273 magnetic control, 172
magnetic field satellite (Magsat), 56, 68, 77, 87, 169, 218 magnetic fields, 51, 68, 87, 157, 218, 236, 291-293, 311 magnetic poles, 169 magnetic sensor, 385 magnetometer, 333
magnetosphere, 13, 17, 63, 174, 195, 279, 314, 350, 358, 375, 406, 497 506
Mahon, Joseph B., 5, 206
main propulsion test (MPT), 251
Makarov, Oleg G., 233, 239, 504
Malakhit, 147
Malaysia, 22, 241
Malina, Frank J., 312
Malyshev, Yuri V., 166, 169, 177, 178, 234, 473 Man Will Never Fly Society,
Manassas, Va., 170 Mandelshtam, S.L., 66 Mangoendiprodjo, Willy Moenandir, 22 Manhasset, N.Y., 373 Manhattan project,
Manila, Philippines, 98 Manke, John A., 128, 304 Manned Maneuvering Unit (MMU), 62, 73 self-propelled, 441
Manned Orbiting Laboratory (MOL), 98, 303 Manned Space Flight, Office of (NASA),
Mansion, England, 287 Marana, Ariz., 239
Marconi Space and Defence Systems (U.K.), 91,481
Marianas Islands, 177, 215
Marine Corps, U.S., 249, 313, 434
Mariner 9, 117
Marisat, 44
maritime communications subsystems (MCS), 259
Maritime European Communications Satellite (Marecs), 48, 77, 233, 345 445 Marecs-A, 48, 231, 316, 345, 445 Marecs-B, 48, 188, 231, 316, 345, 364, 517 Marecs-C, 48, maritime services, 233, 345 communications, 231, 259, 364, 366, 445, 517 global, 210 payloads, 231
Mark, Hans M., 73, 125, 269, 288, 300, 328, 481 Markey, David, 519
741
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Mars, 24, 30, 42,43,52,61, 117, 121, 180, 186,280-282,306,326 376,397,398,409,410, 415, 445, 453, 459, 480 atmosphere, 52, 53 Mars Data Analysis Program, 459 Marseilles, 236 Marshall, George C., 175 Marshall, William R., 365
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), 3, 4, II, 14, 16, 23, 70, 78, 86 88, 112, 137, 140, 234, 271, 289, 322, 323, 325, 346, 365, 366, 375 378, 385, 405, 413, 428, 442, 467. 486. 490, 497, 498, 515
contracts, 37, 137, 151, 173, 174, 176, 214, 283, 346, 489, 491
Materials and Processes Laboratory, 36, 219
missions, 132. 292
Payload Crew Training Complex, 498
people, 7, 16, 26, 31, 36, 41, 54, 57, 297
programs, 37, 54, 103, 119, 127, 129, 130, 160, 187, 191, 192, 282 Shuttle Projects Office, 515 Structures and Propulsion Laboratory, 187 tests, 11, 22, 34, 38, 54, 79, 124, 154, 161, 230, 242, 321 training, 3 Martin, Jim, 193 Martin, John J., 461
Martin Marietta Aerospace Corporation, 38, 62, 65, 73, 95, 108, 127 176, 214, 215, 227, 235, 306, 330, 338, 358, 365, 375, 397, 489, 491 493, 512, 513, 515 Maryland, 135 Massachusetts, 241
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), 4, 30, 145, 156, 157, 191 192, 196, 241, 288, 329, 338, 366, 415, 481 Center for Theoretical Physics, 329 Lincoln Laboratory, 30 Masursky, Harold, 28, 159 Matagorda Island, 289, 363
material science studies, 151, 271, 323, 340, 371, 434
Mattingly, Thomas K. (Ken) 11, 313, 331, 350, 351, 370, 389, 467
Mauna Kea, Hawaii, 349
Mauna Loa, Hawaii, 334
Maunder Minimum, 342
Mauro, Larry, 99
Mayfield Robert A., 143, 168
MCI, 434
measurement of atmospheric pollution from satellites (MAPS), 381 measuring devices and techniques, 4, 38, 73. 75, 77, 78, 87, 94, 194 197, 235. 241 atmospheric, 280 micrometeoritc, 355 surface, 10
medicine, 22, 64, 85, 452 biomedical research, 194, 360, 447 pharmaceutical research, 424, 431 rehabilitation therapy, 44 space, 151, 190
See also health programs and studies Mendez, Armando Tamayo, 208
742
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Merbold, Ulf, 3, 156, 297, 314, 323, 366, 447, 448, 453, 513 Mercury (planet), 197, 232, 263 Mercury, 113, 274, 335, 339, 494 Mercury Redstone 1,31,
Project Mercury, 112, 351 Meredith, Leslie H., 338 Merrett, Stephen, 516 Merrett Syndicates Ltd., 496, 516 Merrill, Bob, 314 Merritt Island, 160 mesosphere, 250, 303, 313 Messerschmid, Ernst, 513 Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blom (MBB), 203, 281 metallurgy, 349, 480 meteoroids, 211
meteorology, 37, 67, 93, 121, 131, 138, 142, 167, 193, 198, 254, 280 288, 327, 424, 445, 491
Meteosat 1,91
Meteosat 2,91, 260, 283
methane, 371
Metzger, Albert, 174
Mexico, 124
Michoud Assembly Facility, 31, 38, 513
micrometeorites, 75, 395
Military Operations Research Society, 92
military programs, 7, 34, 71, 104, 106, 262, 280, 281, 345, 412, 448 461,492 funding, 7
laser applications, 282
Milky Way, 106, 154, 162, 203, 303, 404, 405, 442, 485, 526
Miller, Edgar, 322
Mimas (Saturn moon), 228, 263
mineral exploration, 138
Minneapolis, Minn., 10
Minos, 46
mirror, primary, 282, 315 missiles, ballistic, 54, 61 cruise, 21 nuclear, 453
Mission Control Center, Houston, 448
mission specialists, 157, 161, 179, 199, 236, 297, 325, 331, 332, 370 386, 398, 400, 431,463
Mississippi, 130, 226
Missouri, 158
Mitchell, E., 504
Moffett Field, Calif., 315, 488
Mohave Desert, 266
Mongolian People’s Republic, 257, 261, 273 monitoring systems, 210 Earth-resources, 139 environmental, 143 land surfaces, 15 ocean surfaces, 15, 86
Monroney, A.S., Mike (“Mr. Aviation”), 146
743
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
monsoon experiment (MONEX), 25
Montes, Roberto Nunez, 150
Montreal (Quebec), 4
Moore, Jesse W.„ 472, 493, 517, 518
Morel, Pierre, 283
Morrison, David, 349
Morrison, Dennis, 252
Morrison, Philip, 145
Morrison-Knudsen, Inc., 98
Moscow, 77, 204, 377
Moscow Olympics, 169
Moscow Institute of Medico-Biological Problems, 22, 75, 87 Moscow Aviation Institute, 377 Moscow University', 77 Moser, Tom, 155
motion sickness, 335, 336, 376, 386, 408, 420, 451 Motorola Inc., 495 Mt. Hopkins, Ariz., 303 Mt. Palomar, 303, 371
Mt. Saint Helens (volcano), 158, 183, 184, 207, 208, 340, 388
Mt. Wilson, 442
Mountain View, Calif., 290
MPS-19 (radar system), 141
Mullane, Richard M., 399, 487, 489, 500, 503
multiplexer-demultiplexer (MUX/DEMUX), 308
multispectral infrared radiometer, 381
MultiVisions, Ltd., 182
Mumma, Michael J., 281
Muraca, Ralph, 479
Murphy, John F., 338
Murray, Bruce C., 210. 339
Musgrave, Story, 152, 332, 407, 408
Mutch, Thomas A., 30, 55, 63, 94, 106, 115, 153, 409, 480
Mutch Memorial Station. See Lander 1
Myers, Kenneth J., 470
Nakaya, Ukichiro, 314
Nasvytis, Algirdis L. (or Nasyvtis?), 52
Nasvytis multiroller traction drive, 52
Natal, Brazil, 146
National Academy of Engineering, 462
National Academy of Sciences, 39, 109, 219, 329, 460
National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), 30, 31, 39, 124 180, 288, 339, 351, 425, 494
Lewis laboratory, 288
National Aeronautic Association (NAA), 11,21, 125, 130, 146,202, 222 277 National Aeronautics and Space Agency (NASA), 43, 75, 132, 213, 201 383, 398, 399, 407, 409
Advisory Council, 231, 288 Astronaut Office, 51
budget, 6, 57, 83, 109, 110, 116, 120, 128. 130, 133, 139, 249, 250, 259, 260, 304, 345, 394, 403, 425, 454 Chariots of Apollo, 45
744
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Civil Aviation Research and Development (CARD), 462
contracts, 41,74, 85, 96, 112, 115, 127, 134, 141, 144, 150, 156, 160, 161, 168, 179, 181, 189, 199, 209, 214, 230, 339, 358, 365, 379, 401,494, 497	.
costs, 45, 76, 80, 83, 84, 94, 127, 133, 135, 145, 199, 274, 275. 307, 406, 472, 496 delays, 53, 76, 165, 265
Earth and Planetary Exploration Division of OSSA, 472, 493 experiments, 4 funding, 8, 10, 44, 88
Headquarters, 124, 142, 180, 188, 222, 231, 234, 302, 341, 342, 351,415, 467, 493
launches, 6, 238, 255, 269, 276, 333, 421,505
lawsuit, 165, 415
Life Sciences Division, 449
management, 176, 244, 301
Mission Control Center (Houston)
missions, 5, 17, 65, 68, 76, 87
Office of Advanced Research and Technology (OART), 269
Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology (OAST), 71, 24, 287, 317, 493, 500, 526
Office of Applications, 49
Office of DOD Affairs, 188
Office of External Relations, 310
Office of Govemment/lndustry Affairs, 188
Office of International Affairs, 39, 188
Office of Management, 300, 317
Office of Management Operations, 300, 317
Office of Manned Space Flight, 14
Office of Public Affairs, 188
Office of Space, 103
Office of Space and Terrestrial Applications (OSTA), 142, 300, 310, 313 Office of Space Flight, 366, 476, 506
Office of Space Science (OSS), 30, 51, 63, 103, 184, 222, 231, 300, 310, 313, 323, 335, 342, 472, 493
Office of Space Science and Applications (OSSA), 30, 57, 21, 300, 428, 449, 472
Office of Space Station, 493
Office of Space Tracking and Data Systems, 306
Office of Space Transportation System Operations, 74, 206, 366
Office of Technology Assessment, 453
Office of University Affairs, 188
people, 6, 14, 29, 30, 56, 57, 71, 81, 88, 185, 410
Program Office (planned), 475
“Program Plan, Fiscal Years 1981 through 1985,” 199
program management, 110
programs, 47, 81, 83, 145, 153, 158, 202
reorganization, 270, 290, 300, 301,317, 340, 366, 462
Solar Terrestrial Division of OSS, 472, 493
Space Medicine Branch, 449
Space Station Program, 467
Space Station Program Office (interim), 467, 493
Space Tracking and Data Systems, 300
Space Transportation Operations, 300
Spacelab Flight Division of OSSA, 472, 493
Technical Exchange Agreement, 480
“Technologies for the Handicapped and Aged,” 44
745
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
testing, 169, 242 25th anniversary, 437
See also Space Transportation Systems, Office of National Air and Space Museum, 14, 35, 45, 56, 106, 222, 226, 287, 342 439, 440, 480, 486 National Association for Search and Rescue, 388, 389 National Broadcasting Corporation (NBC), 66, 155 National Bureau of Standards, 93, 322, 476. 477 National Business Aircraft Association, 125 National Center for Atmospheric Research, 5, 288 National Center for Policy Analysis, 484 national defense, 92
National Earth Satellite Service (NESS) (formerly National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and National Environmental Satellite Service, 205, 206, 397 National Institutes of Health fNIH), 329 National Joint Propulsion Conference, 348
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), 5, 9, 25, 27 38, 64, 66, 67, 86,
93, 110, 138, 144, 153, 160, 179, 193, 199. 205 207, 213, 254, 284, 357, 397, 406, 475, 492, 522
Marine Fisheries Sendee (NMFS), 194 National Severe Storms Laboratory, 194 NOAA-A (Noaa 6), 38, 153, 284 NOAA-B, 153, 159, 207 NOAA-C, 160. 284
NOAA-E (Noaa 8), 167, 406, 410, 490 NOAA-F, 167, 232, 372, 491 NOAA-G, 167, 232 NCAA-7, 284
National Oceanic Satellite System (NOSS), 110, 179, 250, 259 National Operational Environmental Satellite System (NOESS), 153 National Organization for Women (NOW), 159 National Park Service, 239
National Research Council (NRC) (U.S.), 109, 175, 288
National Research Laboratory (NRL), 129, 134
National Science Foundation (NSF), 5, 57, 64, 121, 131, 369, 525
National Science Teachers Association (NSTA), 153, 273
National Scientific Balloon Facility (NSBF) (Texas), 23, 217, 369, 412 473
National Space Club, 133
National Space Technology Laboratories (NSTL), 26, 38, 41, 80, 84, 97 119, 130, 132, 137, 140, 142, 149, 161, 180, 181, 203. 235, 241, 382 467 National Taxpayers Union, 198
National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 27
National Transportation Safety Board, 109
National Trust for Historic Preservation, 415
National Weather Service, 382
National Wildlife Refuge, 160
natural resources, 171
Naugle, John E., 29, 30, 231
Naval Electronics System Command, 291
Naval Research Laboratory, 426, 483
Naval Space Command, 424
Naval Weapons Center, 233
navigation, automatic. 279
746
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Navstar satellite (USAF), 83, 133, 409
Navy, U.S., 5, 44, 125, 132, 150, 151, 171, 189, 249, 273, 274, 324 373, 426, 461,500, 514
near-sensing programs, 208
nebula, 401, 442
Neidner, Malcolm, 485
Nelson, George D. (Pinky), 400, 413, 474
Nelson, Todd E., 273
Neptune (planet), 6, 7, 304, 371,410, 411,418 Ness, Norman F., 29
Netherlands, 3, 15, 25, 56, 64, 156, 179, 228, 446 Aerospace Agency, 393 Neugebauer, Gerry, 456 Neupert, Werner, 184 neutral-bouyancy simulator, 192 neutrinos, 225, 226 New China News Agency New Delhi, 363 New England, 217 New Guinea, 122 New Jersey, 130 New Mexico, 118, 230 New Orleans, La., 31, 53 New York, N.Y., 117 New York Society of Illustrators, 202 Newell, Homer E., Jr.,, 426 Newman, C. Thomas, 109, 312 Newman, Larry, 420, 505 Newport, Wemer, 184 Newport News, Va., 215 Newton, Jon, 481 NGC 6946, 227 Niamey, 140 Nicks, OranW., 125 Nicollier, Claude, 3, 156, 179, 297, 513 Niell, Arthur E., 92 Niger, 140
night landings, 432, 446 Nike-Orion (rocket), 75, 195, 350 Nikon Inc., 66 Nimbus
Nimbus 5, 355, 405 Nimbus 6, 232, 233, 430 Nimbus 7, 10, 193, 393, 525 1979 J1 (satellite), 150 1979 J2 (satellite), 150 1983TB (unknown object), 445, 446 nitrogen, 41, 335, 489 tetroxide, 283, 299, 305, 311, 315, 438, 446 Nixon, Richard M., 329, 370 Nola, Frank J., 63, 88 Nordsat, 145
Norfolk General Hospital, 85
747
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Norman, Okla., 194 North, Ed, 153
North American Aerospace Defense Command (NAADC), 464
North American Air Defense Command (NORAD), 23, 37, 42, 75, 125, 169 209, 280, 411
North American Rockwell, 338
North Carolina, 209
North Star, 427
Northwest Airlines, 288
Northwest Territories (N.W.T.), Canada, 311
Norway, 169, 191, 228
Norwegian Sea, 169
Nova I, 273
Novick, Robert, 337
nuclear arms test area, !56
nuclear emulsion studies, 30
nuclear power, 149, 349, 404
nuclear reactor, 404
nuclear warhead, 156
numerical aerodynamic simulator (NAS), 394
Nysmith, C. Robert, 317, 493
nystagmus (eye condition), 452
Oakley, Merrill, 309
OAO Corporation, 30, 221
Oaziz, 147
Obayashi, Tatsuzo, 314
Oberg, James E., 439, 499
Oberon (Uranus moon), 349 Oberphaffenhofen
Observatory for Geophysical Monitoring of Climatic Change, 334
ocean color experiment, 65, 66
ocean data, 166, 179, 275, 284, 342
Ocean of Storms, 284
Ocean Search, Inc.,
oceanographic data, 393, 468
Ockels, Wubbo, 3, 156, 179, 297, 314, 323
O’Connor, Brian D., 161, 470
O’Dell, C. Robert, 485
Odium, Floyd, 203
O’Hara, Tom, 202
Ohio State University, 30, 139
Ohira, Masayoshi, 68
O’Keefe, John A., 167, 470
O'Keefe, William S.
Okinawa Island, 259 Oklahoma, 269, 280 Olstad, Walter B., 57, 221, 317 O’Neill, Gerard K., 289 Onizuka, Ellison S., 370, 467 Ontario, 10 Opal, Chet, 485 Operation Paperclip, 187 optical fabrication, 282 optical landing aid, 76
748
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
optics, 349
Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle (OMV), 491 Orbital Systems Corporation, 410 Orbital Transfer Vehicle (OTV), 365
orbiter, 4, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13, 38, 74, 76, 88, 146, 159, 197, 269, 311 322, 326 changes, 41 engines, 146 lunar, 57 Orbiter 1, 326 Orbiter 2, 326 OV-2, 269 OV-99, 7, 9, 437 OV-102, 7, 9, 269, 437 OV-103, 7, 9 OV-104, 7, 9 permanent, 350, 358 reusable, 14, 289
Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (OAO), 252 Oao 3 (Copernicus), 222, 252 orbiting satellite carrying amateur radio (OSCAR), 304 orbits, 328, 369 deorbiting, 7, 40 Earth missions, 280 eccentric, 407 elliptical, 410, 415, 438 fixed, 150
geostationary, 8, 34, 37, 51, 261, 284, 433, 461, 494 geostationary transfer, 517
geosynchronous, 34, 157, 182, 205, 206, 229, 232, 241, 280, 289, 310, 321,329, 409 412 413,421,423,476	’
geosynchronous transfer, 255 heliocentric, 417 horseshoe, 326
near-geosynchronous, 238, 333 near-polar, 225, 332 polar, 284, 393 polar-transfer, 273 “round,” 347 stationary, 122, 427 Sun-synchronous, 34
synchronous, 5, 37, 53, 268, 333, 339, 348, 360, 413, 414 synchronous transfer, 207, 221, 372
transfer, 79, 84, 232, 333, 347, 360, 366, 409, 412, 425, 430, 434 orbit-maneuvering system (OMS), 265 OMS-1, 265 OMS-2, 265
Oregon Graduate Center, 208
origins of plasmas in Earth’s neighborhood (OPEN), 94
Orion (barge), 322
Orion (nebula), 348
Orion (rocket), 75
Ormsby, Robert B., Jr., 197, 198
749
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Osgood, Charles, 93 Oshkosh, Wise., 99 OSS-1, 184, 313, 336 OSTA 1, 65, 66 O’Toole, Thomas, 37 Ots (satellite), 120 Ottawa, 154
Overmyer, Robert F., 331, 376, 400 oxygen, 365 gaseous, 309
liquid (LOX), 38, 53. 85, 86, 124, 146, 220, 221, 235, 242, 251, 253, 262, 307, 308, 438, 495
leak, 403, 460 pressure, 377, 385 ozone, 75, 208, 249, 288, 305, 313 Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E), 117, 208 Pacific Ocean, 5, 23, 40, 43, 64, 148, 177, 231, 254, 266, 316. 492 Packard, David, 329 Pad A, 24
Page, George F., 31, 244, 262, 297, 299, 307, 351 Page America, 177 Paine, Thomas A., 185 Painter, Wen, 280 Palapa, 22, 220 PalapaA-l, 22 Palapa A-2, 22 Palapa B system, 22, 418 Palapa B-l, 241
Palapa B-2, 241,464, 496, 516, 518 Palestine, Tex., 217, 369
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), 310, 381 Palmdale, Calif., 14, 54, 165 Palo Alto, Calif., 4, 16 Palomar, 86
Pan American World Airways. 466 Pang, Kevin D., 117
parachutes, 233, 351. 358, 399, 473, 515 Paris, France, 153 Paris, Paul C., 198 Parker, Robert, 157, 314, 447, 448 Parks, Robert J., 14, 456 Pasadena, Calif., 16, 241, 293 Patrick Air Force Base, Fla.. 73, 311, 335 Civil Engineering Squadron. 311
payload specialists, 3, 16, 156. 236. 297, 323, 359, 372, 399, 424 448, 451,463, 510 payload-assist module (PAM), 465 Payload-Operations Control Center (POCC), 359i, 498
payloads, 15, 23, 34, 54, 57, 62, 65, 73, 77, 78, 80, 88, 91, 118, 124 127, 150, 184, 191, 195, 215, 229, 266, 271, 273, 274, 281, 301,310 313, 314, 329, 332, 335, 340, 345, 351, 360, 363, 365, 369, 372, 401 413, 434, 448, 476, 485, 489, 499, 512. 524 commercial, 376 cost, 151, 160
750
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
experiments, 298 free-flying, 74
“getaway specials” (GAS), 353 maritime communications, 231 passenger, 260 reservations, 103 retrieval, 140, 195, 230, 281 scientific, 283, 380, 453 search-and-rescue, 490 transfer of, 243 Payne, Randolph, 173 peaceful uses of space technology, 4, 154 Pearl, John C., 29 Peenemunde, 188 Pegasus, 154 Pegasus 1, 75 Pegasus 2, 75, 83 Pegasus 3. 75 Pennsylvania, 217
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, 216
Pennsylvania State University, 118, 195	,
People’s Republic of China (PRC), 4, 11, 27, 42, 52, 54, 74, 85, 104 127, 145, 156, 209, 228, 299, 349, 364, 392, 428, 461,498 Academy of Sciences, 110, 392 Academy of Space Technology, 4, 27 cooperation with the United States, 4 RPC 13. 428 training of astronauts, 105 Ptrcheron project, 289, 291 Perkin-Elmer Corporation, 282, 315, 406 Perry, Geoffrey, 439 Perry, William J., 33 Peru, 64, 228, 406 Petersen, Richard H., 519, 526 Peterson, Donald H., 332, 407, 408 Peterson Air Force Base, 125 Petrone, Rocco A., 185 Petrov, Boris, 190 Pettit, Donald R., 470 Pham Tuan, 185, 189, 190, 203, 204 phenomena induced by charged-particle beams (P1CPAB), 236 Philadelphia, 4 Philco Corporation, 449 Philippines, 22, 241 Philips (Netherlands company), 91 Phobos (Mars satellite), 117 Phoebe (Saturn moon), 263, 331 Phoenix, Ariz., 236
photography, 166, 177, 199, 206, 220, 226, 228, 236, 266, 267, 293 294, 336, 357, 430 ultraviolet, 232	’
X-ray, 337 photometers, 446
751
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
photons, 282 photopolarimcter, 333 phototypesetting technology, 206, 207 physiological studies, 268 Pickering, William, 312 Pilotless Aircraft Research Station, 180 pilotless research vehicle, 71 Pilyugin, Nikolai, 360, 361
Pioneer, 24, 55, 56, 60, 61,62, 78, 123, 159, 235, 243, 280, 333 Pioneer 6, 243, 306, 414 Pioneer 7, 243, 306, 414 Pioneer 8, 243, 306, 414 Pioneer 9, 243, 306, 414 Pioneer 10, 43, 56, 123, 306, 333, 411,418 Pioneer II, 38, 49, 55, 56, 59, 60, 61, 62, 78, 220, 263, 306 Pioneer 12, 306 Pioneer Saturn, 55, 123
Pioneer-Venus, 16, 24, 26, 28. 124, 162, 225, 232, 235, 322, 331,483 Pioneer Venus I. 28, 331 Pioneer Venus 2, 28, 331 Pioneer Parachute Company, 515 Piper, William T., 189 Piper Aircraft Corporation, 189 Pisa, Italy, 120
plasma-wave phenomena and instruments, 279, 406, 476, 483, 497 Plum Brook (test area), 209 Pluto (planet), 6, 7, 43, 349, 350, 371,411 POGO (satellites), 77, 251 pogo-correction device, 107, 132 Pogue, William, 216, 377, 385 Poland, 11, 66, 75, 273, 523 cosmonauts, 11 polarimeter, 337 political aspects, 133, 379, 392 pollutants and contaminants, 211, 321, 391,407, 459 Polynom apparatus, 17 Pond, Clayton, 202 Ponnamperuma, Cyril, 121 Pool, Sam, 447
Popov, Leonid, 147, 159, 163, 164, 166, 169, 177, 178, 185, 189, 203 208, 213-216, 222, 234, 273, 276, 359, 377, 384 Port Arthur, Tex., 194 Poseidon (barge), 16 Potate, John S., 234 Powell, Luther E., 74 power consumption systems, 88, 150 power factor controller, 63 power transmission system, 52 power units, 308 Powers, John A. (Shorty), 113
Pratt & Whitney. See United Technologies Corporation Presque Isle, Me., 153
752
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Press, Frank, 4, 7, 86, 112, 219 Princeton University, 30, 86, 191 Institute for Advanced Study, 210 Prinz, Dianne K., 16, 152, 483 Prognoz 7, 162 Progress
Progress 2, 18 Progress 5, 18, 31 Progress 6, 31, 39, 40 Progress 7, 49 Progress 8, 147, 148 Progress 9, 148, 163 Progress 10, 178, 185, 189 Progress 11, 213 Progress 12, 260, 261 Progress 13, 346, 347 Progress 16, 377 Progress 17, 430, 434 Progress 18, 439 Progress 20, 479 Progress 23, 495 program operating plan (POP), 69 Project Condor, 406 Project Orion, 210 Project Whitecloud, 514 Promontory Point, Utah, 34
propulsion systems, 84, 85, 1 13, 132, 161, 181, 220, 236, 237, 251 269, 289, 297, 299, 329, 337, 347, 349, 363, 386, 437, 490	’	’
flight test, 294
liquid, 47, 110, 127, 167, 181, 183, 214, 262, 326 on-board, 280, 340 protons, 225, 481
proton-electron flux, 284 Proxmire, William, 197, 198, 345, 346 Prunariu, Dumitru, 273, 276 Ptacek, Stephen, 287 Puddy, Don, 107, 256, 266 Puerto Rico, 24, 111, 135, 209 pulsars, 279, 337 Purcell, Joseph, 116 Purdue University, 139, 405 Laboratory for Applications of Remote Sensing, 139 Purgold, Gerald C., 210, 211 pylons, 279, 337 pyrotechnic shock test, 171 Quagliarello, Ernesto, 469 Quann, John J., 366 quasars, 222, 240, 241, 279, 346, 371 PKS2000-330, 371 Queen Mary, 158, 202 Queen Maud Land, 131
quiet clean general-aviation turbofan (QCGAT), 78
753
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
quiet short-haul research aircraft (QSRA), 189, 193, 249, 290 Quistgaard, Erik, 98, 233 radar, 24, 28, 330, 358, 379, 391, 406, 464 C-band system, 141 mapping, 410 radar-sensing craft, 345 radiation, 13, 154, 333, 501 belts, 174, 395 contamination, 391 infrared, 393, 512 solar, 393
Radiation Monitor Experiment, 516
radiators, 329
radios
cellular, 380, 381
tracking, 369
radio communications, 123, 184, 193, 291,377
Radio Corporation of America (RCA), 93, 94, 96, 121, 122, 127, 128 135,206,310,424,421 American Communications Company, 449 Astro-Electronics, 179, 284, 495 RCA Americom, 310, 433 RCA-C, 321 RCA-D, 433 RCA-E, 433 RCA-F, 433 RCA-G, 433 Radio Luxembourg, 145 radio static, 336
Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics, 186 radio waves, 154 radioactivity, 134, 331, 391 isotopes, 322 radioastronomy, 240, 241 radioisotope photoelectric generator, 134 radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTG), 230, 327. 398 radiometry, 140, 199, 208, 232, 284, 342, 355, 381, 382 radiotelephones, 382 radiotelescope, 58, 346 Ragent, Boris, 24 Ramaty, Reuven, 162 Rand Corporation, 198 Ranow, Wayne C., 267 Ransome Airlines, 249 Rauschenburg, Robert, 202 reactor-control system, 300, 329, 339 Readdy, William F., 470
Reagan, Ronald W., 244, 249, 256, 269, 274, 275, 309, 325, 370, 376 383, 391,392, 394, 397, 379, 407, 409, 414, 420, 421, 425, 432, 437 451,460, 463, 469, 475, 493, 496,’ 498, 500, 511, 519, 524 receiver-processors, 63 Recking Peak moraines, 131 recommaissance vehicles, 15, 142
754
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
recovery, 363, See also satellite, retrieval; Space Shuttle, retrieval Redmond, Charles, 308 Redondo Beach, Calif, 4, 51 Redstone, 187
Redstone Army Air Field, 22 Redstone Arsenal, 217
reentry, 23, 75, 83, 113, 169, 245, 265, 268, 270, 271, 280, 289, 294 391, 400 300, 332, 340, 341, 347
problems, 55, 266 See also Skylab Reiber, Duke, 43 Reiche, Henry C., Jr., 381 remote control, 340
remote-manipulator system (RMS), 281, 289, 322, 336 mechanical arm, 151, 152, 298, 309, 313, 335, 336, 413, 419, 420, 430, 474, 480, 503,
510
remote-sensing programs, 9, 15, 86, 108, 140, 142, 144, 154, 171, 208 211, 251, 334, 409, 434, 467, 469
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 175, 494 repair, 103, 108, 256, 330, 342, 370, 408, 413, 464, 491 See also Space Shuttle Republic Airlines, 176
research and development (R&D), 77, 83, 95, 109, 110, 132, 137, 138 141, 144, 193,215, 16, 259 , 285 , 304 , 327 , 345 , 348 , 354 , 3 5 8 , 369 3 75 , 392 , 393 , 397 , 496 , 506 airway systems, 24 atmospheric, 112, 118 biomedical, 453 clinical, 449 energy, 229, 230 microgravity, 340 oceanic, 129
research vehicles, 179, 189
Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science, 383, 405 Research on Atmospheric Volcanic Emission (RAVE), 208 Resnick, Judith A., 152, 399, 487, 489, 500, 503 Reston, Va., 112
retrieval, 408, 413, 419, 464 , 474, 480, 491, 496, 515 , 516 See also Space Shuttle return-beam vidicon (RBV), 291 Reuters, 39, 127, 215, 428 Reynolds Aluminum Company, 53 Reynolds numbers, 137 Rhea (Saturn moon), 62, 228, 263 Rhode Island, 209 Rice University, 485 Richards, Richard N., 161
Ride, Sally K., 152, 355, 386, 418-420, 503, 509, 513 rings, 263, 315 Jupiter, 42, 76
Saturn, 56, 59, 60, 62, 78, 167, 226, 293 Uranus, 511 Ritter, James C., 134
755
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Roanoke, Va., 217 robotics, 196, 219, 331. 335 Rockefeller University, 145 rocket motors, 289 problems, 76 solid-fuel, 74, 127 See also solid-fuel rocket boosters
rockets, 46, 54, 74, 75, 77, 85, 87, 118, 159, 184, 188, 194, 195, 225 238, 239, 255, 279, 292, 304, 317, 337, 363, 393, 398, 406, 438, 465 48J, 499 A-2, 438 applications, 230 casings, 242
G rocket (Soviet), 294, 295 geophisical, 66 H-l, 262 manuevering, 335 MU-35, 255
nozzles, 440, 441,447, 489 on-board maneuvering, 266 research, 179, 312 reusable, 289 sale of parts, 414, 481 SLV-3, 183
sounding, 118, 191, 350 Star-48, 489 V-2, 81
Rockwell International Corporation, 9, 14,27,38,41,45,54,70,76 84,86,91, 103, 110, 122, 130, 132, 140, 157, 159, 179, 209, 220 283, 358 Autonetics Strategic Systems Division, 91 Energy Systems Group, 209 North American Aircraft Division, 71 Palmdale plant, 308
Rocketdyne Division, 80, 105, 110, 380 Space Systems Group, 83 Rodnik, 163 Rogers, Thomas F., 518 Rohini 1, 183
Rolls Royce of England, 154
Romanenko, Yuri V., 58, 163, 208, 504
Romania, 75, 257, 273, 276
room temperature vulcanizing (RTV), 515
Rosat (Roentgensatellit), 271, 358
Rose, Gregory J., 470
Rosen, Stanley G., 104
Ross, Jerry L., 161, 463
Rota, 251
rotor-systems research aircraft (RSRA), 314, 315 Rukavishnikov, Nikolay, 40 Rutherford Appleton Laboratory
Ryumin, Valery, 1 1, 17, 18, 31,49, 58, 71, 147, 148, 159, 163, 164 166, 169, 177, 185, 189, 203, 208, 213-216, 222, 234, 273, 377, 384 385, 424 Sachs Harbor, 311
756
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Saclay, France, 120 Sacramento Peak, N.M., 16
safety, 10, 24, 37, 155, 167, 175, 244, 259, 262, 298, 330, 403 Sagan, Carl, 45 St. Louis, Mo., 47, 287 St. Louis Port Authority, 47 St. Regis Paper Company, 138, 139 Southern Timberland Division, 138 St. Vincent, 26 Saipan, 177, 215, 225 Salt Lake City, Utah, 44 Salyut, 350, 404, 411,423, 454
Salyut6, 10, 11, 17, 18, 31, 39, 47, 49, 58, 71, 72, 97, 113, 134, 147, 148, 159, 163, 164, 166, 169, 177, 178, 185, 189, 190, 203, 208, 213-216, 222, 234, 239, 257, 260, 273, 276, 281, 301, 341, 385, 424, 465
Salyut 7, 341, 345, 347, 350, 353, 359, 360, 377, 384, 404, 411,421, 423, 424, 428, 430, 434, 438, 439, 446, 452, 454, 465, 473, 479, 491, 492, 495, 503, 509 Salyut-Cosmos, 341 San Diego, Calif., 62, 210, 240, 323 San Francisco, Calif., 46, 92, 104, 106, 153, 167, 240 San Marco platform, 23, 118 San Pedro, Calif., 353 Sandler, Harold, 138 Sandusky, Ohio, 209 Santa Susana, Calif. ,110 Satcom program, 135, 221 Satcom 1, 127, 128
Satcom 3 (RCA), 93, 94, 96, 122, 123, 128 Satcom 4, 310, 321
Satellite Business Systems (SBS), 30, 46, 129, 221, 229, 238, 300, 376 489, 500 SBS-A (Sbs 1), 229 SBS-B (Sbs 2), 300 SBS-D (Sbs 4), 500, 503
satellites, 15, 22, 26, 68, 86, 93, 94, 139, 325, 375 artificial, 52 broadcasting, 459
commercial, 8, 43, 166, 238, 240, 310, 331, 347, 348, 354, 363 communications, 8, 9, 25-28, 39, 41,43, 48, 51, 77, 79, 80, 83, 95, 118, 122, 129, 135, 139, 145, 146, 166, 170, 206, 215, 220, 222, 229, 232, 237, 239, 240, 255, 261, 310, 330, 333, 347, 348, 354, 355, 372, 376, 398, 413, 419, 421,425, 427, 431, 441, 448, 481
data-relay, 116, 157, 395, 399 early-warning, 61 Earth-observation, 34 environmental, 207, 213 geostationary, 255 geosynchronous, 475
global communications, 173, 179, 217, 220, 316 infrared astronomy, 6 intelligence-gathering, 345 magnetic field, 56
maritime communications, 231, 259, 316, 345, 364
757
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
meteorological. 34, 199, 254, 255, 260, 283
military, 106, 372
navigational, 273, 274
ocean surveillance. 128, 391
orbiting, 282, 369
POGO, 77
PRC "spy in the sky,” 74 reconnaissance, 73, 218, 391 remote-sensing, 4, 77 research, 250, 260 retrieval, 152, 297, 306 scientific, 206, 255, 271 small astronomy, 23 SPOT, 15 surveillance, 165 telecommunications, 465 tethered, 394
tracking, 116, 122, 157, 395, 399,472 weather, 10, 80, 86, 206, 284, 288, 380, 522 X-ray, 271
See also communications; television
Saturn (planet), 13, 49, 56, 59, 60, 62, 78, 95, 96, 124, 157, 167 196, 206, 211,218, 227, 228,232,235,249,262-264,279,293,304 315,325,399.410,427’	’	’	’
Saturn, 110, 187, 226	’
Saturn V, 45, 203 Saturn 5, 57, 294 Saudi Arabia, 25 Savage, J.C., 92
Savinykh, Viktor. 260, 261, 273, 276 Savitskaya, Svetlana, 359, 360, 377, 419, 491,492, 504 Savoca, Tony L. , 494 Scandanavia, 25, 145 scanners, 27, 139, 140 linear array, 240
multispectral (MSS), 172, 240, 292, 355, 397 Scarab 2, 357 Scarf, Frederick L., 279 scatterometers C-band, 468 wave, 467 wind, 467
Scherer, Lee R., 57, 81, 364
Schirra, Walter M., 120, 274
Schmitt, Harrison, 166, 187
Schneider, William C., 125
Schriever, Bernard A., 189
Schubert, Johannes, 281
Schweikarl, Russell L. (Rusty), 48, 49, 504
Science and Industry Museum, 63
Science Applications Inc., 328
Science Research Council (SRC), 108
scientific research facility, rcsusablc, .325
758
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
scientific studies and experiments, 4, 16, 18, 22, 26, 30, 31, 36, 38 42, 47, 48, 52, 56, 80, 84, 87, 93, 120, 121, 128, 144, 204, 250 252, 273, 281, 283, 289, 291,293, 298, 315, 333, 434, 447,448,490 505 animals, 75, 244 biology, 305 disappointments, 54 forestry, 217
instruments, 77, 161, 225, 322, 393 laser applications, 282 plants, 87, 145, 163, 305, 306 Spacelab, 151
scientists, 108, 155, 162, 179, 184, 256, 268 European, 179, 256 Scobee, Francis R., 400, 412, 474 Scorpius (constellaton), 5 Scott Air Force Base, 167 Scott Science and Technology, 341 Scout, 10, 33, 68, 127, 206, 273, 274 Scully-Power, Paul D., 510 Sea of Smyth, 454 Seabrook, Tex., 161
search-and-rescue (SAR) missions and systems, 63, 167, 185, 259, 365 406, 420, 522
search-and-rescue satellite-aided tracking (SARSAT), 365, 372, 410, 490
search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI), 210
Seattle, Wash., 144
Seddon, Margaret Rhea, 355, 463
Seiff, Alvin, 28	.
Selenia (Italian company), 91 Senate, U.S. See Congress, U.S.
Senior Interagency Group for Space, 409
Serebrov, Aleksandr, 411
Sergo Ordzhonikidze Aviation Institute, 492
servomotors, 172
7-Up Company, 67
Severe Storm Forecast Center, 213
Sewell, Chuck, 523
Shafer, Robert J., 109
Shanghai, 105
Sharma, Rakesh, 473
Sharpe, Lonnie, Jr., 470
Shatalov, Vladimir, 11, 233, 452
Shaw, Brewster H., Jr., 447, 451, 463
Shenandoah (dirigible), 506
Shepard, Alan B., 180, 274, 392
Shick, William H., 237
Shilstone, Arthur, 202
“The Crawler: Rollout of the Enterprise,” 202 shock absorber system, 307, 309 Shoemaker, Gene, 210 Shramo, Daniel J., 83 Shriver, Loren J., 370, 467 Shultz, George P., 383, 392
759
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
shutdown, 335
Shuttle Avionics Integration Laboratory (SAIL), 132 Shuttle Imaging Radar (SIR), 379, 510 shuttle-pallet satellite (SPAS), 281 SPAS-01, 281 Siebel, Mathias P., 31 Sierra Nevada, 239 Sievers, G. Kenneth, 78 Silveira, Milton A., 425 Simon, George W., 16, 483 Simons, Vera, 66, 68 Simpson, John, 60, 524 Singapore, 22, 25, 98, 241 Singer Kearfott Company, 456 Sino 2, 188 Sirio-2, 364 Six, Robert F., 189 Sjoberg, Sigurd A., 30, 57 Skiba, Ivan, 384 Sky-Tel, 176
Skylab, 7, 9, 33, 48, 55, 75, 133, 153, 274, 376, 377, 385, 408, 434 launches, 81,284 people, 125 radioactivity, 43 reentry, 33, 37, 55: 57 Skylab I, 332 Skylab 3, 313, 434 Skylab 4, 216, 221 Skylark 12,
Slayton, Donald K. (Deke), 14, 15, 54. 256, 274, 311, 328, 364, 433 small astronomy satellite (SAS), 23, 110 Sas 2, 110 Sas 3, 23
Smith, Bradford A., 218, 220, 226, 227, 263, 511 Smith, David, 56 Smith, Delbert D., 209 Smith, Michael J., 161 Smith, Richard G., 43, 57, 244, 255 Smithsonian Institute, 106, 158, 202 See also National Air and Space Museum Sms 1, 205, 254 Sms 2, 205, 254
Smylie, Robert E., 145, 407, 449 Sochi, 123
Societe Europeenne de Propulsion (SEP), 172
Soderblom, Laurence A., 29, 42
solar,
activity, 119, 123, 152, 184, 342
arrays, 172, 329, 340, 367, 407, 432, 500
batteries, 239, 447
cells, 151, 236, 239, 243, 367
cosmic rays, 243
760
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
cycle, 115 data, 13, 157, 243 disk, 152 eclipse, 10
energy, 14, 85, 115, 117, 162, 230, 291, 298, 342 flares, 184-186, 236, 237, 255, 337 gravity, 235 heat, 334
magnetic field, 243
minimum, 333
panels, 7, 85, 172, 180, 406
physics, 151, 161
power, 74, 96, 115, 193, 239
radiation, 66, 121, 237, 335, 371
sail, 363
storms, 243, 444 weather stations, 123, 243 wind, 63, 146, 235, 243, 263, 264, 497 Solar Challenger, 236, 239, 287	.
Solar Maximum Mission (SMM), 115, 116, 119, 122, 185, 236, 237, 413 Solar Max, 185, 186, 192, 255, 342, 370, 413, 431,474, 480, 512, 516 Solar Maximum Observatory, 474 solar-polar mission, 6, 17, 51, 73, 134, 259, 280 Solar Riser, 99
Solid Rocket Booster and External Tank Division (SRB/ET), 276 Solar System Exploration Program, 459 Mars Data Analysis Program, 459 Solar Systems Exploratory Committee, 410 solar-electric propulsion system (SEPS), 276 solar-ultraviolet spectral irradiance monitor (SUS1M), 151, 152
solid-fuel rocket boosters (SRBs), 53, 54, 88, 97, 112, 119, 132, 165 168, 169, 230, 231,235, 237, 242, 243, 265, 276, 297, 305, 326, 327 332, 346, 350, 357, 358, 363, 399, 400, 405, 440, 497, 500, 515 reusable, 350 SRB-X, 306 Solovieff, Nicholas, 202
Solovyev, Vladimir, 341,465, 479, 492, 495, 503, 509 South Africa, Union of, 208
Southern Pacific Communications Company (SPC), 135, 238 Soviet Union, 66, 120, 129, 156, 208, 256, 323, 437, 461,485, 499 academy of sciences, 438 airbus, 123 awards, 71
Committee for Inventions and Discoveries, 146
costs, 257, 268
experiments, 62, 430
goals, 341
installation, 10
launches, 22, 34, 49, 66, 96, 98, 149, 158, 177, 185, 190, 233, 239, 260, 273, 292, 311.
347,359,372,421,465,523,524 military programs, 181, 371 Olympic contenders, 117
761
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
orbiting space station, 203 Pravda, 256, 281 problems, 257 research, 177, 194, 280, 281 rockets, 46, 209 scientists, 75, 77, 146, 268 scarch-and-rescue, 167, 372, 490 shuttle considerations, 280, 281 television, 215 tests, 142, 218 training, 11 sounders, 199
sounding rocket program, 10 Soyuz, 96, 185, 214, 222, 239, 404, 438, 439, 446 Suyuz 5, 214 Soyuz 8, 214 Soyuz 10, 40, 214 Soyuz 11, 233, 239 Soyuz 12, 233 Soyuz 16, 40 Soyuz 25, 11, 260 Soyuz 26, 18, 58, 163 Soyuz 27, 233
Soyuz 29, 10, 18, 31, 39, 58, 260
Soyuz 32, 10, 11, 17, 18, 31, 39, 40, 58, 189, 213
Soyuz 33, 40
Soyuz 34, 40, 58
Soyuz 35, 139, 147, 148, 163, 164, 166, 177, 213
Soyuz 36, 158, 164, 166, 177, 189, 190, 204, 234
Soyuz 37, 185, 189, 190, 203, 215
Soyuz 38, 208
Soyuz 39, 261, 276
Soyuz 40, 273, 276
Soyuz T, 96, 97, 98, 113, 134, 222, 234, 276, 411,465 Soyuz T-l, 166
Soyuz T-2, 166, 169, 177, 178, 234 Soyuz T-3, 233, 234, 239, 465 Soyuz T-4, 260, 261, 276 Soyuz T-5, 347, 350, 353, 359, 360 Soyuz 7-6, 350, 353 Soyuz T-7, 359, 377, 384, 491 Soyuz T-8, 411
Soyuz 7-9, 421,423, 424, 430, 434, 446 Soyuz 7-10, 465, 473 Soyuz 7-11, 509 Soyuz 7-12, 491, 492 Space Adaptation Syndrome, 449 Space Aerospace, 152 Space America, 433
Space and Earth Science Advisory Committee, 381
Space and Missile Systems Organization (SAMSO) (USAF), 8, 73, 79
Space and Rocket Center, 519
762
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Space Defense Center, 23 Space Environment Services Center, 123 Space Industrialization Act, 166 space operations center (SOC), 329, 330 “Space, Our Next Frontier” (conference), 484 space platform, unmanned, 433, 434, 491 Space Sciences Inc., 328 Space Services, Inc. (SSI), 433
Space Shuttle, 3, 4, 6, 8, 13, 16, 38, 79, 88, 107, 112, 118, 131, 150, 151, 154, 168, 176, 188, 200, 214, 220, 237, 250, 253, 270, 283, 327, 328, 365, 404, 410, 440, 449, 490, 493, 494, 496 assembly, 23
budget and costs, 68,69, 83, 111, 122, 123, 133, 134, 304 carrier aircraft, 466	;
civilian reservations, 103, 366 crew, 51, 305
delays, 155, 165, 289, 292, 304, 335, 417, 440, 479, 515 engines, 80, 97, 111, 119, 137, 141-143, 162, 167, 226, 237 facilities, 34
first mission (Columbia), 53, 149, 256, 269, 270, 274, 275, 277, 287, 512
flight 41-D, 489, 503
flight 41-F, 489
flight 51-A, 463, 515
flight 51-C, 515
flight 51-D, 463
flight 61-D, 463
fourth mission (Discovery), 304, 322, 351 funding, 33, 69
launch, 73, 74, 87, 160, 171, 174, 176, 182, 187, 225, 232, 262
management, 68-71, 83
national defense, 92
night landings, 432
nonastronauts, 366
orbiters, 7, 9, 137, 159, 205
organization, 70
passengers, 180, 455
people, 21, 131, 453, 470, 498
planetary, 349
planning problems, 69
problems, 3,141, 274
production, 83
reentry, 267
repair, 103, 108, 256, 342 retrieval, 105, 115, 124, 211,256, 342 reusable, 46, 103, 159, 181, 219, 274, 414 safety, 256
scheduling, 70, 84, 87, 187, 196, 260, 262, 271
second mission (STS-2), 271, 274, 304, 305, 308, 309, 322
subcontractors, 69
technical problems, 70
telecommunications, 276
tests, 11, 27, 157, 171, 176, 203, 241, 242, 251, 256, 480
763
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
third mission (ET-3), 301, 305, 309, 322, 323 training exercise, 185 space sickness, 428, 429, 431,449, 473
Space Station, orbiting, 203, 246, 409, 460, 472, 475, 479, 486, 490 493, 495, 496, 503-505 design, 467 organization. 467, 471 study contracts, 471 task force. 469, 475
space suits, 58. 62, 143, 168, 192, 199, 269, 290, 335, 355, 370, 408 438, 495 “Chibis,” 495
problems, 167, 377, 380, 383, 398, 408, 460 Space Task Group (STG), 112 Space Technology Laboratories, 27
Space Telescope (ST), 6, 55, 86, 160, 191, 250, 304, 315, 327, 406 442, 443 Space Transportation Systems Acquisition, Office of, 75, 81
Space Transportation Systems (STS), Office of, 5, 39, 57, 75, 88, 118 150, 179, 184, 188, 199. 242, 251. 276, 303, 342, 366, 376, 491,496 497, 516 Expendable Equipment Division, 276 management, 303 Space Adaptation Project, 449 STS-1, 251, 265, 297, 309, 342 STS-2, 271, 274. 292. 309. 375, 379, 380 STS-3. 375
STS-4, 331, 350, 353, 375, 398, 400, 487 STS-5. 281, 331, 370, 375, 377, 380, 385, 398, 400 STS-6, 331, 407
STS-7, 375, 400, 408, 418-420, 449 STS-8, 400, 408. 413, 414, 430-432, 449 STS-9, 408. 448, 451,455. 463 STS-10, 370 STS-11. 398 STS-12, 398 STS-13, 400, 413 STS-18, 400 STS-41C, 474 STS-4 ID, 500 Upper Stage Division, 276 See also Columbia; Space Shuttle space treaty, 201. 202
space walk, 168, 205. 355, 377, 398, 407, 408, 460, 491,495, 503, 504 space weapons, 142
spacecraft charging at high altitudes (SCATHA), 8. 79 Spaceflight Tracking and Data Network (STDN), 21 1, 255, 459
Spacelab, 3, 6, 15, 74, 77, 118, 130, 151. 179. 188, 200, 226, 234 260. 271. 289, 290. 313, 325, 340, 366, 380, 408, 412, 413. 421, 428 431,437, 447, 459, 463, 485, 518 D-l, 271 D-4, 271
delay, 440, 441, 447 experiments, 163, 297, 448 instrument-pointing system, 160 Spacelab 1,4, 156, 179, 314, 400 Spacelab 2, 112, 321
764
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Spacelab 3, 400, 498 See also European Space Agency spacenauts, 341, 354
space-processing applications rockets (SPAR), 77, 230 SPAR 6, 78 SPAR 8, 230
Spain, 155, 203, 228, 251, 304
Spectrolab, 151
spectrometer, 415, 446, 483
Sperry Support Services, 116
Spinak, Abraham D., 39, 301
spinning solid upper stage (SSUS), 232, 276
Splav furnace, 39, 204
SPOT satellite, 15
SP-100 program, 404
Spring, Sherwood C., 161,463
Springer, Robert C., 161
Spruce Goose, 158, 173, 202
Sputnik, 112, 369, 395, 400
SRI International, 196
Sriharikota Island (India), 54, 183, 410
SS-5 Skean vehicle, 34	'
Stanford University, 196, 288, 329 STAR (German industrial consortium), 73 Stecker, Floyd W., 225 Stella experiment, 120 Stewart, Frank, 26, 36, 79 Stewart, Ian, 483
Stewart, Robert L., 398, 463, 464
Stitt, James E., 125
Stofan, Andrew J., 218, 310, 338
Stone, Edward C., 29, 218, 262, 277, 293
Stone, John, 337
strain isolation pads (SIP), 515
Strategic Air Command, 291
stratospheric studies, 26, 75, 157, 158, 183, 184, 195, 208, 250, 292 305, 313, 334, 340, 357, 369	’	’	’
stratospheric aerosol and gas experiment (SAGE), 10, 26, 158, 184, 208 305, 340 Strekalov, Gennady, 239, 411, 473 Strickland, Pete, 193
Structural Information Enhancement Program (SIEP), 198 Stuttgart, 3
subsonic operations, 141 sulfur gases, 334 Sullivan, Kathryn D., 509, 510 Summa Corporation, 158, 173, 176, 202 Sun, 115, 116, 119, 132, 152, 185, 197,243 exposure to, 324 formation, 106 relationship to planets, 6 structure, 17 studies, 51
765
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
sunspot activity. 342 Sun-Earth explorer, 162 Super Areas (rocket), 75, 118, 195 Super Loki (rocket), 75, 184 supernova activities, 106, 162, 227, 271, 337 N-49, 162
supersonic operations, 141
Suryadi, Drs, 241
Sweden, 15, 110, 209, 228
Swigert, Jack, 381, 387
Switzerland, 3, 156, 228
SYNCOM (satellite), 463
Synnott, Stephen P., 150, 206, 325
synthetic-aperture radar (SAR), 225. 467
Systems and Applied Sciences Corporation, 392
Syvertson, C.A., 124, 222, 462
Tabakaev, Eugcny, 438
Tallahassee, Fla., 144
Tallone, Tip, 267
Talonc, John, 487
Tanegashima Space Center, 9, 122, 254, 398, 427, 459 Tarantula (cloud). 401 Tashkent, 123
Tass (Soviet news agency), 17, 31, 43 Taylor, Eldon D., 57 Taylor. Fred W., 26 technical services, 210 problems, 176, 221, 255, 297 resources, 253 technicians. 267
technological studies and developments. 3, 18.64,80.83, 137. 138 151, 165,259,299,310.
340, 345, 358
advanced technology house, 208 problems, 281 tektites, 167 Telecom 1A, 188
telecommunications, 3, 8, 22, 28, 41,48, 91, 118, 261, 276, 363, 465 global, 210, 363, 484 maritime, 233
Teledyne Industries, 251, 279 telegraph, 334 Telemail, 442
telemetry-. 51, 158, 191, 217, 310. 372, 378, 451,524 Telepazio (Italian co ), 91, 222
telephone, 93. 143, 145, 173, 215. 216. 220, 225, 228, 231, 243, 259 276, 310, 316, 376, 419 air-to-ground services, 176, 177, 216 Telesat (Canada), 158, 348, 360, 418, 449. 463 Telesat-H, 514
telescopes, 86, 166, 228, 252, 261, 279, 303, 315, 371, 393, 405, 427 442. 445, 490 Cassegrain, 393 Earth, 405 imaging, 415
766
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
infrared, 340, 349, 351 mirrors, 406 optical, 237, 282 radio, 237
solar, 282, 337, 342 space, 103, 191, 250, 282 ultraviolet, 351, 501
X-ray, 65, 116, 174, 213, 222, 271, 337 Telestar 3. 503 Telestar 3A, 425 Telestar 3C, 500 Telstar, 489
television transmission, 41,52, 93, 94, 108, 122-124, 128, 143, 145 163, 205, 215, 225, 232, 259, 265, 276, 293, 310, 316, 334, 350, 358 363, 414, 419, 434 cable, 237, 505 pay, 348
subscription, 216 See also communications telex, 215, 225, 231, 316, 334 Tempel 11 (comet), 14, 85, 182 Temple University, 424 Tennessee River, 16
Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), 137, 230 Tereshkova, Valentina, 419 Terhune, Charles H., Jr, 456 Terrile, Richard J., 511 Terzan 2, 29
testing, 7, 13, 14, 45, 81, 84, 94, 96, 129, 132, 133, 142, 143, 149 242, 244, 289, 292, 380, 392
approach-and-landing, 31, 54, 313 crash, 37 endurance, 27
engines, 78, 124, 140, 154, 235
flight tests, 74, 76, 119, 128, 134, 137, 169, 172, 239, 259, 280, 294, 314, 331, 334. 335, 339, 350, 354, 375, 394 ignition, 26
main propulsion system, 36 missile, 127
test firings, 3, 38, 79, 80, 84, 119, 137, 161, 162, 167, 226, 244, 332, 385, 386, 440, 441
thermal, 335
tiles, 15, 146
volunteers, 137, 138
wind tunnel, 79,'394
wings
Tethered Satellite System (TSS), 394, 469 Tethys, 227, 228, 263 Teton mountains, Wyo., 67 Texas, 64
Texas A&M University, 125
Thagard, Norman, 152, 386, 400, 418-420, 449
Thailand, 22, 209, 241
thematic mappers, 139, 140, 201,355, 397, 475
767
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
thermal expansion, 282
thermal protection system (TPS), 137, 157, 159, 315, 332, 336, 395.
See also tiles, protective thermal radiation, 371 Thesee (Theseus), 316
Thiokol Corporation, 11, 34, 112, 181, 332, 440 Wasatch Division (Utah), 11, 112, 513 Thome, Pitt, 77 Thomas, D. Scott, 273 Thomas, John W., 234 Thompson, Herman, 181 Thompson, J.R., 38 Thompson, Robert, 165 Thor, 34, 418 Thor MB-3. 110 Thornton, Kathryn C., 470
Thornton, William E., 386.. 400, 429, 431,432. 449 Tiamat, 179
tiles, protective, 14,23.65,74,84, 111, 146, 155. 165, 171, 172 245,265-267,270,274, 292, 311, 332, 336, 351, 395, 420, 455, 487 503, 515 problems, 14, 15,76, 111, 122,297,299,304.353 Tilford, Shelby G., 405, 510 Tillamook, Oreg., 66 Timko, Robert, 194 Tinker Air Force Base, 269 Tirone, Robert J., 465 TIROS (satellite), 153. 199, 522 TIROS-1, 522 TIROS-N, 406. 491
Titan (Saturn satellite), 60, 61,62, 78, 196, 211, 232. 263, 31.5. 410 414 Titan, 127, 166, 214, 215, 349, 418 Titan 2, 215 Titan 3, 215, 373 Titan 3B-Agena, 28 Titan 3C, 34, 73 Titan 3D, 15 Titan 34D, 493, 525 Titov, Gherman, 369 Titov, Vladimir, 411 Tombaugh, Clyde, 6 Toon, Brian. 357 Toronto (Ontario), 4, 173
Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), 10, 250, 332. 380 403, 404, 407, 410, 412, 418, 421,429, 431,434, 441,449, 450, 461 510 TDRS-A (TDRS-1), 157, 407, 413, 448 TDRS-B, 408, 413
Tracking and Impact Predictions (TIPs), 23 tracking facilities, 116, 122, 141, 145, 166,310 training, 3,11
non-NASA scientists, 3 Trans World Airlines, 353 Transit (satellite), 273, 274
768
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
transmitters, high-intensity, 350 Transpace Carriers Inc. (TCI), 494
transponders, 63, 98, 128, 135, 182, 310, 330, 36, 348, 363, 398, 409 425 Trinh, Eugene H., 483 Triton, 349, 350, 371
troposphere, 195, 208, 288, 292, 350, 380 .
Truly, Richard, 94, 97, 107, 242, 307, 386, 429, 431,434
TRW Systems, Inc., 10, 43, 78, 95, 124, 134, 150, 243, 279, 291,358 410, 441,471,495 Defense and Space Systems Group, 166, 221 Space and Technology Group, 470 Space Systems Division, 51 Tsiolkovsky, Konstantine, 147 Tucson, Ariz., 236 turbines, 115
turbopumps, 149, 251, 364 Turner, Ted, 93, 127, 128 TVSat (German broadcasting system), 220 Tyuratam, 166
ultraviolet differential absorption lidar (UV-D1AL), 249
ultraviolet studies and findings, 42, 55, 118, 154, 155, 191,222,225 232,236,249,252, 292, 293,303,351,357,483,500,501 Union of South Africa, 111
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR). See Soviet Union United Airlines, 99, 176, 249
United Kingdom (Great Britain), 15, 33, 56, 64, 93, 107, 124, 144, 154 203, 211, 228, 238, 241,371,497 Britannia II, 233 costs, 33, 130 Post Office, 173 postal service, 173 Royal Aeronautical Society, 35, 288 Royal Air Force, 287 Royal Aircraft Establishment, 33 Royal Navy, 232 Science Research Council, 52 Science and Engineering Research Council, 393 UK 6, 33
United Nations, 149, 154, 201,202, 210, 214, 228 General Assembly, 201,210, 228 United Nations Children’s Fund, 466
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), 312 United Press International (UP1), 43, 123, 146, 242, 261, 347 United States, 519
Advisory Group on Science and Technology (President’s), 481 Armed Services Committee,
.budget, 7, 33, 128, 134, 139, 171, 182, 199, 256, 327, 425 costs, 9, 93, 119, 141, 144, 171
Management and Budget, Office of (OMB), 128, 138, 225, 256, 304, 442
National Archives, 152
National Commission on Space, 511
National Security Council, 27, 414
National Space Policy, 496
769
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
National Space Strategy, 496, 497 Naval Research, Office of, 324 Technology Assessment, Office of. 198, 518 White House communications centers, 25, 128 White House National Aeronautics and Space Council, 303, 324 White House Office of Science and Technology Policy, 7, 27, 68, 93, 219, 301, 327 White House Science Council (WHSC), 328 U.S. Court of Appeals, 129 U S. Forest Service,
U.S. Geological Survey, 27, 28, 29, 42, 64, 68, 77, 92, 240 U.S. Information Agency (USIA), 452 U.S. National Hot Air Balloon Championships, 192 U.S. Naval Observatory, 7
U.S. Naval Research Laboratory' (NRL), 16, 116, 151 U.S. Telephone & Telegraph, 118 USNS Arnold
United Technologies Corporation (UTC), 143, 211, 279, 315 Hamilton Standard Division, 143, 168, 378, 383, 460 Pratt & Whitney Division, 91, 92, 154, 165, 183, 377 Sikorsky! Division, 315
United Space Boosters, Inc. (USBI), 168, 211, 357, 497 UTC Freedom, 168, 211, 242, 357, 358 UTC Liberty, 168, 211, 242, 358 Universities Space Research Association (USRA), 156, 383, 405 University College London, 155 University Corporation for Atmospheric Research. 473 University of Alaska, 208
University' of Arizona, 86, 191, 208, 211.446, 511 University of Beme, 227
University of California at Berkeley (UCB), 3, 105, 145, 156, 288 500, 501 Space Sciences Laboratory, 501 University of California at San Diego (UCSD), 191 University of Chicago, 60, 524 University of Cincinnati, 36 University of Colorado, 105, 191
Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics, 105, 303 University of Groningen, 366, 446 University of Hawaii, 349, 371 University of Illinois, 328 University of Iowa, 30, 59, 279 University of Maryland, 121, 174, 208, 281 University of Minnesota, 30 University of New Mexico, 86, 191 University of Notre Dame, 461 University of Paris, 24 University of Pittsburgh, 131 University of Rome, 119 University of Santa Clara, 196 University of Surrey, 304 University of Texas, 481, 525 University of Tokyo, 255, 314
Institute of Space and Aeronautical Science, 255
770
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
University of Utah, 353
University of Wisconsin, 199
University Research Association (URA), 86
Uosat, 304
Upper Volta, 228
upper-atmosphere research satellite (UARS), 250, 313, 314
Uranus (planet), 13, 43, 249, 264, 293, 304, 349, 410, 511
Uruguay, 228
U.S. Air, 249
USNS Arnold, 265
Utah, 11, 112, 119
Utopia Planitia, 52
Utsman, Thomas E., 487
V-2 rockets, 81
vacuum chamber, 282
Vallis Marineris, 24
Van Allen, James, 59, 60
Van Allen radiation belt, 395
van den Berg, Lodewijk, 483
Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif., 15, 28, 34, 68, 73, 98, 129, 141 144, 262, 284, 303, 327. 332, 352, 393, 406, 410, 415, 475, 512, 513 522 Space Shuttle Facility, 98 Van Hoften, James D., 400, 413, 474 Van Hove, L., 120 Vanguard, 369, 395 Project Vanguard, 426 VanHoosier, Michael E., van Rensselaer, Frank, 276 Vazon, 147 Veach, C. Lacy, 470 Vega (star), 427, 445, 456 Vega-1, 523, 524
Vega-2, 523, 524	.
Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB), 23, 53, 88, 231, 237, 241-244, 289 292, 297, 299, 300, 328, 399, 498 Vela (satellite), 111, 162 Velikovsky, Immanuel, 89 Worlds in Collision, 89 Venera (USSR spacecraft), 24, 331 Venera 1, AM Venera 3, 417 Venera 4, 417 Venera 9, 331 Venera 10, 331 Venera 11, 162 Venera 12, 162 Venera 13, 162, 417 Venera 14, 331, 417 Venera 15, 417, 438 Venera 16, 417, 438 Venezuela, 124 Vento, Bruce, 171
771
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Venus, 26, 61, 95, 159. 225, 235, 256, 280, 322, 330, 331,410, 417 483, 523
Venus-orbiting imaging radar (VOIR), 95, 225, 250, 259, 260, 394
Vemikos-Danielis, Joan, 194
Vernon, France, 172
vertical-motion simulator, 339
vertical/sidewise takeoff and landing (V/STOL), 260
Vertikal 8, 66
Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI), 240, 241, 346 VFW-ERNO, 226 vibrations, 268, 353, 456 Victor, Robert, 235 Vietnam, 190, 228, 273 cosmonauts, 185, 189, 190, 203, 204, 213 Viking, 16, 30, 55, 121, 133, 186, 280, 326, 331, 397, 409, 459, 480 Viking I, 180, 193, 306, 376, 398, 415 Viking 2, 52. 415
Viking Lander Monitor Mission (VLMM), 459 Viking Orbiler 2. 117
Villafranca tracking station (Vilspa), 108, 155, 227 Virgin Islands, 135 Virginia, 117
Virginia Polytechnic Institute, 301
visible-infrared radiometric atmospheric sounder (VAS), 275 visible-infrared spin-scan radiometer (VISSR), 199, 205, 207, 275 Vitro, 14
volcanic activity. 26, 29, 42. 158, 183, 184, 207. 208, 305, 340, 357 388 Volk, Igor, 491,492
von Braun, Wemher, 81, 133, 175, 187, 188. 442 von Kamiann, Theodore, 312 Vostok. 268 Vostok 1, 280
Votaw Precision Tool Inc.. 346 Vought, Inc., 106, 127, 142
Voyager, 13, 14, 29, 60, 76, 150. 157. 206, 211, 220, 277, 304, 325 problems, 293
Voyager I, 13, 16, 29, 38, 42, 49, 76, 95, 96, 150, 206, 211, 218, 220. 226-228. 232. 262, 280,293.306,315
Voyager 2, 29, 38, 41,42, 49, 52. 76, 150, 206, 249, 264, 279, 293, 306. 315, 325. 349. 511
W&J Construction Company, 214
Waddell, James B., 470
Wake Island, 266
wake vortex, 169
Waldheim, Kurt, 208
Walker, Charles D.,, 424, 487, 500
Walker, David M., 516
Walled Lake, Mich., 21
Waller, Peter, 483
Wallops Flight Center (WFC), 10, 119, 179, 180,290.311,334.340, 350 consolidation with Goddard Space Flight Center, 270, 290 contacts. 141
instruments, measuring. 194, 195
772
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
missions, 26, 33, 184, 191
people, 39, 208
test program, 84, 170
Wallops Flight Facility, 301, 369, 406, 473 Wallops Island, 179, 180, 280 Walters, Larry, 353 Warren, Edward, 486 Wasatch. See Thiokol
Washington, D.C., 16, 17, 37, 106, 144, 155, 226 Washington Hilton, 155 Washington University (St. Louis), 198 waste and debris, 209, 210, 265, 294, 342, 354 control, 336 damage from, 417 in space, 143, 283 nuclear, 104, 156 possible effects, 203 radioactive, 111, 149 water repellants, 301 water resources, 138, 323 water-immersion facility (WIF),
Watkins, Kermit, 193
weather, 26, 52, 54, 80, 86, 112, 118, 167, 184, 192, 205, 232, 233 291,334, 342, 363, 380, 404, 419, 420, 429, 430, 474, 492, 421, 523 climate, 192
delays, 35, 87, 292, 293, 297, 335, 337, 350
global patterns, 357
hurricanes, 236, 429, 492
impact of, 139, 194, 335
Josephine (tropical storm), 510
problems, 14, 255, 269, 328, 350
solar stations, 123
solar storm, 59, 60
storm information system, 213, 292
studies and experiments, 4, 5, 10, 25, 140, 199
temperatures, extremes and effects, 273, 322, 324, 331, 332, 335, 351, 353, 357, 384; 405, 445, 456, 474 tests, 132 visibility, 337 weatherfax charts, 255 Weaver, W.R., 243 Webb, James, 44 Weber, Daniel J., 273 Weeks, L. Michael, 81,276, 366
weightlessness, 87, 120, 152, 314, 329, 335, 336, 408, 428, 453 adaptation to, 17, 190
effects of, 133, 137, 147, 162, 163, 1943, 222, 359, 360
effects on physiological processes, 267, 268, 359, 385, 428-432, 448, 453, 473
experiments, 77, 87, 189, 273, 408, 419
plant growth, 47, 48, 87
problems, 18, 19
Weinberger, Caspar W., 311, 460, 471
773
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
INDEX
Weiss, Stanley I., 188, 241, 281, 351, 425 Weitz, Paul J., 332, 407, 408 Werner, Michael, 348
West Germany. See Germany, Federal Republic of Westar, 135 Westar 7, 46, 330, 348 Westar 2, 46, 330, 348
Westar 3 (WESTAR-C), 46, 47, 53, 79, 330, 348 Westar 4, 47, 330, 348 Westar 5, 347, 348 Westar VI, 464 , 516, 518 Western Research Company, 329
Western Space and Missile Center (WSMC). Calif., 73. 98, 159, 273, 284 291. 303, 406, 420 Western Test Range (WTR), 38, 73, 77. 87, 274. 352, 371
Western Union Telegraph Company, 10,46,53,79, 118. 129, 135,238 330,348,464,465, 516
Space Communications Corporation, 238 Westford, Mass., 241 Westinghouse, 209 Whitcomb, Richard T., 45, 124 White, Terry, 467 White Sands, N.M., 334, 337 White Sands Missile Range, 77, 230, 233 White Sands Test Facility. 168, 421,431 Whitecloud (code name), 129 Widick, Fritz, 474 Widlick, Herman K., 432 Wild, R, 227 Williams, Kenneth, 150 Williams, Sam B., 21 Williams, Walter C., 53, 351 Williams, Wiley, 315 Williams Research Corporation, 21 Williamson, John, 93 Willson, Richard C., 342 Wilson, Robert, 155 wind-shear phenomena. 280
wind tunnels, 79, 125, 146, 195, 215, 219, 298, 417, 462
windscreens, 287, 327, 328
Winget, Charles, 359
winglets, 45, 71, 298
wings, weight of, 197
wingtips, 45, 48, 79
Winkfield (tracking station), 211
Winn, Larry, 185, 394
Wolfe, John, 55, 56, 59
Wolfe, Tom, 45
women, 159, 203, 355, 360, 419, 420, 438, 491, 504, 510 Women’s Air-Force Service Pilots (WASPS), 203 Wood, W., 179
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, 214 Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 124
774
INDEX
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Worden, Al, 44
World Administrative Radio Conference, 1979, 380 World Meteorological Organization, 4, 75 World Weather Watch, 4 Wrather Corporation, 202 Wright State University, 451 Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, 287 Wyckoff, Susan, 485 Wyeth, James, 202 Wyoming, 153, 184 Xinhua (PRC press agency), 156 Xinjiang (PRC region), 127 X-ray, 106, 154, 174, 191, 213, 255, 271, 337 data, 23, 94, 105 emissions, 116, 222 equipment, 29, 105 experiments, 33 films, 129, 130 observatory, 415 sources, 5, 107, 116, 358 XUV camera, 358 Yamato mountains, 131 Yardley, John F., 3, 5, 75, 81, 84, 122, 303 Yegorov, Anatoly, 147 Yegorov, Boris, 385 Yeliseyev, Aleksey S., 72, 214 Yost, Charles, 469 Young, A. Thomas, 88, 222, 338
Young, John W., 16, 94, 107, 244, 255, 256, 265, 266, 269, 270, 284 337, 342, 395, 447, 451, 459 Yugoslavia, 124 zero-gravity, 273 Zipoy, David, 281
ITS
The NASA History Series
HISTORIES
Anderson, Frank W., Jr., Orders of Magnitude: A History of NAC A and NASA, 1915-1980 (NASA SP-4403, 2d ed., 1981).
Benson, Charles D., and William Barnaby Faherty, Moonport: A History of Apollo Launch Facilities and Operations (NASA SP-4204, 1978).
Bilstein, Roger E., Stages to Saturn: A Technological History of the Apollo/Saturn Launch Vehicles (NASA SP-4206, 1980).
Boone, W. Fred, NASA Office of Defense Affairs: The First Five Years (NASA HHR-32, 1970, multilith).
Brooks, Courtney G., James M. Grimwood, and Lloyd S. Swenson, Jr., Chariots for Apollo: A History of Manned Lunar Spacecraft (NASA SP-4205, 1979) .
Byers, Bruce K., Destination Moon: A History of the Lunar Orbiter Program (NASA TM X-3487, 1977, multilith).
Compton, W. David, and Charles D. Benson, Living and Working in Space: A History of Skylab (NASA SP-4208, 1983).
Corliss, William R., NASA Sounding Rockets, 1958-1968: A Historical Summary (NASA SP-4401, 1971).
Ezell, Edward Clinton, and Linda Neumann Ezell, On Mars: Exploration of the Red Planet, 1958-1978 (NASA SP-4212, 1984).
Ezell, Edward Clinton, and Linda Neuman Ezell, The Partnerships: A History of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (NASA SP-4029, 1978).
Green, Constance McL., and Milton Lomask, Vanguard: A History (NASA SP-4202, 1970; also Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1971).
Hacker, Barton C., and James W. Grimwood, On the Shoulders of Titans: A History of Project Gemini (NASA SP-4203, 1977).
Hansen, James R., Engineer In Charge: A History of the Langley Aeronautical Laboratory, 1917-1958 (NASA SP-4305, 1987)
Hall, R. Cargill, Lunar Impact: A History of Project Ranger (NASA SP-4210, 1977).
Hallion, Richard P., On the Frontier: Flight Research at Dryden, 1946-1981 (NASA SP-4303, 1984).
Hartman, Edwin P., Adventures in Research: A History of Ames Research Center, 1940-1965 (NASA SP-4302, 1970).
Levine, Arnold, Managing NASA in the Apollo Era (NASA SP-4102, 1982).
Muenger, Elizabeth A., Searching the Horizon: A History of Ames Research Center, 1940-1976 (NASA SP-4304, 1985).
Newell, Homer E., Beyond the Atmosphere: Early Years of Space Science (NASA SP-4211, 1980).
Pitt, John A., The Human Factor: Biomedicine in the Manned Space Program, 1980 (NASA SP-4213, 1985).
Roland, Alex., Model Research: The National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, 1915-1958 (NASA SP-4103, 1985).
Roland, Alex., A Spacefaring People: Perspective on Early Spaceflight (NASA SP-4405, 1985).
Rosenthal, Alfred, Venture into Space: Early Years of Goddard Space Flight Center (NASA SP-4103, 1985).
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
amts mm 111
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
THE NASA HISTORY SERIES
Rosholt, Robert L., An Administrative History of NASA, 1958-1963 (NASA SP-4101, 1966).
Sloop, John L., Liquid Hydrogen as a Propulsion Fuel, 1945-1959 (NASA SP-4404, 1978)
Swenson, Lloyd S., Jr., James M. Grimwood and Charles C. Alexander, This New Ocean: A History of Project Mercury (NASA SP-4201, 1966).
REFERENCE WORK
Aeronautics and Space Report of the President, annual volumes for 1975-1986.
The Apollo Spacecraft: A Chronology (NASA SP-4009, vol. 1, 1969; vol. 2, 1973; vol. 3, 1976; vol. 4, 1978).
Astronautics and Aeronautics: A Chronology of Science, Technology, and Policy, annual volumes with an earlier summary volume, Aeronautics and Astronautics, 1915-1960.
Dickson, Katherine M. ed., History of Aeronautics and Astronautics: A Preliminary Bibliography (NASA HHR-29, 1968, multilith).
Ezell, Linda Neuman, NASA Historical Data Book, vol. II Programs and Projects 1958-1968 and vol. Ill Programs and Projects 1969-1978 (NASA SP-4012, 1988).
Hall, R. Cargill, Project Ranger: A Chronology (JPL/MR-2, 1971, multilith).
Hall R. Cargill, ed. Essays on the History of Rocketry and Astronautics: Proceedings of the Third through the Sixth History Symposia of the International Academy of Astronautics (NASA CP-2014, 2 vols., 1977).
Looney, John J., ed., Bibliography of Space Books and Articles from Non-Aerospace Journals, 1957-1977 (NASA HHR-51, 1979, multilith).
Roland, Alex F., A Guide to Reseach in NASA History (NASA HHR-50, 6th ed., 1982, available from NASA History Office).
Skylab: A Chronology (NASA SP-4011, 1977).
Van Nimmen, Jane, and Leonard C. Bruno, with Robert L. Rosholt, NASA Historical Data Book, 1958-1968, vol 1, NASA Resources (NASA SP-4012, 1976).
Wells, Helen T., Susan H. Whiteley, and Carrie E. Karegeannes, Origins of NASA Names (NASA SP-4402, 1976).
Recent volumes are available from Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402; early volumes from National Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA 22161.
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTINg, OFFICE :
265-950
778
1990
NASA FORM 1626 OCT 86

i
mm
0S5S^®eO^(!^g5S
toasts EBtiRmeesg KtfflSEBfiaeiEdlte qS g^aa«aitRffffi-3 SK9&®)
r
t
&