

January 4:  NASA released a proposal to select a prime contractorfor a long©duration, human©tended scientific satellite called theAdvanced X©Ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF). The third of NASA'sfour proposed orbiting "great observatories," AXAF would studyhigh©energy emissions associated with quasars, spinning neutronstars, and black holes, providing valuable information about thesephenomena and serving as an important new tool for basic researchin plasma physics. AXAF would also provide data on the variousforms of "dark matter" in the universe, which may help determinewhether the universe is an open or closed loop. AXAF could bescheduled for launch as early as 1995. The orbiting observatorywould be 14 feet in diameter, 45 feet long, and would weigh 12©15tons. It would be placed into a circular orbit 320 miles above theEarth, and would operate for about 15 years. Maintenance of AXAFwould be accomplished by crews of either the Space Shuttle or theU.S. Space Station. (NASA Release 88©1)

January 4: Engineers at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch facility in Utahconcluded that a design flaw had led to the failure of a previouslyuntested Space Shuttle booster part during a full©scale test firingDecember 23. NASA officials delayed the flight schedule after theydiscovered that a portion of the booster's nozzle assembly, whichguides the vehicle, had fallen apart during testing, a monthearlier.
 
¡  ¡Engineers finished taking the booster motor apart andrecovered all six missing pieces of the failed nozzle part. Knownas the outer boot ring, the failed part anchored the booster'snozzle to a flexible rubbery "boot" that allowed the nozzle toswivel. One purpose of the boot ring was to shield the metal andrubber bearing at the core of the swivel mechanism from the intenseheat of the rocket gases. During the test firing, the booster'snozzle was deliberately moved to the maximum seven degrees©©somethree degrees beyond what would be required during a normal Shuttleflight. NASA was looking into the possibility that the extremesteering might have caused the boot ring to come apart ordelaminate.

¡ ¡A group of officials at the Johnson Space Center, Houston,Texas, developers of the original design test requirements for anextreme swiveling of the nozzle, studied whether the maneuvershould be repeated in future tests of whatever design is adopted,or whether a less severe maneuver would be an adequate test underthe more stringent, post©Challenger standards. The test failurewould probably force a delay of 6 to 10 weeks in the resumption ofSpace Shuttle flights, delaying the STS©26 flight of Discovery to‘  â ? ' ‘no earlier than August 1988. (NASA Release 87©190; √√ƒƒ√√UPIƒƒ, Jan 4/88;‘  â ? ÿ' ‘√√W Postƒƒ, Jan 5/88; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jan 6/88)   ‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘åôJanuary 11:  Speaking at the American Institute of Aeronautics andAstronautics supported Aerospace Sciences Conference, Ross M.Jones, an engineer at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena,California, presented a proposal to launch very small, low costscientific probes to various destinations in the solar system byusing Earth©orbiting electromagnetic launchers or railguns. Electromagnetic launchers, which produce strong electromagneticforces that accelerate projectiles to extremely high velocities,were being developed by the U.S. military for use both on the‘  â ?  ‘ground and in space.  (NASA Release 88©4; √√M Newsƒƒ, Jan 11/88; √√W‘  â ? – ‘Timesƒƒ, Jan 11/88; √√LA Timesƒƒ, Jan 11/88; √√LA Star Newsƒƒ, Jan 12/88)

January 13:  President Ronald Reagan signed a report to Congresscreating a joint Department of Defense (DoD) and NASA program forthe development of the Advanced Launch System (ALS). The ALS wasintended to provide a launch system that would meet long©termnational launch needs; would be flexible, robust, reliable, andresponsive; and would drastically cut costs in all elements of thespace launch system. The management plan created a joint programoffice headed by an Air Force program manager and a NASA deputyprogram manager. DoD would manage the systems engineering andintegration, vehicle, logistics, and payload module. NASA wouldmanage liquid engine systems and focused technology efforts. DoDwould accept full funding responsibility for the program, with anyunique civil requirements not addressed by the ALS baseline beingfunded by NASA. (NASA Release 88©5)

January 15:  NASA announced that Dr. Raymond S. Colladay, AssociateAdministrator for the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology,would leave the Agency to serve a
s Director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency,effective February 1, 1988.  (NASA Release 88©6)

January 22:  EG&G Florida, Inc. was awarded a $635,529 contract tomake modifications to the Space Shuttle Landing Facility (SLF).This work would include grinding a 3,500©foot section at each endof the runway to smooth the surface texture, removing cross groovesand adding longitudinal "corduroy grooving."  Additionally,existing landing zone light fixtures were to be modified andmarkings on the entire runway and overruns repainted.  Thesemodifications were intended to enhance landing safety by reducingSpace Shuttle orbiter tire wear during landing operations.  The SLFis 15,000 feet long and 300 feet wide, with a 1,000©foot pavedsafety overrun at each end. Work was scheduled to begin January 26and be completed by mid©March 1988.  (NASA Release 88©10)

January 26: An engineer who, only hours before the Space ShuttleChallenger blew up, warned NASA that it was dangerous to launch thespacecraft in cold weather was named a winner of the ScientificFreedom and Responsibility Award.  Roger M. Boisjoly, a formerengineer for Morton Thiokol, Inc.©©the manufacturer of the SpaceShuttle solid rocket motor blamed for the Challenger accident that‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘killed seven crew members©©was honored by the American Associationfor the Advancement of Science (AAAS) for attempting to halt thelaunch and for his attempts to have the flawed rocket redesigned.The AAAS, in an announcement, cited Boisjoly "for his exemplary andrepeated efforts to fulfill his professional responsibilities as anengineer by alerting others to life threatening design problems onthe Challenger Space Shuttle and for steadfastly recommendingagainst the tragic launch."  Boisjoly was to receive the AAAS award‘  â ? @ ‘during February 14 ceremonies in Boston. (√√LA Star Newsƒƒ, Jan 27/88) 

January 26: This date marked a decade of continuous operation ofthe International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE). The IUE is creditedwith some of the most important advances in modern astronomy,including the discovery of galactic halos, monitoring volcanicactivities on Io, beaming the first images ever recorded ofHalley's comet from space, and monitoring the intense emissions ofultraviolet radiation from Supernova 1987A. The IUE was a jointeffort of NASA, the European Space Agency (ESA), and the BritishScience and Engineering Research Council (SERC). Goddardscientists, engineers, and technicians designed, integrated, andtested the IUE. An ESA team built the solar array and the groundfacilities near Madrid. SERC, in collaboration with the UniversityCollege, London, provided four TV camera detectors for transformingthe spectral displays into video signals.  (NASA Release 88©9)

January 27:  NASA announced August 4, 1988, as the target forlaunch of the next Space Shuttle mission, STS©26. This new launchtarget was selected following a major program assessment,subsequent to the most recent full©scale firing of the redesignedsolid rocket motor (SRM) in December 1987, which revealed a designdefect in the outer boot ring of the SRM case©to©nozzle joint. Asa result of the assessment, NASA officials determined that the SRMsthat would boost the orbiter Discovery on STS©26 would use analternative outer boot ring configuration tested successfullyduring the Development Motor©8 firing in August 1987.

¡ ¡Roll out of Discovery to Kennedy Space Center Launch Pad 39Bwas scheduled for May 13, and a flight readiness firing ofDiscovery's main engines and liquid propulsion system was to take‘  â ? x ‘place on June 13.(NASA Release 88©11; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jan 28/88;  √√W Postƒƒ,‘  â ? @ ‘Jan 28/88; √√USA Todayƒƒ, Jan 28/88; √√LA Timesƒƒ, Jan 28/88; √√P Inqƒƒ,‘  â ?   ‘Jan28/88√√ƒƒ)

‘  â ? ò! ‘January 27: The √√Washington Postƒƒ reported that the Martin MariettaCorporation agreed to launch communications satellites for theGeneral Electric Corporation (G.E.) on untended Titan rocketsduring the next several years. According to the news account, theagreement to launch 15 satellites would establish Martin Mariettaas the dominant company, developed in the two years since theJanuary 28, 1986, explosion of the Challenger, in the domesticrocket business.  The ageeement was expected to bring in revenuesbetween $750 million and $1 billion for Martin Marietta through the‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘early part of the next decade, one senior company official told the‘  â ? »  ‘√√Postƒƒ.  Analysts told the newspaper that th√√ƒƒe G.E. agreement wouldmake Martin Marietta dominant over two U.S. rivals in thecommercial satellite launching business©©McDonnell DouglasCorporation, manufacturer of the Delta rocket, and General Dynamics‘  â ? Ë ‘Corporation, manufacturer of the Atlas Centaur rocket. (√√UPIƒƒ, Jan27/88.)

January 27: A United Nations (U.N.) report warned of an alarmingincrease in the amount of space debris in low©Earth orbit since thefirst orbital launch in 1957. The report, prepared by Siegfried J.Bauer, Chairman of a U.N. panel on "Potentially EnvironmentallyDetrimental Activities in Space," declared that "action on aninternational scale is obviously needed to deal with the globalissue of space debris." Bauer, a professor at the Institute forMeteorology and Geophysics of the University of Graz, Austria, saidmost damage in space collisions until now had been caused by debrisfrom "normal" activities in space. However, as a result of thefirst U.S. anti©satellite weapon tests, part of the StrategicDefense Initiative program, "there are already signs of 'willful'fragmentation and production of space debris," he said. 

¡  ¡Bauer said that in the 30 years of the Space Age, since thefirst Soviet Sputnik of October 4, 1957, about 18,000 man©madeobjects had been projected into space. About 7,000 of them, largerthan 8 inches©©the visibility limit of radar©©remain in "near Earthspace." Of these, 23 percent are satellite payloads, 10 percent areburned©out rocket stages, and 62 percent are various fragments.Only 5 percent are "active" satellites. Some 50 objects "appear tocontain radioactive material." Besides the larger fragments, thereare at least 2,000 objects ranging in size from 4 to 8 inches andabout 50,000 in the range of 1/2 inch to 4 inches.  Below that,there are "millions to billions" of metal and paint chips in themillimeter and submillimeter range" which pose greater danger thanwould appear from their size. Bauer claimed that a half©millimetermetal chip moving at 18,500 miles per hour "could easily penetratea space suit and even kill an astronaut." Most space junk isconcentrated between 220 and 800 miles above Earth, "exactly wheremost of the satellites, the Space Shuttle and space stationsoperate."
 
¡  ¡Bauer said that at this point "the possibility of a collisionwith space debris is still very small, but is not completelynegligible, particularly compared to the hazard fromextraterrestrial material such as micrometeorites." Bauer listedseveral examples of damage to satellites caused by man©made space‘  â ? # ‘debris. (√√UPIƒƒ, Jan 27/88)

January 28:  NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher and HiroyukiOsawa, President of the National Space Development Agency of Japan(NASDA), recently signed an agreement to allow NASA to directlyreceive data from Japan's Earth Resources Satellite (ERS©1).  The‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘agreement would allow NASA to have access to real©time data fromJapan's ERS©1 synthetic aperture radar and optical sensor.  NASAwould receive the data at a ground station at the University ofAlaska, Fairbanks. Data from the ground station would be providedto NASDA. Japan's ERS©1 was scheduled to be launched by NASDA onthe H©1 launch vehicle in early 1992.  (NASA Release 88©12)

¡ ¡* NASA commemorated the second anniversary of the SpaceShuttle Challenger accident.  At the Kennedy Space Center (KSC),Florida, workers preparing to resume Shuttle flights paused to paysilent tribute to the Challenger crew by halting all activity at11:38 a.m., the time of the Challenger lift off from launch Pad 39™B on January 28, 1986.  Flags around KSC and at NASA Centersthroughout the country were lowered to half staff while workersstood silent for 73 seconds, the length of the fatal Challengerflight.  Just before the ceremony, KSC Director Forrest S.McCartney spoke to workers over a television circuit andloudspeakers saying: "As we make preparations to return the SpaceShuttles to flight this year, it is appropriate to remember the men‘  â ? ÿ ‘and women of the Challenger crew." (√√ƒƒ√√UPIƒƒ, Jan 28/88; √√LA Timesƒƒ, Jan‘  â ? † ‘29/88; √√C Tribƒƒ, Jan 29/88; 

January 29:  It was announced in a recent NASA press briefing thatthere had been a total of 230 reported "close calls" since theChallenger accident.  A "close call" was defined by NASA as anincident in which there is no injury, no damage, and no impact onschedule, but which possesses the potential for a more seriousmishap.  (NASA Release 1©29©88)

¡ ¡* Scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC),Greenbelt, Maryland, successfully launched a rocket experimentaimed at simulating the effect of small comets entering the Earth'satmosphere.  Following two aborted attempts, the EnvironmentalReactions Induced by Comets (ERIC) experiment payload was launchedfrom GSFC's Wallops Flight Test Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia,by a two©stage suborbital Terrier©Black Brant VC rocket.  At the186©mile (300 kilometer) apogee of suborbital trajectory, thepayload released a combination of water, carbon dioxide, and icecrystals into the upper atmosphere, simulating the release of gasesthat would result from the impact of a small comet with the Earth'satmosphere. The gas release was synchronized with the passage ofNASA's Dynamic Explorer (DE) satellite over Wallops Island. Thesatellite photographed the atmosphere over Wallops in ultraviolet(UV) light in order to detect ionospheric depletion resulting fromthe release of the gases. The purpose of the experiment was to testthe hypothesis that the phenomenon of ionospheric depletion©©asudden appearance of small holes in the Earth's ionosphere©©iscaused by the impact of small, undetected comets. The principalinvestigator for the project, Dr. Michael Mendillo, declared theexperiment a success and noted, based on preliminary data, that thehole in the ionosphere "seemed to last longer than we had‘  â ? ÿ' ‘anticipated." (GSFC Release 88©5; √√UPIƒƒ, Jan 29/88)‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘åôJanuary 30: This date marked the thirtieth anniversary of thelaunch of Explorer 1, the first satellite put into orbit by theUnited States. The launch of the 31©pound satellite aboard amodified Army Jupiter©C booster marked America's entry into a spacerace with the Soviet Union following their launch of two Sputniksatellites.  In addition, Explorer 1 discovered the Van Allen‘  â ? ∞ ‘radiation belts that surround the Earth. (√√UPIƒƒ, Jan 30/88) ‘   ∞        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘
‘  â ? »  ‘√√Februaryƒƒ

February 2: A DMSP F©9 meteorological observation satellite wassuccessfully launched at 9:53 p.m. aboard an Atlas©E rocket fromVandenberg Air Force Base Space Launch Complex©3 in California. The1,650©pound Department of Defense (DoD) satellite was placed in a‘  â ? x ‘near©polar orbit. (√√W Timesƒƒ, Feb 4/88; √√Aeronautics and Space Report‘  â ? @ ‘of the President: 1988ƒƒ, 171)

February 3: An experimental jetliner being developed by McDonnellDouglas Corporation debuted in a 1©hour flight from the DouglasAircraft Facility in Long Beach, California.  The aircraft, withone unducted fan (UDF) engine and one ordinary jet engine, was aforerunner of the planned MD©91 and MD©92 passenger jets thatMcDonnell Douglas was actively marketing to airlines. The UDFengine, developed by GE, had demonstrated significant reductions infuel consumption over conventional jet engines. McDonnell Douglas'MD©91 and MD©92 airliners were being developed to meet the expecteddemand among airlines for alternative, fuel©efficient aircraftduring the latter 1990s. "This is as big a jump in technology asgoing from propellers to jets," said Walt Orlowski, program managerfor the experimental aircraft. "We are at the forefront of aviation‘  â ? ¯ ‘technology." (√√LA Timesƒƒ, Feb 3/88) 

February 6: A Trident 1 missile exploded 18 seconds after atraining test launch from the nuclear submarine Sim¿;¿n Bol¿1¿var. Abrief statement issued by the Navy said the first stage fired asplanned but suffered a malfunction shortly after breaching theocean surface 50 miles off Cape Canaveral, Florida, in the AtlanticOcean. This was the third failure for the Trident series ofsubmarine©launched ballistic missiles since August. The Navy‘  â ?   ‘planned to conduct an investigation of the test failure. (√√W Postƒƒ,‘  â ? » ‘Feb 7/88; √√W Timesƒƒ Feb 8/88)
 
February 8: A NASA Delta 181 launch vehicle carrying a majorStrategic Defense Initiative (SDI) experimental payload waslaunched at 5:07 pm EST from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station,Florida. The 6,000 pound payload, the heaviest ever carried by aDelta rocket, consisted of a main orbiting sensor platform andfifteen subsatellites released from the main spacecraft during thefirst 4 hours of the 12©hour experiment. The goal of the $250million exercise was to test the ability of an orbiting sensorplatform to detect and track the various components of SovietIntercontinental Ballistic Missiles (ICBMs) in flight. Four of thesubsatellites were small solid©fuel rockets whose exhaust plumessimulated the exhaust from the upper stages of Soviet ICBMs,whereas other test objects simulated real and "dummy" Sovietwarhead reentry vehicles. During the mission, the main satelliteand subsatellites were monitored by over 100 radar trackingstations, which simulated the ground©based component of anantimissile defense system. In addition, the exercise also included‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘the detection, by sensors on the satellite, of a 40©foot soundingrocket launched from Kauai, Hawaii. The experiment was declared asuccess despite the failure of an infrared sensor. The Deltalaunch, originally scheduled for February 4, was delayed five daysbecause of an apparent valve malfunction on the Delta. Datagathered by the satellite during the 12©hour exercise would be‘  â ? ∞ ‘transmitted to Earth over a 10©day period. (SSR 1988 008A©D; √√UPIƒƒ,‘  â ? x ‘Feb 9/88; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Feb 9/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Feb 9/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Feb 9/88;‘  â ? @ ‘√√USA Todayƒƒ, Feb 9/88;    

¡ ¡* NASA announced that Andrew J. Stofan, AssociateAdministrator for the Space Station, would retire from the Agencyon April 1.  Stofan's career with NASA spanned nearly 30 years. Hehad directed the Space Station program since June 1986. During histenure, the program underwent a major cost review which culminatedin an Administration©approved plan to develop the Space Station intwo phases.  Stofan also oversaw the establishment of the SpaceStation program office in Reston, Virginia.  (NASA Release 88©16)

February 11: The White House officially unveiled a comprehensive"Space Policy and Commercial Space Initiative to Begin the NextCentury," intended to assure U.S. space leadership into the 21stcentury.  The release of the space policy had been delayed forseveral days because of a dispute among NASA, the President'sEconomic Policy Council, and Congress over aspects of thecommercial space initiative.  The most controversial component ofthe initiative was the proposed Industrial Space Facility (ISF), anorbiting, Shuttle©tended materials processing laboratory that wouldbe jointly used by NASA and by private companies. The ISF was beingpromoted by some members of Congress and the Economic PolicyCouncil as an interim step toward the permanently crew©tended SpaceStation.  NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher submitted a"minority report" to the president opposing the policy Council'srecommendation that NASA immediately commit to leasing the ISF fromSpace Industries, Inc., a commercial space venture. In response tothe Administrator's concerns, the commercial space policy statementrecommended competitive bidding to build the ISF and areconfiguration of the facility as a crew©tended laboratory.

¡  ¡A draft of the 39©page commercial space initiative included areport by the National Security Council on national securityimplications of commercializing space, and legislative andadministrative proposals by President Ronald Reagan's EconomicPolicy Council on how to promote commercialization of space. Amongother key proposals were the promotion of a private launch vehicleindustry and the establishment of limits on the amount of third™party liability insurance coverage commercial space projects wouldhave to carry. ¡  ¡
‘   Ä%         0*†(†(∞∞  ‘
¡  ¡President Reagan also announced a program to develop thetechnologies needed to conduct human©assisted exploration of thesolar system, including a  mission to Mars. The program, labeledProject Pathfinder, would allot NASA $100 million in fiscal year1989 to begin developing technologies for tended missions to the‘  â ? ∞ ‘Moon and Mars. (√√Presidential Directive on National Space Policy:‘  â ? x ‘Fact Sheetƒƒ, Feb 11/88; WH Release, Feb 11/88; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jan 24/88;‘  â ? @ ‘√√W Timesƒƒ, Jan 27/88; √√AvWkƒƒ, Feb 1/88)     

February 15: NASA successfully launched the first of threesuborbital rocket experiments to study Supernova 1987A. The rocket,launched from the Woomera, Australia Range, carried an X©rayspectrometer that observed X©ray emissions in the 0.3©7 keV band.Two additional rocket experiments were scheduled for launch duringa window lasting until March 20.  An earlier series of soundingrocket observations of Supernova 1987A were conducted from Woomeraduring November and December 1987. Both campaigns used Black BrantIX two©stage, solid©fuel rockets. (LRC Release 88©7)  

February 24:  A segment of a Space Shuttle solid rocket motor wastest fired at Morton Thiokol's Wasatch facility in Utah in a testof the solid rocket motor nozzle joint. The overall test objectivewas to evaluate performance of the redesigned solid rocket motorcase©to©nozzle joint that had an insulation adhesive defect anddamaged o©ring in order to determine the fail©safe performance ofthe redesigned joint. The redesigned case©to©nozzle joint included100 added radial bolts, adhesively bonded insulation surfaces, andan added "wiper" o©ring designed to keep the adhesive on theinsulation surfaces during assembly. The test was part of theShuttle motor redesign program. (NASA Release 88©23)

¡ ¡* NASA announced that it would lease to the U.S. Governmentunassigned space aboard a commercially developed space facility.The leasing agreement would apply for five years beginning at theend of fiscal year 1993.  At least 30 percent of the facility wouldbe available for commercial use. 
¡  ¡The facility would be deployed, checked out, and servicedperiodically on orbit by Space Shuttle crews. It would provide acrew©tended, shirtsleeve workspace and would also be able tooperate in an untended, free©flying mode, providing a microgravityenvironment for periods of four to six months. NASA would initiatean open competition to be managed by the Marshall Space FlightCenter, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release 88©25) 

February 26:  NASA announced the appointment of Manuel (Manny)Peralta as Associate Administrator for Management, effectiveFebruary 28. He had been acting in this post since April 28, 1987,replacing June Gibbs Brown, nominated by the President to becomeInspector General for the Department of Defense.  Prior to joiningNASA, Peralta had over 30 years of industry experience in business,engineering, and project management, most recently as a senior‘   ÿ'	        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘executive with Exxon, responsible for implementation of worldwidecapital projects and the European Engineering Office. (NASA Release87©26 and Key Personnel Change Announcement, Feb 25/88)

February 29:  NASA announced plans to acquire a Boeing 747©100jetliner to serve as a second Space Shuttle Carrier Aircraft (SCA)for the space transportation system.  A letter contract was signedwith Boeing Military Airplane Company, a division of the BoeingCompany, Seattle, to reserve the aircraft for NASA use. Theadditional SCA would provide increased ferrying capability andeliminate a potential single©point failure in the spacetransportation system.

¡  ¡The 231©foot long aircraft would be modified to carry Shuttleorbiter vehicles from landing sites to orbiter processingfacilities at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The 747©100, whichis nearly identical to the original SCA, was selected to minimizecosts associated with modifications and operation. (NASA Release88©28; JSC Release 88©005)

‘  â ? † ‘√√During February:ƒƒ

‘  â ? 0 ‘*  √√Aviation Week Space Technologyƒƒ reported that the Soviet Unionwas assessing a major expansion of its untended Mars balloon/rovermission planned for 1994. Soviet officials were evaluating thepossibility of significantly increasing the payload capability ofits dual Mars orbiter/lander spacecraft by using aerobrakinginstead of rocket propulsion to enter Martian orbit. Aerobrakingwould enable the Soviets to dispense with rockets needed todecelerate the spacecraft sufficiently to enter Martian orbit,thereby making available an additional 3,300 pounds of payloadcapacity. 

¡  ¡An approved aerobraking maneuver would give the Sovietsseveral new features to the balloon/rover mission, including: a110©pound subsatellite that would be released into Martian orbit toprovide Mars gravity data; 10 "meteorbeacons" dropped on thesurface that would return data on temperature, pressure, and windvelocity; 2 penetrators that would dive as deep as 16 feet intoMars' surface to return data on chemical composition, soiltemperature, and water vapor content; a high resolution orbiterimaging system; and 2 Earth©return vehicles, which would serve astest vehicles for a future automated soil sample return mission.‘  â ? ò! ‘(√√AvWkƒƒ, Feb 29/88) 

* Using NASA's new supercomputer at the Numerical AerodynamicsSimulation Facility, Dr. Kozo Fujii, a research fellow at NASA'sAmes Research Center, Mountain View, California, developed acomputer model that simulates the air©flow field physics associatedwith vortex breakdown and provides new insights into its causes.Vortex breakdown is a complex phenomenon that can cause loss oflift and control for high©performance aircraft. Understanding and‘   ÿ'
        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘eventually controlling vortex breakdown would improvemaneuverability and safety for high©performance aircraft.  (NASARelease 88©13)

‘  â ?   ‘√√Marchƒƒ

March 1: NASA announced that an international team of researchers,coordinated by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena,California, was using satellites to study how the Earth's tectonicplates move in the Caribbean Sea and Central and South America. The experiment, spanning several years, would allow researchers tochart the motions of dozens of land sites in 16 countries usingsignals from orbiting navigation satellites. Research teamscarreied electronic receivers designed to pick up signals fromseven NAVSTAR satellites operated by the U.S. Department ofDefense, as part of the Global Positioning System (GPS) program. By locating receiver equipment at established survey markers inSouth America and the Caribbean, and collecting GPS data from up tofour GPS satellites passing overhead, researchers calculated thelocation of receiving sites on the ground and are planned tocompare measurements over time to determine tectonic displacement. 
¡  ¡
¡ ¡The plates studied included the Caribbean plate, in portionsof the southern Caribbean Sea; the Cocos plate, in the PacificOcean off the west coast of Central America; the Nazca plate, offthe west coast of South America; and the South American plate, uponwhich lies most of the South American continent. The research wasfunded by NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, EarthScience and Applications Division. (NASA Release 88©30)

March 3:  NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appeared beforethe House Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications on theagency's proposed 1989 budget. He stressed that 1989 would be acrucial year for NASA, a year that would "make or break" theNation's space program. The proposed budget included funds toincrease the rate of Shuttle flights in 1989 in order to "fly off"the backlog of vital defense and science missions. A build up offunding for Space Station hardware development was also requested.Dr. Fletcher testified that the requested additional funds for theSpace Station were the minimum necessary to avoid the disbandmentof development teams and the indefinite deferral or cancellation ofthat program. He also warned that if funds for advanced technologywere not approved, the necessary technological foundation forfuture achievements would not be built, and the goal of long©termU.S. space leadership would "become an idle dream."  (1989 NASAAuthorization Hearings Before the House Subcommittee on Space‘  â ? # ‘Science and Applications, Mar 3/88; NASA Release 88©31; √√APƒƒ, Mar‘  â ? ∏$ ‘22/88; √√W Timesƒƒ Mar 23/88; √√LA Timesƒƒ Mar 23/88)

¡ ¡* NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher announced thatJames B. Odom was the new Associate Administrator for SpaceStation, NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC.  He replaced Andrew J.‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘Stofan, who recently announced he was leaving the Agency on April1.  Odom joined the U.S. Army's rocket research and developmentteam at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, in 1956, as a systems engineer. He transferred to the Marshall Space Flight Center in 1959, wherehe held various engineering and technical management positions,including that of Chief of the Engineering and Test OperationsBranch for the second stage of the Saturn V launch 3 vehicle.  Hewas appointed Manager of the External Tank Project in the SpaceShuttle Projects Office in 1972 and became Deputy Manager forProduction and Logistics in the Shuttle Projects Office in 1982. He was appointed Manager of the Space Telescope Office in 1983. Odom is the recipient of numerous service awards. (NASA Release 88™32)
 
March 7: In response to a civil suit brought under the Freedom ofInformation Act by the Associated Press and six other newsorganizations, the Justice Department disclosed documentationshowing that the Federal Government and Morton Thiokol paid$7,735,000 in cash and annuities to settle all claims with thefamilies of four of the crew members who died in the explosion ofthe Shuttle Challenger. Thiokol, maker of the faulty booster rocketblamed for the January 28, 1986, explosion, paid $4,641,000.  TheGovernment's share of the settlement was $3,094,000.  Thesettlements were reached on December 29, 1986, with the immediatesurvivors of the spacecraft crew members, Francis R. Scobee,Ellison Onizuka, Gregory B. Jarvis, and Sharon Christa McAuliffe.Settlements had been reached among Thiokol and two other families©™those of Judith Resnik and Ronald E. McNair©© with no Governmentcontribution.  A claim by the widow of Michael J. Smith againstThiokol was still pending in Federal court. The Federal Governmentmaintained that it cannot be held liable for the deaths of civilian‘  â ? 8 ‘and military government employees who die on duty. (√√ƒƒ√√ƒƒ√√ƒƒ√√UPIƒƒ, Mar 8/88;‘  â ?   ‘√√NY Timesƒƒ, Mar 8/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Mar 8/88; √√WSJƒƒ, Mar 8/88; √√USA Todayƒƒ, Mar‘  â ? » ‘8/88; √√LA Timesƒƒ, Mar 8/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Mar 8/88; √√C Tribƒƒ, Mar 8/88; √√P‘  â ? ê ‘Inqƒƒ, Mar 8/88; √√APƒƒ, Mar 13/88)        
March 8:  NASA announced that preparations were underway to bringon line two new Space Shuttle abort©landing sites in northwesternAfrica. These sites would be used as contingency landing facilitiesin the event of a transatlantic abort during the launch of STS©26and subsequent missions. The new sites would be located at BenGuerir (40 miles north of Marrakech), Morocco, and Banjul, TheGambia.
 
¡  ¡With the addition of these new sites, and the continued use ofsites at Zaragoza Air Base and Moron Air Base in Spain, the totalnumber of transatlantic abort sites came to four. The Ben Guerir,Banjul, and Moron sites would be staffed with 30 to 40 NASA andcontractor personnel during the launch of STS©26. Robert Fleming,program manager for the contingency landing site program at KennedySpace Center, said, "These sites must be operational and allrequirements met in time for the next mission.  We hope we neverhave to use them.  But they will be ready."  (NASA Release 88©34)‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘åôMarch 10:  NASA announced it was designing a sophisticated radarreceiving system to help image and track Arctic ice flows and studythe remote areas of Alaska and its surrounding seas. The overallsystem, including a 10©meter receiving antenna called the AlaskaSAR Facility, was to be located at the University of Alaska,Fairbanks (UAF), managed by the university Geophysical Institute,and implemented by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL).  Thesystem initially was to receive signals from three satellitescarrying synthetic aperture radar (SAR), which penetrates thickcloud cover and produces data for high resolution images.

¡  ¡The facility was scheduled to be fully operational in time forthe April 1990 launch of the ESA satellite E©ERS 1.  The facilitywas to receive data from Japan's J©ERS 1 satellite and theCanadian©led multinational Radarsat satellite.  NASA had assembledan ad hoc team of investigators, cochaired by project scientistsfrom JPL and the University of Alaska, to assist in facilitydevelopment. (NASA Release 88©35)

¡ ¡* NASA announced that George W.S. Abbey was to be the newDeputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Flight, NASAHeadquarters, effective immediately.  Abbey had been SpecialAssistant to the Director, Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas,since November 1987.  He began his NASA career in 1967 as TechnicalAssistant to the Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program.  Hebecame technical assistant to the Center Director in 1969, Directorof Flight Operations in 1976, and Director of the Flight CrewOperations Directorate in 1983. He is a recipient of numeroushonors and service awards. (NASA Release 88©36)

March 11: A European Space Agency (ESA) Ariane 3 launch vehicle wassuccessfully launched from Kourou Launch Center in French Guianacarrying two communications satellite payloads, including a U.S.satellite. The launching had been scheduled for December but wasdelayed for extra tests after abnormalities were detected in theoxygen and liquid hydrogen third©stage engine. Twenty minutes afterlaunch, the Ariane 3 released the French Telecom 1C and GTE'sSpacenet III Geostar R01 communications satellites for auto©boostinto geostationary orbit, 22,554 miles above the Equator. Thespacenet satellite was expected to begin its boost towardgeostationary orbit at 87 degrees west longitude on Wednesday.‘  â ?   ‘(FBIS©WEU©88©049, Mar 14/88; SSR 1988 018A©D; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Mar 13/88;‘  â ? –  ‘√√W Postƒƒ, Mar 12/88; √√LA Timesƒƒ, Mar 12; √√C Tribƒƒ, Mar 13)
 
March 12:  NASA's C©141 Gerard P. Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO)departed NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California,for Guam to study the Sun's atmosphere during the total solareclipse of March 17©18. A team of seven scientists aboard KAO wasto make a flight through the shadow of the Moon as it moves acrossthe Pacific Ocean.  The scientists were interested in the fewseconds at the beginning and end of the solar eclipse when the Sunwould be almost completely covered by the Moon and when the edge of‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘the solar disk would begin to reappear from behind the Moon. TheKuiper would intercept the path of the eclipse about 600 milesnorthwest of Guam. The Kuiper, a modified Lockheed C©141 jettransport aircraft, is fitted with a 36©inch diameter telescope andflies at 41,000 to 45,000 feet. Measurements of the solaratmosphere would be made at the far©infrared wavelengths of 30, 50,100, 200, 400 and 800 micrometers, representing the first attemptto record simultaneously these wavelengths from the Sun on such anarrowly defined spatial scale. (NASA Release 88©37; ARC Release88©08)
    
March 15: A report released by an international panel of over 100scientists assembled by NASA showed that the depletion of theEarth's ozone layer over the Northern Hemisphere had increased ata much faster rate than previously believed. The report, prepared over 17 months, provided definitive evidence showing that the ozonelayer, which shields life on Earth from harmful ultravioletradiation, had been depleted by an average of about 2.3 percent,since 1969 over most of the United States, and by as much as 5percent over the South Pole.  The observed ozone loss was at leasttwice as large as scientists had predicted and was attributedprimarily to the continued release of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). 

¡  ¡The NASA study group reexamined years of ground©based andsatellite observations of the atmosphere in order to remove thenormal biennial fluctuations of many atmospheric characteristicsand the effects of the 11©year solar cycle. The ground©basedobservations were limited to mid©latitudes in the NorthernHemisphere because there were few stations elsewhere in the world. This was the first effort by scientists to separate the effects ofsolar and biennial fluctuations from the monthly data at differentlatitudes. The release of the study results followed  ratificationby the U.S. Congress of the Montreal Protocol, an agreementendorsed by 46 countries, which calls for a 50 percent reduction in‘  â ? ê ‘emissions of CFCs by the end of the century. (√√UPIƒƒ, Mar 15/88; √√NY‘  â ? X ‘Timesƒƒ, Mar 16/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Mar 16/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Mar 16/88; √√USA Todayƒƒ,‘  â ?   ‘Mar 16/88; √√WSJƒƒ, Mar 16/88;√√ƒƒ √√CSMƒƒ, Mar 16/88;√√ƒƒ √√B Sunƒƒ, Mar 16/88; √√P Inqƒƒ,‘  â ? Ë ‘Mar 16/88; √√C Tribƒƒ, Mar 16/88; √√LA Timesƒƒ, Mar 21/88) 

March 15: NASA issued an updated fleet manifest reflecting currentplanning for primary payloads for Space Shuttle missions andexpendable launch vehicles through fiscal year 1993. Twointerplanetary missions were planned for launch in 1989: Magellan,a mission to map Venus; and Galileo, a cooperative project withGermany to survey Jupiter and its moons. The Hubble Space Telescopealso maintained the flight assignment date of June 1989. Astro©1,a Spacelab mission designed to study the universe in theultraviolet spectrum, was being reconfigured to enhance the studyof Supernova 1987a and was slated to fly on STS©35 in November1989. Two additional Spacelab missions were assigned flights forSeptember 1990©©a Spacelab Life Sciences mission in March and thefirst Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS©1)‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘mission.  The Gamma Ray Observatory was moved forward in theprojected schedule for a March 1990 launch, and the Ulysses missionto study the Sun and its environment remained at the projectedOctober 1990 launch date.
    
¡  ¡Another important addition to the manifest was a mission toretrieve the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) in July 1989.The manifest was also designed to support the commercial spaceinitiative included in the National Space Policy. In addition tothe Shuttle launches, thirty©five launch vehicle launches were‘  â ? – ‘planned through fiscal year 1993. (√√Payload Flight Assignments©NASA‘  â ? ò ‘Mixed Fleetƒƒ, Mar/88; NASA Release 88©38)

March 16: Congress ordered a temporary halt to NASA's efforts tolease a commercial crew©tended space laboratory, citing severalirregularities in NASA's handling of the procurement process andquestioning the space agency's abrupt reversal of its prioropposition to the facility. The chairmen of the Houseappropriations subcommittee for NASA, Representative Edward Boland,and the Chairman of the House authorization subcommittee for NASA,Representative Bill Nelson, agreed to freeze funding for thefacility until these issues could be addressed. Several rankingmembers of the House and Senate had written NASA to complain thatthe Agency was moving ahead with a contract without congressional‘  â ? ¿ ‘authorization. (√√H Postƒƒ, Mar 24/88; √√AvWkƒƒ, Mar 28/88)

¡ ¡* Morton Thiokol, Inc. was fined by Utah state officials forsix safety violations in connection with a December 29, 1987, firethat killed five workers and destroyed a missile casting buildingat Thiokol's Wasatch facility near Salt Lake City. The UtahOccupational and Safety Health Division sought fines of $31,700against Thiokol, citing violations of safety rules related toprotection of workers, deviations from approved procedures, andfailure to take precautions against static electricity buildup ina rocket©casting facility. An Air Force investigation into theimmediate cause of the fire, which occurred during the casting ofsolid rocket propellant into the metal casing of an MX missile‘  â ? Ë ‘segment, was pending. (√√UPIƒƒ, Mar 16/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Mar 17/88; √√NY Timesƒƒ,‘  â ? ∞ ‘Mar 17/88; √√WSJƒƒ, Mar 17/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Mar 17/88)  

March 16: NASA began flight tests of a new design of low©noise,energy efficient aircraft propellers. The tests, undertaken jointlyby NASA and Lockheed Corporation as part of the Propfan TestAssessment (PTA) program, were to determine whether large, unductedpropellers with a radically swept design are a feasible alternativeto higher©cost turbofan (conventional jet) propulsion systems. 

¡  ¡Researchers estimated that a thoroughly reworked version ofthe old propeller aircraft would save airlines 15 to 30 percent ayear in fuel costs, compared with the most advanced turbofan™powered aircraft flying in the 1990s, and still fly as fast asconventional airliners.  (NASA Release 88©40)‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘åô¡ ¡* The Soviet Space Research Institute and the Sovietgovernment agreed to place aboard a spacecraft, destined for theMartian moon Phobos, a plaque commemorating discovery of the Moonand its sister moon Deimos in 1877 by Asaph Hall, an Americanastronomer at the U.S. Naval Observatory. The Soviet Phobosmission, due for launch in July 1988, involved two Sovietspacecraft. They would reach the vicinity of Mars in early 1989 andbe placed in elliptical orbits around the planet. Both wouldapproach Phobos in sequence and release landing probes.  (NASARelease 88©41) 

March 18: NASA concluded negotiations with the ESA on a bilateralmemorandum of understanding (MOU) for cooperation in the design,development, operation, and use of the permanently crew©tendedcivil international Space Station complex. Under the terms of thenew MOU, ESA would provide the Columbus laboratory module to theinternational Space Station complex. This permanently attached,pressurized module would support approximately 40 single equippedracks for payloads and storage. ESA would also provide an untended,free©flying polar platform for Earth observation experiments,complementing the polar platform under development by the UnitedStates.  As a third element, ESA would provide a man©tended freeflyer (MTFF) designed to accommodate long©duration microgravityapplications in the fields of fluid physics, life, and materialsciences. (NASA Release 88©44)

March 22: NASA unveiled plans for an ambitious program to study the‘  â ?  ‘Earth as a single ecological system, the √√Los Angeles Timesƒƒreported.  Called the Earth Observing System, the U.S. portion ofthe multinational project would cost well above $2 billion andwould use a wide range of orbiting laboratories, including freeflying platforms and facilities aboard the international spacestation. The heart of the program would include four platforms©©twofrom the United States, one from Europe, and one from Japan©©thatwould be launched into polar orbit around the Earth by theparticipating countries. The program, which was still in theplanning stage, was described by NASA science division spokesmanCharles Redmond as "a critical element in NASA's strategic plan."‘  â ? ∞ ‘(√√LA Timesƒƒ, Mar 23/88)

‘  â ? @ ‘√√ƒƒMarch 25: The San Marco D/L spacecraft was successfully launched ona U.S. Scout launch vehicle from the San Marco Equatorial Range inKenya. The launch, originally planned for March 18, had beendelayed to permit replacement of a yaw rate gyro in the Scout. Fivescientific instruments©©three from the United States, one from theFederal Republic of Germany, and one from Italy©©were carried onthe spacecraft to study Earth's lower atmosphere. (SSR 1988 026B;NASA DAR, Mar 3/88; NASA Release Mar 2/88; LRC Release 88©8, 88©8A)

March 30: NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers(CCSSO) invited America's students to participate in a nationalcompetition to name NASA's replacement Space Shuttle orbiter. NASA‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘specified that the name chosen not only should identify an Americanspacecraft but also should capture the spirit of America's missionin space. In honor of the seven crew members lost in the Challengeraccident, the name "Challenger" has been retired. 

¡  ¡House Joint Resolution 559, introduced March 10, 1986, byCongressman Tom Lewis (R©Florida), called for the name of thereplacement orbiter to be selected from suggestions submitted bystudents. On October 30, 1987, Congress authorized the NASAAdministrator to select a name for the new orbiter "from amongsuggestions submitted by students in elementary and secondaryschools."  The new orbiter, designated OV©105, under constructionby Rockwell International in California, was scheduled forcompletion in April 1991. (NASA Release 88©46).

During March: The Air Force and NASA debated possible new destructguidelines covering when a malfunctioning Shuttle and  crew wouldhave to be blown up to prevent greater loss of life on the ground.In the wake of the Challenger accident, the debate over new Shuttlerange safety guidelines focused on increasing public safety whileat the same time giving the crew of a malfunctioning Shuttle aslong as possible to overcome the problem and "fly it out" before adestruct order would have to be issued. As a result, the Air Forcesuggested barring all non©essential personnel©©VIPs, journalists,and spectators©©from the Kennedy Space Center for future Shuttlelaunches. "It's the kind of thing [where] you wish you could hideyour head in the sand and pretend like it didn't have to exist,that there was never going to be any problem," said veteran Robert"Hoot" Gibson, Commander of the second post©Challenger Shuttle‘  â ? ® ‘flight. (√√UPIƒƒ, Mar 5/88, √√H Chronƒƒ, Mar 6/88)

‘  â ? 8 ‘√√Aprilƒƒ

April 2: NASA announced that it would remove and inspect the liquidoxygen turbopumps aboard the Shuttle Discovery, a move that wasexpected to delay Discovery's launch beyond the scheduled date ofAugust 4. The pumps will be inspected to ensure that critical boltsin the devices are properly tightened and have not been stripped.Delays resulting from the inspection are expected to push back‘  â ? x ‘Discovery's launch date until late August. (√√UPIƒƒ, Apr 2/88; √√W Postƒƒ,‘  â ? @ ‘Apr 3/88; √√USA Todayƒƒ, Apr 4/88; √√P Inqƒƒ, Apr 4/88)  

April 5: NASA and the ESA announced the selection of scientificinvestigations to be conducted on two spacecraft as part of a jointNASA©ESA solar terrestrial research program.  More than 130 U.S.scientists were scheduled to participate in the Solar andHeliospheric Observatory (SOHO) and Cluster missions.  Twospacecraft systems were to be built by ESA with instrumentssupplied by both ESA and NASA.  The Cluster mission, involving aset of four satellites, was planned for launch on an ESA Arianelaunch vehicle in December 1995. The Cluster would investigate thespace plasma three©dimensional microphysics phenomena in Earth's‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘magnetic field environment, using four identical spacecraft inpolar orbits.  SOHO, planned for launch by NASA on the Shuttle oron an expendable launch vehicle in March 1995, would be placed atthe Earth©Sun La Grangian point and investigate the physicalprocesses that form and heat the solar corona and give rise to thesolar wind.
¡  ¡
¡ ¡The SOHO and Cluster missions are an outgrowth of theInternational Solar Terrestrial Physics (ISTP) program, a majorinternational program in solar and space physics organized in 1985by NASA, the Japanese Institute for Space and Astronautical Science(ISAS), and ESA. (NASA Release 88©48)

April 7: NASA selected a telescoping pole as the egress method forthe Space Shuttle's new crew escape system. The escape system, tobe carried on all future Shuttle flights, would provide crew escapecapability from the orbiter during controlled, gliding flightfollowing failures or difficulties during ascent or entry wherelanding at a suitable landing field could not be achieved.  Testsconducted in February and March, using a fixed pole extendingthrough a hatch©like opening in a C©141 aircraft, demonstrated thatthe pole would provide adequate orbiter clearance in an emergencyegress situation.  The telescoping pole system had been chosen overan alternative tractor rocket extraction system. (NASA Release 88™‘  â ? ¿ ‘50; JSC Release 88©014; √√APƒƒ Apr 8/88; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Apr 8/88; √√W Postƒƒ,‘  â ? à ‘Apr 8/88; √√USA Todayƒƒ, Apr 8/88; √√LA Timesƒƒ, √√C Tribƒƒ, Apr 9/88; Apr‘  â ? P ‘8/88; √√P Inqƒƒ Apr 8/88; √√H Postƒƒ, Apr 8/88; √√H Chronƒƒ, Apr 8/88)

April 11: Astronomers at the University of Hawaii at Manoaannounced the discovery of the oldest and most distant galaxy everseen. The galaxy, called 0902+34, was estimated to be ten times thesize of the Milky Way and 12 billion light years from Earth.Measurements indicated that the galaxy was formed much earlier inthe history of the universe than had been generally thoughtpossible, requiring a revision of accepted theories on thedistribution of matter in the early universe and the formation ofgalaxies. The galaxy was discovered by Dr. Simon J. Lilly, a staff‘  â ? Ë ‘astronomer at the University of Hawaii at Manoa. (√√NY Timesƒƒ Apr‘  â ? ∞ ‘12/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Apr 12/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Apr 12/88; √√P Inqƒƒ, Apr 12/88)   

April 14: NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher stated that theMoon, rather than Mars, may be the best initial destination forpossible U.S./U.S.S.R. human©assisted missions. "Going to the Moontogether would give the two leading spacefaring nations in theworld an opportunity to build a stable base for furthercooperation, which could, one day, lead to a cooperative mission toMars," he said. Speaking before the National Space Symposium inColorado Springs, Colorado, Fletcher cited timing, cooperativeexperience, and technical readiness as three crucial factorsfavoring the Moon for an initial cooperative crew©tended mission.

¡  ¡Dr. Fletcher described 1988 as "perhaps the most critical year‘   ÿ'         0*†(†(∞∞  ‘in the history of the U.S. civil space program," and he refuted thenotion that American space leadership was lost. 
Dr. Fletcher said the Administration's fiscal year 1989 budgetrequest for NASA provided the resources to reestablish U.S.leadership in space. (Excerpts from Remarks Prepared for Delivery,National Space Symposium, U.S. Space Foundation, Colorado Springs,Colorado, Apr 14/88;  NASA Release 88©52) 

April 18: NASA submitted to the Congress its acquisition plan forthe Space Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM).  The plancontained NASA's strategy for a full and open competition tointroduce an ASRM into the Shuttle system.  NASA contended that anew booster design would result in substantive improvements inflight safety, reliability, and performance over the current SRMsproduced by contractor Morton Thiokol. 

¡  ¡The ASRM design considered by NASA would be an advancedversion of the segmented boosters currently in use in the Shuttleprogram.  The new boosters would have a more reliable field jointdesign and would be more powerful than the current SRMs, providingfor a 12,000©pound increase in the Shuttle's payload capacity.Additionally, the ASRMs would preclude the necessity for throttlingthe Space Shuttle's main engines during the period of maximumdynamic pressure, thereby reducing or eliminating about 175"criticality 1/1r" failure modes for the Shuttle system. 

¡  ¡An important aspect of NASA's ASRM acquisition plan was theproposal that the boosters be developed in a new Government©ownedcontractor operated (GOCO) facility and that the contract besubjected to competitive bidding. In response to protests by MortonThiokol and the Utah congressional delegation, led by Senator JakeGarn, NASA altered the proposal to include the possibility ofbuilding the ASRM in a currently existing private facility. Theoverall cost to develop the ASRM was estimated at just under $1billion, including modern tooling and equipment, plus $200©$300million for construction of facilities. Under the currentproduction schedule, the first ASRMs would be flight certified by1993.  Thiokol announced it would bid aggressively to build the‘  â ? ∞ ‘ASRM at its existing facilities in Utah. (NASA Release 88©54; √√UPIƒƒ,‘  â ? x ‘Apr 18/88; √√APƒƒ, Apr 19/88; √√USA Todayƒƒ, Apr 19/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Apr 19/88; ‘  â ? @ ‘√√NY Timesƒƒ Apr 20/88; √√W Postƒƒ Apr 20/88; √√WSJƒƒ, Apr 20/88; )

April 20: The third full©duration test firing of NASA's redesignedSpace Shuttle solid rocket motor was carried out at MortonThiokol's Wasatch Facility near Brigham City, Utah. The 126©footlong, 1.2 million©pound motor, designated Qualification Motor©6(QM©6), underwent a full©duration horizontal test firing of twominutes.  The test, tentatively labeled a success, was the third offive test firings to be carried out prior to the scheduledresumption of Shuttle flights in August 1988. (NASA Release 88©51;‘  â ? ' ‘MSFC Releases 88©43, 88©44; √√APƒƒ, Apr 20/88; √√UPIƒƒ, Apr 20/88; √√NY Timesƒƒ‘  â ? ÿ' ‘Apr 21/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Apr 21/88; √√USA Todayƒƒ, Apr 21/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Apr‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘21/88)

April 21: The Canadian government announced that it would become anactive partner in the international Space Station Program and wouldprovide equipment worth $1.2 billion to the project. Canada's mainequipment contribution to the Space Station would be a roving spacerobot that would serve as the "arms and legs" of the Station.  Therobot, which would be comparable to but more advanced than the"Canadarm" currently carried on U.S. Space Shuttles, would be acritical tool in Station construction and docking activities. Inreturn for Canada's contribution, Canadian astronauts would beentitled to six©month tours of duty on the Station every two years.Canadian space officials announced plans to expand their astronautcorps in anticipation of the Canadian presence on the Space‘  â ? 
 ‘Station. (√√Tor Starƒƒ, Apr 22/88) 

April 25: Two U.S. Navy navigation satellites were launched fromVandenberg Air Force Base, California, into a 600©mile circularpolar orbit aboard a NASA Scout rocket. The two Oscar satelliteswere part of the U.S. Navy's long©established, continuous all™weather global navigation system. Made available to non©Navy usersin 1967, the spacecraft had since been adapted for diverse civilianuses such as commercial shipping, charting of offshore oil andmineral deposits, and land survey projects. The system providedposition information within one©tenth of a nautical mile anywherein the world. This marked Scout's 100th flight and followed closelyon the heels of the Scout San Marco D/L launch, which took place onMarch 25 from the San Marco Range platform in the Indian Ocean.(SSR 1988 033A©G; NASA Release 88©55)

April 28: The fifth and final short©duration solid rocket motorNozzle Joint Environment Simulator (NJES) firing test was carriedout. The overall objective of the test, part of the Space Shuttlesolid rocket motor redesign program, was to evaluate the fail©safeperformance of the redesigned case©to©nozzle joint with verifieddefects. (NASA Release 88©56)
 

‘  â ? ∞ ‘√√Mayƒƒ

May 4: A series of powerful explosions destroyed the PacificEngineering & Production Company oxidizer plant near Las Vegas,Nevada, killing two plant employees and injuring over 350 people.The plant was a major supplier of the ammonium perchlorate oxidizerused aboard the Space Shuttle's solid rocket motors and othermilitary and civilian boosters.  The explosions produced flamesthat shot 100 feet into the air and created a 400 foot©wide craterat the facility site.  Seismographs at NASA's Jet PropulsionLaboratory, 200 miles away in Pasadena, California, detected two ofthe blasts registered at 3.0 and 3.5 on the Richter scale.  Thecause of the explosions was investigated.
‘   ÿ'         0*†(†(∞∞  ‘å¡  ¡The destruction of the oxidizer plant raised concerns amongNASA and contractor Morton Thiokol over the availability of solidfuel oxidizer beyond the next four Space Shuttle flights. Aprolonged interruption of Pacific Engineering's productionactivities would also threaten the military's missile production‘  â ? Ë ‘schedule. (√√UPIƒƒ, May 5/88; √√APƒƒ, May 5/88; √√NY Timesƒƒ, May 5/88; √√W Postƒƒ,‘  â ? ∞ ‘May 5/88; √√WSJƒƒ, May 5/88; √√USA Todayƒƒ, May 5/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, May 5/88; √√B‘  â ? x ‘Sunƒƒ, May 5/88;  

May 5: NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher voiced alarm overthe House of Representative's resolution for funding of NASA'sfiscal year 1989 budget.  Speaking in Washington before a symposiumon "Science Education: A Challenge for Excellence in America'sFuture,"  Dr. Fletcher issued his toughest warning yet about theconsequences of reducing the NASA funding levels proposed by theAdministration.  The Administrator warned that "the civil spaceprogram will be stopped in its tracks" if the House funding figureof $10.2 billion©©cut by over $1 billion from the Administrationproposal©©were to be passed.  More specifically, Dr. Fletcherpredicted the reduced budget would kill the Space Station programand lead to the abrogation of several international commitments inspace science and applications. (NASA Release 88©60). 

‘  â ? ¯ ‘√√ƒƒMay 12: The Associated Press and United Press International newsagencies reported that U.S. surveillance satellites had detectedthe explosion of a Soviet solid propellant plant 500 milessouthwest of Moscow in the Ukraine.  The Soviet Union confirmedthat an explosion had occurred©©killing three people and seriouslyinjuring five others©©but denied that rocket propellants had beeninvolved in the blast. U.S. intelligence officials claimed that theexplosion destroyed several buildings at the plant and put a haltto all solid propellant manufacturing activities at the facility,which was the only source of solid propellant for the SS24intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM).  Two weeks previously,a powerful series of explosions destroyed a solid propellant plantin Nevada, killing two plant employees and injuring hundreds ofothers.  Pentagon officials estimated it would take at least sixmonths for the Soviet facility to resume production of ICBM‘  â ? ∞ ‘propellants. (√√APƒƒ, May 18/88; √√UPIƒƒ, May 18/88; √√W Postƒƒ, May 18/88;‘  â ? x ‘√√WSJƒƒ, May 18/88; √√USA Todayƒƒ, May 18/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, May 18/88)

May 13: NASA's Lewis Research Center and the NASA/Industry AdvancedTurboprop Team were awarded the prestigious Collier Trophy at theannual Robert J. Collier Trophy Dinner hosted by the NationalAviation Club.  Lewis and the NASA/Industry Advanced Turboprop Teamwere honored for developing technology and testing advancedturboprop propulsion systems that offered dramatic reductions infuel usage and operating costs for subsonic transport aircraft.(NASA Release 88©59)

May 14: An untended Soviet spacecraft carrying fuel, food,equipment, and mail, docked with the Mir space station.  Two Soviet‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘cosmonauts, on a long duration mission, tended Mir. The cosmonauts,Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov, arrived at the space station inDecember and were expected to stay in space for about a year,breaking the 325©day endurance record set the previous year by Yuri‘  â ?   ‘Romanenko. (FBIS©Sov©88©108, Jun 6/88; SSR 1988 038A; √√APƒƒ, May14/88)

May 17: A European Space Agency (ESA) Ariane 2 launch vehicle wassuccessfully launched at 7:58 p.m. EDT from the Kourou LaunchCenter in French Guiana.  The 162©foot three©stage rocketsuccessfully carried into orbit the 2,619©pound Intelsat 5commercial communications satellite which would eventually propelitself into a 22,300©mile geosynchronous orbit.  This was the 22ndlaunch of the Ariane series and the second Ariane 2 launch in 1988. A total of eight Ariane 2 launches were scheduled for 1988. (SSR‘  â ? ∏ ‘1988 040A; √√APƒƒ, May 18/88; √√UPIƒƒ, May 18/88)

‘  â ? H ‘May 19: √√Scienceƒƒ magazine published findings from a recent Earth™based radar mapping of the planet Venus, conducted by JetPropulsion Laboratory (JPL) scientists. Newly processed radarpictures of the surface of Venus showed what may be geologicallyrecent volcanic activity and impact cratering, including possiblevolcanic mountains and broad lava flows and fields like those whichmake up the Hawaiian Islands.  The JPL radar images, with aresolution of less than a mile, were the latest in a series ofEarth©based radar scans of Venus conducted at the Goldstone,California, complex of NASA's Deep Space Network.  The Magellanspacecraft was expected to make more detailed radar observations of‘  â ? ‡ ‘Venus in 1990. (NASA Release 88©65; √√C Tribƒƒ, May 21/88; )

‘  â ? p ‘May 21: In an interview with the √√Washington Postƒƒ, Soviet leaderMikhail Gorbachev announced he would ask President Ronald Reagan toapprove a joint Soviet©U.S. untended flight to Mars during theupcoming summit meeting in Moscow.  A Soviet Foreign Ministryspokesman said Gorbachev's proposal for a Mars mission wasrecommended by Roald Z. Sagdeev, a Soviet space expert, as a symbolof superpower cooperation and a fruitful scientific andtechnological undertaking. "This is a field for cooperation thatwould be worthy of the Soviet and American people," Gorbachev said.‘  â ? x ‘"And I will make that proposal to President Reagan." (√√W Postƒƒ, May‘  â ? @ ‘22/88; √√UPIƒƒ, May 22/88; √√LA Timesƒƒ, May 22/88; √√B Sunƒƒ, May 23; √√C Tribƒƒ,May 23/88) 

May 23: NASA and the Department of Commerce awarded the first U.S.Government contract for commercial launch transportation servicesto a private firm.  The two agencies contracted General DynamicsSpace Systems Division, San Diego, California, to provideexpendable launch vehicle transportation services for theDepartment's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES). Thiscontract marked the first time a contractor assumed systemsperformance responsibility for overall program and subcontractor‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘management, vehicle design, production, testing and vehicle©to™payload integration, mission integration, launch services, systemeffectiveness, overall launch vehicle performance, and missionsuccess. 
¡  ¡
¡ ¡In a related matter, NASA's Kennedy Space Center recentlyentered into an agreement with General Dynamics that allowed thecompany to use NASA Launch Complex 36 and associated facilities forcommercial launch operations of the Atlas/Centaur rocket. (NASA‘  â ?  ‘Release 88©66; √√UPIƒƒ, May 23/88; √√APƒƒ, May 24/88; √√B Sunƒƒ, May 24/88; √√ƒƒ√√NY‘  â ? – ‘Timesƒƒ, May 25/88; √√C Tribƒƒ, May 26/88)

¡ ¡* Negotiators from NASA and the government of Japan reachedagreement in substance on the text of a memorandum of understanding(MOU) for cooperation in the detailed design, development,operation, and utilization of the permanently crew© tended civilSpace Station. The Japanese Science and Technology Agency wouldserve as NASA's counterpart in implementing this MOU.
 
¡  ¡Under the terms of the new MOU, Japan would provide theJapanese Experiment Module (JEM)©©a permanently attached,pressurized laboratory module, which would include an exposedfacility and an experiment logistics module.  The pressurizedportion of the JEM would provide a shirt©sleeve environment for theSpace Station crew to perform research activities.  The JEM'sexposed facility would be used for scientific observations, Earthobservation, communications, advanced technology development andother activities requiring direct exposure to space. The experimentlogistics module, which would provide transportation and storage oflogistics items, would be transported to the Station by the SpaceShuttle. (NASA Release 88©70)

‘  â ?   ‘√√Juneƒƒ

June 6: Morton Thiokol announced that it would not bid on a $1.5billion contract to build the proposed Space Shuttle Advanced SolidRocket Motor (ASRM). Instead, Thiokol officials stated they wouldconcentrate on building the current generation of redesigned solidrocket motors, currently undergoing final testing prior to the‘  â ? x ‘resumption of Space Shuttle flights in September. (√√ƒƒ√√UPIƒƒ, Jun 6/88;‘  â ? @ ‘√√APƒƒ, Jun 6/88; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jun 7/88; √√WSJƒƒ, Jun 7/88; √√LA Timesƒƒ, Jun7/88) 

June 7: A Soviet Proton launch vehicle, carrying a Soyuz TM©5spacecraft with a three©man Soviet©Bulgarian crew, took off fromthe Baikonur launch facility.  The Soyuz TM©5 crew was to join atwo©man crew aboard the Mir space station.  The launch, whichoccurred at 10:04 a.m. EDT, was the first Soviet crew©tended launchin 1988.  The Mir visit was to be a 10©day mission in which thevisiting astronauts would perform over 40 experiments aboard thestation.  The two astronauts aboard Mir were to remain after thedeparture of their colleagues and continue a year©long endurance‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘mission that was expected to break the record established by Yuri‘  â ? »  ‘Romanenko in 1987. (FBIS©Sov©88©110, Jun 8/88; SSR 1988 048B; √√NY‘  â ? ê ‘Timesƒƒ, Jun 8/88; √√B Sunƒƒ, Jun 8/88) 

June 8: Negotiations were completed among the United States,Canada, Europe, and Japan on the framework for internationalcooperation in the Space Station program. 
 
¡  ¡Under the agreements, the United States would provide theoverall Space Station framework: operating subsystems, includinglife support and 75 kilowatts of power; laboratory and habitatmodules; and a free©flying platform that would be placed in polarorbit for Earth observation.  Canada would provide a MobileServicing System, which would be used in conjunction with theassembly, maintenance, and servicing of Space Station elements. Japan would provide the Japanese Experiment Module, a permanentlyattached pressurized laboratory module, which would include anexposed facility and an experiment logistics module.  The EuropeanSpace Agency would provide a pressurized laboratory module, whichwould be permanently attached to the crew©tended base; a free™flying polar platform to work together with the U.S. polarplatform; and an astronaut©tended free flyer to be serviced at thecrew©tended base.
¡  ¡
¡ ¡The United States anticipated spending approximately $16billion (fiscal year 1989 dollars) to develop Space Stationhardware.  The total foreign commitment to the Space Station was inexcess of $7 billion.  Furthermore, the partners would cover morethan 25 percent of the Space Station's expected annual operatingcosts throughout the 20©30 year life of the program. Signature ofthe agreements was expected later in the summer. (NASA Release 88™74)

June 9: The first direct observation of an atmosphere on Pluto wasmade by Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) astronomersflying aboard NASA ARC's Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO).  A teamof astronomers from MIT, including Edward Dunham, James Elliot,Amanda Bosh, Steve Slivan, and Leslie Young, made the observationduring a temporary occultation of a star behind Pluto.  Theobservations were made at 41,000 feet (12,300 meters) altitude,approximately 500 miles south of Pago Pago, American Samoa, overthe Southern Pacific Ocean.  Information about the temperature,pressure, and extent of the atmosphere would be derived from theoccultation data, obtained using a solid state video cameraattached to KAO's 36 inch (92 cm) telescope.  The airborneobservations lasted about 1.5 minutes, occurring shortly aftermidnight. (ARC Release 88©40) 

June 13: This date marked 5 years since the Pioneer 10 spacecrafthad left the solar system on its trajectory toward interstellarspace.  Pioneer 10©©the most distant human©made object inexistence©©was now 4,175,500,000 miles from the Sun, almost 45‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘times the distance from the Earth to the Sun.  Radio signals,moving at the speed of light, took 12 hours and 26 minutes totravel from Earth to spacecraft and back, the longest time of anyradio communication in history. 

¡  ¡The spacecraft, launched in 1972, continued to operateextremely well as it collected and transmitted data back to Earth.Its primary mission, originally scheduled for 21 months, was toassess the feasibility of passage through the Asteroid Belt andprovide the first close©up examination of Jupiter and its moons. Pioneer 10 accomplished all of its original goals by December 1973.At that point, the mission was indefinitely extended.  Scientistsreprogrammed the probe to explore the Sun's atmosphere and to lookfor a tenth planet and gravity waves in the far outer solar systemand beyond. 

¡  ¡Recent improvements in the NASA ground stations were expectedto allow communications with Pioneer 10 to continue until the rangeapproached six billion miles, more than twice the pre©launchestimates.  Project Manager Richard O. Fimmel expected that NASAwould be able to track Pioneer 10 until the power source limitedcommunications, which was expected to occur  toward the end of the1990s. 

¡  ¡Both Pioneer 10 and its sister spacecraft, Pioneer 11, carriedan easily interpreted graphic message in the event that theyencountered any intelligent life forms on their journey. Scientistsbelieved Pioneer 10 and 11 would travel among the stars virtuallyforever because the vacuum of interstellar space is so empty thatthe risk of any type of collision would be negligible. (ARC Release88©36)

‘  â ?   ‘√√ƒƒJune 14: The fourth full©duration test firing of NASA's redesignedSpace Shuttle solid rocket motor was conducted at Morton Thiokol'sSpace Operations facility near Brigham City, Utah.  The test waspart of the Shuttle motor redesign program. The 126©foot©long, 1.2™million©pound motor, designated Qualification Motor©7 (QM©7),underwent a full©duration, horizontal test firing of two minutes. After a preliminary examination of the fired motor, NASA and MortonThiokol officials declared the test an apparent success.  Theexercise involved the first use of a new test stand at MortonThiokol.  One remaining full©duration test, Production VerificationMotor©1 (PVM©1), would be conducted in July, prior to the next‘  â ? ò! ‘Space Shuttle flight. (NASA Release 88©7; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jun 15/88) 

June 16: An advanced Navy navigation satellite, NOVA©II, waslaunched into polar orbit on a NASA Scout launch vehicle fromWestern Space and Missile Center (WSMC), California.  This was the111th flight of the 73©foot long, four©stage, solid propellantScout launch vehicles. (SSR 1988 052C; NASA Release 88©75)

June 26: This date marked the tenth anniversary of the launch of‘   ÿ'         0*†(†(∞∞  ‘NASA's Seasat Satellite, which ushered in a new era in spaceresearch focusing on unsolved questions of the world's oceans andweather. Launched on June 26, 1978, on an Atlas©Agena rocket fromVandenberg Air Force Base, California, Seasat carried a payload offive scientific instruments unlike any package carried on previousremote©sensing satellites.

¡  ¡Among the experimental instruments Seasat pioneered were asynthetic aperture radar, which provided highly detailed images ofocean and land surfaces; a radar scatterometer to measure near™surface wind speed and direction; a radar altimeter to measure theheight of the ocean surface and waves; and a scanning multichannelmicrowave radiometer to measure surface temperature, wind speeds,and sea ice cover.  The satellite also carried a passive visual andinfrared radiometer to provide supporting data for the other fourexperiments. 

¡  ¡Seasat demonstrated how space sensors could be used inoceanography, serving as a protoype for a generation ofinternational missions that could provide answers to some of theworld's most baffling and threatening weather phenomena. (NASARelease 88©84)

June 28: Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA AssociateAdministrator for Space Flight, updated the target for the upcomingSpace Shuttle launch to early September and indicated that he wasvery pleased with the progress of preparations for STS©26.  The newlaunch target was selected following a major review covering allaspects of the Shuttle program and Truly's subsequent report toNASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Truly said, "Hard work bya lot of people is paying off and the Shuttle program is comingalong nicely."

¡  ¡Discovery was scheduled to be rolled out to the Kennedy SpaceCenter Launch Pad 39B the first week of July. A flight readinessfiring (FRF) of Discovery's main engines and liquid propulsionsystem was targeted for late July.  The final full©scale, full™duration test firing of the redesigned Shuttle solid rocket motor(SRM) prior to STS©26 was also planned for late July. (NASA Release88©85)

June 30: The NASA Administrator appointed Ivan Bekey to be SpecialAssistant for System Engineering and Planning Integration, Officeof Exploration.  Bekey would be responsible for overall systemsengineering for Office of Exploration studies and formulation oftop level architecture.  In the previous year, he served asDirector of Program Planning for the Office of Policy and Planning. For the preceding six years, he was the Director of AdvancedPrograms, Office of Space Flight. He was also NASA coordinator forthe National Commission on Space.  Bekey joined NASA in 1978. (NASASpecial Announcement on 06©60©88)
‘   ÿ'         0*†(†(∞∞  ‘å‘  â ?    ‘√√July
ƒƒ
July 1: NASA officially transferred custody of Launch Complex 17and East Coast Delta launch operations to the U.S. Air Force. Since1960, NASA had conducted 143 Delta launches from the two©padComplex, located at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida.Under Air Force stewardship, Complex 17 would continue to be usedto launch Delta medium class vehicles. The Air Force had procured20 new Delta IIs for Department of Defense payloads. The firstlaunch was scheduled for later in 1988.  In addition, at leasteight commercial Delta IIs would be launched by McDonnell DouglasAstronautics Company, Huntington, Beach, California, from Complex17 between 1989 and 1992. (NASA Release 88©99) 

July 1: NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena,California, inaugurated its Mark III Hypercube parallelsupercomputer, the result of a 5©year research and developmenteffort at the JPL Center for Space Microelectronics Technology andthe California Institute of Technology (Caltech). The Mark IIIspearheaded the arrival of massively parallel supercomputing. Itsfirst module, placed on©line at the Caltech computer network,contained 32 nodes, or processing units, which together had a peakspeed of about 512 million floating point operations per second.Three more 32©node modules would be added during the next ninemonths to form a 128©node hypercube with a peak speed of 2 billionfloating point operations per second.
 
¡  ¡The Mark II Hypercube was being used for scientific,engineering, and defense research applications, including analysisof NASA multispectral space imaging data; analysis of NASAsynthetic aperture radar images taken from the Space Shuttle; andsimulation of the Strategic Defense System. (NASA Release 88©88)

‘  â ? » ‘√√ƒƒJuly 4: The fully assembled Space Shuttle Discovery vehicle wasrolled out of the Kennedy Space Center Vehicle Assembly Building(VAB) to Launch Pad 39©B in preparation for mission STS©26,‘  â ?   ‘scheduled for late September. (√√UPIƒƒ, Jul 4/88; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jul 5/88;‘  â ? Ë ‘√√W Postƒƒ, Jul 5/88; √√WSJƒƒ, Jul 5/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Jul 5/88; √√P Inqƒƒ, Jul5/88)  

July 5: An ad hoc committee, assembled to review safety riskmanagement in the National Space Transportation System program,completed its report, finding that there had been "a positivechange in attitudes" by NASA and NASA contractors towards safety.The six©member committee, composed of both Government andindependent safety experts, found no significant system safetyissues that would adversely impact the STS©26 launch. (NASARelease: 88©89) 

July 7: The Soviet Union successfully launched the Phobos 1spacecraft to Mars aboard a 198©foot Proton launch vehicle from theBaikonur launch facility.  Phobos 1 and Phobos 2, scheduled for‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘launch the following week, would carry 100©pound landers designedto analyze Phobos, the larger of the two moons of Mars. The 17™mile©long, potato©shaped Phobos and its smaller moon Deimos werethought to be asteroids captured by the gravitational field ofMars.  Tracking support for the Soviet missions would be providedby NASA's Deep Space Network (DSN), whose primary mission would beto provide essential tracking data to permit landings on Phobos.The DSN would then shift to enabling a key scientific goal of themission, to track Phobos very precisely. The 13,000©pound Phobosspacecraft would carry more than two dozen robotic instruments ontheir 200©day journey to Mars. (FBIS©Sov©88©131, Jul 8/88; SSR 1988‘  â ? ò ‘058A; NASA Release 88©87; √√UPIƒƒ, Jul 8/88; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jul 8/88; √√W‘  â ? `	 ‘Postƒƒ, Jul 8/88;)

July 12: The Soviet Union successfully launched the Phobos 2spacecraft to Mars aboard a 198©foot Proton launch vehicle from theBaikonur launch facility.  The Phobos 2 launch occurred less thana week after the launch of its companion spacecraft, 
‘  â ?  ‘Phobos 1. (FBIS©Sov©88©134, Jul 13/88; SSR 1988 059A; √√W Postƒƒ, Jul‘  â ? ÿ ‘13/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Jul 13/88; √√LA Timesƒƒ, Jul 13/88; √√P Inqƒƒ, Jul 13/88;‘  â ? † ‘√√C Tribƒƒ, Jul 13/88) 

¡ ¡* NASA announced that a scientist at the Ames Research Center,Mountain View, California, had developed a new, ground breakingcomputational model that could accurately simulate the complex,fluctuating air flow within aircraft engine turbines andcompressors.  The new computational model, developed by NASAscientist, Man Rohan Rai, was expected to generate significantsavings for the aircraft engine industry once it became ready forcommercial applications.  The model performed one of the mostcomplex computer simulations ever undertaken and provided the mostaccurate calculation to date of air flow within turbines. Engineconcepts and designs had been tested primarily by experimentalmethods, most often by building prototype engines and subjectingthem to a battery of tests.  Advanced computer techniques were farless expensive and much faster. Current computational work wasperformed on a Cray©2 supercomputer at the new Ames NumericalAerodynamics Simulation Facility. (NASA Release 88©94; ARC Release‘  â ? ∞ ‘88©50; √√SF Chronƒƒ, Jul 13/88; √√Bus Weekƒƒ, Jul 25/88) 

July 13: In a setback for the Space Station program, the Senateapproved a $10.1 billion appropriation for fiscal year 1989©©$1.4billion less than was requested by NASA and the Reaganadministration.  The legislation provided only $200 million of theestimated $767.4 million NASA said it needed to continue basic workon the Space Station program.  An earlier House appropriations billapproved $902 million of the $967 million requested for theStation.  Senior Reagan administration officials warned that thefinal version of the bill would provoke a Presidential veto if itlacked sufficient funding to continue the Space Station program.‘  â ? ' ‘(√√UPIƒƒ, Jul 13/88; √√WSJƒƒ, Jul 14/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Jul 14/88; √√USA Todayƒƒ, Jul‘  â ? ÿ' ‘14/88; √√LA Timesƒƒ, Jul 14/88)  ‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘åô¡ ¡* An Indian©built rocket carrying a weather satellitemalfunctioned and plunged into the Indian Ocean shortly after itwas launched from India's Sriharikota Island launch facility. Thefive©stage, 80©foot rocket Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle(ASLV) apparently suffered a malfunction in the solid fueled firststage boosters.  This was the second failure of the new rocket,which suffered a catastrophic malfunction during its first launchattempt in March 1987.  The launch failure was interpreted by spaceexperts as a major setback for India's civilian space and ballistic‘  â ?  ‘missile development programs. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Jul 14/88; √√C Tribƒƒ, Jul‘  â ? – ‘14/88; √√P Inqƒƒ, Jul 14/88; √√LA Timesƒƒ, Jul 14/88) 

July 13: The Administrator appointed Edward A. Frankle to be NASAgeneral counsel.  Frankle had been Deputy General Counsel sinceOctober 27, 1985.  He began his career at NASA in September 1982,as Chief Counsel of the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt,Maryland. (NASA Release 88©98) 

July 15: The launch of the Space Shuttle Discovery faced furtherdelays as a result of the discovery of a fuel leak in a fuel lineinside one of the Shuttle's orbital maneuvering system (OMS) pods. NASA engineers determined that the small leak, which was detectedduring a test of the OMS fuel tanks, would have to be fixed priorto the launch of Discovery. The repair might delay the Shuttlelaunch by up to two months, depending on whether the spacecraftcould be serviced at the launch pad or would have to be rolled backto the vehicle assembly building at Kennedy Space Center.  NASAofficials said the leak would not affect the scheduled test firing‘  â ? ‡ ‘of the Shuttle main engines on July 28. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Jul 18/88; √√W‘  â ? ® ‘Postƒƒ, Jul 18/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Jul 18/88; √√USA Todayƒƒ, Jul 18/88; √√P Inqƒƒ,Jul 18/88)

July 18: President Ronald Reagan christened the plannedinternational Space Station "Freedom," to symbolize the valuesshared by the U.S. and its allies. White House spokesman MarlinFitzwater said the name "Freedom" was recommended by NASA officialsand representatives of Canada, Japan, and the European Space‘  â ? Ë ‘Agency, project participants. (WH Release, Jul 18/88; √√UPIƒƒ, Jul‘  â ? ∞ ‘18/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Jul 18/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Jul 18/88)

July 20: NASA announced it would test©©throughout the month©©a newdeep©space communications system with its Voyager 2 spacecraft, inpreparation for the Voyager 2 fly©by of Neptune in August 1989.  Aspart of the new system, NASA added the 27 telescopes from theNational Radio Astronomy Observatory's (NRAO) Very Large Array(VLA) facility to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's deep spacenetwork (DSN). This action more than doubled DSN's ability tocapture the Voyager signal, which became extremely faint as itapproached the vicinity of Neptune.  Under an agreement betweenNASA and the National Science Foundation, NRAO sponsors, engineersinstalled new receivers and microwave horns, tuned to the VoyagerX©Band radio frequency, on all the 82©foot dish antennas at the‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘VLA.  Special signal©processing and communication equipment wasadded so that the VLA would be linked by satellite to the DSN'sDeep Space Communication's Complex at Goldstone, California. (NASARelease 88©102)

July 21: An ESA Ariane 3 rocket carrying two communicationssatellites was successfully launched from the Korou Launch Centerin French Guiana. The Ariane 3, launched at 7:12 p.m. EDT, carriedtwo satellites belonging to India, and the European‘  â ?  ‘Telecommunications Satellite (Eutelsat), into polar orbit. (√√UPIƒƒ,‘  â ? – ‘Jul 22/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Jul 22/88)  

July 26: NASA announced selection of the Government sites to beused as production and testing facilities for the Agency's plannedSpace Shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM). The TennesseeValley Authority property known as Yellow Creek, in northeasternMississippi, was selected as the location of the ASRM productionfacility, while NASA's Stennis Space Center near Bay St. Louis,Mississippi, was selected for ASRM testing. Maximum utilizationalso would be made of available manufacturing and computercapability at the Michoud Assembly Facility and the SlidellComputer Complex, both located in southeast Louisiana, to minimizetotal program costs.  The planned ASRM, which would replace thecurrent Redesigned Solid Rocket Motors in the mid©1990s, wouldincorporate substantive design changes to improve reliability andsafety margins, as well as provide a significant added performancecapability to the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 88©104; MSFC Release‘  â ?  ‘88©102; √√UPIƒƒ, Jul 27/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Jul 27/88; √√USA Todayƒƒ, Jul 27/88) 

During July: A team of NASA scientists from the Marshall SpaceFlight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, the Lockheed Company, and theUniversity of Alabama in Huntsville, announced the discovery of anew high©temperature superconductor. According to a paper published‘  â ? » ‘in √√Applied Physics Lettersƒƒ, the scientists demonstrated that"samples of yttrium©barium©copper oxide, when mixed with silveroxide, heat treated, and exposed to ©320 degrees Fahrenheit, can besuspended below a rare Earth magnet by the magnetic field trappedin the sample." Because superconducting material excludes amagnetic field, by floating a superconductor beneath a magnet, thetwo materials are firmly attracted to each other, but never touch.According to Palmer N. Peters, of Marshall's Cryogenics PhysicsOffice and a member of the scientific team, the implications ofhigh temperature superconductors for space technology are numerous."In space, with the elimination of the weight associated withgravity, it should be possible to develop low©vibration, low™friction couplings and bearings," Peters said. "The importance ofthe discovery is that this new material not only has strongersuspension forces but exhibits other unusual magnetic properties:it has demonstrated a lower electrical resistance at normaltemperatures, is easier to solder, and is less brittle than otherhigh temperature superconducting materials." (MSFC Release 88©104) 
‘   ÿ'         0*†(†(∞∞  ‘å‘  â ?    ‘√√Augustƒƒ

August 1: A Wet Countdown Demonstration Test (WCDT) of the SpaceShuttle Discovery's External Tank (ET) was conducted followingseveral unplanned holds as a result of problems with ground supportequipment. The WCDDT, carried out with Discovery deployed forlaunch at the Kennedy Space Center's Launch Complex 39©B, consistedof loading the ET with liquid Oxygen and Liquid Hydrogen in mock‘  â ? @ ‘preparation for a Shuttle launch. (NASA √√STS©26 Press Kitƒƒ)  

August 2: NASA launched the first of three untended balloons thatwould search for cosmic rays, including those that could provideevidence of galaxies made of antimatter.  The balloon flights wereto be conducted throughout August from a launching site at PrinceAlbert Saskatchewan Airport, Canada, as part of the NASA BalloonProgram.  Each of the balloons would carry one of three cosmic rayexperiments: an extragalactic matter experiment that would searchfor heavy antinuclei; a scintillating optic fiber experiment; anda high energy spectrometer telescope. (NASA Release 88©106; GSFC™WFF Release 88©25) 

August 3: NASA held dedication ceremonies for the newly renamedJohn C. Stennis Space Center©©formerly the National SpaceTechnology Laboratories©©in Hancock County, Mississippi. The Centerwas named for Mississippi's retiring senator by an Executive ordersigned May 20, 1988, by President Ronald Reagan. (NASA Release 88™93) 

August 4: NASA appointed Gary L. Tesch to be NASA Deputy GeneralCounsel. Tesch had been serving as Associate General Counsel(contracts) prior to this appointment. (NASA Release 88©109)

August 8: Astronomers at NASA's Space Telescope Science Institute,Baltimore, Maryland, and the University of California at Berkeleyuncovered the most distant galaxy yet seen. Called 4C41.17, thenewly discovered galaxy is located at an estimated distance of 15billion light years©©more than 90 percent of the distance to thevisible limits of the universe.  The discovery was made by a teamof American and European astronomers, using the Very Large Array(VLA) Radio Telescope Facility near Socorro, New Mexico, and wasconfirmed a galaxy using the 2.1 meter optical telescope at KittPeak National Observatory. Studying remote galaxies like 4C41.17was expected to help forge a better understanding of how galaxieshave evolved since the time of the Big Bang.  This research wassupported by NASA, the European Space Agency, the National ScienceFoundation, the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope project, and the‘  â ? # ‘Space Telescope Science Institute. (NASA Release 88©111; √√P Inqƒƒ, Aug‘  â ? ∏$ ‘9/88; √√B Sunƒƒ, Aug 9/88; )

August 10: After an aborted first attempt on August 4, a 22©secondflight readiness firing (FRF) of the Space Shuttle Discovery's mainengines was conducted on the launch pad at the Kennedy Space‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘Center's Launch Complex 39©B.  The first FRF attempt had beenhalted inside the T©10 second mark because of a sluggish fuel bleedvalve on the number 2 main engine. The faulty valve was replaced‘  â ? X ‘prior to the FRF. (√√APƒƒ, Aug 10/88; √√UPIƒƒ, Aug 10/88; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Aug‘  â ?   ‘11/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Aug 11/88; √√WSJƒƒ, Aug 11/88; √√CSMƒƒ, Aug 11/88; √√W Timesƒƒ,‘  â ? Ë ‘Aug 11/88; √√B Sunƒƒ, Aug 11/88; √√P Inqƒƒ, Aug 11/88) 

August 11: A Space Systems Development Agreement was signed by NASAand Spacehab, Inc., a private firm that was developing a Shuttle™based pressurized module for commercial applications. According tothe agreement, NASA agreed to provide Shuttle payload bay space forSpacehab's middeck augmentation module on six Shuttle flightsbeginning in 1991.  Spacehab would pay $28.2 million (adjusted forinflation) for standard services for each flight. The Spacehabmodule, to be constructed by McDonnell Douglas AstronauticsCompany, Huntsville, Alabama, would be a metal truncated cylindermeasuring 10 feet in length by 13 feet in diameter, designed to fitin the Shuttle's cargo bay. Shuttle crew members would access themodule through a tunnel from the Shuttle's middeck. The companywould make available to customers a variety of locker and rackaccommodations, with associated support and integration services. Spacehab was specifically identified in the President's CommercialSpace Initiative, announced in February, in which the Reaganadministration committed to make the best efforts to launch thecommercial module in the early 1990s.(NASA Release 88©114)

August 18: The fifth and final test of NASA's redesigned SpaceShuttle solid rocket motor, prior to resumption of Shuttle flights,was conducted at Morton Thiokol's Space Operations facility nearBrigham City, Utah.  The 126©foot©long, 1.2 million©pound motor,designated Production Verification Motor©1 (PVM©1), underwent afull duration, horizontal test firing of two minutes. The motor wasextensively flawed to demonstrate the fail©safe characteristics of‘  â ? » ‘the redesign. (NASA Release 88©113; √√APƒƒ, Aug 18/88; √√UPIƒƒ, Aug 18/88;‘  â ? ê ‘√√NY Timesƒƒ, Aug 19/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Aug 19/88; √√WSJƒƒ, Aug 19/88; √√USA Todayƒƒ,‘  â ? X ‘Aug 19/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Aug 19/88; √√B Sunƒƒ, Aug 19/88 )

¡ ¡* NASA announced that TRW, Inc. had been selected for finalnegotiations leading to the award of contracts for extendeddefinition and development of the space©based Advanced X©rayAstrophysics Facility (AXAF).  The facility would be the third inNASA's series of space©based great observatories, following theHubble Space Telescope and the Gamma Ray Observatory into orbit inthe mid©1990s.  These observatories, as well as the Space InfraredTelescope Facility, would permit simultaneous, complementaryobservations of astrophysical phenomena over different wavelengthsof the spectrum. The objective of this project would be to developa high©quality, X©ray telescope to be used by the internationalscientific community, in conjunction with NASA, for an operationalperiod of 15 years. The proposed cost of the contract wasapproximately $508 million. (NASA Release 88©118; MSFC Release 88™131)‘   ÿ'         0*†(†(∞∞  ‘å‘  â ?    ‘√√ƒƒôAugust 25: NASA launched two U.S. Navy navigational satellitesaboard a Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California.The two Oscar satellites, each weighing 141 pounds, were placedinto a 600©nautical©mile circular polar orbit. The Oscars were partof the Navy's all©weather, global navigation system. The StackedOscars on Scout©4 (SOOS©4) mission marked the fourth and finalScout launch for 1988. (SSR 1988 074A©G; NASA Release 88©116)

August 29: A Soviet Proton launch vehicle carrying a Soyuz TM©6spacecraft, with three cosmonauts on board, was successfullylaunched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The three©man Soyuz crew,which included an Afghan and a Soviet physician, was scheduled tojoin a two©man crew aboard the Mir space station on the week©longmission.  The physician, Valery Polyakov, was to remain aboard Mirafter the departure of his Soyuz crewmates and continue monitoringthe health of the Mir cosmonauts, who were in the eighth month ofa record©breaking year©long endurance mission. (FBIS©Sov©88©168,‘  â ? H ‘Aug 30/88; SSR 1988 075A; √√UPIƒƒ, Aug 30/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Aug 30/88; √√CSMƒƒ,‘  â ?  ‘Aug 30/88; √√P Inqƒƒ, Aug 30/88)  

August 30: NASA issued the newest update of its mixed©fleetmanifest, reflecting current planning for primary payloads forSpace Shuttle missions and expendable launch vehicles (launchvehicles) through fiscal year 1993. The manifest reflected changesmade to accommodate a slower than expected resumption of Shuttleflights and the necessity of rescheduling to conserve the launchwindows for three major planetary missions. Among the major changesmade was a rescheduling of the Hubble Space Telescope launch fromJune 1989 to February 1990 and the transferral of a Department of‘  â ? ® ‘Defense Shuttle mission to an expendable launch vehicle. (√√Payload‘  â ? p ‘Flight Assignments©NASA Mixed Fleetƒƒ, Aug 1988; NASA Release 88©120)

During August: A Cray Y©MP, the fastest supercomputer in the world,arrived at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California,and underwent acceptance tests in the Numerical AerodynamicSimulation (NAS) Facility.  The NAS was established as a nationalfacility available to leading U.S. research institutions through anational network.  It had long©term support from Congress to usethe fastest available computers to achieve rapid progress in U.S.aerospace work and in other fields such as weather, astrophysics,and chemistry. 
¡ ¡
¡ ¡Supercomputer systems were complementing and extendingaerospace research being done in wind tunnels and high©velocity(4,000 to 15,000 mph) shock tunnels. The new Y©MP central processorwould not only solve old problems four times as fast as existingsystems, but also would be used to investigate flow phenomena thatcould not be investigated currently by wind tunnels or computers.Another important application of the NAS supercomputer system wouldbe the modeling of air flows for hypersonic vehicles such as theNational Aero©Space Plane and the Space Shuttle. 
¡ ¡‘   ÿ'!         0*†(†(∞∞  ‘å¡ ¡Ames was the first customer to take delivery of this newsupercomputer, expected to be fully operational by January 1989.(ARC Release 88©80)

‘  â ?   ‘√√Septemberƒƒ

September 1: The fifth firing in a series of Transient PressureTest Articles (TPTA) was conducted in the East Test Area of NASA'sMarshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama. The test,designated TPTA 1.3, was part of the Space Shuttle solid rocketmotor redesign program.  For this test, flaws were intentionallycut into both the test article's field joints, the case©to©nozzlejoint, and other components of the redesigned motor.Instrumentation on the motor recovered data to verify thestructural performance, thermal response, and sealing capability ofthe redesigned field and case©to©nozzle joints. (MSFC Release on08/30/88)

September 2: A classified Department of Defense payload waslaunched aboard a Titan 34D launch vehicle from launch complex 40at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station.  Sources quoted by theAssociated Press said the rocket failed to carry its payload intothe correct orbit. The payload was widely believed to be a Vortex‘  â ? ¯ ‘reconnaissance satellite. (SSR 1988 077A©C; √√UPIƒƒ, Sep 2/88; √√Reuterƒƒ,Sep 2/88)
 
September 5: A classified Department of Defense payload wassuccessfully launched aboard a Titan 2 launch vehicle fromVandenberg Air Force Base, California.  Civilian experts said theybelieved the rocket was carrying a cluster of Navy recon© naissancesatellites known as "White Cloud."  The Titan 2 launch followed anapparent failure of a Titan 34D rocket to launch a military‘  â ?   ‘reconnaissance satellite into proper orbit. (SSR 1988 078A©B; √√NY‘  â ? » ‘Timesƒƒ, Sep 6/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Sep 6/88; √√CSMƒƒ, Sep 6/88)   

September 6: China successfully launched its first experimentalweather satellite, the Wind and Cloud No. 1. The satellite waslaunched by a Long March 4 launch vehicle from the Taiyuan launchfacility in north©central China. (FBIS©CHI©88©90, Sep 16/88; SSR‘  â ? x ‘1988 080A©B; √√APƒƒ, Sep 7/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Sep 8/88) 

September 7: After a tense 24©hour delay of deorbit burn, a SovietSoyuz TM©5 capsule carrying two cosmonauts landed safely in SovietCentral Asia. The Soyuz TM©5, returning to Earth from a week©longvisit to the Mir space station, experienced premature shutdowns ofits reentry motor during the first two deorbit burn attempts. Thefirst shutdown had been caused by a malfunction in the automaticguidance system, whereas the second failure resulted from improperresetting of the flight computer. The problem was considered bysome U.S. space experts as potentially life threatening because theSoyuz was estimated to have only 24 to 48 hours of oxygen left anda limited amount of fuel with which to attempt a third deorbit‘   ÿ'"        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘burn. The mission had been noted for the participation of anAfghani cosmonaut and the transfer to the Mir space station of a‘  â ? ê ‘physician crew member. (FBIS©SOV©88©175, Sep 9/88; √√APƒƒ, Sep 7/88; √√NY‘  â ? X ‘Timesƒƒ, Sep 7/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Sep 7/88; √√WSJƒƒ, Sep 7/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Sep‘  â ?   ‘7/88; √√B Sunƒƒ, Sep 7/88)   

¡ ¡* NASA and McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, 
St. Louis, Missouri, announced the signing of an agreementproviding for use of facilities at the Kennedy Space Center,Florida, and technical support from the Goddard Space FlightCenter, Greenbelt, Maryland, in support of commercial launches. Theumbrella agreement would enable McDonnell Douglas to gain access toNASA©managed launch support facilities when conducting commerciallaunches of the Delta rocket, expected to begin in 1989. (NASARelease 88©124) 

September 8: An ESA Ariane 3 launch vehicle carrying two U.S.communications satellites was launched from the Korou launchfacility in French Guiana.  The Ariane 3 was carrying the 1.3©tonG©STAR 111 and 1.2©ton SBS 5 telecommunications satellites, bothdesigned for television, telephone, and digital data transmission.Upon reaching low Earth orbit, the G©STAR satellite failed to boostitself into its planned 23,000©mile geosynchronous orbit. (FBIS™‘  â ? ¯ ‘Lat©8©175, Sep 9/88; SSR 1998 081C©D; √√APƒƒ, Sep 7/88; √√Reuterƒƒ, Sep‘  â ? ¿ ‘7/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Sep 9/88; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Sep 15/88; √√WSJƒƒ, Sep 15/88; √√W‘  â ? à ‘Postƒƒ, Sep 15/88) 

¡ ¡* A guidance system malfunction caused the Soviet Marsobserver spacecraft Phobos 1 to wobble out of control on its waytoward Mars. The spacecraft stopped responding to commands fromSoviet ground controllers and was rapidly losing power as it wasunable to properly orient its solar panels toward the Sun.  Phobos‘  â ?   ‘2 continued to function normally. (√√UPIƒƒ Sep 9/88; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Sep‘  â ? » ‘9/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Sep 9/88; 

September 10: An untended Soviet Progress©38 supply spacecraft,bound for the Mir space station, was launched from the Baikonurlaunch facility.  The Tass News Agency reported the Progress©38ferried "expendable materials and various loads" for use by the Mir‘  â ? x ‘three©man crew. (SSR 1988 083A; √√C Tribƒƒ, Sep 11/88; 

September 12: NASA and the Air Force, responsible for range safety,mutually determined that the number of persons permitted access tothe Kennedy Space Center, Florida, for the launch of the SpaceShuttle Discovery, STS©26, would be greatly reduced for safetyreasons.  Studies of the January 1986 Challenger accident,  and theloss of an Air Force Titan 34D the following April, showed that thedanger to persons on the ground, if an accident occurred, was muchgreater than previously thought. Under certain conditions, a solidrocket booster released from the vehicle as a result of an accidentwould follow an unknown ballistic trajectory, rather than tumble oncourse as previously thought. In addition, upon destruction the‘   ÿ'#        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘boosters fragmented into thousands of pieces and the explosiveproperties of unburned solid motor propellant were greater thanoriginally determined in laboratory tests.  Because of this newinformation, NASA and the Air Force determined that the prudentaction would be to minimize the population at the close©in viewingareas. (NASA Release 88©125)

September 16: NASA set a target launch date of September 29 forSTS©26, the next Space Shuttle flight. The establishment of thelaunch date followed an updated assessment of the projected impactof Hurricane Gilbert on mission control and training facilities atthe Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas. In connection withthe announcement, Rear Admiral Richard H. Truly, NASA AssociateAdministrator for Space Flight, said, "NASA's decision to set thislaunch date is based on over two years of persistence anddedication by NASA and contractor personnel, culminating in theSTS©26 flight readiness review held at the Kennedy Space Center onSeptember 13 and 14. I'm delighted to have reached this point andmy hat is off to all members of the Shuttle team whose tirelessefforts have brought us here to the brink of America's return tomanned spaceflight." (NASA Release 88©127)

September 19: Israel launched its first orbital satellite aboard anIsraeli©built rocket.  The Horizon I experimental satellite waslaunched from an Israeli launch facility in the Negev desert aboardwhat U.S. experts believed was either a Jericho II or a Cometlaunch vehicle. The Horizon I was expected to have an operational‘  â ?  ‘lifetime of one month in low Earth orbit. (SSR 1988 087A©B; √√NY‘  â ? ‡ ‘Timesƒƒ, Sep 20/88; √√W Postƒƒ Sep 20/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Sep 20/88; √√CSMƒƒ, Sep‘  â ? ® ‘20/88; √√B Sunƒƒ, Sep 20/88; √√LA Timesƒƒ, Sep 20/88)

September 24: The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's NOAA©11, meteorological weather satellite was launched aboard aU.S. Air Force Atlas©E launch vehicle from Launch Complex 3 atVandenberg Air Force Base, California. NOAA©11, and its companionspacecraft, NOAA©9 and NOAA©10, assist in global and local weatherforecasting. In addition, the NOAA satellites are used forhurricane tracking and warning; global sea ice monitoring; variousatmospheric studies; and for agricultural, commercial fishing,forestry, maritime, and other industrial uses. NOAA©11 was placedin a 540©mile Sun©synchronous, near polar orbit, where it wouldcircle the Earth approximately every 102 minutes, observe adifferent portion of the Earth's surface on each orbit, and viewthe Earth's entire surface and cloud cover once every 12 hours.‘  â ? `" ‘(NASA Release 88©126; √√Aeronautics and Space Report of the‘  â ? (# ‘President: 1988ƒƒ; SSR 1988 089A©C) 

September 29©October 3: U.S. crew©assisted space flight resumedafter a hiatus of over two years with the successful launch of theSpace Shuttle Discovery on mission STS©26 from Kennedy Space CenterLaunch Complex 39©B in Florida. The first Space Shuttle flightsince the Challenger accident in January 1986, STS©26 followed a‘   ÿ'$        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘prolonged period of review and reassessment of the entire Shuttleprogram and redesign of the Shuttle's solid rocket motors (SRMs),which had experienced a catastrophic failure on STS©25.  STS©26 hadas its primary payload the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite©C(TDRS©C), which would significantly expand communications and datalinks between Earth and the orbiting Shuttles. In addition,Discovery carried the Orbiter Experiments Program AutonomousSupporting Instrumentation System (OASIS), which would recordenvironmental data in the orbiter payload bay during STS flightphases, as well as 11 secondary payloads. The STS©26 mission lastedfour days and concluded with a landing at Edwards Air Force Base,California, on October 3. The five©man crew for STS©26 includedNavy Captain Frederick H. Hauck (Commander), 
Air Force Colonel Richard O. Covey (Pilot), and Mission SpecialistsJohn M. Lounge, Marine Lieutenant Colonel David C. Hilmers, and‘  â ? ∏ ‘George D. Nelson. (√√NASA STS©26 Press Kitƒƒ, SSR 1988 091A; √√UPIƒƒ, Sep‘  â ? Ä ‘29/88; √√APƒƒ, Sep 29/88; √√Reuterƒƒ, Sep 29/88; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Sep 30/88; √√W‘  â ? H ‘Post,ƒƒ Sep 30/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Sep 30/88; √√USA Todayƒƒ, Sep 30/88)

‘  â ? ÿ ‘√√Octoberƒƒ

October 1: NASA marked its thirtieth anniversary with ceremonies at‘  â ? 0 ‘the Centers. (√√Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1988ƒƒ)

October 17: A localized electrical fire occurred on board theMagellan spacecraft during a power systems check at the KennedySpace Center's (KSC) Spacecraft Encapsulation Facility (SAEF©2).The fire, which occurred while a technician worked within thespacecraft, was quickly extinguished without injuries and with onlyminor damage to Magellan. The KSC fire department also respondedbut was not required to enter the SAEF©2 clean room environment.The incident was being investigated by NASA. (NASA Releases 88©141and 88©153). 

October 19: Dr. Noel W. Hinners was appointed Associate DeputyAdministrator by NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher. Hinnershad been serving as Associate Deputy Administrator. He joined NASAin 1972 as Deputy Director of Lunar Programs, Office of SpaceScience.  From 1974 to 1979, he was NASA Associate Administratorfor Space Science.  He was Director of the National Air and SpaceMuseum, Smithsonian Institution, prior to his 1982 appointment asDirector of the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland.(NASA Release 88©138)

¡ ¡* NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher received theInternational Technology Institute's (ITI) William F. Rockwell, Jr.Medal at the International Congress on Technology and TechnologyExchange banquet, in Pittsburgh.  The Rockwell Medal, awardedannually to a maximum of three individuals from differentcontinents, recognizes contributions toward the generation,transfer, and application of technology for the betterment ofmankind. (NASA Release 88©139)‘   ÿ'%        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘åôOctober 20: Two of the three cosmonauts aboard the Mir spacestation took a four©hour spacewalk to replace a faulty component onan x©ray telescope attached to the station.  Cosmonauts VladimirTitov and Musa Manarov, on a year©long endurance mission aboardMir, wore a new spacesuit design intended to increase flexibility.‘  â ? Ë ‘(√√C Tribƒƒ, Oct 21/88) 

October 25: NASA announced that it was rescheduling the launch ofthe Hubble Space Telescope from February 1990 to an earlier date ofDecember 1989. The earlier date was made possible followingreassessment of a variety of factors, including payloadrequirements and Space Shuttle orbiter assignments during theperiod. (NASA Release 88©143)

‘  â ? 
 ‘√√Novemberƒƒ

November 1: NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt,Maryland, issued a request for a proposal that would lead to theaward of a prime contract for the design, development, testing andfabrication of Space Station Freedom's flight telerobotic servicer(FTS). The FTS would be a space robot with automated features thatwould assist crews in the assembly, maintenance, and servicing ofthe Freedom station and visiting spacecraft. Mandated by Congress,the FTS program would consist of a developmental flight test on theSpace Shuttle in 1991, followed by a demonstration test flight ofthe prototype robot on the Space Shuttle in 1993. The FTS wasscheduled to be launched on the second Space Station Freedomassembly flight. (NASA Release 88©150)

¡ ¡* NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, and theDepartment of Energy's Argon National Laboratory, Chicago,Illinois, signed an agreement to begin joint research in thedevelopment of high©temperature superconductivity (HTS) materialsand technology.  The objective of this major research effort wouldbe to exploit recent rapid advances in HTS technology forsignificant space and aeronautical applications. Research andtechnology development would be undertaken in those areas where HTScould be an enabling technology or substantially improve existingsystems.
 
¡  ¡Initially, research would concentrate on advanced studies andcritical exploratory experiments to identify the most promisingapplications for further development. Among the first candidateapplications would be superconducting magnetic energy storage,space electromagnetic propulsion, microwave power transmission,aeropropulsion, and electromagnetic launch systems. (NASA Release88©149)

November 2: The Space Shuttle Atlantis was rolled out to Launch Pad39©B for a scheduled launch in late November of STS©27, aclassified Department of Defense mission. (NASA Release 88©171)
‘   ÿ'&         0*†(†(∞∞  ‘åNovember 6: A classified Department of Defense payload wassuccessfully launched into orbit aboard a Titan 34D launch vehicle.‘  â ? ê ‘(√√Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: 1988ƒƒ)

November 10: NASA announced that it had negotiated a contract withRockwell International's Space Transportation Systems Division toconsolidate Space Shuttle orbiter logistics operations at theKennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida launch site.  Under thecontract, Rockwell's orbiter logistics operations in Downey,California, would be transferred to existing Launch SupportOperations activity at KSC.  During this same period, Rockwell'scomponent overhaul and repair activities would move from itsnetwork of original Shuttle equipment manufacturers to the RockwellService Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida.  The move would completea consolidation begun in 1985. (NASA Release 88©156)

November 11: Controllers at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory,Pasadena, California, directed the Voyager 2 spacecraft to fire itshydrazine thrusters for 3 minutes and 29 seconds in order to steerthe craft toward a fly©by of Neptune on August 28, 1989. TheVoyager 2 trajectory would bring it to within 3,000 miles of‘  â ? h ‘Neptune's cloudtops. (√√Voyager 2 Neptune Encounter Press Kitƒƒ; √√LA‘  â ? 0 ‘Timesƒƒ, Nov 14/88) 

November 14: NASA Administrator Dr. James C. Fletcher appointed Dr.Franklin D. Martin Assistant Administrator for the Office ofExploration.  Martin had been serving as the Deputy AssociateAdministrator for the Space Station office since September 1986.From 1983 through 1986, Martin was Director of Sciences and ofSpace and Earth Sciences at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center,Greenbelt, Maryland.  From 1974 through 1983, he served in avariety of positions at NASA Headquarters, including manager of theadvanced programs in astrophysics, solar terrestrial, and lunardivisions. (NASA Release 88©158)

November 15: After several delays, the Soviet Union successfullycompleted an automated orbital flight test of the Space ShuttleBuran.  The untended Soviet orbiter©©which is almost identical inaerodynamic design and dimensions to the U.S. orbiters©©waslaunched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Central Asia. Buran waspowered by a 198©foot Energia rocket with two strap©on boosters ina configuration similar to that of the U.S. Space Shuttle. Unlikethe Shuttle, however, the Soviet orbiter does not carry its ownmain engines, but relies almost entirely on the Energia's enginesfor ascent to orbit.  According to Soviet sources, the Sovietshuttle can be equipped with jet engines to assist landing©©acapability the U.S. Shuttles lack.  After completing two orbits,Buran landed successfully on a 2.7©mile runway at the Baikonurfacility, ending the 3©1/2 hour mission. The Tass News Agencyhailed the Buran mission as a "major success" and as a prelude tocrew©tended Shuttle flights.  In Washington, NASA Administrator Dr.James C. Fletcher congratulated the Soviet Union. (FBIS©SOV©88©222,‘   ÿ''        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘‘  â ?    ‘Nov 17/88; SSR 1988 100A;  √√APƒƒ, Nov 15/88; √√UPIƒƒ, Nov 15/88; √√NY Timesƒƒ,‘  â ? »  ‘Nov 16/88; √√WSJƒƒ, Nov 16/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Nov 16/88; √√LA Timesƒƒ, Nov 15/88;‘  â ? ê ‘√√W Timesƒƒ, Nov 16/88; √√B Sunƒƒ, Nov 16/88; √√P Inqƒƒ, Nov 16/88; √√C Tribƒƒ, Nov15/88) 

¡ ¡* In a major setback for the U.S. radio astronomy program, theNational Radio Astronomy Observatory's (NRAO) 300©footradiotelescope in Greenbank, West Virginia, unexpectedly collapsed,completely destroying the metallic antenna dish. The instrument,built in 1962, was one of the most powerful radiotelescopes in theworld and had been responsible for several important discoveries,e.g. pulsars.  The cause of the collapse was not known, but was notbelieved to be related to wind or other atmospheric conditions. The NRAO Assistant Director George Seielsand noted that thetelescope structure, originally designed for a dish diameter of140©feet, had been expanded to a diameter of 300 feet without acorresponding increase in material strength.  No decision wasannounced on whether funds would be sought for a replacement‘  â ?  ‘radiotelescope. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Nov 17/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Nov 17/88; √√B Sunƒƒ, Nov17/88;   

November 21: NASA Administrator Dr. Fletcher appointed Kenneth S.Pedersen to be Associate Administrator for External Relations,effective immediately.  Pedersen would be responsible forcongressional, intergovernmental, international, and industryrelations, educational activities and relations with educationalinstitutions, and the NASA History Office. (NASA Release 88©160)

November 23: NASA announced the selection of General Electric,Astro©Space Division, Princeton, New Jersey, for negotiationsleading to the award of a cost©plus©award©fee contract for design,fabrication, instrument integration, and launch operation supportof the Global Geospace Science (GGS) Wind and Polar missions.  Thetwo GGS laboratories, with their complement of scientificinstruments, were to examine the flow of energy from the Sunthrough the Earth's geospace environment. This project was to bepart of the overall scientific investigations within theInternational Solar©Terrestrial Physics Program.

¡  ¡The contract would provide for delivery of the Wind laboratoryto Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, for launch readinesson December 30, 1992, and delivery of the Polar laboratory toVandenberg Air Force Base, California, for launch readiness on June30, 1993.  Each laboratory would be launched on a government™‘  â ? `" ‘furnished expendable launch vehicle. (NASA √√News,ƒƒ Nov 23/88)

November 26: A Soyuz TM©7 spacecraft, carrying a joint Soviet™French crew, was successfully launched from the Baikonur Cosmodromein Kazakhstan, for a month©long tour in the Mir space station. WithFrench President Fran¿'¿ois Mitterand in attendance, the three©mancrew, which included French astronaut Jean©Loup Chretien, liftedoff from Baikonur on the second French©Soviet crew©tended mission. ‘   ÿ'(        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘Chretien had also been aboard the first joint mission in July 1983. The three©man Soyuz crew planned to join the two©man crew, aboardMir since January, to perform a series of scientific experiments. Additionally, Chretien was scheduled to become the first WestEuropean to perform a spacewalk. (FBIS©Sov©88©228; SSR 1988 104A;‘  â ? Ë ‘√√NY Timesƒƒ, Nov 27/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Nov 27/88; √√CSMƒƒ, Nov 28/88)

¡ ¡* After 23 years in solar orbit, Pioneer 6, the oldestoperating spacecraft, returned to the vicinity of its launch.  Thecraft passed within 1.16 million miles of the Earth, roughly fivetimes the distance between the Earth and its Moon. This distancewas the closest Pioneer 6 had ever approached Earth since launchfrom the Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Florida in 1965. With onlyfive lunar distances separating them, Earth's gravitational pullwas strong enough to haul the craft toward its own orbit, therebyincreasing time in orbit for Pioneer 6 by six days (from 311 to 317days) and 6 million miles.
 
¡  ¡The spacecraft was designed to study the Sun's atmosphere, theheliosphere.  After 23 years, two of Pioneer 6's originalinstruments were still transmitting information on the turbulenceof the solar wind to scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center,Mountain View, California.  Three sister probes followed Pioneer 6into solar orbit. During the period from 1966 to 1970, Pioneers 7,8, and 9 were launched into coordinated orbits. With Pioneer 6,this spacecraft team formed a network of solar weather stationsmonitoring the heliosphere, triangulating information back to Earthfrom the far side of the Sun, and increasing understanding of solareffects on Earth's magnetic field. (SSR 1965 105A; ARC Release 88™81) 

November 30: Thomas L. Moser was named Deputy AssociateAdministrator for Space Station by the head of the Space StationOffice, James B. Odom.  Moser had been serving as Director of theSpace Station Freedom program in Reston, Virginia, since October1986. (NASA Release 88©163)

During November: NASA continued its multifaceted program ofobservation of Supernova 1987a, using untended scientific balloonsand the Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO): 

¡  ¡NASA launched two heavy©lift balloons from Australia inNovember to continue scientific studies of Supernova 1987a. A 28.4million cubic foot balloon was scheduled to carry a scientificexperiment, weighing 1100 pounds, to measure gamma©ray and hard x™ray emissions. A second, 29.47 million cubic foot balloon also wasscheduled to carry a scientific experiment, weighing 3700 pounds,that would measure gamma©ray emissions, but over a different energyband. These scientific missions were part of the overall NASABalloon Program managed by the Wallops Flight Facility, WallopsIsland, Virginia. (NASA Release 88©154; MSFC Release 88©160)
‘   ÿ')         0*†(†(∞∞  ‘å¡  ¡NASA deployed the C©141 Kuiper Airborne Observatory (KAO), toobserve Supernova 1987a. KAO completed a five©week deployment toNew Zealand to conduct high altitude observations of chargedparticle and heavy metals emissions produced in the explosion ofthe giant blue star, first detected in February 1987.   TheNovember 1988 mission found nickel, argon, and iron explodingoutward at 868 miles per second.  Previous Kuiper observations ofthe expanding ejected cloud had greatly contributed tounderstanding how the explosion proceeds. KAO Supernova 1987aresearch was being conducted by the Astrophysics Branch, SpaceScience Division, Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California.(NASA Release 88©168; ARC Release 88©89)

‘  â ? (
 ‘√√Decemberƒƒ

December 2©6: The Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched from  KennedySpace Center (KSC), Florida, on mission STS©27, a dedicatedDepartment of Defense (DoD) mission.  After a 24©hour launch delaybecause of strong winds at KSC, Atlantis lifted off on a four©daymission to deliver into orbit a classified DoD payload, reported byvarious media sources as being a Lacrosse radar reconnaissancesatellite. Crew members for STS©27 were Robert L. Gibson,Commander; Guy S. Gardner, Pilot; and Richard M. Mullane, Jerry L.Ross and William M. Shepherd, Mission Specialists.  Atlantis landedon December 6 at Edwards Air Force Base, California. (NASA Release‘  â ? à ‘88©171; √√APƒƒ, Dec 2/88; √√UPIƒƒ, Dec 2/88; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Dec 7/88; √√W Postƒƒ,‘  â ? P ‘Dec 7/88; √√WSJƒƒ, Dec 7/88; √√W Timesƒƒ, Dec 7/88; √√B Sunƒƒ, Dec 7/88; √√P Inqƒƒ,Dec 7/88)

December 5: The Pioneer Venus orbiter spacecraft marked 10 years oforbital observations of the cloud©draped planet. Ceremonies wereheld at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, tocelebrate Pioneer's accomplishments.  December 9 would also mark 10years since a companion spacecraft, Pioneer Venus 2, had enteredthe atmosphere of Venus along with 4 hard©impact probes it hadreleased.  Observations by Pioneer revealed a great deal about theatmospheric content of Venus, plate tectonics, volcanic activity,and the magnetic field.  Pioneer had also observed five comets,including Halley.  Pioneer, whose orbit was deteriorating, wasscheduled to cease operating in August 1992 and be destroyed uponentering the lower atmosphere of Venus. (NASA Release 88©165)

December 8: NASA and the Missiles Division of LTV Missiles andElectronic Group, Dallas, Texas, announced the signing of anagreement that would grant the firm exclusive rights tocommercially produce and market the Scout launch vehicle. NASAconsidered the negotiation of the agreement as another importantadvance in establishing a strong U.S. commercial launch vehicleindustry through the privatization of Government expendable rocketprograms. (NASA Release 88©167)

December 11: The European Space Agency (ESA) successfully launched‘   ÿ'*         0*†(†(∞∞  ‘its first Ariane 4 booster from the Korou launch center in FrenchGuiana. The Ariane 4, the latest and most powerful ESA©builtbooster, carried two European telecommunications satellites.  Thelaunch had been delayed by 24 hours because of a faulty sensor onthe rocket's third stage. (FBIS©Weu©88©238, Dec 11/88; SSR 1988‘  â ? Ë ‘109C©D; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Dec 12/88)

December 21: Two Soviet cosmonauts and a French astronaut returnedto Earth aboard a Soyuz TM©6 capsule, following the completion bythe Soviets of a record breaking year©long endurance mission aboardthe Mir space station.  Cosmonauts Vladimir Titov and Musa Manarov,launched into space on December 21, 1987, and French astronautJean©Loup Chretien, successfully landed their capsule inKazakhstan.  Titov and Manarov were to undergo extensive medicaltests to determine the effects of prolonged weightlessness.  (FBIS™‘  â ? ∏ ‘Sov©88©245, Dec 21/88; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Dec 22/88; √√W Postƒƒ, Dec 22/88; √√WSJƒƒ,‘  â ? Ä ‘Dec 22/88; √√CSMƒƒ, Dec 22/88; √√B Sunƒƒ, Dec 22/88; √√P Inqƒƒ, Dec 22/88)    

December 29:  E. Ray Tanner was appointed Director of the SpaceStation Freedom Program Office, effective January 3, 1989. Tannerhad been serving as Manager of the Space Station Projects Office,Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, since August1988.  Prior to that he was Deputy Director for Space Systems inthe Science and Engineering Directorate. (NASA Release 88©175; MSFCRelease 88©178)

¡ ¡* Margaret G. Finarelli was appointed Deputy AssociateAdministrator for External Relations, effective December 12.Finarelli had been serving as Director of the Policy Division inthe Office of Space Station. (NASA Release 88©164)