

January 1: The Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, awardedRockwell International Corporation a five©year extension on the contract for systems integration.  The $1.36 billion contractextensions were for flight and ground systems engineeringmaintenance and safety analysis, including configuration of thehardware required for each orbiter flight and Shuttle missionsupport from countdown to landing. (NASA Release C90©A; C90©B;‘  â ? ò ‘√√WSJƒƒ, Jan 12/90)

January 3: Technical assistant Edwin Sherry, from the JetPropulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, explained a minorproblem that the Spacecraft Magellan had developed three daysearlier and a little more than halfway into its journey to mapVenus. A computer chip failure, caused either by electricalcorrosion or an electrically charged particle spewed out by thesun, necessitated frequent commands from ground crews to keepMagellan moving in the right direction. The craft's guidancesystem normally focused on two stars to ascertain and adjust itsheading. Sherry explained that some difficulties with the vastarray of electronics during flight were expected and that themission was in no danger. Scientists hoped to send a new programaloft that would allow the ship's computer to bypass the damagedchip. (AP, Jan 4/90) 

––   X∞`	∏h¿p» x– (#Ä%ÿ'0*à,‡.81ê3Ë5@8ò:<H?†Aˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇ                      X∞`	∏h¿p» x– (#Ä%ÿ'0*à,‡.81ê3Ë5@8ò:<H?†Aˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇˇ                    ∞ˇˇ– –¡  ¡* NASA released a request on this date to various companiesfor a proposal concerning design, management, building andtesting of the Advanced Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System.The first ATDRSS was scheduled for delivery in 1987 and couldreplace one of the older TDRS systems in orbit. By 2001, "A four™satellite constellation of ATDRSS is expected to be in orbit,"said Thomas Underwood, Assistant Chief for the TDRS system atGoddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The ATDRSSpromised to offer a much higher communication rate, needed forSpace Station Freedom missions. (NASA Release 90©2; C90©x)

January 5: NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Thomas E.Utsman as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight.  Hewas to assist William Lenoir, Associate Administrator, in dailymanagement of space flight programs. Utsman began at NASA in 1963as a facilities design engineer in the Apollo program and laterwas named to head the Design Engineering Directorate's ProjectEngineering Office. He also served as Deputy Director of ProjectManagement, Associate Director of Design Engineering, OperationsManagement Director of Technical Support, Director of ShuttleOperations, and Director of Shuttle Management and Operations. 
¡  ¡
¡ ¡Truly also named James A. Thomas as Deputy Director of theKennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Thomas joined‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘NASA in 1962 and served as lead engineer for pre©launch testingand communications for the Apollo program.  He worked on theinitial Shuttle program and served as lead flight engineer, aschief Shuttle flight project engineer, in the Shuttle EngineeringDirectorate, and as Director of Shuttle Launch and LandingOperations. (NASA Release 90©3)

January 8: NASA and Japan's Institute of Space and AstronauticalScience agreed to launch Japan's Geotail spacecraft on a Delta IIrocket from Kennedy Space Center, in Florida, in 1992. The craftwas to study the stored energy in the geomagnetic tail of theEarth, a magnetic field drawn by the solar winds on the Earth'snight side and responsible for the Aurora Borealis. (NASA Release90©4)

January 9: NASA launched the first of 10 expected Shuttle flightsin 1990 (flight STS©32) from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with a 10™day mission to orbit a Navy communications satellite and toretrieve another. The lift©off, originally scheduled for December18, had been delayed three times because of problems with therenovated launch pad and once because of low clouds. The Navysatellite was deployed January 10.  On January 12, the spacecraftclosed in on and retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facility(LDEF), an 11©ton satellite, into the cargo bay, using a 50©footrobotic arm.

¡  ¡The LDEF was sent up with Space Shuttle Challenger in April1984 to provide vital information on the design of spacecraft andNASA's Space Station, as well as other experiments. The orbitinglaboratory was scheduled to be recovered 10 months after itsdeployment, but the nearly 5©year postponement caused byscheduling problems and the Challenger accident resulted in adecaying orbit that was expected to reach Earth's atmosphere byMarch of 1990. The 57 experiments aboard the 30©foot©longcylindrical satellite included an array of potential spacebuilding materials being tested for reactions to radiation,extreme temperature changes, and collisions with space matter.Also tested for prolonged space exposure were optical fibers,pure crystals for use in electronics, and a student experimentinvolving tomato seeds. Interstellar gases and cosmic radiationwere also trapped in an attempt to find clues into the formationof the Milky Way and the evolution of heavier elements. For theremainder of the mission, astronauts carried out other scientificand engineering work.

¡  ¡Columbia landed on a concrete runway early in the morning onJanuary 20 at Edwards Air Force Base in California after alanding postponed for a day because of fog. The flight set aprecedent both because of duration, 11 days, and because theaircraft was the heaviest Shuttle ever to land, a result of thecaptured cargo. The mission was without incident, save for a fewminor problems involving a leaky dehumidifier, a smoke detector‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘that went off unexplainably, a malfunction in one of the threeInertial Measurement Units (critical for reentry, but the Shuttlecan land with only one functioning unit), and a small engine usedby the automatic pilot for maintaining flight path that fired forno reason. The retrieved satellite remained in the Shuttle cargobay and was scheduled to be flown to Kennedy Space Center inFlorida atop a modified NASA jumbo jet later in the week.

¡  ¡During re©entry, two NASA experiments measured the aerodynamicand thermodynamic characteristics of the orbiter. One of theexperiments, a Shuttle Infrared Leeside Temperature Sensingexperiment, involved an infrared camera used to collect imageryfrom the left wing, an area that reached 1,100 degreesFahrenheit, a higher than usual temperature, on the STS©28flight.  The second experiment involved the Shuttle Entry AirData System, housed in Columbia's nose cap to gather "air data"‘  â ? Ä ‘to determine the orbiter's aerodynamic flight characteristics.(√√NY‘  â ? H ‘Timesƒƒ, Jan 10/90; Jan 11/90; Jan 13/90; Jan 21/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Jan‘  â ?  ‘10/90; Jan 11/90; Jan 13/90; Jan 21/90;√√ƒƒ √√C Tribƒƒ, Jan 13/90;√√ƒƒ √√CSMƒƒ,‘  â ? ÿ ‘Jan 16/90√√ƒƒ√√ƒƒ√√ƒƒ; NASA Release 90©8)

January 10: Vice President Dan Quayle, leader of the White House 
National Space Council, told scientists at the 175th meeting ofthe American Astronomical Society that "the rest of the world iscatching up and may pass us by" because our space programsconsume too much time and money. His eight©page speech was notlauded by the audience until he suggested greater emphasis onuntended space flight; many scientists, dependant on Federalfunding, see crew©assisted flights as a drain on their ownprojects. Quayle reiterated a commitment to balance tended anduntended space exploration and called upon allied nations, mostspecifically Japan, and the business sector to share costs.

¡  ¡The Vice President also asked the NASA to look "across thetraditional divisions among civil, commercial, and nationalsecurity activities," which some NASA sources interpreted as asuggestion that outside agencies might assume a bigger role inthe space program. In accord with Quayle's comment concerninglengthy and costly space projects, John Pike, Associate Directorfor Space Policy at the Federation of American Scientists,brought up NASA plans for crew©assisted flights to the Moon andto Mars. The missions, he noted, would cost $15 to $20 billionannually over 25 years while guaranteeing job security for NASA.‘  â ? ò! ‘(√√P Inqƒƒ, Jan 11/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Jan 11/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jan 11/90, √√W‘  â ? `" ‘Timesƒƒ, Jan 11/90)

January 13: NASA scientists reported to the American AstronomicalSociety preliminary information obtained from the CosmicBackground Explorer spacecraft, launched on November 18, 1989,aboard a Delta rocket. The data gleaned by the Far InfraredAbsolute Spectrophotometer, the Differential MicrowaveRadiometer, and the Diffuse Infrared Background Experiment‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘supported the Big Bang theory, but at the same time minimized thebelief that other releases of energy had subsequently occurred.Scientists reported that instruments aboard the craft performedwith unprecedented precision.  This precision was predicted toincrease over the spacecraft's estimated two more years of data‘  â ? Ë ‘gathering. (NASA Release 90©5; √√P Inqƒƒ, Jan 15/90)

January 15: The White House began looking at other ideas forastronaut expeditions to the Moon and Mars besides thosepresented by NASA. The unprecedented move stemmed from NASA'scost and time estimate, $400 billion over 30 years for theproject. A panel representing 54 aerospace companies had met inthe previous week, and the National Research Council planned toreview its own efforts to seek innovative ideas later in theweek. NASA joined the search for sources of outside ideas aswell. Arnold Aldrich, NASA Associate Director for Aeronautics,called the move "highly appropriate" and added, "A lot of ourideas are good, but we certainly haven't covered the waterfront."‘  â ?  ‘(√√NY Timesƒƒ, Jan 15/90)

January 17: NASA selected 23 new astronaut candidates from a listof 1,945 qualified applicants for one year of training andevaluation that was to begin in July 1990.  Of 11 civilians and12 military officers, 7 were selected as pilots and the other 16as mission specialists. (NASA Release 90©7)

January 19: NASA announced the selection of two payloadspecialists for the International Microgravity Laboratory missionaboard the Space Shuttle Columbia, scheduled for launch inDecember 1990. Dr. Roberta Bondar of the Canadian Space Agencyand Dr. Ulf Merbold of the European Space Agency were to conductthe first of several microgravity investigations using theSpacelab Module. (NASA Release 90©9)
 
January 21: The European Space Agency successfully sent up anAriane 4 rocket from its launch site in French Guiana and itspayload, a SPOT 2 observation satellite and six smallersatellites, that included four tiny U.S. spacecraft for educationand science.  It was the first 1990 launch for ESA, the thirty™first since 1979.  All seven satellites were successfullydeployed. (UPI, Jan 22/90)

January 24: Four major U.S. defense contractors©©General DynamicsCorporation, McDonnell Douglas Corporation, United TechnologiesCorporation, and Rockwell International Corporation©©announcedthey would jointly develop the X©30 National Aerospace Plane.Till September 1989, industry had roughly matched Governmentinvestment in the project, $806.3 million since inception during‘  â ? Ä% ‘the Reagan administration.  "Fiscal realities," said the√√ Wall‘  â ? H& ‘Street Journalƒƒ, "spur the call for teamwork." (√√W Postƒƒ, Jan 24/90;‘  â ? ' ‘√√WSJƒƒ, Jan 24/90)
‘   ÿ'         0*†(†(∞∞  ‘å¡  ¡* Japan launched a lunar probe from Uchinoura, on their southern coast, making it the third nation, after the UnitedStates and the Soviet Union, able to send up a moon probe. Theflight schedule was to go into elliptical orbit around the Earthuntil it came within 10,000 miles of the Moon, launch aninstrument package to orbit the moon, and send back data‘  â ? ∞ ‘concerning temperatures and electrical fields. (√√WSJƒƒ, Jan 25/90; √√W‘  â ? x ‘Postƒƒ, Jan 25/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jan 25/90)

¡  ¡* Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, issued a call forproposals for design of a Satellite Servicer System flightdemonstrator to show the ability to maintain satellites in polarand high inclination orbits. The on©orbit flight demonstrationwould exercise rendezvous and docking, as well as orbitalreplacement unit exchange and fluid transfer. (NASA Release 90™12)
 
January 25: The projected cost for NASA's Earth Observing System(EOS) had soared from an estimated $12 billion to $30 billiondollars, Administration sources announced. It was the largest andmost expensive project yet undertaken by NASA. President GeorgeBush had asked the National Academy of Sciences to review thematter and recommend cost reductions. 

¡  ¡Lauded by environmental scientists and termed by formerastronaut Sally Ride as a "mission to planet Earth," the plancalled for putting platforms, launched by Titan 4 rockets fromVandenberg Air Force Base in California, into polar orbit. Eachplatform would carry 10 sophisticated scientific instruments thatcould send 10 trillion bytes of data daily. The first EOS‘  â ? p ‘platform, said NASA, would not be in orbit until 1998. (√√LA Timesƒƒ,Jan 26/90)

January 26: NASA granted a small Alexandria firm, Global Outpost,rights to find ways of using empty Space Shuttle fuel tanks, usedto carry 500,000 gallons of liquid hydrogen and oxygen for SpaceShuttle launch and initial insertion into orbit, as a platformfor military, civilian, and commercial experiments. The agreementfollowed a June 1988 NASA announcement requesting commercial and‘  â ? x ‘academic uses for expended tanks. (√√W Timesƒƒ, Jan 29/90; NASARelease 90©14)
    
January 28: President George Bush prepared to send a 1991 budgetspending plan to Congress that proposed a 24 percent increase forNASA, bringing its fiscal year 1991 budget to $15.12 billion. Theincreased funds were earmarked for the Space Station, a satelliteprogram to monitor Earth's environment (EOS), and another for‘  â ? ∏$ ‘sending astronauts to the Moon and Mars. (√√WSJƒƒ, Jan 29/90) 

January 29: NASA announced a recently revised 1990 schedule forSpace Shuttle launches that called for 9 flights instead of thepreviously announced 10. The reason behind the shuffling hinged‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘on a three©week delay to launch the Hubble Telescope, originallyplanned for deployment March 26, because of an unsatisfactoryleak check of the Space Shuttle's solid rocket booster. Thisdelay threatened the high©priority Ulysses mission scheduled forOctober 5. The mission had to be sent up within an 18©day timeperiod in order to slingshot Jupiter and head back toward theSun, where it would achieve polar orbit around the star. The newagenda for Shuttle launches and their payloads is as follows:
¡  ¡
¡ ¡Jan 9: Columbia; Navy communications satellite and retrieval¡ ¡of another.
¡  ¡Feb 22: Atlantis; classified military satellite.
¡  ¡Apr 18: Discovery; the Hubble Telescope.
¡  ¡May 9: Columbia; "astro" astronomy telescopes.
¡  ¡Jul 9: Atlantis; classified military cargo.
¡  ¡Aug 29: Columbia; a Spacelab life sciences module.
¡  ¡Oct 5: Discovery; the Ulysses probe.
¡  ¡Nov 1: Atlantis; Gamma Ray Observatory.
¡  ¡Dec 12: Columbia; a materials science laboratory.
¡  ¡
¡ ¡A military mission carrying a variety of infrared sensors forthe Strategic Defense Initiative was reassigned for 1992. NASAplanned for 64 Space Shuttle flights and 30 expendable launch‘  â ? ¯ ‘vehicle missions through September 1995. (UPI, Jan 29/90; √√W‘  â ? ¿ ‘Timesƒƒ, Jan 30/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Feb 4/90; NASA Release 90©15)
 
‘  â ? P ‘January 30: The√√ƒƒ Sandia National Laboratories in New Mexico issueda report concerning an electric gun, the coil gun, that couldthrust payloads into orbit.  Hoping one day that the device wouldlaunch small satellites, Bill Cowan, director of the project, predicted that objects could be hurled into space at 2.8 milesper second at 1 percent of the cost of conventional rockets. Thegun accelerates projectiles by pulling them through successive,interacting magnetic fields created by electric currents passingthrough coils of wire.  According to Cowan, obstacles such asdamage to the payloads and launchers themselves and the heatgenerated by projectiles rapidly propelled through the atmosphere‘  â ? Ë ‘would eventually be overcome. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, (Jan 30/90)

¡  ¡* Astronauts who retrieved the Long Duration Exposure Facilityin early January said, in a press briefing, that the satellitewas in worse shape than engineers had expected after its nearly6©year orbit. The conclusion was that materials used for the‘  â ? ò! ‘planned Space Station would require greater scrutiny. (√√W Timesƒƒ,Jan 31/90)

January 31: Columbia's flight in early January, NASA announced,was made with a flawed backup o©ring inspectors had overlooked. Adisaster similar to the Challenger accident 4 years previouslycould have occurred if the primary seal had failed. Inspectorsalso missed inferior welds on a critical pump that supplied oneof the Atlantis main engines with fuel.  The problem was‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘corrected while on the launch pad in preparation for the upcoming‘  â ? »  ‘February 22 launch. (√√Orl Senƒƒ, Feb 1/90; √√Fla Todayƒƒ, Feb 1/90)

During January: NASA completed a facility to house the secondground station for its Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS)system. Located at White Sands, New Mexico, near the existingterminal, the station was predicted to be fully operational by1993. The equipment that the new terminal would house was to betechnically superior to the communications network in theoriginal building, but the two were to work together in acombination meant to reduce the likelihood for any loss of‘  â ? ò ‘contact with the two TDRS satellites in orbit. (√√CSMƒƒ, Jan 30/90)
√√ƒƒ
¡  ¡* NASA signed an agreement with the Maryland Department ofEconomic and Employment Development for technology sharingdesigned to increase commercial exploitation of space technology.The agreement, like the ones reached earlier with Virginia andWest Virginia, would mainly involve supplying NASA researchreports, sponsoring seminars and lectures, and making NASA‘  â ? ÿ ‘laboratories available to the private sector. (√√W Postƒƒ, Jan 5/90)
√√
‘  â ? h ‘Februaryƒƒ

February 1: NASA announced the appointments of Peter G. Smith tothe position of Director, International Relations Division, andDavid L. Stottlemyer to the position of Director, IndustryRelations Division.  Smith, who would direct NASA's internalrelations, worked with the Department of State before coming toNASA in 1979, where he was Chief of the International Program forPolicy and Deputy Director of International Relations.Stottlemyer previously held a number of positions with theForeign Service and the United Nations. (NASA Release 90©20)

February 4: On this date, China put its fifth relay satelliteinto space on a Long March 3 rocket sent up from the Xichangcenter in western China and announced that it was ready to launchforeign satellites.  China had scheduled launches for Hong Kongand Australian companies who wanted to send up three American™built satellites beginning in April of 1990. (Beijing Xinhua‘  â ? x ‘domestic service in Chinese, Feb 20/90; √√W Timesƒƒ, Feb 5/90)
 
February 5: NASA selected 28 research proposals for negotiationof Phase II contract awards in their Small Business InnovationResearch Program.  The awards were worth $13 million and part ofan ongoing effort to stimulate technological innovation, increasethe use of the small business sector, and increase thecommercialization of federally funded research. (NASA Release 90™21)

February 6: NASA Administrator Richard Truly addressed the HouseScience, Space, and Technology Committee and defended theprojected 24 percent budget increase that President George Bush‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘had proposed for the agency. Truly warned that any attempt toslash the budget would render the Space Station defunct, aproject whose expected cost had risen from the original 1984estimate of $8 billion to $20 billion, despite reduction in design.  Also discussed was the status of the planned Shuttle©C,an crew©assisted heavy©lift cargo rocket that representativesclaimed could be built by private industry. It was doubtful thatthe rocket could be ready in time to aid construction of theSpace Station.  William Lenoir, NASA Associate Administrator,said the new rocket was not necessary for building the SpaceStation, but would have other uses.

¡  ¡In a related matter, Truly released to the White House andCongress his plan to increase NASA's budget by 60 percent overthe next three years: $15 billion in 1991, $17.6 billion in 1992,$19.3 billion in 1993.  The increases, he said, were needed forthe Space Station Freedom, the Earth Observing System, and crew™assisted Moon and Mars explorations. (Hearings before theSubcommittee on Space Science and Applications, Feb 6, 8, 21,‘  â ? ÿ ‘27/90; √√Sp Newsƒƒ, Feb 15©11/90; √√H Chronƒƒ, Feb 7/90; UPI, Feb 6/90)
 
February 10: The Galileo spacecraft launched from the SpaceShuttle Atlantis on October 18, 1989, looped 10,000 miles abovethe planet Venus in what NASA engineers termed a "gravityassisted maneuver" that increased its speed by almost 5,000 mphfor its trek to Jupiter.  After taking 16 pictures of Venusiancloud and wind patterns while searching for lightning, the craftwas scheduled to take more pictures of the planet during itsreturn journey.  The second set of photographs, which were to becoupled with sensors, were to detect dust, infrared and visiblelight, and electrically charged particles. Scientists determinedthat the spacecraft would be within range of the Earth and ableto send back data, in October, using its small antenna.  It was‘  â ? » ‘expected to reach Jupiter in December 1995. (√√P Inqƒƒ, Feb 12/90; √√B‘  â ? ê ‘Sunƒƒ, Feb 11/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Feb 11/90)
 
February 13: Scientists, after taking their first long look atthe Long Duration Exposure Facility recovered by Space ShuttleColumbia in January, said the varied surfaces of the satelliteshowed signs of pits, scars, and discoloration in some areaswhile being strangely unscathed in others. The surfaces revealedno "showstoppers" however. The satellite was an experiment meantto test materials for use in building spacecraft and the Space‘  â ? ò! ‘Station. (√√W Postƒƒ, Feb 13/86; NASA Release 90©23)

¡  ¡* The 12©year©old Voyager 1, into deep space and some 3.7billion miles from Earth on this date, began taking 64 picturesof our solar system for a kind of "family portrait."  NASAconsidered having the pictures, which were too large forpublication, displayed in a 100©foot exhibit produced by Los‘  â ? ' ‘Angeles artist David Hockney. (√√USA Todayƒƒ, Feb 14/86, AP, Feb14/86)‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘åô¡  ¡* Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama,announced the selection of Teledyne Brown Engineering fornegotiations leading to a $172 million contract for payloadmission integration. Under the contract, the company wouldprovide management, personnel, equipment, services, supplies,facilities, and materials for Shuttle/Spacelab missions.Spacelab, carried in the Shuttle's cargo bay, converted theShuttle into a versatile on©orbit research center. (NASA ReleaseC90©f)
 
February 14: A Delta rocket carried two satellites into spacefrom Cape Canaveral, Florida, to test laser technology plannedfor the Strategic Defense Initiative program. One satellite, theRelay Mirror Experiment, was to reflect a beam fired from amountain top in Hawaii back to another nearby point on Earthusing a mirror.  The other satellite, the Low Power AtmosphericCompensation, was to correct laser strike distortions caused bydust, moisture, and gases.  The media generally opined thatsuccess of the experiment might induce Congress not to slash the$4.5 billion that President George Bush had requested for further‘  â ? † ‘research into the project in budget year 1991. (√√W Timesƒƒ, Feb‘  â ? h ‘15/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Feb 15/90) 

February 18: For the first time, Soviet defense committeelawmakers visited the Kennedy Space Center in Florida as NASAprepared Shuttle Atlantis for a classified satellite launch that,said sources, was to take reconnaissance photographs andintercept military and diplomatic communications. The 12©dayvisit reflected a new openness in the Soviet Union, and thecommittee chairman, referring to the mission said, "We have no‘  â ? p ‘special secrets...I think you are wasting your money." (√√W Postƒƒ,‘  â ? 8 ‘Feb 19/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Feb 20/90)

February 19: Soviet cosmonauts ended a 22©week mission when theirSoyus TM©8 capsule touched down on the Kazakhstan Steppe,southeast of Moscow. The fifth mission involving a crew livingaboard the 20©ton Mir Space Station included dozens of scientificexperiments and testing of a "space motorcycle," a one©manvehicle designed for servicing satellites. (FBIS Moscow, Tass‘  â ? x ‘(Eng trans) Feb 19/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Feb 20/90; √√P Inqƒƒ, Feb 20/90)

February 20: NASA signed an agreement to support the UniversityCorporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) study of thefeasibility of using the Shuttle's external tanks as research,storage, or manufacturing facilities. Space Shuttle fuel tankswere used to carry 500,000 gallons of liquid hydrogen and oxygenfor launch and initial insertion into orbit. The agreementfollowed a June 1988 NASA announcement requesting commercial andacademic uses for expended tanks. (NASA Release 90©26)

¡  ¡* A German scientific satellite, ROSAT, scheduled for NASAlaunch on a Delta II rocket, in early summer, arrived at Cape‘   ÿ'	        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘Canaveral, Florida, on this date from the Federal Republic ofGermany aboard a 747 cargo plane. The spacecraft was to perform"all sky" surveys with two x©ray imaging telescopes, after whichit would focus on detailed x©ray sources. (NASA Release 90©27)
  
February 21: Launching of the Shuttle Atlantis and deployment ofa classified payload mission on February 22 were canceled becausethe mission Commander had a sore throat and headache, coupledwith the prediction of wind and rain over Cape Canaveral,Florida.  This was the first time a NASA mission had been‘  â ? – ‘scrubbed because of crew illness. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Feb 22/90; Feb‘  â ? ò ‘23/90; √√W Postƒƒ; Feb 22/90)

¡  ¡* Space Shuttle mission specialist Colonel Richard M. Mullaneannounced his retirement from NASA, effective July 1, 1990. Heflew two Shuttle flights in 1984 and 1988 and was scheduled tofly aboard the Atlantis later in February. (NASA Release 90©28)

February 22: An Ariane rocket carrying two American©builtJapanese satellites exploded over the Atlantic Ocean shortlyafter liftoff from French Guiana; a fire in the rocket'spropulsion system was suspected to be the cause of the explosion.Ariane had a record of 17 successful flights previous to thisaccident; it held more than 50 percent of the internationalmarket for commercial launches. (The European Space Agency lateradmitted that a cloth inadvertently left in the rocket had causedthe failure by blocking water supplies to one of its first stage‘  â ?  ‘engines.) (FBIS Paris AFP in English, Apr 13/90; √√W Timesƒƒ, Feb‘  â ? ‡ ‘23/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Feb 23/90)

February 23: Pioneer 11, launched  April 5, 1973, was 2.8 billionmiles from Earth, passing the planet Neptune (Neptune and Plutoexchange outermost planet status because of Pluto's eccentricorbit) to become the fourth spacecraft that had left the solarsystem. Its main mission was to glean data from Saturn andJupiter, but scientists hoped that Pioneer 11 would send back‘  â ?   ‘information concerning solar winds until 1995. (√√C Tribƒƒ, Feb‘  â ? Ë ‘25/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Feb 25/90; NASA Release 90©29)   

February 26: Space Shuttle pilot Donald E. Williams announced hisretirement from NASA and the Navy, beginning March 1. He pilotedtwo Shuttle missions, in April 1985 and October 1989, was Chiefof the Astronaut Office Mission Support Branch, and DeputyManager of Operations Integration. (NASA Release 90©31)

February 27: NASA issued a request for proposals to thecommercial launch industry for launch of up to 10 small Explorer™class spacecraft between 1993 and 1998. The request called forfurnishing the launch vehicle, facilities, personnel, andservices necessary for the required orbit. (NASA Anno)
 
February 28: After five delays because of the Shuttle Commander's‘   ÿ'
         0*†(†(∞∞  ‘head cold, a faulty ground computer, and inclement weather,Atlantis (STS©36) lifted off under dark skies from CapeCanaveral, Florida, to deliver a 37,300©pound classified militarysatellite into orbit.  The postponements tacked on an additional$2.7 million to the mission, but NASA Administrator Richard Trulyreiterated NASA's policy that meeting launch schedules wassecondary to safety observation. The Space Shuttle deployed its$500 million military payload the following day at an orbitinclined 62 degrees north of the equator, allowing it to fly overevery major populated and industrialized center in the SovietUnion.  An even higher inclination orbit would have beenpreferred. A polar orbit was considered ideal for a recon©naissance satellite, but the Shuttle base at Vandenberg Air ForceBase, California, from where such an orbit could have been safelyachieved, was not operational; the weight of the largersatellites required they be launched from the Space Shuttle.

¡  ¡Atlantis landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base, Californiaon March 4. No problems were reported during the brief 4©1/2 daymission, the Space Shuttle's 34th mission and the 6th mission‘  â ? † ‘dedicated solely to the military.√√ƒƒ √√ƒƒ(√√W Postƒƒ, Mar 1/90; Mar 2/90;‘  â ? h ‘Mar 5/90; Feb 28/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, March 1/90; Mar 2/90; Mar 6/90; √√P‘  â ? 0 ‘Inqƒƒ, Mar 5/90)√√ƒƒ)

¡  ¡* NASA Administrator Richard Truly announced the completion ofthe merger of the Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology andthe Office of Exploration; the two offices were merged into theOffice of Aeronautics, Exploration, and Technology. Arnold D.Aldrich was named to head the new NASA office, which was intendedto combine the analysis of exploration mission alternatives withinnovative technologies, two closely related efforts that Trulyfelt should proceed under a strong central management.
¡  ¡
¡ ¡Truly also announced the establishment of the Office of 
Legislative Affairs, effective March 18, 1990.  Headed by MartinP. Kress, this NASA office would be responsible for legislativematters and the coordination of budgetary and policy matters withCongress.  (NASA Release 90©32; 90©33)

During February:  Daniel Brandenstein, NASA's chief astronaut,returned from a tour of Soviet space facilities and said theoriginal untended Russian shuttle, maiden voyage in 1988, wouldnever fly again.  He also reported that the Soviets planned tolaunch a second untended space shuttle in 1991 and automaticallydock it with Mir.  The station's crew planned to run some tests. Again untended, it would undock and reenter the atmosphere. (UPI, Feb 21/90)

‘  â ? Ä% ‘¡  ¡* A √√Chicago Tribuneƒƒ article reported on the progress ofcommercial space launch ventures that were born out of theChallenger disaster in 1986. McDonnell Douglas and MartinMarietta made their first successful launches of satellites in‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘1989, and Orbital Sciences and General Dynamics were expected tofollow this year. Hundreds of millions of dollars were investedby the corporations, and a backlog of missions was seen until1995 when Japan, Russia, and China were predicted to compete withU.S. and European systems.  The threat of so much competition wasunnerving for the industry, but the promise of U.S. militarycontracts offered enough compensation for the continuation of‘  â ? x ‘their projects. (√√C Tribƒƒ, Feb 19/90) 

¡  ¡* The Los Alamos National Laboratory urged NASA and theNational Space Council to fund a multibillion dollar nuclearpropulsion project that the group believed would reduce the Marsjourney by half of the expected time.  The proposed system woulddraw on a 1970s technology, Rover and Nerva programs, thatcirculated liquid hydrogen through a solid reactor core, therebyheating the hydrogen and creating thrust.  The reactor enginecould operate only in a vacuum, so testing it on Earth would‘  â ? H ‘prove difficult.  The program, reported √√Space Newsƒƒ, would likely‘  â ?  ‘receive substantial money. (√√Sp Newsƒƒ, Feb 19©25/90)

¡  ¡* In an unreleased report, NASA determined that the proposeduntended Shuttle©C would prove too costly for use in building theSpace Station. The original plan called for 18 Shuttle flights ata cost of $1.5 billion to erect the $25 billion station. Althoughusing the Shuttle©C would reduce the number of required flightsto 10 because of its more than doubled cargo space, the price tagwould jump to $3.7 billion, not including the $2 billion needed‘  â ?  ‘to develop the vehicle. (√√Sp Newsƒƒ, Feb 26©Mar 4/90) 
¡  ¡
¡  ¡* Three SR©71 Blackbird aircraft, reconnaissance planes beingretired by the Air Force, were Scheduled to arrive in February atEdwards Air Force Base in California, for "flyable storage." NASAhoped to use the high©speed aircraft, capable of Mach 3 at 80,000feet, for tests relating to the Space Plane later in the year.‘  â ? ê ‘(√√Daily Newsƒƒ, Jan 30/90; NASA Release 90©24)

¡  ¡* NASA reported on the completed computerized medicalreference system, a project engendered by computer and medicalexperts at the University of Florida and the Kennedy Space Centerin Florida in 1979 and known as the Clinical Practice Library ofMedicine (CPLM). The system contains nearly all of the text andgraphics of seven commonly used medical reference books that areconsidered essential for practicing medicine. Being lightweightas well as offering high speed access to references, the CPLM hasgreat potential for both space travel and Earth uses alike. (NASARelease: 90©30a)

‘  â ? ∏$ ‘√√Marchƒƒ

March 1: Telescopes for NASA's Extreme Ultraviolet Explorerspacecraft were delivered to the Goddard Space Flight Center forintegration into a payload module scheduled for launch in August‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘1991. The science payload was designed, built, and tested at theUniversity of California, Berkeley, to focus on the study of anunexplored portion of the electromagnetic spectrum called theextreme ultraviolet, between the X©ray and ultravioletwavelengths. (NASA Release 90©34)

March 2: The National Research Council reported that NASA plansfor accomplishing President George Bush's mandate, crew©assistedmissions to the Moon and Mars, should be viewed only as aspringboard to further research. Among their recommendations weregreater research into nuclear power for habitable bases and spaceflight, research into low and artificial gravity, and greateremphasis on planning the Space Station Freedom for essentialresearch concerning weightlessness and habitable bases. Updating Space Shuttle technology to better comply with the needs ofbuilding the Space Station was recommended as well; it was notedthat the orbiter would become obsolete after the year 2000‘  â ? H ‘without these changes. (√√W Postƒƒ, Mar 3/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Mar 5/90 √√Sp‘  â ?  ‘Newsƒƒ, Mar 12©18/90)
 
March 5: Japan successfully tested its new H©2 rocket, whichpromised to lift large, sophisticated satellites. The rocketusing an LE©7 engine, similar to the high©technology propulsionsystem used by the Space Shuttle, was slated for service in March1992. (AP, Mar 6/90)

March 6: Rockwell Space Operations was selected by NASA for a$814 million, 10©year station operation support contract. Thecontract would provide support for mission, flight crew, andfacility operations for the Space Station and other flight‘  â ? p ‘programs at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. (√√H Postƒƒ,Mar 7/90)

¡  ¡* Victor L. Peterson was named Deputy Director of the AmesResearch Center in California. Since joining NASA in 1956,Petersen held several positions at the center. (NASA Release 90™36)

March 13: A House subcommittee approved a plan that authorized$1.1 billion to build the Shuttle©C. Representative Bill Nelsonwas chairman of the committee and a supporter of the crewlessShuttle. The Shuttle©C would carry 100,000 pounds of cargo into‘  â ? –  ‘space; an orbiter would have only a 50,000©pound capacity. (√√Sp‘  â ? ò! ‘Newsƒƒ, Mar 19©25/90)

March 14: A satellite launched by Martin Marietta from CapeCanaveral, Florida, failed to reach a useful orbit because of awiring problem that did not allow separation from the Titan 3rocket's second stage. Ground engineers successfully took thecraft to a higher, but still useless, orbit, so that it would notbe as likely to reenter the atmosphere. One plan offered byOrbital Sciences Corporation in Virginia was to attach a rocket‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘to the satellite via the Space Shuttle so it could obtain thenecessary 23,000 mile orbit. Martin Marietta, which had only tworemaining contracts, believed it was in jeopardy of not getting‘  â ? X ‘any more contracts because of the incident. (√√WSJƒƒ, Mar 15/90; √√W‘  â ?   ‘Postƒƒ, Mar 17/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Mar 16/90) 

March 15: NASA's Langley Research Center selected BallCorporation for a $90 million contract to develop an atmosphericinstrument for the proposed Earth Observing System. Theinstrument, Spectroscopy of the Atmosphere Using Far InfraredEmission, would be designed to study middle©atmosphere ozonedistribution. (NASA Release, C90©i)

March 18: The military reconnaissance satellite launched fromAtlantis in February malfunctioned and was slowly spinning fromorbit, said White House intelligence officials. The satellite,"vital for START (Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty) verification,"‘  â ? H ‘was expected to reach Earth's atmosphere in April. (√√W Timesƒƒ, Mar‘  â ?  ‘19/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Mar 19/90)

March 23: Shuttle program director Robert Crippen said that aSpace Shuttle rescue of the errant satellite sent up earlier thismonth by Martin Marietta appeared possible. He could not saywhether the Intelsat communications satellite would be liftedinto a higher orbit or if the Shuttle would bring it back toEarth, but noted that either approach would require about one‘  â ? P ‘year for planning. (√√W Postƒƒ, March 24/90)

March 25: A Delta 2 rocket carried a $654 million navigationsatellite, NAVSTAR, into orbit from Cape Canaveral Air ForceStation in Florida. This was the eighth launch of the Air Force'sDelta 2 rocket, designed for heavier payloads than the originalDelta. It was number 7 of a planned 21 satellite constellationsthat were to help ground units, ships, and aircraft locate theirprecise positions. (UPI, Mar 26/90)

March 29: NASA released a call for proposals to lease acommercially developed and owned space module, the CommercialMiddeck Augmentation Module, which would ride in the payload bayof the Space Shuttle and add about 50 lockers to the orbiter'scapacity. The need for greater capacity resulted from NASA'sCommercial Development of Space Program, which was designed toenlarge research opportunities for private use by conductingexperiments in materials processing, protein crystal growth,‘  â ? `" ‘biotechnology, and fluid dynamics. (NASA Release 90©46; √√Sp Newsƒƒ,Mar 12©18/90)

During March: A NASA study released to the Senate disclosed thatdesigns for the planned Space Station Freedom needed significantchanges that would drive up the initial cost. The study found anelaborate program of preventative maintenance that would requireabout 2,200 hours each year for space walks by astronauts and‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘begin before the station was even completed. Possible solutionsincluded use of advanced robots for maintenance, newly designedspacesuits to ease space walks, and a redesign of Space Station‘  â ? X ‘parts that would make them easier to repair. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Mar19/90; Mar 20/90; Mar 28/90; Mar 29/90)

¡  ¡* NASA's 1991 budget would be cut by $1 billion dollars,warned Congress. The Space Station, planned explorations of theMoon and Mars, and the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle were slated tobe trimmed. Money for the Earth Observation System was earmarked‘  â ? – ‘for an increase. (√√Sp Newsƒƒ, Mar 26©Apr 1/90)

¡  ¡*  The Jet Propulsion Laboratory began testing its prototypefor the Planetary Rover Navigation Test Bed Vehicle, a self™navigating vehicle, about the size of a small car, for use in‘  â ? ∏ ‘planned outposts on the Moon and Mars. (√√Daily Newsƒƒ, Mar 13/90)

¡  ¡* Orbital Communications Corporation requested Federalapproval for deploying a global satellite system for datatransmission, 20 small satellites that would mostly be used foremergency services. Orbital planned to deploy them, beginning in‘  â ? h ‘April with its Pegasus rocket, launched from a B©52 aircraft. (√√W‘  â ? 0 ‘Timesƒƒ, Mar 6/90; NASA Release N90©18)

¡  ¡* NASA successfully tested its self©repairing flight controlsystem on an F©15 aircraft at Ames©Dryden Flight ResearchFacility at Edwards Air Force Base in California. The systemdetected damaged flight control components, such as ailerons,rudders, and elevators, and adjusted undamaged flight surfaces tocompensate so the pilot could maintain good aircraft response.(NASA Release 90©43)

¡  ¡* A one©year analysis of the results from a study of the ozoneabove the Arctic performed in the winter of 1988©1989 by AirborneArctic Stratospheric Expedition reported a possible 17 percentloss in March. The finding was a reversal of the originalconclusion that said no ozone depletion similar to that found inthe Antarctic was present. (NASA Release 90©41)

‘  â ? x ‘√√Aprilƒƒ

April 2: President George Bush announced his plans for acooperative effort with the Soviet Union in the human©assistedexploration of space, including voyages to the Moon and Mars.

¡  ¡On a related note, Japan agreed to open its doors to foreign™made satellites by lifting its ban on government agencies andbusinesses that required them to buy only Japanese spacecraft.The Japanese law was created in order to help Japan's fledgling‘  â ? H& ‘space industry. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Apr 3/90; Apr 4/90; √√W Timesƒƒ; Apr 4/90;‘  â ? ' ‘√√WSJƒƒ, Apr 4/90)
 ‘   ÿ'         0*†(†(∞∞  ‘å¡  ¡* NASA and Rockwell International Corporation signed anagreement in which Rockwell would produce a cryogenic palletaimed at extending orbiter flights from an average of 8 days to16 days. The extended duration orbiter program involved a palletholding spherical tanks of liquid hydrogen, liquid oxygen, valvepanels, and avionics boxes for feeding additional cryogenicfluids to the orbiter's electricity©generating fuel cells. (NASARelease 90©47)

April 6: Orbital Sciences Corporation successfully launched itsPegasus rocket from a NASA B©52 aircraft to boost a 422©poundpayload into polar orbit over the Pacific Ocean. The experimentalrocket deployed a NASA scientific satellite and a Navycommunications satellite, opening a new avenue for launchingsmall payloads. The elimination of a costly ground booster, saidcompany president David Thompson, provided a means by which‘  â ? Ä ‘payloads could be delivered inexpensively. (√√W Postƒƒ, Apr 6/90;‘  â ? H ‘√√WSJƒƒ, Apr 6/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Apr 6/90; √√LA Timesƒƒ, Apr 6/90)

April 7: China launched a communications satellite, AsiaSat 1,from Sichuan Province for an Australian firm and became the firstthird©world country to enter the commercial satellite launchingbusiness. China promised to follow fair pricing practices afterPresident George Bush lifted a sanction, brought on the countryfor human rights violations, that barred them from launching theU.S.©built satellite. The launch still drastically undercut U.S.‘  â ? P ‘and Ariane fees. (FBIS China, √√China Dailyƒƒ, Apr 7/90; √√CSMƒƒ, Apr‘  â ?  ‘9/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Apr 8/90)

April 9: NASA Administrator Richard Truly named Lawrence J. Rossas Director of the Lewis Research Center (LeRc), Cleveland, Ohio. Administrator Truly announced the planned retirement of Dr. JohnW. Townsend and named Dr. John Klineberg to replace him as thenew Director of the Goddard Space Flight Center.  Sue MathisRichards was also appointed Deputy Associate Administrator forcommunications.  She had previously held several managerialpositions in the private sector.  Lawerence Ross, who joined NASAin 1963, has served mostly in an executive capacity, as DeputyDirector of LeRC, as a design and test engineer, and has beengiven several special assignments. Klineberg joined NASA in 1970.After conducting research at the Ames Research Center, near SanFrancisco, California, he became Deputy Associate Administratorfor Aeronautics and Space Technology and, later, Director ofLeRc.  Townsend began government service in 1947 and held severalpositions with NASA. (NASA Release 90©49; 90©50; 90©51; 90©55) 

April 10: Boeing Space Operations, Inc. was awarded a $35.9million cost©plus©award©fee contract for program assuranceengineering support at Ames Research Center in California. Underthe contract, Boeing would provide reliability and qualityassurance, system safety engineering, test engineering,management, institutional safety, and health and environmental‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘services. (NASA Release C90©o)

April 11: NASA unveiled its latest research laboratory at AmesResearch Center in California. The Human Performance ResearchLaboratory was designed for study of prolonged space travel.Ground was also broken at the dedication for the new $8.6 millionAutomated Sciences Research Facility, designed to provideresearch and technology development in automation and artificialintelligence. (NASA Release 90©53)

April 16: A panel of experts convened by the National Academy ofSciences opined against a U.S./U.S.S.R. joint mission to Mars.The reason they cited was the lack of any experience incooperation between the two and instead suggested a "graceful‘  â ? 
 ‘path of coordinated but independent explorations." (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Apr17/90)

April 19: NASA scientists Michael J. Prather and Robert T. Watsonwarned that current levels of ozone depletion could cause publichealth problems and threaten plant life regardless of what stepswere taken to reduce it. Their study predicted that the salientdepletion over the Arctic could drift southward, similar to thedamaged ozone over Antarctica that periodically drifts over New‘  â ? ¯ ‘Zealand and Australia. (√√P Inqƒƒ, Apr 20/90)
 
April 24: Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS©31, wassuccessfully launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, with the $1.5billion, 25,000©pound Hubble Space Telescope in its cargo bay.Seven years of delays, the latest occurring last April 10, when apower failure in the orbiter caused the mission to be scrubbed,preceded the event. The craft ascended to a 381©mile orbit, thehighest altitude yet obtained by a Shuttle. On April 25 theHubble telescope, which had an expected 15©year duration, wasdeployed; the telescope was to probe the universe with 10 timesthe clarity ever before achieved. Discovery landed at Edwards AirForce Base in California, on April 29, with a test of stronger,carbon brakes that would allow future landings at the KennedySpace Center in Florida, reducing both time and money for NASA'sShuttle launches.

¡  ¡Scientists, however, could not receive data from the telescopeimmediately after it had been deployed because of an antennaentangled in a power cable. The entangled antenna could notrotate and relay information to a TDRS satellite.  The low, 381™mile orbit prevented all data from reaching ground stations. Thesix© to eight©week chore of powering up and calibratinginstruments on the telescope could not begin until the problemwas resolved. Engineers zeroed in on and only partially resolved‘  â ? Ä% ‘the next day. (√√B Sunƒƒ, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Apr 25/90;‘  â ? H& ‘Apr 26/90; Apr 30/90; May 1/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90;‘  â ? ' ‘Apr 30/90; √√W Timesƒƒ, Apr 25/90; Apr 26/90; √√P Inqƒƒ, Apr 25/90; Apr‘  â ? ÿ' ‘26/90)√√ƒƒ√√ƒƒ‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘åôDuring April: NASA began acting on some of the recommendationsfrom its principal independent safety review organization, whichhad predicted that the approximately 100 flights planned by theagency would probably entail another Shuttle loss.  Among thepanel's main engineering concerns were the Shuttle main engine,the redesigned solid rocket motor, orbiter structural loads,long©term orbiter maintenance, and human factors. NASA AssociateAdministrator William Lenoir explained that the safety panel actsas a "devil's advocate" and noted that conclusions drawn by them‘  â ?  ‘were intentionally exaggerated. (√√AvWkƒƒ, Apr 23/90; √√CSMƒƒ May 8/90)

¡  ¡* NASA tested two of its experimental aircraft at the Ames™Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base inCalifornia. One of the aircraft, an F©16XL, used an experimentalwing surface for improving airflow at supersonic speeds. Thesecond aircraft, an X©29, demonstrated an increase for high™angle©of©attack, the angle of an aircraft relative to its actualflight path. (NASA Release 90©52; 90©59)

¡  ¡* Two NASA sounding rockets were scheduled for launch from theWhite Sands Missile Range in New Mexico to observe Comet Austin.The two©stage, suborbital Black Brant IX rockets were set tocarry a faint object telescope and a spectrograph (forobservation in the far ultraviolet spectral range) for JohnsHopkins University and a far ultraviolet spectrometer for theUniversity of Colorado. (NASA Release 90©57)

‘  â ?  ‘√√Mayƒƒ

May 1: NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland,awarded Jackson and Tull of Washington, D.C. a $19 millioncontract to support the Applied Engineering Division inautomation and robotics and thermal and data systems. The firmwas selected under Section 8(a) of the Small Business Act; thepotential for the contract over a five©year period was $63million. (NASA Release C90©q)

May 2: NASA named William W.L. Taylor of TRW Corporation as theChief Scientist for the Space Station Freedom Program.  Taylor,who was with NASA until 1978 when he joined TRW, was the thirdperson chosen for the two©year assignment and the first fromindustry. (NASA Release 90©61)

May 3: NASA was scheduled to launch two Multiple AccessCommunications Satellites (MACSATs) later in May aboard a Navyowned Scout rocket. The MACSATs were designed for a global store™and©forward message relay. (NASA Release 90©64)

May 4: Engineers at NASA ran tests of the Hubble Space Telescopeto determine if vibrations were interfering with precise pointingat specific stars.  The problem had been discovered two daysearlier when sensors locked on to a "guide star" to orient the‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘spacecraft. Engineers noticed a slight wobble, one six©hundredthof a degree up and down every minute, that interfered with both‘  â ? ê ‘fine pointing mechanisms and star observations. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, May5/90) 

May 8: The Hubble Telescope failed a test on this date asscientists attempted to direct it toward stars emanating a commonbrightness; the telescope was able to find none. It was laterdiscovered that the problem originated from an error in thetelescopes computer guidance system, and a new program with an‘  â ? – ‘updated star chart was sent up. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, May 10/90; √√W Postƒƒ, May10/90)

May 14: Jerry Grey, Director of Science and Technology Policy forthe American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics,recommended that weapons designed for the Strategic DefenseInitiative be developed to locate and destroy any asteroids thatthreaten Earth, views endorsed by Vice President Dan Quayle. Greynoted that 1,500 asteroids cross the Earth's orbit every year,that the location of only 100 of them is known, and that theimpact of even a relatively small asteroid could have a‘  â ? h ‘devastating effect. (√√P Inqƒƒ, May 15/90; √√C Tribƒƒ, May 17/90)

¡  ¡* Lockheed Corporation received a $971 million contract fromNASA to oversee design and development of a new generation ofrocket motors for the Space Shuttle. Twenty more powerful solidrocket motors were to begin lifting the Shuttle in 1995,according to the contract, and sources said that if NASAexercised the option to order 88 more, the contract would be‘  â ? ® ‘worth $1.39 billion. (√√WSJƒƒ, May 15/90; NASA Release 90©68)

May 15: NASA said that it would rescue the uninsuredcommunications satellite that Martin Marietta Corporation boostedinto a useless orbit last March 14. The cost was set at $1million to either retrieve it or attach rockets, that would sendit into a higher orbit, in 1991 or 1992. Intelsat said that itwould consider the cost at its next board of governors meeting.‘  â ? Ë ‘(√√W Timesƒƒ, May 16/90)  

May 20: Ground controllers adjusted commands on the Hubble SpaceTelescope for focusing on stars. Although other problems existed™© wobble from solar panels on the telescope and vibration as itwent through space©©the first pictures were taken and sent to‘  â ? ò! ‘Earth on this day. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, May 21/90; √√W Timesƒƒ, May 21/90; √√W‘  â ? `" ‘Postƒƒ, May 21/90)

May 24: The Department of Defense and NASA announced theappointment of contractors to continue research and developmenton the National AeroSpace Plane.  General Dynamics, McDonnellDouglas, United Technologies (Pratt & Whitney), and RockwellInternational planned to jointly pursue hypersonic technologies.(NASA Release 90©71)‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘åôMay 31: The Apollo 204 Capsule, which caught fire on the launchpad at Cape Canaveral, Florida, and claimed the lives of threeastronauts on January 27, 1967, remains at Langley ResearchCenter in Virginia, where it has been stored since shortly afterthe accident. The capsule was slated to be entombed with the ill™fated Space Shuttle Challenger in an abandoned missile silo atCape Canaveral, Florida. (NASA Release 90©76)

‘  â ? @ ‘√√Juneƒƒ

June 1: NASA launched a Delta rocket carrying a West Germanobservatory into a 360©mile©high orbit from Cape Canaveral,Florida. The observatory consisted of an X©ray telescope and awide©field camera for detecting extreme ultraviolet light;scientists hoped the observatory would yield information aboutforces associated with the center of our galaxy, intergalacticgasses, quasars, black holes, hot stars, and objects on the edgeof the universe. The observatory was dubbed Rosat, after theGerman Scientist Wilhelm Roentgen who discovered X©rays in 1895,and promised to be 100 times more sensitive than even theEinstein X©ray Observatory launched in 1978. It was originally‘  â ? h ‘scheduled for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in 1987. (√√LA Timesƒƒ,‘  â ? 0 ‘Jun 2/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jun 2/90; √√B Sunƒƒ, Jun 2/90; √√P Inqƒƒ, Jun 2/90)

June 5: A letter from Lennard A. Fisk to Jacques Breton of theFrench space agency, the Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales,revealed NASA's defunct plans for a U.S.©French experiment thatwas to fly aboard a 1994 Soviet mission to measure the mineralcontent of Mars. The constraints recently imposed on the twocountries was the reason given for cancellation of the project.‘  â ? p ‘(√√W Postƒƒ, Jun 18/90)
  
June 6: A fuel leak that postponed Space Shuttle Columbia's 
May 30 launch was located, and engineers decided the orbiterwould have to return to the hanger for repairs. NASA officialswere not sure when the craft would be launched but announced thatonly eight of the nine planned flights for the year would be‘  â ? Ë ‘flown. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, June 7/90; √√W Timesƒƒ, Jun 8/90)

June 7: NASA canceled a contract with TRW Corporation for theOrbital Maneuvering Vehicle, aka Space Tug, a spacecraft intendedto lift satellites (specifically the Hubble Space Telescope and aproposed X©ray telescope) into higher orbit. The reason given for‘  â ? ò! ‘the cancellation was recent budget pressure facing NASA. (√√WSJƒƒ,‘  â ? `" ‘Jun 8/90; √√W Timesƒƒ, Jun 8/90; √√Sp Newsƒƒ, Jun 11©17/90; NASA Release90©78)

¡  ¡* NASA announced that Steven A Hawley had been named AssociateDirector at Ames Research Center, California. He was selected asan astronaut in 1978 and was the veteran of three Shuttleflights. (NASA Release 90©77)
‘   ÿ'         0*†(†(∞∞  ‘åJune 8: The Air Force launched a Titan 4 rocket from CapeCanaveral in Florida and put a classified payload into orbit. TheTitan 4, manufactured by Martin Marietta Corporation, wasdesigned to replace the Space Shuttle as the military's principalmeans of reaching space. This was the second successful launch ofthe rocket, although the maiden voyage in 1989 almost resulted in‘  â ? ∞ ‘a catastrophe because of a malfunctioning engine nozzle. (√√W Postƒƒ,‘  â ? x ‘Jun 9/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jun 9/90)

June 13: NASA said it had received the go ahead from Intelsat torescue the Intelsat 6 satellite put into a low orbit three monthsearlier. Plans called for lifting the satellite into a higherorbit sometime in 1992; sources said that the mission wouldprobably be carried out during the inaugural flight of Shuttle‘  â ? 
 ‘Endeavor. (√√B Sunƒƒ, Jun 14/90; √√W Timesƒƒ, Jun 14/90)

June 14: NASA engineers revealed that problems with the HubbleSpace Telescope were even more difficult to correct than firstexpected. The most vexing problem was a 20©minute vibration fromthe solar panels every 90 minutes as the craft passed from nightto day. The on©board computer's attempt to compensate for thevibration only made the problem worse. Another problem was thetelescope's frequent inability to lock onto the stars that it wascommanded to seek. In addition, the reaction of the spacecraft toradiation over the South Atlantic, where the Van Allen belt dipscloser than usual to the Earth, was more acute than expected;numerous data were lost and false computer signals were given. Itwas hoped that all three problems could be remedied via‘  â ? ‡ ‘modifications to the telescope's computer. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Jun 15/90;‘  â ? ® ‘√√P Inqƒƒ, Jun 15/90; √√B Sunƒƒ, Jun 15/90)

¡  ¡* NASA's Office of Commercial Programs sponsored plans todevelop a system for launching and recovering commercialspaceborne experiments. Assisted by numerous universities, theCommercial Experiment Transporter would be launched on anexpendable rocket and contain both a recovery system and aservice module. The two would then separate so that theexperiments aboard the recovery system could land in the UnitedStates while those not requiring recovery could remain in orbit.(NASA Release 90©83)

June 21: Contel Federal Systems transferred title of the Trackingand Data Relay Satellite System to NASA, effective July 1, 1990.Contel transferred the system 42 months earlier than called for,saving the Government $16 million. (NASA Release 90©86)

¡  ¡* The Ames Research Center in California awarded a five©year,$32.8 million contract to Silicon Graphics for a work station tobe used in the Ames Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation ProcessingSystem Network. The work station would allow users to analyze andvisualize their work in computational fluid dynamics and otherlarge©scale scientific simulation and modeling applications.‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘(NASA Release C90©w)
     
June 23: Martin Marietta Corporation successfully launched aTitan 3 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, on this date thatcarried a replacement satellite into orbit for the Intelsat 6stranded in March. The new communications satellite was to join14 others in September and would transmit 3 television channels‘  â ? x ‘and 120,000 telephone calls simultaneously. (√√P Inqƒƒ, Jun 24/90; √√W‘  â ? @ ‘Postƒƒ, Jun 24/90)

June 27: NASA said that the Hubble Space Telescope, which hadbeen plagued with problems, was discovered to have a flawedmirror, causing the $1.5 billion instrument to be "near sighted."The mirrors, which were ground into the wrong shape, rendereduseless the telescope's most important scientific instrument, awide©field planetary camera designed to explore the farthestreaches of the universe. Engineers said that instrumentsscheduled to be attached to the telescope in 1993, 1996, and 1997could compensate for the flaw and added that these flightschedules might be advanced. Tests were not done on theeffectiveness of the mirrors before the telescope was launched‘  â ? h ‘because engineers felt that the checks were cost prohibitive. (√√P‘  â ? 0 ‘Inqƒƒ, Jun 28/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, June 28/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Jun 28/90)

June 28: Ames Research Center in California awarded a cost©plus™award©fee $210.8 million contract for software support. Under thecontract Sterling Federal Systems, Inc. would providecomputational support for problem applications and systemsprogramming, systems design and engineering, software managementand maintenance, and modification of existing software. (NASARelease C90©y)

June 29: A hydrogen leak similar to the one that scrubbedColumbia's mission late in May was discovered in the SpaceShuttle Atlantis as it was being readied on the launch pad.Engineers determined that Atlantis would need to return to thehanger where it could be separated from its external fuel tankfor repairs. Officials said that the flight, originally scheduledfor mid©July, would be delayed at least several weeks and notedthat the entire fleet was grounded until the problem could beascertained. Finding the cause of the leak had proven difficult.If the final analysis pointed to a design flaw, grounding mighthave been stretched to months or even years. (NASA Release 90©89;‘  â ? ò! ‘√√W Postƒƒ, Jun 30/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jun 30/90; √√WSJƒƒ, July 2/90; √√CSMƒƒ, Jul2/90)

During June: NASA awarded a $1.3 million contract to MartinMarietta Corporation to study design concepts for a space based"service station." The system would service satellites beyond therange of the Space Shuttle, provide them with fuel as well as‘  â ? ' ‘replace certain components. (√√W Timesƒƒ, Jun 7/90)
‘   ÿ'         0*†(†(∞∞  ‘å¡  ¡* The Air Force and NASA entered their final stage of a $250million, ten©year experiment for the X©29 program, scheduled tobe completed in March 1991. The test plane was designed to be 30percent unstable and was dependent upon a sophisticated flightcontrol system to produce and maintain stability. Glenn Spacht ofGrumman Corporation, developer of the X©29 and producer of the 
F©14, said, "When applied to the F©14, the plane will get betterhandling qualities, survivability, maneuverability, and antispincharacteristics....The F©14 can certainly reap the benefits of‘  â ?  ‘the X©29." (√√Def Newsƒƒ, Jun 25/90)

¡  ¡* Scientists and engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory inPasadena, California, began extensive tests on its recentlydeveloped untended planetary rover.  An unproven technology wasneeded for a vehicle on a distant planet controlled by groundcrews on Earth inasmuch as round©trip communication would beanywhere from 8 minutes to 40 minutes. Computer Aided RemoteDriving allowed vehicle planning and identification of a 10s©of™meters©long©obstacle©free path, with a three©dimensional displayfrom stereo cameras aboard the vehicle. Semi©AutonomousNavigation allowed an operator to determine a nominal extendedroute tens of kilometers long. (NASA Release 90©85)

‘  â ? ¯ ‘√√Julyƒƒ

July 2: NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville,Alabama, awarded a $42.6 million contract to RockwellInternational for continued Space Shuttle systems engineering andintegration services. The contract called for Shuttle launch andflight support, test verification, operations integration, flightevaluation, engineering analysis, and data systems operations, aswell as special studies. (NASA Release C90©z)

July 3: NASA and Orbital Sciences Corporation signed a 5©yearagreement in support of the firm's Pegasus and Taurus launchvehicle programs. As part of a continuing effort to foster astrong U.S. commercial launch industry, Orbital Sciences wasgiven access to agency launch support property and services.Prior to this agreement, similar agreements were made withGeneral Dynamics, McDonnell Douglas, Martin Marietta, and the LTVCorporation. (NASA Release 90©92)

July 5: The Hubble Space Telescope Optical Systems Board ofInvestigation created by NASA met for the first time inWashington, D.C., to hear presentations from the Marshall SpaceFlight Center in Alabama, Huntsville, and the Hughes DanburyOptical Systems, makers of the precision mirrors for thetelescope. Members of the Board included Lennard A. Fisk,Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications; 
Dr. Lew Allen, Director, Jet Propulsion Laboratory; and GaryTesch, Board Counsel. At the conclusion of the meeting, Dr. Allensaid, "The board now has a good base of information from which to‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘proceed with its investigation." (NASA Anno)
   
July 8: President George Bush said he would allow U.S. commercialsatellites to be launched by Soviet rockets. The rockets would befired from a projected site in Australia, an advantageousposition for orbits, located just 12 degrees south of the‘  â ? ∞ ‘equator. (FBIS Sov, Jul 9/90;√√ NY Timesƒƒ, Jul 9/90)

July 9: Two Space Shuttle crew commanders were grounded by NASA for disciplinary reasons. Robert L. Gibson was grounded for oneyear after he flew a stunt plane, in a July 7Texas air show, thatcollided with another plane and killed the second pilot. David M.Walker was grounded for 60 days because the T©38 jet aircraft hepiloted in May 1989 nearly collided with a Pan Am Airbus 310 over‘  â ? 
 ‘Dulles Airport, according to the second pilot. (√√P Inqƒƒ, Jul 10/90;‘  â ? ∏ ‘√√W Timesƒƒ, Jul 10/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jul 10/90; NASA Release 90©96)

July 10: NASA's Chief Scientist William Lenoir told a Senatecommittee that the Agency should have performed tests on theHubble Space Telescope's mirrors. He said that the problem couldhave been caught by simpler, less costly tests than the "end©to™end" test, rejected because of its high cost. (Hearing before the‘  â ? 0 ‘Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space, Jul 10/90; √√B Sunƒƒ,‘  â ? ¯ ‘Jul 11/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Jul 11/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jul 11/90)

July 13: Engineers located two leaks in the Space Shuttle's fuelline that they determined could easily be fixed and stated thatflights would resume soon. The problems, said William Lenoir,NASA's flight director, did not appear to be a result of anydesign flaw; he added that eight of the nine scheduled missionswould likely be flown this year. 

¡  ¡In the meantime, investigators from a six©member board ofinvestigation created by NASA July 2 were seeking to find whathad gone wrong with the Hubble Space Telescope. Lew Allen,Director, Jet Propulsion Laboratory, who headed the board,promised a congressional committee that they would pinpoint theproblem and fix responsibility. The investigation, he said, would‘  â ? ∞ ‘be "very embarrassing to someone or some group." (√√W Postƒƒ, Jul‘  â ? x ‘14/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jul 14/90)
 
July 15: Recent grounding of the Space Shuttle fleet and problemswith the Hubble Space Telescope had prompted President GeorgeBush to consider appointing a panel composed of a group ofexperts outside of Government to review the space program, WhiteHouse officials announced. Officials noted, however, that NASAmade a good call when it grounded the Shuttle fleet and that noplans for changing its management had been formulated. VicePresident Dan Quayle met with NASA Administrator Richard R. Trulyon July and directed him to appoint the independent task force.‘  â ? ' ‘(√√NY Timesƒƒ, Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90; √√B Sunƒƒ; Jul 16/86; Jul 17/90;NASA Anno)‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘åôJuly 17: NASA scientists proposed almost a dozen plans for atemporary fix of the Hubble Space Telescope until 1993 SpaceShuttle mission would install an optically corrected main camera.A brainstorming session included some "far fetched" ideas thatinvolved Shuttle missions to the telescope.

¡  ¡Elsewhere, NASA official William Lenoir reported that SpaceShuttle flights might resume soon and that Atlantis could fly asearly as August 10. He added that if the repairs could not beaccomplished on the launch pad, then the orbiter would be takeninto the hanger and rescheduled for launch sometime after the‘  â ? ò ‘October 5 liftoff of Discovery. (√√B Sunƒƒ, Jul 18/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Jul‘  â ? `	 ‘18/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jul 18/90) 

July 20: A report released by NASA, concerning plans for theSpace Station Freedom, said that 3,700 hours of maintenance wouldbe required annually to keep it running. The final figure fromthe 6©month study was up from the 2,200 hours that a preliminaryversion had given in March and dwarfed the original goal of 130hours. The most alarming statistic was that 6,200 hours ofmaintenance would be needed before the station could even behabitable. "The significance is that there's no one up there todo this," said Dr. William J. Fisher, an astronaut who headed the‘  â ? ¯ ‘12©member panel that did the estimate. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Jul 21/90; √√W‘  â ? ¿ ‘Postƒƒ, Jul 21/90; √√WSJƒƒ, Jul 23/90)

July 24: A NASA official announced that Mark Showalter, at theAmes Research Center in California, had discovered another moonorbiting Jupiter. He found it while doing analysis of imagestaken in 1980©1981 by Voyager 2. The smallest of the planet's‘  â ? p ‘known satellites was dubbed 1981S13. (√√B Sunƒƒ, Jul 25/90; √√W Postƒƒ,Jul 25/90; NASA Release 90©103)

¡  ¡* An Ariane rocket carrying both a French and a German TVsatellite was successfully launched from French Guiana. Therocket was identical to the one that exploded shortly after‘  â ?   ‘liftoff last February 22. (√√W Postƒƒ, Jul 25/90; √√WSJƒƒ, Jul 25/90)

July 25: The hydrogen leak that was detected in the Space ShuttleAtlantis reappeared, and engineers determined that the Shuttlewould have to be taken off the launch pad and rolled back to thehanger for a closer look. Columbia, undergoing repairs for asimilar leak, was expected to be on the launch pad early inAugust. The Atlantis liftoff with its classified military payloadwere rescheduled for November, bumping another launch into 1991‘  â ? (# ‘and reducing the projected number of flights in 1990 to seven. (√√P‘  â ? # ‘Inqƒƒ, Jul 26/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jul 26/90; √√W Timesƒƒ, Jul 26/90)

¡  ¡* After three delays, NASA and General Dynamics Corporationlaunched a Delta rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, thatcarried a $189 million satellite to study the Earth's magneticand electrical fields. The Combined Release and Radiation Effects‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘Satellite (CRRES), a joint effort by NASA and the Department ofDefense, carried 24 canisters containing chemicals that were tobe released in fall 1990 and become ionized by the sun's rays.Visible clouds would then spread along magnetic field lines,allowing scientists to see how electrical fields interact withnormally invisible charged particles. The CRRES releases were tobe augmented by chemicals released from 10 sounding rockets‘  â ? x ‘launched from Puerto Rico and the Marshall Islands. (√√P Inqƒƒ, Jul‘  â ? @ ‘26/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Jul 26/90; NASA Release 90©97; 90©98) 

¡  ¡* The United States and the Soviet Union signed an agreementin which NASA's Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) would flyon a Soviet Meteor©3 spacecraft sometime in 1991. A TOMSinstrument had monitored ozone concentrations from a Nimbus©7satellite since 1978, focusing on the southern hemisphere and thedevelopment of the Antarctic ozone hole. This satellite, however,had already performed well beyond its designed lifetime, and theTOMS/Meteor©3 mission was slated to replace it. Another TOMSsatellite was scheduled to be aboard a U.S. spacecraft in 1993;two or three years subsequent to that mission another TOMS wasscheduled for a Japanese ADEOS satellite. (NASA Release 90©105)

July 26: NASA and Japan's Ministry of State for Science andTechnology agreed on new areas of space cooperation during ameeting in Tokyo. NASA/Japan projects agreed upon wereobservation of the ozone layer from satellites, space environmentmonitoring (real©time solar wind data), Space Station solarterrestrial physics carried out from the Space Station Freedom,and space microgravity experiments aboard the Space Shuttle.Other areas discussed were the ongoing cooperation for buildingand utilization of the Space Station and joint projects in x©rayand infrared astronomy, cosmic ray research, the study of oceandynamics, measurement of cloud height by satellite stereograph,reception of Japan's first marine observation satellite data, andsatellite measurements of tropical rainfall. (NASA Release 90™106)

July 31: State officials said that the Soviet Union had requesteduse of facilities at Cape Canaveral, Florida, to launch theirProton rockets. The request followed their stated intentions ofjoining the commercial space race. University of Houstonprofessor Peter Bishop explained that a launch pad closer to theequator meant less fuel would be needed for achieving proper‘  â ? ò! ‘orbit. (√√B Sunƒƒ, Aug 1/86)

During July: NASA and U.S. university scientists and Canadianresearchers joined in a study of pollution at high northernlatitudes resulting from the release of methane, an importantgreenhouse gas, from tundra, forests, and marshes.  Both groundand air measurements were taken; NASA's main sampling platformwas a Lockheed Electra aircraft. Research began July 5 and wasscheduled to conclude on August 20, 1990. (NASA Release 90©102) ‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘åô¡  ¡* The Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland,selected Stanford Telecom for negotiations leading to a five™year, $30 million contract to provide systems engineering supportfor the Advanced Tracking and Delta Relay Satellite and theAdvanced Network Control Center. Also, Martin MariettaCorporation received a $326.8 million contract from the Air Forcefor modifications to space launch facilities at Cape Canaveral,Florida. (NASA Release C90©aa)

¡  ¡* Scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena,California, devised a way to salvage the Japanese lunar missionthat successfully orbited a probe around the Moon but did notsend data back because of a failed transmitter. The mother shipthat launched the probe was in an elliptical orbit around theEarth and could achieve lunar orbit by taking advantage of the"fuzzy boundary." The "fuzzy boundary" is an area about 1 millionmiles from Earth where gravitational forces emanating from ourplanet and the Sun cancel each other out. The limited supply offuel carried by the spacecraft was not sufficient to allow it toreach a lunar orbit by conventional means. Success with the plan,they determined, would mean an enormous fuel savings should lunar‘  â ? h ‘bases be built in the future. (√√LA Timesƒƒ, July 16/90)  

‘  â ? ¯ ‘√√Augustƒƒ

August 2: The Air Force launched a Delta rocket from CapeCanaveral, Florida, which successfully carried a NAVSTARsatellite into orbit. The navigation satellite was the eighth ina planned series of 21 that promised to give military units their‘  â ? ® ‘locations to within 50 feet. (√√W Postƒƒ, Aug 3/90)

¡  ¡* Officials announced that an advisory committee created byVice President Dan Quayle and the National Space Council was setup to examine how to manage future efforts in space. Thecommittee, made up of two former congressmen, a former astronaut,and several top industry executives, was to report to theNational Space Council in about four months. Quayle said that hehad urged the committee's creation because of problems with theHubble Space Telescope, grounding of the Shuttle fleet, and‘  â ? x ‘design flaws in the proposed Space Station. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Aug 3/90)

August 8: Government officials said that the mirrors attached tothe Nation's next generation of weather satellites used toreflect images from Earth's atmosphere into internal sensorswould warp from the Sun's heat, according to recent tests. NASA formed a team of nine experts from Ford and ITT, makers of thespacecraft, to correct the problem, in time to meet the 1992launch date.  A single Geostationary Operational EnvironmentalSatellite was in orbit at the time. Officials were worried that,if it failed, the Nation would have to rely on planes, radarunits, and other satellites that were not capable of giving thecomprehensive overview needed, for example, to follow storms.‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘There were normally two satellites of this type in orbit, but onewas destroyed in 1986 when a Delta rocket malfunctioned.Solutions for the GOES©NEXT flawed mirrors ranged from repairingthem, which would cause a six©month delay, to re©manufacturing,‘  â ?   ‘and causing a delay of more than one year. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Aug 8/90; √√W‘  â ? Ë ‘Postƒƒ, Aug 9/90; √√W Timesƒƒ, Aug 9/90)

August 10: The $744 million Magellan spacecraft launched in May1989 reached Venus and achieved polar orbit for a mission to mapthe entire planet. The radar©produced images promised to be 10times more detailed than those from previous expeditions that hadmapped only sections of Venus. Information from the mission couldalso provide a better understanding of predicted global warming,‘  â ? (
 ‘or the greenhouse effect, said NASA scientist Gentry Lee. (√√NY‘  â ? 
 ‘Timesƒƒ, Aug 11/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Aug 11/90; √√LA Timesƒƒ, Aug 11/90; √√C Tribƒƒ,Aug 11/90) 

August 13: Surprised NASA scientists released a photograph takenAugust 3 by the Hubble Space Telescope that provided unexpecteddetail of a young star system known as 30 Doradus, 160,000 lightyears from Earth.  After scientists corrected the flawed mirrorproblem with computer enhancement, the telescope revealed 60 ofwhat were yet the youngest and heaviest stars known. The "starnursery," was once thought to have only one large star; the mostadvanced telescope prior to the Hubble telescope had raised that‘  â ? à ‘number to 27. (√√W Postƒƒ, Aug 14/90; √√W Timesƒƒ, Aug 14/90; √√P Inqƒƒ, Aug14/90; NASA Release 90©111) 

August 16: Charles Pellerin, director of astrophysics for NASA,announced that problems with the Hubble Space Telescope mirrorscould easily be fixed in a Space Shuttle mission scheduled formid©1993. The mission would require replacing the telescope'swide©field planetary camera with one designed to correct the‘  â ? » ‘flawed mirrors. (√√P Inqƒƒ, Aug 17/90; √√W Timesƒƒ, Aug 17/90)

August 17: NASA scientists regained contact with Magellan after a14©hour loss. The spacecraft went into a safe mode, in which itshut down many of its systems and pointed its solar panels towardthe Sun because of navigation problems it falsely interpreted.The ship's computer memory was sent back to Earth so scientistscould determine the problem in Magellan's program. Scientistswere pleased, however, with the first set of pictures takenduring Magellan's test run over the planet. They, however,cautioned that Magellan's mission to begin regular mapping by‘  â ? `" ‘August 29 would likely be delayed. (√√W Timesƒƒ, Aug 20/90; √√P Inqƒƒ,‘  â ? (# ‘Aug 19/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Aug 18/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Aug 18/90; √√LA Timesƒƒ, Aug18/90)

August 18: A Delta rocket carried a British televisionbroadcasting satellite, Marcopolo 2, and put it into orbit fromCape Canaveral, Florida. The only problem for the ninth U.S.commercial launch of a payload into orbit was a two©hour delay‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘caused by thunderstorms in the area. (AP, Aug 18/90)

August 20: NASA Administrator Richard R. Truly announced theestablishment of a Space Commerce Steering Group, composed ofNASA officials, that would provide an overview of commercialspace technology applications. The goal of the Group was toprovide coordination of potential commercial capabilities; NASA'sOffice of Commercial Programs would remain the primary actionagent. Truly maintained that NASA "must ensure that [its]technology is transferred to the private sector. The taxpayer'sinvestment in NASA is an investment in the internationalcompetitiveness of U.S. industry." (NASA Release 90©112)
 
August 21: Scientists at NASA said that the Magellan spacecraftseemed to be working. Engineers had received all of the data fromthe craft's computer memory and were in the process of loadingnew programming. Officials said the navigation problem might havebeen caused by a series of rare events; they hoped it would be‘  â ?  ‘fully operational soon. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Aug 22/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Aug 22/90;‘  â ? ÿ ‘√√W Postƒƒ, Aug 22/90)

¡  ¡* A report from a panel convened by the National ResearchCouncil and released to the White House recommended smaller andsimpler satellites to monitor the Earth's climate, as opposed tothe $30 billion, six large satellites being planned by NASA. Theexpense of the Earth Observing System (EOS) could take funds awayfrom other important studies and future budgets.  It could resultin a delay in launching the EOS spacecraft, the report warned.Noting that at least one large platform was necessary for anumber of scientific instruments to be grouped together, thepanel recommended that three of the large satellites be replaced‘  â ? 8 ‘by smaller ones. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Aug 22/90; W post, Aug 22/90)    

August 27: NASA responded to a request issued August 7 by theOffice of Management and Budget asking for various Federalagencies to outline the effects of a $100 billion cut in the 1991budget. The report submitted by NASA warned of a halt in SpaceShuttle flights, suspended development of the Space Station, anddelayed launch of the Mars Observer spacecraft. Although notexpected, cuts across©the©board were a possible result of the‘  â ? @ ‘Gramm©Rudman deficit control law. (√√Sp Newsƒƒ, Sep 9©13/90)

August 29: The first scientific results from the Hubble SpaceTelescope confirmed that it would reveal a more detailed view ofthe heavens than any ground telescope, in spite of its flawedmirror. The latest pictures showed the clearest view yet of asupernova discovered in 1987 and of densely packed stars in adistant galaxy that could be the result of a black hole.
 
¡  ¡Meanwhile, scientists at NASA reported that the Magellanspacecraft was operating in another safe mode and communicationwith it had been off©and©on. The navigation problem had been‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘narrowed down but not pinpointed, and the mapping survey of Venus‘  â ? »  ‘would be delayed two or three weeks. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Aug 30/90; √√W‘  â ? ê ‘Timesƒƒ, Aug 30/90; NASA Release 90©117; 90©118)

During August: Joseph B. Mahon, Deputy Associate Administrator,and astronaut Michael J. McCulley announced they would retire.Mahon had served with NASA for almost 30 years, managing anddirecting untended launch vehicles, Shuttle carrier systems, andspacelab operations. Captain McCulley, who planned to retire fromthe Navy, was to join Lockheed Space Operations Company and beinvolved with day©to©day processing of Space Shuttle vehicles.(NASA Release 90©116; 90©119)

¡  ¡* NASA announced the selection of Margaret G. Finarelli asActing Associate Administrator for External Relations, and thenames of microgravity mission payload specialist candidates.Finarelli, who had been Deputy Associate Administrator sinceDecember 1988, would temporarily replace Kenneth S. Pedersen, whohad taken a one©year teaching assignment with GeorgetownUniversity in Washington, D.C. Candidates for payload specialistsfor the March 1992 STS©53 Space Shuttle mission were Lawrence J.DeLucas, Joseph Prahl, Albert Sacco, and Eugene H. Trinh. (NASARelease 90©107; 90©108)

¡  ¡* A Government industry board selected the gas generator powercycle engine, similar to the J©2 engine used on the Saturn moonrockets, for the rocket engine to be designed and built to powerthe NASA/USAF Advanced Launch System. Chosen over the closedexpander power cycle, the engine would power next century launchvehicles, capable of delivering a wide range of payloads intoEarth orbit at a reduced cost. (NASA Release 90©113)

¡  ¡* In a flight test that concluded in August, NASA, the AirForce, and Boeing Commercial Airline Group announced better©than™expected findings taken from the results of modifying a 22©footsection of a Boeing 757 wing. The design reduced drag in whatcould equate to 10 percent if the entire span of both wings hadbeen modified. A 1©percent reduction would have amounted to a$100 million annual savings in fuel costs for the U.S. airlineindustry. (NASA Release 90©115)

‘  â ?   ‘√√Septemberƒƒ

September 5: Liftoff of the Space Shuttle Columbia was scrubbedfor the third time, after a fuel leak was discovered. It wasreportedly not in the same area as the leak that halted themission last May. The second delay for liftoff occurred duringthe last week of August because of communication problems withthe X©ray telescope in Columbia's cargo bay. NASA engineersbelieved the problem lay in the fuel pumps feeding the Shuttle'sthree main engines and began replacing them the next day. Agencyofficials said that the flight would be delayed at least 11 days.‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘‘  â ?    ‘(√√W Timesƒƒ, Sep 6/90; Sep 7/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Sep 6/90; Sep 7/90; √√NY‘  â ? »  ‘Timesƒƒ, Sep 6/90; Sep 7/90)

September 7: A Titan 4 rocket booster exploded at Edwards AirForce Base in California during tests, killing one worker andinjuring nine others. The Air Force was further developing therocket, which experts called problem plagued, hoping to replace‘  â ? x ‘the Space Shuttle for launching of heavy payloads. (√√C Tribƒƒ, Sep‘  â ? @ ‘8/90; √√LA Timesƒƒ, Sep 9/90)

September 13: NASA Administrator Richard Truly told a panelcreated by President George Bush that the Agency was facingserious problems, but not what most people believed them to be.The two obstacles standing in front of the Agency, he said, were"Governmentwide practices" that encumbered connections betweenprograms and resources and the public's misunderstanding of theproposed Space Station Freedom. The Space Station's design flaws,he added, were either solved or close to a solution, "yet publicunderstanding is to the contrary."

‘  â ? † ‘¡  ¡In a related matter, √√Federal Computer Weekƒƒ reported that NASAplanned to spend $1.9 billion over the next five years on itsseven centers of excellence in the area of high©performancecomputing. The Centers would focus on training college andgraduate©level students, thereby educating the next generation ofscientists in the field. Truly, who spoke at a conference onsupercomputing in September noted, "NASA needs high©performance‘  â ?  ‘computing. Some of our missions depend on it." (√√W Postƒƒ, Sep‘  â ? ‡ ‘14/90; √√Fed CoWkƒƒ, Sep 10/90)

September 15: Magellan officially began its mission of mappingVenus on this date when it used radar to photograph the planetfor the first time since radio contact was lost August 16.Computerized commands were radioed to the spacecraft, andconfirmation that it had begun its 243©day chore was returned 13minutes later. Pictures revealing mountains, valleys, and aunique looking meteor crater were received by scientists two days‘  â ? Ë ‘later. (√√P Inqƒƒ, Sep 16/90; Sep 18/90; √√W Postƒƒ Sep 25/90)

September 17: Liftoff of Columbia was again scrubbed because ofanother hydrogen leak. This time the suspect was gritty sandpaperresidues from a mobile launch platform restoration. Apostponement period for the launch was indefinite, but officialssaid that it would be delayed until after the October 5 Discovery‘  â ? `" ‘flight. (√√W Timesƒƒ, Sep 18/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Sep 18/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Sep18/90)

September 18: The House voted to slash the Strategic DefenseInitiative $4.7 billion request to $2.3 billion. RepresentativeJon Kyl argued that the United Stated needed "Star Wars" to avoid"being held hostage by some tinhorn dictator." RepresentativeRonald Dellums retorted that only $143 million of the program's‘   ÿ'        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘budget was dedicated to destroying short©range missiles, those‘  â ? »  ‘developed by Third World Nations. (√√P Inqƒƒ, Sep 19/90)

September 19: The House Science, Space, and Technology Committeerecommended an increase of NASA's budget from $12.3 billion to$17 billion for the next year, including the $2.9 billionearmarked for continued development of the Space Station.Committee members acknowledged that the final spending plan wouldprobably be lower but wanted to show their support despite NASA's‘  â ?  ‘recent problems. (√√P Inqƒƒ, Sep 20/90)

September 20: NASA took the Space Shuttle Columbia off itsschedule for 1990 launches, operating under the assumption thatthe orbiter was prone to fuel leaks. Still unable to pinpoint theexact location of the last hydrogen leak, NASA hoped that thecraft would be able to fly in early 1991. A team of nine‘  â ? Ä ‘engineers was working on the problem. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Sep 21/90; √√W‘  â ? H ‘Postƒƒ, Sep 20/90; √√C Tribƒƒ, Sep 20/90; NASA Release 90©127)

September 27: The Federal Aviation Administration signed amemoranda of understanding with NASA to jointly research problemsin aviation. Areas to be investigated were environmentalcompatibility, human factors, severe weather, integration ofcockpit and air traffic operations, airworthiness, and noise.(NASA Release 90©131)

September 28: The House passed a $44 billion, 3©year spendingauthorization bill for NASA that included establishment of a Moonbase and a crew©assisted expedition to Mars. The bill was to nextgo to a conference committee to work out differences with the‘  â ? p ‘Senate. (√√LA Timesƒƒ, Sep 29/90)

During September: Astronaut Bruce McCandless retired from NASAand as Captain from the U.S. Navy. He helped develop the spaceagency's Manned Maneuvering Unit, a jet©powered backpack he wasthe first to wear during a Space Shuttle Challenger mission in‘  â ?   ‘February 1984. (√√W Timesƒƒ, Sep 12/90)

¡  ¡* The Langley Research Center in Virginia selected Mason andHanger Services, Inc. for negotiation of a 5©year, $97.9 millioncontract to support all aspects of supply, transportation andequipment management; general and specialized administrativeservices; different aspects of the security program; and supportof the scientific and technical information program.

¡  ¡The Television Development Division of NASA Headquartersawarded the Imaging Systems Laboratory of Florida AtlanticUniversity a one© to five©year contract with a potential value of$3 million for research and development in advanced video systemsfor space and terrestrial applications. (NASA Release C90©cc; 90™131A)
‘   ÿ'          0*†(†(∞∞  ‘å¡  ¡* A joint NASA/U.S. Geological Survey team of Americanscientists planned to work with a Soviet Science team to studyvolcanoes along Russia's Kamchatka Peninsula, part of thePacific's "Ring of Fire." The study would mark the first timeWestern scientists had been allowed in the region. (NASA Release90©124)

¡  ¡* The Air Force decided in September to convert the SpaceLaunch Complex©6 at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California forSpace Shuttle liftoffs into a launch pad for its Titan 4 rockets.The launch pad had been idle since the Challenger accident in‘  â ? ò ‘1986. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Sep 30/90) 

‘  â ? (
 ‘√√Octoberƒƒ

Oct 1: The High Resolution Imager, an instrument for the study ofcosmic X©rays aboard the German Roentgen Satellite launched lastJune, sent back its first light pictures to a ground station nearMunich. The cooperative program between the United States, WestGermany, and Great Britain, called ROSAT, excited severalinternational scientists. The pictures sent back represented aneutron star 3,000 light years from Earth, a supernova thatoccurred in this galaxy 320 years ago and 10,000 light yearsaway, and a cluster of galaxies known as Abell 2156. (NASARelease 90©133)

October 3: The Senate approved $13.4 billion for NASA's 1991budget. The bill drastically reduced the Moon and Mars initiativeand cut $863.6 million from the planned Space Station. Themeasure was to go to a conference committee to iron outdifferences with the House appropriations bill before being sent‘  â ? 8 ‘to President George Bush. (√√WSJƒƒ Oct 4/90)

October 4: NASA scientists reported that despite its flaws, theHubble Space Telescope was sending back some clear pictures,better than any a ground telescope could produce. The latestphotographs of Jupiter and Pluto were better than any ever taken,but until the telescope's "near sightedness" was corrected images‘  â ? ∞ ‘of distant, faint objects would continue to be unclear. (√√W Postƒƒ,‘  â ? x ‘Oct 5/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Oct 5/90)

¡  ¡* The official Soviet Tass News Agency reported that theirmost advanced rocket, a Zenit booster, had blown up seconds afterliftoff and destroyed much of the launch pad in the KazakhstanRepublic. The payload, said Western analysts, was likely a recon©naissance satellite. The rocket had earlier been promoted forsale in the West and had been used to fly some versions of the‘  â ? ∏$ ‘Soviet Space Shuttle. (√√W Postƒƒ, Oct 12/90)

October 6: Space Shuttle Discovery, flight STS©41, was launchedfrom Cape Canaveral, Florida after a 5©month dry spell; the fleetwas grounded during much of this period because of hydrogen‘   ÿ'!        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘leaks. Ulysses, the craft's 814©pound nuclear powered payload,was released later that afternoon, and a three©stage solid©fuelrocket began the craft on its long trip to Jupiter. Ulysses wasto sling shot Jupiter in order to achieve polar orbit about 120million miles from the Sun in May 1994. In order to escape anEarth orbit, the $750 million joint mission between NASA and theEuropean Space Agency reached 34,130 mph, the greatest velocityyet required by an interplanetary probe for the task.

¡  ¡ The scientific mission also included a controlled fire to seehow flames behave in weightlessness and release of the craft's50©foot robotic arm, which had a special material attached toestimate effects of deterioration on the Intelsat satellite,launched earlier this year into a low and useless orbit.Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base, California, on‘  â ? ∏ ‘October 10, ending a four©day, practically flawless mission. (√√W‘  â ? Ä ‘Postƒƒ, Oct 7/90; Oct 11/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Oct 7/90; Oct 11/90)√√ƒƒ√√ƒƒ 

October 11: The Office of Technology Assessment warned that Spacedebris could make space activity too risky in 20 to 30 years ifthe most traveled orbits continue to be littered. With theaverage collision velocity in low Earth orbit 6.2 miles persecond, an object having 1/35th the weight of an aspirin tablethas the impact of a .30©caliber bullet, they said. The Air Forcetracks such debris to advise NASA before Shuttle missions, but no‘  â ? à ‘course change has ever been deemed necessary. (√√W Postƒƒ, Oct 12/90;‘  â ? P ‘√√C Tribƒƒ, Oct 14/90)

¡  ¡* NASA scientists warned that examination of data from theozone hole over the South Pole showed record depletion. Theyadded that ozone levels throughout the Southern Hemisphere wereas low as they had ever been. The ozone hole has been monitoredsince 1979 with the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, an‘  â ? » ‘instrument on the Goddard©Managed NIMBUS©7 spacecraft. (√√C Tribƒƒ,Oct 12/90; NASA Release 90©137)

October 16: The Senate, in a rush to agree on the 1991 spendingplan, compromised on a $1.9 billion allocation for NASA's SpaceStation. Said Senator Barbara Mikulski, "The space program hasbeen increased by 13 percent so it's not as if we gouged them."‘  â ? @ ‘(√√W Postƒƒ, Oct 17/90; √√AvWkƒƒ, Oct 22/90)

October 17: NASA released a photograph from the Cosmic BackgroundExplorer (COBE) of the vast dust clouds that fill the Milky Waygalaxy. Launched almost one year previously, the COBE was tostudy background radiation from the Big Bang believed to havecreated the universe. It found that the fireball was unexpectedly‘  â ? ∏$ ‘smooth, belying numerous theories. (√√W Postƒƒ, Oct 18/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ,Oct 23/90; NASA Release 90©140)

October 25: NASA announced the selection of 280 researchproposals for immediate negotiation of Phase I contracts in their‘   ÿ'"        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘1990 Small Business Innovation Research program (SBIR). SBIR hadaimed at stimulating technological innovation in small businessfor the past 8 years; the Phase I contracts normally would notexceed $50,000. (NASA Release 90©144)

October 26: NASA considered a proposal for a major repair of theHubble Space Telescope that would include the reinstating of fullobservation abilities. In addition to replacing the telescope'smain camera in 1993, as already planned, astronauts would alsoreplace another device with corrective optics for light thatreached other important scientific instruments. The plan calledfor repairing or replacing the craft's solar panels, as well,because their vibrations had interfered with many sensitive‘  â ? (
 ‘observations. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Oct 27/90)

October 30: NASA declared its Shuttle fleet "leak free" asColumbia passed a fueling test after two defective seals had beenreplaced and nuts and connectors in the engine compartment hadbeen tightened. Space Shuttle Atlantis had passed its fuel test a‘  â ? ÿ ‘week earlier and was scheduled for liftoff November 9. (√√NY Timesƒƒ,‘  â ? † ‘Oct 31/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Oct 31/90; NASA Release N90©86) 

¡  ¡* A Delta rocket was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida,successfully carrying an International Maritime SatelliteOrganization communications satellite into orbit. The satellitewas intended to expand international telephone and facsimile‘  â ? P ‘services aboard ships, planes, trains, and other vehicles. (√√W‘  â ?  ‘Postƒƒ, Oct 31/90)

During October: Photographs sent back from the Magellanspacecraft since September 15 were ten times sharper than anyseen before. The images "revealed a whole new planet" and "almosteverywhere you look on Venus you see volcanic features," said‘  â ? » ‘scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California. (√√CSMƒƒ,Oct 25/90)

¡  ¡* United States and Soviet space and aeronautics officialsplanned three separate meetings for October to visit U.S.S.R.space facilities. A U.S./U.S.S.R. Solar System Exploration JointWorking Group meeting was also planned for October in Virginia,where the group would visit NASA's aeronautics centers. (NASARelease 90©138)

¡  ¡* NASA selected ST Systems Corporation for negotiation to a 
5©year, $37 million contract for operation and analysis supportfor Goddard's National Space Science Data Center, Greenbelt,Maryland. NASA also awarded CBI Services, Inc. a $28.2 millioncontract for work on Ames Research Center's 12©foot pressure windtunnel. (NASA Release C90©dd; C 90©ee)

¡  ¡* NASA announced in October that its expertise in structuralmechanics, design optimization, and computer codes was finding‘   ÿ'#        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘application in orthopedic science in the custom design ofprosthetic joint implants. Similar development of a computercode, said experts, would allow implants a life span increasefrom an average of 7 years to 20 years while providing lessdiscomfort to the patient. (NASA Release 90©142)

‘  â ? ∞ ‘√√Novemberƒƒ

November 4: NASA officials announced that the Hubble SpaceTelescope for the first time had observed a faint object, aquasar billions of light years from Earth. Officials hoped thatstudy of the image, known to astronomers as UM675, would giveclues as to the chemicals present soon after the universe was‘  â ? (
 ‘born. (√√W Timesƒƒ, Nov 5/90)

November 5: Arnold Aldrich, Associate Administrator forAeronautics, Exploration and Technology, announced anorganizational change at the Ames©Dryden Flight Research Center,Mountain View, California, designed to reinforce and strengthennational flight research capabilities at the Ames©Dryden FlightResearch Facility (DFRF), Edwards, California.  Kenneth J. Szalaiwas chosen as the Ames Deputy Director, effective December 3,1990.  He was, however, located at Dryden and directed researchand operations.  Szalai previously served as Chief of theResearch Engineering Division at Dryden. (NASA Release 90©149)
 
November 7: NASA officials said that they had begun overhaulingthe design of their Space Station, a response to budget cutspassed by Congress and a directive to eliminate $6 billion fromthe Space Station plan over the next 5 years. William Lenoir,NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said that theredesign would make the Space Station an orbiting laboratorymerely visited by astronauts for scientific research. He addedthat it would not only be stripped of equipment for studyingEarth and to make astronomical observations, but for servicing‘  â ? X ‘spacecraft on their way to the Moon and Mars. (√√WSJƒƒ, Nov 8/90; Nov‘  â ?   ‘9/90; Nov 12/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Nov 8/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Non 9/90) 

November 12: A Titan 4 rocket blasted off from Cape Canaveral,Florida, with a classified payload outside experts believed was a$180 million advanced missile warning satellite. It was the thirdlaunch of the Titan 4 and followed a 2©month delay caused byundisclosed technical problems. The satellite, they added, wouldlikely observe Iraq. The Space Shuttle Atlantis, which occupied anearby launch pad for liftoff on the November 15, also had a‘  â ? (# ‘classified cargo aboard thought to be for the same purpose. (√√W‘  â ? # ‘Postƒƒ, Nov 13/90; √√W Timesƒƒ, Nov 13/90)

November 13: The Galileo spacecraft, launched from Space ShuttleAtlantis October 18, 1989, fired its thrusters so it could comecloser to Earth and use our planet's gravity to slingshot inDecember toward the Sun for a 1995 rendezvous with Jupiter. The‘   ÿ'$        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘fly©by would mark the first time Earth had been approached by aspacecraft from Venus, or anywhere inside Earth's orbit. Thecraft was scheduled to study Earth during the maneuver, slingshotthe Sun and study our planet again on the return trip in 1992,and then study Jupiter's atmosphere for 2 more years afterreaching the planet. The loop around the solar system wasnecessary because the rocket that launched the craft was too weak‘  â ? x ‘to propel Galileo directly on its 2©year trip to Jupiter. (√√Fla‘  â ? @ ‘Todayƒƒ, Nov 14/90; √√P Inqƒƒ, Nov 14/90)

¡  ¡* NASA selected investigators and science teams from 11 U.S.universities, 3 NASA centers, 3 other U.S. laboratories, and 13foreign countries for the Saturn orbiter portion of the Cassinimission scheduled for launch in 1996. The mission would include62 investigations for analysis of Saturn's atmosphere, its ringparticles, and moons within them. The orbiter would also send aprobe to Saturn's moon, Titan, and later map it. (NASA Release90©150)

November 15: Space Shuttle Atlantis, flight STS©38, was launchedfrom Cape Canaveral, Florida with a classified satellite,probably to be used for reconnaissance in the Persian Gulfregion. The flight marked the last time a Shuttle would beassigned a secret and sole military payload because the Pentagonplanned to use untended rockets for classified missions in the‘  â ? à ‘future. The satellite was deployed the following day.√√ƒƒ√√ƒƒ

¡  ¡Atlantis touched down at Cape Canaveral on November 20 after acontinuation of high winds and rains had prevented landing atEdwards Air Force Base in California the day before. NASApreferred using the 7©mile runway at Edwards, as opposed to the3©mile strip at Kennedy Space Center in Florida, which had notbeen used since 1985. Astronauts, however, said they felt nohesitation in using the Kennedy runway. This was only the sixthtime the orbiter had used the runway and the first time since theChallenger accident. Two more military missions were planned for‘  â ?   ‘the Space Shuttle, but the payloads would be unclassified. (√√NY‘  â ? Ë ‘Timesƒƒ, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Nov 16/90; Nov 21/90; NASAAnno)

November 26: The Air Force launched a Delta 2 rocket from CapeCanaveral, Florida, that carried a $65 million NAVSTAR GlobalPositioning System satellite into orbit. The navigation satellitewas 10th in a series of 21 that the United States hoped to have‘  â ? `" ‘in orbit by 1992. (√√W Postƒƒ, Nov 27/90; √√USA Todayƒƒ, Nov 27/90)

¡  ¡* NASA announced the selection of 84 proposals for Phase IIcontracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program.Aiming to stimulate technological innovation from small business,the contracts were allowed to reach $500,000 over a two©yearperiod. (NASA Release 90©152)
‘   ÿ'%         0*†(†(∞∞  ‘åNovember 27: The six©member Hubble Optical Systems Board ofInvestigation, formed by NASA and headed by Dr. Lew Allen of theJet Propulsion Laboratory at Pasadena, California, released itsfinal report, cumulating a 5©month study. The report stated thatboth NASA and the Perkin©Elmer Corporation, then known as HughesDanbury Optical Systems, were responsible for the flawed mirrorthat prevented the Hubble Space Telescope from distinguishingvery faint objects. Lower management at the Corporationdiscounted any information that conflicted with certifiedprocedures for testing the mirror with newly designed equipment.Upper management at Perkin©Elmer and at NASA, the report went on,were left unaware of potential problems the mirror might have hadin 1981. Dr. Allen and Leonard Fisk, NASA's Chief Scientist,agreed that NASA management operated under different procedures‘  â ? 
 ‘then and would have caught the problem in 1990. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Nov‘  â ? ∏ ‘28/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Nov 28/90)

During November: NASA and the Technology Utilization Foundationheld their first "Technology 2000" conference in Washington,D.C., to encourage marketing of space technology. Among theinnovations showcased were an implant device for releasinginsulin in programmed doses; a light sensing instrument calledthe "Video Harp"; a system to allow the hearing impaired tolocate loud noises such as sirens; a digital audio signalprocessing system for fuller, more realistic sound called the"Convolvotron"; the model 700 Infrared Temperature Taking System;and the Intelligent Physics Tutor with step©by©step instructions‘  â ?  ‘to a student. High©tech gear only a few years away, said √√USA‘  â ? ‡ ‘Todayƒƒ, included a space©age washer and dryer, refrigerator, and‘  â ? ® ‘gloves. √√ƒƒ(√√USA Todayƒƒ, Nov 29/90)

¡  ¡* NASA's Langley Research Center at Langley Field, Hampton,Virginia, and Honeywell's Space System Group, successfullyconcluded a joint flight research project that involved study ofGlobal Positioning System (GPS) satellites for improved automatedlanding in spacecraft and aircraft. Fifteen GPS satellites werein orbit at the time of the test, and the group hoped to add ninemore by 1993.

¡  ¡Meanwhile, NASA and the Technical and Administrative ServicesCorporation signed a 2©year agreement for the exchange ofinformation associated with closed environment systems related tofood production both on Earth and in space. The hydroponictechnology sharing involved no exchange of funds. (NASA Release90©155, 90©148)

¡  ¡* NASA convened with the Space Activities Commission of Japanin November for the fourth annual meeting of the NASA/SACCooperative Space Activities Planning Group in Arlington,Virginia. Discussions focused on a number of collaborativeprojects in the fields of astrophysics, solar system science,microgravity science, life science, and Earth observation. (NASA‘   ÿ'&        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘Release 90©156) 

¡  ¡* Physicians at the Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas,announced in November that they had instituted a new treatment,promethazine, for space motion sickness. Since NASA's return toflight in September 1988, the medication had helped decrease themalady. (NASA Release 90©155)

December 2: Space Shuttle Columbia (flight STS©35) was launchedfrom Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the $150 million Astro©1for a 10©day astronomy mission. The payload consisted of one 
x©ray telescope and three ultraviolet telescopes that wouldsupplement and spot targets for the Hubble Space Telescope. Theproject originally had been scheduled for a May 30 liftoff, butsubsequent hydrogen leaks grounded the entire fleet. The Astro©1crew had the longest wait for this mission in Space Shuttlehistory. It was to have observed Halley's Comet in 1986, but themission was postponed after the Challenger accident. The X©raytelescope was controlled from Goddard and the three ultravioletinstruments from Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville,Alabama. 
¡  ¡
¡ ¡Columbia landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California
on December 11, one day earlier than planned to avoid a rainforecast. The Astro©1 mission did not achieve all of itsobjectives because of a failed computer that overheated from lintin the cooling system. Because astronomers on board were forcedto aim the telescopes manually at predetermined objects, only 135‘  â ? ‡ ‘of the slated 250 targets were observed. (√√NY Timesƒƒ, Dec 3/90; Dec‘  â ? ® ‘7/90; Dec 12/90; √√W postƒƒ, Dec 3/90; Dec 7/90; Dec 12/90)√√ƒƒ

¡  ¡* A Soviet rocket carrying a TM©11 space capsule was launchedinto orbit from Kazakhstan Republic in Central Asia on this date.Accompanying the two cosmonauts on board was a Japanesetelevision reporter, making him the first journalist in space.Japan's biggest private television company, TBS, as well as otherJapanese companies, had their slogans emblazoned on the rocket.‘  â ? Ë ‘(√√B Sunƒƒ, Dec 3/90; √√LA Timesƒƒ, Dec 3/90)

‘  â ? x ‘√√December
ƒƒ
December 4: The Ulysses spacecraft launched from Space ShuttleDiscovery and developed a problem on its trip to rendezvous withJupiter in 1992, from which it would slingshot to achieve polarorbit around the Sun. It was believed that the difficulty camefrom a 24©1/2©foot antenna boom meant to study radio signals inspace and waves in the solar winds. Scientists ascertained thatthe boom was bent, perhaps from the Sun's rays, and was causingthe craft to wobble. Because of the wobble, the main dish©shapedantenna would not be able to focus on Earth and relay datagleaned from the star. Scientists were confident that the problem‘  â ? ÿ' ‘would be solved before the craft's 1994 mission began. (√√C Tribƒƒ,‘   ÿ''        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘‘  â ?    ‘Dec 15/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Dec 16/90)

December 8: The Galileo spacecraft came to within 590 miles ofEarth and received a push from Earth's gravity that increased itsspeed from 67,000 m.p.h. to 78,000 m.p.h. This was the first oftwo gravity assisted passes by Earth that were planned for thecraft, enabling it to reach Jupiter in December 1995. Itcollected numerous data from Earth, as it would again on its‘  â ? @ ‘second pass. (√√CSMƒƒ Dec 10/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Dec 9/90) 

December 10: A White House commission, formed in July as a resultof the Hubble Space Telescope problem and temporary grounding ofthe Shuttle fleet, released its report concerning future spaceplans. The 12©member panel emphasized a new system of crewlesslaunch vehicles for a number of NASA missions in order to reducereliance on the Space Shuttle. It also recommended a greaterpursuance of scientific study and less emphasis on theaccomplishment of engineering feats for their own sake, that is,crew©assisted space flight. In addition, it recommended a gradualphasing out of the Space Shuttle; redesign of the Space Stationto make it cheaper and simpler, with a focus on life in space;and restructuring of Agency management.

¡ / ¡William Lenoir, head of NASA's space flight program, said thata heavy©lift rocket would take $10 billion to design and take 7to 10 years to complete. He also said that new Space Stationdesigns were underway, but would be similar to the original ones.‘  â ?  ‘(√√WSJƒƒ, Dec 7/90; Dec 11/90; √√NY Timesƒƒ, Dec 11/90; √√W Postƒƒ, Dec‘  â ? ‡ ‘11/90; √√H Postƒƒ, Dec 14/90; NASA Release 90©161)

December 20: The selection of 12 research projects, under theauspices of the Earth Observations Commercialization ApplicationsProgram, for developing private sector applications of space™based and airborne remote sensing technologies, were selected byNASA. The 12 projects would lead to 1©year funding contracts andwould identify and research new commercial products and servicesthat might be developed from existing technology. (NASA Release90©164)

December 26: NASA announced its Integrated System PreliminaryDesign Review for Space Station Freedom was completed.Preliminary figures for June 1990 showed Freedom's weight to be143,000 pounds lighter than the allocated limit of 512,000 poundsand that the housekeeping power limit of 45 kilowatts wasexceeded by 15 kilowatts. A summer©long resources scrub reducedweight estimates by 130,000 pounds and housekeeping power by 13kilowatts. "What this means," said Deputy Manager Marc Bensimon,"is that the design is maturing and converging." (NASA Release90©165)

During December: NASA awarded contracts to CentennialContractors, SPACEHAB, and Dyncorp. Centennial was given a ‘   ÿ'(        0*†(†(∞∞  ‘å1©year $5 million contract for various minor constructions,modifications, and rehabilitation projects at the Goddard SpaceFlight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, SPACEHAB received a 5©year$184,236,000 contract for providing commercial middeckaugmentation module services: physical and operationalintegration of the module and the experiments; power, cooling,data management; and crew training in six Space Shuttle flightsat six©month intervals. Dyncorp procured a $30 million contractfor technical services that included operation and maintenance ofradar, telecommunications, and optical services. (NASA Release‘  â ? – ‘C90©gg; 90©157; √√W Timesƒƒ, Dec 4/90)

¡ / ¡* Colonel Robert C. Springer retired from NASA and the MarineCorps. He was both an astronaut and a mission specialist andplanned to work for Boeing Aerospace. (NASA Release 90©159)

During 1990: The year saw both major scientific achievements andseveral disappointments. The Hubble Space Telescope wassuccessfully deployed from Space Shuttle Discovery in April butwas discovered to have a spherical aberration that prevented themost distant observations for which it was designed. However, itbegan unprecedented scientific work in spectroscopy, photometry,astronomy, and ultraviolet wavelength imaging not possible fromthe ground. The telescope also sent back impressive photographsfrom Orion's nebula and the giant Saturn storm by using computerimage processing.

¡ / ¡The Magellan spacecraft began detailed mapping of Venus inAugust, the European Space Agency's Ulysses spacecraft waslaunched in October by Space Shuttle Discovery to study the polesof the Sun, and the Galileo spacecraft made its first gravity™assisted pass of the Earth in December. Meanwhile, NASAAdministrator Richard Truly launched an effort to collect thebest ideas on how to return to the Moon and go to Mars.

¡ / ¡Six successful Shuttle missions were flown, a standdown offive months because of hydrogen leaks notwithstanding. TwoDepartment of Defense payloads, a SYNCOM IV communicationssatellite, the Hubble Space Telescope, and the Ulysses spacecraftwere deployed, and the Long Duration Exposure Facility satellitewas retrieved. The Astro©1 astronomy mission was alsosuccessfully completed, though not to every scientist'ssatisfaction. (NASA Release, 90©160)