January 1: Fred J. Friel, a radio scientist and amateur radio operator, died of renal failure on December 24. Mr. Friel worked as a radio engineer for RCA and as an engineer for the Navy before joining NASA when that agency was created. Friel served as radio frequency spectrum manager with NASA from 1971 to 1975. He also served as an adviser to the President's Office of Telecommunications Policy. (W Times, Jan 1/93)   January 3: The project to send the eight-foot-high, 1,000-pound robot Dante to explore Mount Erebus, an active volcano in Antarctica, was aborted a day after the robot started down the volcano. The robot had gone about 21 feet into the volcano when a communications cable linking the machine to its control station broke. NASA scrubbed the mission after it had been determined that repairs to the damaged cable could not be made in time for the mission to be completed before severe weather set in.	* NASA said that its mission to send a robot into an Antarctic volcano had opened the way for exploration of the moon and Mars. Despite the fact that the mission had to be aborted, David Lavery, director of the Dante project, noted that the objectives of controlling the robot from afar and testing sophisticated hardware in a harsh environment had been met.	* The $2 million Dante project was sponsored by Carnegie-Mellon University and the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology. Backed by NASA and the National Science Foundation, the project was directed by NASA's Goddard Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. (B Sun, Jan 1/93; Jan 2/93; AP, Jan 4/93; NY Times, 2/93; W Post, Jan 3/93; W Times, Jan 3/93; WSJ, Jan 4/93)   January 4: When asteroid Toutatis passed within 2.2 million miles of Earth in December, NASA took 100 times more detailed radar images of it than had ever been taken of that kind of object before. According to astronomer Steven Ostro, "This is our first clear look at one of the many thousands of asteroids whose orbits can intersect Earth's orbit." The images show asteroid Toutatis comprises two big chunks of rock, probably held in contact by gravity. One chunk has an average width of about 2.5 miles; the other is about l.6 miles wide. Toutatris is "among the 50 largest Earth-approaching asteroids that we estimate to exit," Mr. Ostro said. NASA bounced radar waves off the asteroid using a 230-wide antenna dish at a tracking station in the California Mojave Desert. (B Sun, Jan 4/93; NY Times, Jan 4/93; W Post, Jan 4/93;  USA Today, Jan 4/93); AP, Jan 4/93)	* The Navy announced that it was turning over the Moffett Naval Air Station, located 40 miles south of San Francisco, California, to NASA's Ames Research Center, which is located on the base. The Center was to continue developing and testing space and aircraft-related technologies. The center's wind tunnels, flight simulators, and other facilities have helped produce and test generations of spacecraft and commercial aircraft, including the Space Shuttle. (AP, Jan 4/93)	* Studies on the feasibility of using Soyuz TM spacecraft as crew return vehicles for the U.S./international Space Station were scheduled to enter a more detailed phase according to NASA Associate Administrator Arnold D. Aldrich. NPO ENERGIA was to study modifications, launch options, and costs for one year. The Soviet hardware could allow NASA to permanently staff the station by 1998 or 1998. (AvWk, Jan 4/1993)	* Florida Today reported that NASA was launching a new type of air-launched Pegasus rocket that activates only after being released from the wing of an aircraft. The winged vehicle, which was developed by Orbital Sciences Corporation, has a solid-fuel rocket that gives it the ability to put small satellites into orbit at a bargain price. Plans called for the Pegasus to carry a Brazilian remote sensing satellite. (Fl Today, Jan 4/93)January 5: Vice President Dan Quayle's space policy advisory board released a report stating that "The U.S. government's organization of space activities is not appropriate for the post-Cold War era." The report noted that space bureaucracy must be simplified and centralized and that more technology must be shared between government and industry. It also called U.S. space launch capabilities inefficient and unsafe. (W Post, Jan 5/93; Space News, Jan 5/93)	* NASA's new Shuttle toilet, the Improved Waste Collection System (IWCS), was slated for its first space-flight test later this month. The IWCS, which is designed to accommodate long-term flights, has "basically unlimited capacity" because of its innovative method of compacting solid waste and use of a modular removal container. The device's $30 million price tag brought criticism from government auditors. (W Post, Jan 5/93; USA Today, Jan 6/93; AP, Feb 13/93)    	* Satcon Technology Corporation (SATCON) entered into an agreement with Advanced Medical Systems Inc. (AMS) for the joint development of cardiovascular medical devices. SATCON was using its active motion control technology to develop these devices. This technology was developed as part of the Department of Defense and NASA's Space Administration SBIR program; the program was established by Congress to provide money to U.S. small businesses to develop innovative products with high commercial potential. (AP, Jan 5/93)  		* Astronomers have discovered a huge concentration of mysterious "dark matter," which scientists believe may make up as much as 95 percent of the universe. The finding was the first to "indicate that there may be enough material to close the universe," said the research team's Richard F. Mushotzky of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. In a closed universe, the expansion of the universe, which is being slowed by the pull of gravity, would come to a halt or nearly so. The discovery was detected by the international ROSAT x-ray satellite observatory. ROSAT, an acronym for Roentgen Satellite, is a joint project of Germany, the United States, and the United Kingdom. It was launched on a Delta II rocket from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, on June 1, 1990. (NASA Release 93-1; W Post, Jan 5/93; W Post, Jan 8/93;  B Sun, Jan 5/93, Jan 8/93; NY Times, Jan 5/93; Arizona Republic, Jan 5/93; P Inq, Jan 8/93; Newsweek, Jan 18) 	* Shortly after Space Shuttle Endeavour's launch later this month, technicians and engineers from GTE Government Systems Corporation were to establish an almost continuous communications link with the Shuttle. The space link to earth would come through a system of tracking and data relay satellites (TDRS), which would be supplemented by a satellite carried by Endeavor. (Business Wire, Jan 5, 93). 	* NASA announced that engineer Karl Anderson from the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, had invented a process that yields more accurate, faster stress measurements. Anderson's method uses a circuit called a "constant current loop"; the system prevents errors caused by temperature changes in the wires that link instruments, called strain gauges, to recording devices. (NASA Release 93-002; AP, Jan 25/93; Antelope Valley Press, Jan 20/93) January 6: A team of astronomers from the University of Arizona told a meeting of the American Astronomical Society that they had found convincing new evidence that a black hole the size of a million suns is at the center of the Milky Way galaxy. The astronomers reported that they had detected faint infrared emissions from an area at the galactic core that is the source of a powerful radio signal possibly produced by forces surrounding a black hole. The team detected the emissions by using a new adaptive optics system known as FASTTRAC, developed by graduate student Laird Close and Donald W. McCarthy Jr., of the University of Arizona. (W Post, Jan 6/93; NY Times, Jan 6/93; USA Today, Jan 6/93) 	* NASA has chosen 38 research proposals to be incorporated into phase II of its Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The projects will be conducted by 36 small business from 18 states; the projects have a value of approximately $19 million. NASA will select approximately 100 additional research proposals in January and February 1993.  	* SBIR attempts to stimulate technological innovation in the United States by using small businesses to help federal agencies meet their research and development needs. (NASA Release 93-003)	* NASA released two new Hubble space telescope photographs that show a bullet of gas streaking across the sky. According to J. Jeff Hester, an Arizona State University astronomer, the new pictures show a "shock wave from a colossal explosion of a star 15,000 years ago smashing into a pocket of interstellar gas, heating the gas and causing it to glow." Following the blast wave is a shaft of gas traveling at more than 3 million miles an hour. The images show the structure behind the shock waves in the Cygnus Loop supernova remnant. The Hubble photos are giving astronomers their first detailed look at the anatomy of the powerful astrophysical shock wave generated by a supernova. (NASA Release N93-002; B Sun, Jan 8/93; W Post, Jan 18/93)	* According to Neal Pellis of the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, a research project from the Cancer Center aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour could provide "a big step in developing better treatments for cancer patients." The experiment will attempt to find out more about the human immune system and why it doesn't work as well in long-term space travel. (H Post, Jan 6/93)  January 7: A rocky asteroid, rather than an icy comet, probably caused a huge explosion over Siberia in 1908 that flattened at least 40,000 trees over about 850 square miles. A research team from NASA and the University of Wisconsin used a computer simulation to determine that an asteroid measuring about 65 yards was a better explanation than the comet; the simulation revealed that comets would explode much too high in the sky to fit the projected altitude of the Tunguska blast. (B Sun, Jan 7/93; NY Times, Jan 7/93; LA Times, Jan 8/93; W Post, Jan 11/93; P Inq, Jan 7/93; WP, Jan 11/93) 	 	* NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA was raising the number of contracts it had with small, disadvantaged and women-owned businesses. According to Goldin, $310 million would be set aside under a Determinations and Findings (D & F) to make sure that NASA awarded 8 percent to such businesses. Eight percent was the figure set by Congress. (LA Watts Times, Jan 7/93)	* Russia agreed to help build a U.S. atom smasher in Waxahachie, Texas. Russian scientists would be involved in the design, engineering, and production of two of the Collider's booster accelerators in addition to its experimental detectors. According to the terms of the agreement, which could add $100 million to the Russian economy and save the U.S. a similar amount, Russia would provide Russian hardware at half price. (WSJ, Jan 7/93; USA Today, Jan 7/93)  	* By using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers have concluded that the Markarian 315 galaxy, a galaxy that has been observed for ten years, is in reality composed of two merged galaxies; the collision of the two galaxies is thought to have provided new fuel for a massive black hole, which has a "tail" of gas 240,000 light-years long. (NASA Release 93-006; W Times, Jan 8, 1993)	* Using the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), NASA scientists measured thermal radiation differences across the universe and come up with more conclusive evidence than ever to support the "Big Bang" theory that the universe was created by a single blast 15 billion years ago. Measurements made by COBE revealed that 99.97 percent of the early radiant energy of the universe was released within the first year after the Big Bang itself. "This is the ultimate in tracing one's cosmic roots," said NASA scientist John C. Mather, who announced the findings at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society. (NASA Release 93-5; USA Today, Jan 8/93; NY Times, Jan 8/93; AP, Jan 8/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)		 	* NASA released four new images gathered by the Cosmic Background Explorer. The images, which were released at the American Astronomical Society meeting in Phoenix, Arizona, showed infrared sources such as dust within the Solar System, stars in the Milky Way Galaxy, and dust and stars in other galaxies. The images were created from Diffuse Infrared Background Experiment (DIRBE) data. (NASA Release 92-256) 	* Static firing tests of a propulsion development test article for Space Station Freedom began at NASA's White Sand's Test Facility (WSTF) in New Mexico in late December. The tests checked the preliminary design for the propulsion module that was to be used for Space Station attitude control, orientation, speed and altitude control, and avoidance of space debris. (NASA Release 93-7) January 8: A Utah State university group sponsored by NASA's National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program Office was scheduled to launch a high-altitude research balloon on January 11 to measure ozone distribution and wind parameters in the Earth's stratosphere. The balloon, which was to fly across the Gulf of Mexico to Florida, was the eleventh launched by this team and the first of 24-hours duration. 	* Throughout the balloon's flight, teams of amateur radio operators in Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida were to receive information from the balloon's gondola; this information was to be relayed by high-frequency radio to the Utah State University team. Other flights of an longer duration were scheduled to be launched from Canada, the United States, Mexico, and Central America. (NASA Release 93-8)	* NASA announced that it would soon begin tests using a modified Convair 990 commercial jet airliner to expand the operational landing capabilities of the Space Shuttle system. The Convair has been undergoing modifications for two years in preparation for tests that would help Johnson Space Center researchers better understand the operational capabilities of the Shuttle system. (Desert Wings, Jan 8/93) 	* A General Accounting Office (GAO) report charged that NASA was very resistant to change. Some of the GAO's criticisms, including poor budgeting, contract management, and organizational culture, had also been identified as problem areas by a White House scientific panel. (NY Times, Jan 8/93; USA Today, Jan 8/93)  	* A report released by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA must improve its ability to transfer technology to business. The report included eight recommendations for changing NASA's culture to facilitate technology transfer.	* The report noted that NASA's efforts were quitegood in areas where technology transfer was the primary mission activity. These areas included aeronautics, the Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) program, and the Centers for Commercial Development of Space.	* NASA created the Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology last November to better meet the needs of industry, academia, and NASA communities. Ensuring the rapid transfer of technology into the commercial sector is one of the new office's major functions. (NASA Release 93-009)January 11: In an interview in the Scientist, NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin said that the current NASA reorganization would make science more of a priority in NASA and involve the science community in correcting problems at NASA. He stated, "NASA is science and exploration, not infrastructure and bureaucracy." In response to a question about jobs, he noted that NASA was not a jobs program, but rather existed for "inspiration and hope, and a basic understanding of science." He said that he hoped to launch a small discovery satellite every year, while cutting back Space Shuttle flights from 12 or 13 to six a year. (The Scientist, Jan 11/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)	* A team of astronomers from the University of Massachusetts in Amherst and Arizona's Kitt Peak Observatory announced at a gathering of the American Astronomical Society in Phoenix that they had gotten a glimpse of hundreds of sun-like stars shortly after the stars emerged from the clouds of dust that would have obscured their birth. The team found that many stars begin life in small, tight-knit families and at that stage are surrounded by orbiting disks of dust grains and gas. Scientists believe that this is the material from which planets like Earth are derived. (W Post, Jan 11/93)   January 12: NASA announced that it planned to use the eight Space Shuttle flights scheduled for 1993 for research relating to the building and operation of Space Station Freedom, scheduled to be launched in three years.   	* Endeavour, scheduled for its first 1993 launch in January, was to conduct extravehicular activities involving station assembly and maintenance; a 10-hour test shut-down of one of the shuttle electricity-generating fuel cells in order to demonstrate the capability required to certify the Shuttle for long duration stays at the Freedom; and an experiment called the Application Specific Preprogrammed Experiment Culture System (ASPECS) designed as a cell growth and maintenance device to support cell biology research and improve existing bioreactor technology.	Columbia, a German-sponsored mission, the first Spacelab module flight of 1993, scheduled for launch in February, was scheduled to continue studies in materials and life sciences research. The Spacelab Discovery, scheduled for lift off in March, was to measure the long-term variability in the total energy radiated by the sun and study its interaction with the Earth's atmosphere. An April Endeavour flight was to fly the first Spacelab middeck augmentation module and retrieve the European Retrievable Carrier deployed from Atlantis in August 1992. Spacehab also would carry a space station flight experiment called the Environmental Control and Life Support Systems Flight Experiment, containing two components of Freedom's environmental control system. A Discovery flight in July was scheduled to expose various materials to the space environment to help determine which materials would work best in future spacecraft design, including the space station. The Columbia, scheduled to be launched in August, was to focus on understanding how the human body reacts and adapts itself to the space flight environment.	* A November Discovery flight, the second Spacehab flight of the year, was scheduled to carry the Wake Shield Facility (WSF), designed to be released from the payload bay to create an atomic oxygen wake as it circled the Earth. Discovery astronauts would conduct experiments to determine the effect the "space wake" had on them. The December flight of Endeavour was scheduled to be the first servicing mission to the Hubble Space Telescope. (NASA Release 93-10)	* NASA appointed Deidre A. Lee as Acting Associate Administrator for Procurement. She replaced Don G. Bush, who announced his intention to resign in November 1992. Since September 1991, Lee has been serving as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Procurement. Prior to that she was the Executive Officer to NASA's Acting Deputy Administrator. (NASA Release 93-11)     	* Russian scientists on the Mir spaceship were scheduled to begin an experiment that involved using a mirror to reflect sunlight down to earth. In the experiment, a 65-foot-diameter disk of aluminum-coated plastic film would be unfurled in space. The experiment would test the possibility of illuminating areas on the Earth with light equivalent to that of several moons. Scientists agree on the need for environmental studies to access the possible effect of such a practice. (B Sun, Jan 12/93; NY Times, Jan 12/97; W Times, Feb 3/93; AP, Feb 3/93; USA Today, Feb 4/93; W Post, Feb 4/93; LA Times, Feb 4/93)	* Researchers hoped that the lead coffins buried beneath the floor of the 17th-century Great Brick Chapel in St. Mary's City, Maryland, contained 300-year-old air. However, according to Joel Levine, the scientist who headed the team analyzing the air at NASA's Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, the coffins appeared to contain modern air, as signalled by the presence of Chlorofluorocarbons, which were first manufactured in the 1940s.	* Scientists hoped to compare the chemistry of the old air with modern air in order to determine how much the atmosphere has been altered by industrial pollution and the burning of fossil fuels. Although disappointed that no "old air" was found in the coffins, Levine was pleased with the technology that had been developed to extract it. (B Sun, Jan 12/93; P Inq, Jan 13/93; AP Jan 12/93)	* The military's plans to test a Russian Topaz 2 nuclear reactor in orbit were criticized by the governing council of the American Astronomical Society and some other scientists. Council members were concerned because experience with previous Russian reactors had shown that they emit radiations that "can significantly disrupt x-ray and gamma-ray astronomical observations." Society officials noted that they were not opposing the mission or the use of nuclear reactors in space; rather they were asking that the test be conducted at higher levels, which would presumably be safer. 	* Plans called for the Topaz 2 reactor to be put into an orbit 1,000 feet high; over the span of a year, the spacecraft housing the reactor would be lifted to 19,000 feet by an electric propulsion system powered by the reactor. The mission was projected to cost $l50 million. To stay within this budget, the Pentagon would need to use the planned Delta rocket rather than a more expensive Atlas rocket. (NY Times, Jan 12/93)January 13: Crew members of a NASA booster-recovery ship waiting for the launch of the Shuttle Endeavour rescued three Cubans found floating in the ocean about 37 miles east of Cape Canaveral. The Cubans, who were floating on two large inner tubes fastened together with boards and ropes, said they had been at sea for eight days and without food and water for six days. They were heading for Miami. (W Post, Jan 13/93; AP Jan 12/93)	* According to reports, the planet-probing spacecraft Galileo was approaching its last pre-Jupiter target, the asteroid Ida. It was to pass about 1,500 miles from the asteroid on August 28 and was scheduled to arrive at Jupiter on December 5, 1995.	* Galileo's controllers at the California Institute of Technology's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California, continued to work on unfurling the spacecraft's stuck high-gain antenna. If their attempts were unsuccessful, the craft's controllers would use Galileo's low-gain antenna to gather data, including data from a probe that would descend into Jupiter's atmosphere. Use of the back-up system would enable NASA to complete 70 percent of its mission, according to project manager William O'Neill. (CSM, Jan 13/93)  	      	* The three main commercial sponsors of the 52-foot Conestoga 1620 rocket scheduled to be launched this spring from Wallops Island, Virginia, were selling ad space on the shell of the rocket. The price: $500,000 for 58 feet of space. The Conestoga launch was part of NASA's Commercial Experiment Transport program. (P Inq, Jan 14/93; USA Today, Jan 13/93; Advertising Age, Jan 11/93; W Post, Jan 26/93)	 	* Research recently confirmed that 65 million years ago a comet or asteroid crashed into Earth at the northern tip of what is now the Yucatan peninsula. Because dinosaurs disappeared at about the same time, researchers have speculated that there might be some connection between the impact and the dinosaurs' disappearance. However, the comet or asteroid that gouged out the crater seems to have been only one cause of the massive extinctions that occurred at the time. According to Walter Alvarez of the University of California, Berkeley, "If a single big impact and a single big extinction were the whole story, it would be clear by now. Instead we keep finding mysteries wrapped up in enigmas. (CSM, Jan 13/93)January 14: The Space Shuttle Endeavor lifted off on the year's first Shuttle flight. During the six-day mission, crew members would conduct a variety of tasks and experiments in Earth orbit. Six hours after the Shuttle's launch from Florida's Kennedy Space Center, the crew successfully deployed the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), a network that provides communications, tracking, telemetry, data acquisition, and command services for the Space Shuttle. Crew members were also scheduled to take astronomy observations using the Diffuse X-ray Spectrometer (DXS); perform the first in a series of test spacewalks designed to refine training methods for future spacewalks, for example, the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for later in the month; conduct a series of scientific experiments covering a wide range of disciplines; and test a new shuttle toilet, which has unlimited capacity and is intended to accommodate crews on future lengthy space missions. The crew was also scheduled to use toys to demonstrate physics principles in a TV broadcast to four elementary schools in crew members' home towns and to take part in the national bell-ringing ceremony marking President-elect Bill Clinton's inauguration. (NASA Release 93-004; P Inq, Jan 11/93; B Sun, Jan 10/93, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93; USA Today, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 18/93, Jan 19/93; W Times, Jan 11/93, Jan 14/93; AP, Jan 11/93, Jan 12/93, Jan 13/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 19/93; W Post, Jan 14/93; UPI, Jan 11/93, Jan 13/93; LA Times, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; NY Times, Jan 12/93, Jan 14/93, Jan 17/93, Jan 18/93; WSJ, Jan 14/93; P Inq, Jan 14/93; W Times, Jan 18/93;  USA Today, Jan 18/93; UPI, Jan 19/93; AvWk, Jan 25/93)	. Courtney Stadd, Acting Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Advanced concepts and Technology at Nasa, was given the job of designing an effective commercialization office at the agency. His office was commissioned to work on space commercialization, engineering analysis, technology development, and tech transfer. (Washington Technology, Jan 14/93)   	. In his final report on U.S. space policy, Vice President Dan Quayle warned that the planned Space Station Freedom would not survive unless NASA stuck to its current budget and schedule. In his report, he also urged replacement of the Shuttle fleet by different launch systems. The report called for a more cost-effect and efficient method of sending humans into space to be developed by 2005; urged that no more than five years elapse between approval and launch of future science programs; and supported international partnerships in space with the caveat that such transactions should not endanger our economic and security interests. (AP, Jan 14/93; W Post, Jan 15/93; USA Today, Jan 29/93)	* A NASA in-house study reported that the agency's technology transfer reputation had been overblown. According to the assessment,"Technology transfer processes are non-integrated, undocumented, and too slow." The report was requested last May by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. (Washington Technology, Jan 14/93)   	* A panel of government scientists announced that volcanic eruptions had made the last half-year the fifth coldest on record in the United States. The year would have been the coldest since 1958 worldwide had not a surprisingly strong El Nino brought warming effects. The eruptions may also have increased the ozone hole over the Antarctic, the scientists reported. (W Post, Jan 14/93; NY Times, Mar 9/93)January 15: An x-ray spectrometer aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour malfunctioned while scanning the space between stars. Controllers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, were attempting to correct the problem. The spectrometer measures low-energy x-rays emitted from the space between stars. Using this device, scientists hoped to prove or disprove the theory that a bubble of hot gas in the Milky Way Galaxy was produced by a nearby exploding star. Meanwhile, Endeavour crew members conducted medical tests and started 28 biological tests; they also prepared for their elementary school classroom presentation called "Physics of Toys." (NY Times, Jan 15/93; AP, Jan 15/93)	* According to  Luke Dones, a visiting Assistant Research Astronomer at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, the Earth's rotation rate may be caused by early collisions with rocks as large as Mars. Without the large impacts, the Earth would rotate only every 200 hours instead of the 24 hours it rotates today, said Dones. (NASA Release 93-012; AP, Jan 14/93; NY Times, Jan 19/93)    	* David L. Akin and a team at the University of Maryland's Space Systems Laboratory were working on developing a data base on how to operate robots in space. The process involved testing robots in a 50-feet-deep, $1.7 million Neutral Buoyancy Research Tank indoor pool. By testing the robots in the simulated weightlessness of the tank, scientists could learn which would work best in outer space. The space Systems Laboratory was funded by NASA. (B Sun, Jan 15/93) 	* Included in the promises Bill Clinton made during his presidential campaign were two relating to NASA. Clinton promised to create a civilian research agency to serve as a means of transferring new technologies into new products. He also promised to support construction of Space Station Freedom. (AP, Jan 15/93)January 18: On December 23, Bill Clinton picked John H. Gibbons, head of the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, to be his science and technology advisor. Gibbons planned to emphasize civilian-sector competitiveness; he also hoped to broaden industry's input into White House policy making while making sure that companies invested serious money into government-backed projects. (Bus Wk, Jan 18/93)	* The National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration's Space Environment Services Center in Boulder, Colorado, prepared software that allowed scientists to state the level of confidence they had in their weather predictions. Such software allowed utilities to better gauge when to start backup power that would make outages caused by stormy weather less harmful. (Bus Wk, Jan 18/93)January 19: NASA scientists at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, reported that depletion of stratospheric ozone over Antarctica in 1992 was as severe as in any previous year. Ozone is destroyed by chorofluorocarbons, or CFCs, which are used as solvents, propellants, and coolants.  On September 23, 1992, the surface area of the ozone hole reached 8.9 million square miles. Measurements were taken by the Nimbus-7 and Meteor-3 Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) instruments. (NASA Release 93-14; UPI, Jan 19/93)	* Astrophysicists reported that data from an x-ray spectrometer aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour might have come from a million-degree gas produced by a nearby and fairly recent supernova, or exploding star. Scientists have puzzled over these x-rays for 25 year. Wilton T. Sanders from the University of Wisconsin commented, "There's a lot more analysis that needs to be done before we can start pinning down the exact origin of these x-rays. At this point, we're just very happy with the results that we're getting. The x-rays do seem to clearly be from a thermal process." (W Times, Jan 19/93; B Sun, Jan 19/93; NASA Release, Jan 21/93)January 20: The Shuttle Endeavour and its crew of five landed January 19 at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. Endeavour circled Earth 96 times and traveled 2,501,277 miles during its six-day flight. The Shuttle and its five crew members were said to be in good shape. (LA Times, Jan 20/93; W Times, Jan 20/93; NY Times, Jan 20/93; B Sun, Jan 20/93)	* Vice President Dan Quayle, head of the National Space Council, presented Thomas P. Stafford, a retired Air Force lieutenant general and former astronaut, with the Congressional Space Medal of Honor "for exceptional meritorious efforts and contributions to the welfare of the nation and mankind."  Stafford flew in space in the 1960s--twice aboard the two-man Gemini, once on an Apollo flight around the moon,and once in a rendezvous and docking of the Apollo capsule with a Soviet Soyuz spacecraft. (AP, Jan 20/93)	* NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin volunteered to remain at NASA until the Clinton Administration appointed an replacement. He made the offer in a January 14 letter to the White House. Meanwhile he suspended an agency reorganization that he had just begun following months of review. White House officials have just begun to collect names of potential NASA chiefs and solicit opinions on Goldin's record, according to government officials (W Post, Jan 20/93; Space News, Jan 25-31)	* Germany's space agency was scheduled to be in charge of the scientific aspect of Shuttle Columbia's next research mission. NASA would oversee Shuttle operations during the flight. Ninety-three experiments were planned, two-thirds sponsored by German institutions and the rest by other European countries, the United States, and Japan. This would only be the second time in 32 years of American manned spaceflight that a mission had been managed from outside the United States. (AP, Jan 20/97)  January 21: NASA announced that it had been enable to repair the Galileo spaceship's main antenna, which had failed to open despite repeated attempts to fix it. The problem left the craft disabled for its 1995-96 Jupiter exploration.	 NASA said that it expected to complete 70 percent of the Galileo mission even if it were forced to rely solely on the spaceship's small antenna. (W Times, Jan 21/93; NY Times, Jan 21/93; USA Today, Jan 21/93; W Post, Jan 21/93; WP, Jan 21/93; AP, Jan 21/93)January 22: Scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology( MIT) and NASA reported that water that evaporates on the equator flows towards the Earth's poles in airborne "rivers" of vapor that can equal the volume in the Amazon. Reginald E. Newell of MIT said that researchers were trying to determine how and why these atmospheric rivers occurred and what role, if any, they played in cyclones and other phenomena. The rivers were discovered using data collected in 1984 and 1991 by NASA's Measurement of Atmospheric Pollution by Satellite program and analyzed by the European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts. (LA Times, Jan 22/93; B Sun, Jan 22/93; AP, Jan 22/93; W Post, Jan 25/93; NY Times, Jan 26/93)  	* NASA contracted with Stanford University to do additional work on the Gravity Probe-B experiment. The experiment tests predictions of the general theory of relativity. Gravity Probe-B determines how space and time are warped by the presence of the Earth and its rotation by measuring small changes in the spin of four gyroscopes in a satellite at 400 miles altitude in a Earth polar orbit. The first Shuttle test flight was scheduled for October 1995. (NASA Release C93-b)	* Officials at the University of California, Berkeley,  announced that a violent overnight wind storm had destroyed a multimillion-dollar radio telescope. The 85-foot diameter dish, which was built in 1962, was located at the Hat Creek Observatory in the Lassen National Forest 70 miles northeast of Redding. NASA used the dish as part of its Crustal Dynamics Program, which measures motion of plates that compose the earth's crust. (UPI, Jan 22/93)	* The government-backed computer chip consortium Sematech announced Thursday that it had produced chips with electrical devices just 0.35 microns wide using American production equipment. The announcement indicated that the American chip industry was coming back on track technically. The state-of-the-art in chip production was 0.6 microns; however, Japanese companies recently began demonstrating their ability to produce 0.35 chips. Achieving 0.35 micron capabilities by the end of 1992 was one of Sematech's goals at its founding in l987. (LA Times, Jan 22/93)   	* The European Space Agency in the Netherlands invented new shoes for astronauts to use in orbit. The new shoes, which look like ordinary sneakers, have small suction cups on the bottom of each shoe. The suction cups grip floor, wall, and ceiling and allow the astronauts to walk around in the weightless Shuttle. Up until now, in order to get around astronauts have had to stick their feet into loops placed around the Shuttle. (AP, Jan 22/93)	* Outgoing Energy Secretary James D. Wakins conceded in a letter to the chairman of the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee that foreign governments probably would not pick up much of the cost of the $8.2 billion Superconducting Super Collider (SCC), which is under construction near Waxahachie, Texas. The project would consist of a 54-mile tunnel through which subatomic particles would be hurled against each other at nearly the speed of light in an attempt to discern the nature of matter. The SCC, which was supported by many of the nation's scientists, was vulnerable because it had no immediately practical application. (AP, Jan 22/93)January 23: McDonnell Douglas Corporation, the nation's largest defense contractor, announced that it planned to cut 10 percent of its work force, including 4,000  to 5,000 jobs at its commercial aircraft unit in Long Beach, California. As of the end of 1991, the company's employment numbers had fallen by 27 percent, or about 21,700 jobs. (W Times, Jan 23/93; NY Times, Jan 23/93; WSJ, Jan 25/93)	* The Martin Marietta Corporation announced that it had delayed completing its pending acquisition of the General Electric's Aerospace division; the delay was caused in part by government antitrust concerns. The sale would double Martin Marietta's size. (NY Times, Jan 23/93)	* A spaceship, with two cosmonauts on board, was launched from Kazakhstan to test a new docking procedure for a possible linkup with a U.S. Space Shuttle. The spaceship was scheduled to dock with the orbiting Space Station Mir and deliver the two cosmonauts, who would replace the two currently on board the Mir.  (W Times, Jan 23/93; AP, Jan 24/93; UPI, Jan 24/93)January 25: Researchers have turned their military projects to commercial and other uses, and experts say that the real winner would be the economy. At Georgia Tech, scientists converted a project that involved using a laser to help fighter pilots see the enemy through icy clouds to a project that uses lasers to help weather forecasters measure ozone. Agencies like NASA and the Energy Department now supply 20 percent of the $380 million budget at Lincoln Laboratories in Bedford, Massachusetts; the laboratory once worked only for the Defense Department. (AP, Jan 25/93)	* Louis Williams, director of high-speed research for NASA, lectured at NASA's Langely Research Center about an environmentally safe, economically sound supersonic transport (SST) that is within the nation's technological reach. The plane, which would ferry 300 people across the Pacific Ocean in four hours, would go twice as fast as the Concord and carry three times as many people. Government research on the project began in 1990 and was scheduled to run another two years; early research focused on the project's environmental goals, which Williams maintained were being met. The federal government gave $450 million to the project.	The aerospace industry appeared to be somewhat skeptical of the project because of its high costs and the number of technical breakthroughs needed to get the project off the ground. Some estimates placed the cost of developing the SST at around $15 billion, as opposed to the $4 billion cost associated with developing a conventional plane. (Newport News Daily Press, Jan 25/93) January 26: Daniel J. Jones, 80, a senior aeronautical engineer who retired in 1973 after 20 years with the Army Material Command, died January 23 after a heart attack. He served in the Navy from 1941 to 1953, and had tours of duty with the naval Aviation Engineering Division in the South Pacific during World War II and with the Naval Bureau of Aeronautics in Washington during the Korean War. (W Post, Jan 26/93)	* Rockwell International Corporation Chairman and CEO Donald R. Beall presented the Chairman's Team Award to National Aero-Space Plane engineers in recognition of the Engine Flowpath Team's significant contributions to hypersonic propulsion development in the United States. The team was composed of 11 engineers from General Dynamics, McDonnell Douglas, Pratt & Whitney, Rockwell's Rocketdyne and North American Aircraft businesses, and NASA's Langely Research Center. (Antelope Valley Press, Jan 26/93)	* Rockwell International Corporation, based in Seal Beach, California, announced that it had agreed to pay $225 million for Sundstrand Corporation's Data Control subsidiary. Rockwell would merge the subsidiary, which makes flight-control systems and instruments, into its Collins avionics division, which makes communications, navigation, flight control, and position location gear. (WSJ, Jan 26/93)	* Loral Corporation's Loral Vought Systems unit announced that Japan had agreed to buy a multiple-launch rocket system. The four-year contract was for $250 million. The agreement included 1,300 tactical and practice rockets, 47 launcher trainer pods, and 36 launchers for the ground-to-ground defense system. (WSJ, Jan 26/93) 	* A White House panel recently called for the American space program to cut back its program significantly. The panel's report, issued on December 17, said that duplication among agencies had to be eliminated and cold-war secrecy reduced. The panel added that the United States should seek to make international cooperation an essential component of its space exploration strategy. (NY Times, Jan 26/93)	* At a recent meeting in St. Louis, astrophysicists discussed the mystery of blasts of gamma rays that appear every few days from somewhere, but never from the same place. After reviewing new satellite observations and discussing various theories, experts could not even determine where the gamma ray bursters, as they are called, were coming from.	Speculation continued, however. A survey by the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, an orbiting telescope launched in April 1991, revealed that the distribution of the bursters seemed to suggest extragalactic origins. Hence scientists had focused on conceiving what kind of violent forces could produce high-energy gamma rays that could be detected by Earth-orbiting spacecraft. Several scientists proposed that the bursts involved catastrophic encounters of ultra dense neutron stars with each other or with black holes. Astrophysicists conceded that there might be no single source or explanation for the bursters; it was possible that the flashes were related to some physical process still unknown. (NY Times, Jan 26/93)	* House of Representatives freshman, one-third of the 110 new House members, want to serve on the Science, Space and Technology committee. Twenty-new members won seats on the committee. The main draw appeared to be the potential for scientific research and applied technology to save or create jobs in their districts. Committee members could promote technology programs without earmarking federal funds for specific areas. (W Post, Jan 26/93)	* After a two-day trip, a Soyuz rocket docked with the Mir Space Station, using an apparatus designed to link the orbiter with a U.S. Shuttle. On board were two Russian cosmonauts. They were scheduled to replace the two cosmonauts who have been on Mir for the past six months. James Oberg, an expert on former Soviet science and technology, said that "the success of this test clears some worries about the hardware functioning properly." (B Sun, Jan 27/93; UPI, Jan 26/93) January 27: NASA Administrator Daniel S. Golden awarded test pilot A. Scott Crossfield the NASA Distinguished Service Medal for his contributions to aeronautics and aviation during his career of 50 years.	Crossfield played a key part in NASA's research aircraft program in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Recently he had been a key proponent of the National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) program , serving as technical consultant to the U. S. House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology. (NASA Release 93-16; Antelope Valley Press, Feb 4/93)	* Three major aerospace companies announced cutbacks yesterday, with Connecticut and Washington State losing most of the jobs. Pratt & Whitney, a jet engine manufacturer whose plants are mainly in Connecticut, said that 6,700 jobs would be eliminated over the next 12 months. The Boeing Company announced that it would cut back production of all models of jet airliners. Such a downsizing could result in as many as 30,000 lost jobs. McDonnell Douglas, which had already announced that 8,700 jobs would soon be eliminated, most of them production jobs in its California factories, said that 1,500 white-collar jobs would disappear from its St. Louis headquarters. (NY Times, Jan 27/93; WSJ, Jan 27/93)	* Standard & Poor's Corporation downgraded its ratings on about $l.7 billion of Lockheed Corporation's debt. The lowered ratings reflected Lockheed's proposed $1.52 billion acquisition of General Dynamics Corporation's fighter plane unit.	In a separate announcement, Lockheed said that it had finalized a venture with Khrunichev Enterprise to market the Russian-built Proton rocket for commercial satellite launches. (WSJ, Jan 27/93)	* NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and astronaut Mae Jemison visited the Challengers Boys and Girls Club in South-Central Los Angeles and announced funding of a science room in the club's new facility. The club runs all-day education, social, and sports programs, six days a week.	Writing in the Los Angeles Times, Louis Friedman, the executive director of the Planetary Society in Pasadena, California and past head of advanced studies at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, urged the Southern California aerospace community to support efforts such as the Challengers Club. He wrote, "We have a special opportunity in Los Angeles because of the confluence of a large and changing aerospace industry with a larger and more changing social situation in our inner city." (LA Times, Jan 27/93)	* Robert S. Harrington, 50, an astronomer with the United States Naval Observatory in Washington, died of cancer January 23 at George Washington University Hospital. Dr. Harrington was known for his work concerning the possible existence of a 10th planet beyond the orbit of Plato. He also focused on precise stellar distances, solar system dynamics, and multiple star dynamics.	Dr. Harrington received the Simon Newcomb Award from the Naval Observatory for his work on the dynamics of the solar system. Minor Planet 3216 was named after him. (W Post, Jan 27/93; NY Times, Jan 27/93)January 28: NASA's newly formed Minority Business Resource Advisory Committee met in Washington to discuss their charter and to begin developing an agenda. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, who formed the group, charged them with helping NASA respond to a directive from Congress that required the agency to award 8 percent of the total value of the agency's contracts to economically and socially disadvantaged businesses and minority educational institutions involved in key NASA activities.	Goldin pledged in September that NASA would meet its 8 percent goal. In an attempt to meet his pledge. the agency identified 26 procurements that would be set aside for small disadvantaged businesses (SDBs) and for members of the Small Business Administration's 8(a) program for minority-owned firms. (NASA Release 93-17; Federal Computer Week, Feb 1/93; Set-Aside Alert, Mar 15/93)	* The Boeing Company and the four leading European aerospace companies, partners in the Airbus Industrie consortium, reached an agreement to conduct a one-year study of the feasibility of jointly building a superjumbo airliner capable of carrying up to 800 passengers. (NY Times, Jan 28/93)	* Washington Technology reported that Rich Fleet, president of Herndon/Virginia-based PacAstro, planned to build an inexpensive launch rocket. Using technology from Apollo-era liquid rocket boosters and other reliable time-tested components, Fleeter intended to offer 750-pound, low-earth-orbit access for $5 million a shot. This amount was half of what other mainline smallsat launch firms such as Orbital Sciences and EER were asking. FLeeter also runs PacAstro's sister company AeroAstro, a manufacturer of low-cost smallsats. (Washington Technology, Jan 28/93)	* Working with a team of Hopkins scientists last spring, Kimberly Ennico, a 20-year-old junior at Johns Hopkins University, discovered a small flaw in the video camera that acts as a range finder for the Hopkins Ultraviolet Telescope scheduled for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in January 1995. Ms. Ennico discovered that the telescope's video range finder slightly distorted the positions of stars and distant galaxies. Her discovery allowed astronomers to compensate for the flaw by adjusting their computations. (B Sun, Jan 28/93)	* An analysis of more than 27,000 recordings of temperatures taken at various altitudes over the Arctic Ocean in the past 40 years did not show the global warming predicted by computer simulations, according to a report in the journal Nature. Co-author Jonathan Kahl, an assistant professor of atmospheric science at the University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee, said that the findings do not disprove the warming theory. He added, "If  they're not getting the Arctic quite right, then maybe they're not getting the whole picture quite right." (W Times, Jan 28/93; USA Today, January 28/93; O Sen Star, January 29/93)	* Flags flew at half-staff and flowers were placed at the astronauts' memorial at Kennedy Space Center on Thursday, the seventh anniversary of the Space Shuttle Challenger explosion. The Challenger explosion, which took place 73 seconds after liftoff on January 28, 1986, killed all seven on board. (AP, January 28/93)January 29: The Senate confirmed John H. Gibbons as President Clinton's science and technology adviser. Gibbons was scheduled to direct the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP), which advises the president on issues such as global warming, AIDS research, and support of science education in schools. A nuclear physicist, Gibbons, 64, headed the congressional Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) for 13 years. (W Post, Jan 29/93)	* Executives from two major players in the aircraft industry, United Technologies Corporation and General Electric Company, said that job cuts and productivity improvement programs won't by themselves pull the industry out of its downturn. They were beginning to hint that they would like to team up with each other, perhaps through more joint research and development projects. Such hints might be merely a means of testing how far the Clinton administration would let them bend antitrust laws. However, even the suggestion of cooperation revealed the turmoil in the jet engine market, which was suffering because of slumping airline order and deep cuts in government spending on military aircraft. (WSJ, Jan 29/93)	* NASA announced that Kennedy Space Center (KSC) contract award protests were settled. EG & G Florida, Inc; BAMSI, Inc.; and Westinghouse KSC Company, Inc. protested the awarding of the contract to Lockheed Space Operations Company, charging that there were deficiencies in the agency's activities during the original proposal submission. As part of the settlement, NASA agreed to rescind its original selection and said that each of the four competitors would be able to submit a revised proposal. (NASA Release 93-18; WSJ, Feb 2/93; AP, February 2/93; O Sen Star, Jan 19/93; Fla Today, Jan 29/93) 	* In a report to Congress, the General Accounting Office (GAO) reported that NASA  had underestimated the cost of its programs by billions of dollars. The report noted that original estimates for 25 of the 29 NASA programs GAO analyzed were too low. GAO found that more than a third cost more than double the early estimates, while only four cost less than those estimates. Most of the programs cost between 50 and 99 percent more than the early projections. One notable exception was Space Shuttle Endeavour; its $1.8 billion cost was $399 million less than the original estimate. NASA officials cited "overoptimism" as a reason why initial estimates were often significantly lower than current estimates. (NY Times, Jan 31/93; AP, Jan 30/93; Space News, Feb 8-14/94)January 31: After conferring with Space Station contractor McDonnell Douglas, space officials confirmed that a cost overrun of at least $500 million was expected if costs were not brought under control. They told a congressional panel that the Station was now a $31.3 billion project. The increases appeared to be mainly in the Johnson Space Center portion of the program. NASA's Marty Kress, the Space Station project's new deputy director, said managers were determined to lower costs and were considering various means for doing so. Key congressional aides expressed anger at the news of the overrun, noting that for years NASA had ignored their advice on a design strategy to lower costs. (W Post, Jan 31/93; Space News, Feb 1-7/93; O Sen Star, Feb 3/93)		* In a 1992 report to Congress on the danger posed by asteroids smashing into earth, NASA estimated that there were about 1,000 to 4,000 "near-earth asteroids" larger than a half-mile, the minimum size capable of causing global disaster; such asteroids crash into Earth about once every 300,00 years. According to the report, during our lifetime there was a small chance (very roughly l in 10,000) that Earth would be struck by an object large enough to destroy food crops on a global scale and "possibly end civilization as we know it." (AP, Jan 31/93)    	  FebruaryFebruary 1: Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, presented Gene Roddenberry, creator of the Star Trek television series, NASA's Distinguished Public Service Medal on January 30. The medal, which was awarded posthumously, was presented to Roddenberry's widow, Majel Barrett Roddenberry. Gene Roddenberry died in October 1991.	Roddenberry was credited with popularizing the exploration of space through the original Star Trek television series, six motion pictures, and the later television series Star Trek. (NASA Release 93-019)	* Harris B. Hull, 83, a retired Air Force brigadier general and former special assistant to the administrator of NASA, died January 29 at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington after a heart attack. General Hull was assigned to NASA in 1963. After retiring from the Air Force in 1964, he remained with NASA until retiring in 1986. (W Post, Feb, 1/93; NY Times, Feb 2/93)	* Two Russian cosmonauts returned to Earth on Monday after 189 days in space. The two cosmonauts made four space walks during their stay on the orbiting Space Station Mir and carried out a variety of experiments. (AP, Feb 1/93)	* NASA announced that it planned to launch a $550 million-plus mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. Observers viewed the mission as very important for NASA's future; failure to repair the telescope would not only be a blow to astronomy but also would fuel the debate in Congress about NASA's ability to build Space Station Freedom later in the decade. The concern over the repair mission led to extensive oversight, numerous internal debates about the mission, and talk of a possible lengthening of the duration of the mission in order to allow for as many as six spacewalks. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93; Science, Feb 12/93; RTw, Mar 11; B Sun Magazine, Mar 14/93; Time, Mar 22/93)	* Jack Gibbons, President Bill Clinton's science advisor, said that the Clinton administration was debating various options for space policy management. Central was the question of whether to centralize control of the space program in a single White House office or spread out military, individual, and commercial space policy among several high-level councils. The role of science and technology in the Clinton administration was scheduled to be discussed during a January 30-31 meeting in Maryland. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93)	* NASA described Space Station Freedom as a laboratory for industry as well as government and set aside a third of the Station's experiment space for commercial research. NASA planned to begin launching pieces of Space Station Freedom into orbit in 1996. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93) 	* NASA announced that Guy Gardner, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight Russian programs, had been put in charge of overseeing two joint missions with the Russian space program.	In November, a cosmonaut was scheduled to spend eight days aboard the U.S. Space Shuttle Discovery. In 1995, an American and two cosmonauts were scheduled to take off aboard a Russian Soyuz rocket for a three-month stay aboard the Mir Space Station. The following June, the Shuttle Atlantis, carrying two cosmonauts, four Americans, and a Russian-built docking system, were scheduled to link up with Mir for five days of joint medical research. The American astronaut and the two cosmonauts launched in March would return to Earth on Atlantis. (Space News, Feb 1-7)	* NASA said that the titanium weld in Columbia's main engine might be weak; engineers were attempting to determine whether the weld was strong enough for the Shuttle's scheduled launch later in the month. NASA spokesman George Diller said that the turbopump would be replaced if the weld did not meet safety standards. (AP, Feb 1/93)	* NASA announced that five NASA officials would leave as the Clinton administration took office: Bill Livingstone, associate administrator of public affairs; Sue Richard, Livingstone's deputy; Courtney Stadd, acting associate administrator for the office of advanced concepts and technology; Holly Stevens, an administrative assistant; and Robert Simon, writer and editor in Administrator Daniel Goldin's office. (Space News, Feb 1-7/93) February 2: NASA announced that additional analysis had revealed that a suspect weld in Columbia's main engine fuel pump was strong enough for the Shuttle's scheduled launch late in the month. Liftoff tentatively was set for February 25. (AP, Feb 2/93)  February 3: NASA added a spacewalk to Space Shuttle mission STS-51 aboard Discovery, set for launch in July. The spacewalk would continue extravehicular activity tests that began with the addition of a spacewalk to NASA's first Shuttle flight in January of this year. (NASA Release 93-21)	* Joseph George Sobala, 60, a retired chief of the communications systems branch of NASA, died of cancer January 29 at his home in Washington.		Mr. Sobala joined NASA in 1963 at the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt. In 1977 he moved to NASA headquarters as communications program manager; he was later promoted to the position of chief of the communications systems branch, a post he held at the time of his retirement on January 25. (W Post, Feb 3/93)	* Callers jammed switchboards at Cape Canaveral, Florida, reporting that a fiery object had lit up the night sky over the Southeast. People in Georgia, Alabama, North Carolina, and Tennessee reported seeing an object streak across the sky about 10 p.m. Tuesday. Some observers said the object hit the ground and exploded. NASA confirmed that it had launched a navigation satellite at that time, but the boosters fell into the Atlantic Ocean as planned, said Gary Peltier, a spokesman at Cape Canaveral. (AP, Feb 3/93; B Sun, Feb 4/93)	* NASA appeared to be receiving little attention from the Clinton Administration. Neither Administration representativesnor NASA officials were present when a House subcommittee held the first of at least 10 hearings planned for this year to set space program priorities. Meanwhile, the White House had no comment on whether it would retain Daniel S. Goldin as NASA Administrator or choose a new head. (O Sen Star, Feb 3/93)February 4: A commercial suborbital rocket carrying seven experiments was scheduled to be launched on February 10 by the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space (UAH CMDS), a NASA Center for the Commercial Development of Space. The Consort rocket and launch services are funded by a grant from the space agency's Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology. (NASA Release 93-22)	* Ellen Ochoa, the first Hispanic woman astronaut, was scheduled to be a mission specialist on the Shuttle Endeavour launch March 23. Her mission raised anticipation in the Hispanic community, and NASA invited several Hispanic educators and activists to be present at the launch. NASA planned to send Ochoa on a tour of several cities later in the year. (El Sol, Feb 4/93, Feb 10/93)	* Motorola Inc. announced yesterday that it had contracted with a Russian firm, Khrunichev Enterprises, to launch 21 of the satellites needed for Motorola's proposed $3.37 billion Iridlum communications network. The Iridium project, scheduled to begin operating in 1998, required various government approvals and a definitive financing agreement before it could go forward. (B Sun, Feb 4/93;  WSJ, Feb 4/93; W Times, Feb 4/93; C Trib, Feb 4/93; UPI, Feb 21/93)	* A modified troop and cargo plane described as a "flying laboratory" crashed and burned after taking off from Dobbins Air Force Base in suburban Atlanta. The seven people aboard, all Lockheed employees, were killed. The plane, a modified troop and cargo plane, was used by Lockheed for testing new technologies.(B Sun, Feb 4/93)	* NASA officials said that Germany was being charged only $150 million of the $400 million cost of launching a science mission aboard Shuttle Columbia on February 25. Columbia's crew was expected to include two German researchers and a laboratory of German science experiments. The price was agreed upon in 1986 under a pricing policy NASA officials admitted was outdated. (O Sen Star, Feb 4/93)February 5: Dr. Lonnie Reid, a fluid dynamics expert at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, was scheduled to be inducted into the Ohio Science Technology and Industry Hall of Fame in Columbus on February 7.	Reid, who would be the first NASA researcher and one of three African Americans in the Hall of Fame, was being honored for his pioneering work in integrating theoretical and experimental methods in the science of fluid dynamics. (NASA Release 93-23)	* NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the agency had exceeded its 1992 goal of awarding 6.7 percent of the total value of the agency's prime and subcontracts to small disadvantaged businesses. Over $865 million was awarded to minority organizations; this figure represented 7.2 of the total $12 billion awarded during the last fiscal year. (National Black Review, Feb 5/93) 	* Senior astronaut Jerry Ross, payload commander for the Shuttle Columbia's February 25 mission, said that NASA should revamp globe-spanning training because such programs endangered fliers' family life and could lead to physical and mental exhaustion. Ross and another astronaut spent about 28 weeks in Germany preparing for the German spacelab mission aboard Columbia. (USA Today, Feb 5/93; W Times, Feb 5/93; AP, Feb 4/93; Space News, Feb 8-14)	* Russians scientists and engineers unfurled a thin aluminum and plastic mirror in space, sending a narrow beam of reflected sunlight flashing across the night side of the Earth. The experiment could be the first step in creating a solar spotlight that could eventually be used to light up nighttime work, rescue operations, blacked-out cities, or sun-deprived polar areas. The main purpose of the test was to see whether the sheet could be opened using centrifugal force and then maneuvered. (W Post, Feb 5/93; P Inq, Feb 5/94; NY Times, Feb 5/93)	* The Clinton Administration considered cancelling NASA's $30 billion Space Station and the $8.2 billion Super Collider but decided to keep the programs after encountering intense opposition to their cancellation. Cost overruns on the two programs, however, have damaged their political prospects in the administration and Congress. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93; AP, Feb 6/93, 8/93; UPI, Feb 5/93, Feb 8/93; W Post, Feb 6/93; W Times, Feb 6/93; P Inq, Feb 6/93;B Sun, Feb 6/93; NY Times, Feb 6/93)February 7: The Federal Aviation Agency was studying a controversial proposal to improve pilot alertness and performance by scheduling naps in the cockpit on long-haul flights. The proposed nap policy would apply only to three-pilot crews; two pilots would be on duty at all times while the third one slept. At least one union representing pilots strongly objected, charging that the proposal would sacrifice public safety, while allowing the airlines to save money by reducing the number of pilots. 	A NASA study of log books kept by pilots and published in December 1991 reported that pilots took naps in the cockpit 11 percent of the time they were on duty. (Boston Sunday Globe, Feb 7/93)February 8: Richard B. Hoover of the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, was named NASA inventor of the year for his invention of the Water-Window Imaging x-ray Microscope. This instrument should enable researchers to see in great detail high contrast x-ray images of proteins, chromosomes, and other tiny carbon structures inside living cells. (NASA Release 93-024)		* NASA officials announced that they planned to eliminate a number of expensive facilities and delay several Space Station assembly missions in their attempt to cut growing cost projections for the program. Senior program officials said that they had reduced $l.08 billion in anticipated cost increases for the Space Station to $678 million. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93)	* Orbital Science Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, announced that it was again planning to launch its Pegasus orbital rocket after scrubbing launches three times in the past two months because of technical problems.	Pegasus, a winged, three-stage rocket that can put payloads weighing as much as 900 pounds into low-Earth orbit, was to launch a data-relay satellite that was designed and built in Brazil. The rocket would be dropped from the wing of a B-52 bomber airborne 80 miles off Florida's east coast. The satellite, which weighs 350 pounds, was designed to help monitor Brazil's environment. (W Post, Feb 8/93; USA Today, Feb 8/93); USA Today, Feb 9/93)	* NASA Administrator Daniel S. Golden instructed senior NASA managers to begin a five-month study that would examine whether to replace the Space Shuttle after 2005 or upgrade the fleet so that shuttles could fly until 2030. The study was being led by Arnold Aldrich, NASA Associate Administrator for Space Systems Development. (Space News, Feb. 8-14/93)	* NASA added a spacewalk to a U.S. Shuttle mission scheduled for July as part of a continuing program to give astronauts experience before start of Space Station construction in 1996. (Space News, Feb 8-14/93)	* Some NASA scientists, following the "faster, better, cheaper" advice of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Golden, want to send two small space probes to study Pluto, the solar system's last known unexplored planet. The Plato mission could cost $600 million to $1 billion, depending on whether the probes were reached by Russian or U.S. rockets, respectively. By comparison, NASA expected to spend more than $2 billion to launch a spaceship in 1997 to explore Saturn. (AP, Feb 8/93)	* A first formal industrial test of a system that uses computer-set lights to adjust a person's sleep patterns got underway in January at a San Diego Gas and Electric Company plant. The system may prove useful in keeping astronauts and night workers alert, easing jet lag, helping older people sleep, and helping teens get out of bed. NASA started using the system in 1991 to adapt astronauts to night launches and shift work.	In the test, doses of light were applied late in the evening to delay the onset of sleepiness or at other times to fool the body's internal clock. The illumination was 50 to 100 times brighter than normal indoor light, but only about one-thousandth as bright as sunlight on a sunny day. (AP, Feb 8/93)	* Officials at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) recommended eliminating the JPL Edwards Test Facility, staffed by 28 JPL employees and 18 contractors, at Edwards Air Force Base in the Mojave Desert. If NASA managers accepted the recommendation, the facility could shut down by 1996. (UPI, Feb 8/93; Feb 9/Antelope Valley Press, Feb 9/93)February 9: Robert M. Rados, 73, a retired NASA meteorologist, died of cardiac arrest February 3 at Georgetown University Hospital, Washington, D.C.	Mr. Rasdos joined NASA in 1961. His work there included service as project manager for the TIROS weather satellite program and global atmospheric research. He retired in 1980. (W Post, Feb 8/93)   	* Space scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, think they have identified what matter in deep space is absorbing certain wavelengths of light from distant stars. Researchers Farid Salama and Louis Allamandola demonstrated that the light is absorbed by unexpectedly large organic molecules spread throughout the vacuum of space. These molecules, shaped like chicken wire, are called polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).	Salama said, "We think PAHs are the by-product of old carbon-rich stars burning out. This challenges the traditional view of interstellar chemistry, which assumes that all interstellar molecules are produced in the interstellar medium."(NASA Release 93-025)	* Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, who described himself as "an agent of change" in a late-November interview with Government Executive magazine, has set about instituting the "faster, better, cheaper" goals popularized over the past two years by the National Space Council.  	Employee review teams set in motion by Goldin came up with 17 percent reduction in future program costs. Most of these savings would come from repackaging NASA satellites into smaller, less expensive parcels. Goldin also committed himself to diversifying NASA's top management. He noted that he had moved "four brilliant, distinguished black Americans" into senior slots and also had promoted women and pushed contracts for minority firms.	Goldin  also addressed customer and supplier relations. Reaching out to what he calls NASA's "customer"--the American people--Golden held a series of six "town meetings" around the country late last year to talk about NASA and answer questions. Golden also was looking to change the agency's relationship with its suppliers. A recent General Accounting Office report found that costs in a sampling of 29 NASA projects were running 75 higher, on average, than had initially been projected. Goldin declared war on the practice of companies under-bidding and hoping to make up the loss in later contracts. (Government Executive, Feb/93)     	    	* A Pegasus rocket launched from a B-52 bomber flying eight miles above the Atlantic Ocean propelled a Brazilian environmental satellite into orbit. The Pegasus was dropped off the wing of the B-52, which was modified by NASA. After five seconds of free fall, the rocket motors were fired one by one and lifted the satellite into an orbit about 470 miles high. 	 	The satellite, which cost $20 million, was designed to monitor the Amazon River and surrounding rain forests. It was built by Brazil's space agency and launched by the Orbital Science Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia. The satellite was the first of a series of satellites planned by Brazil. (AP, Feb 9/93; UPI, Feb 9/93; USA Today, Feb 10/93; W Times, Feb 10/93; Phil Inq, Feb 10/93; NY Times, Feb 10/93; WSJ, Feb 10/93; W Post, Feb 10/93)February 10: The National Air and Space's new permanent exhibition, "Where Next, Columbus?," sums up U.S. space explorations to date and attempts to guess what lies ahead. The show ends without any firm answers; exploration is limited by technological feasibility, but it is also, as this exhibition emphasizes, very much a cultural enterprise, shaped by the values of a given society. (P Inq, Feb 10/93)	* The Smithsonian Museum put the Air and Space Museum Annex proposed for Dulles Airport on its priority list for 1993. The annex would display, for the first time, such pieces of aeronautical history as the Enola Gay atomic bomber, the Space Shuttle Enterprise, and the SR-71 "Blackbird" spy plane.	Representative Frank R. Wolf of Virginia reported that very likely both houses of Congress would soon be getting legislation authorizing construction of the annex at Dulles. Construction of the Annex had been delayed for years because of disagreement in Congress as to its location. (Reston Connection, Feb 10/93)   	* President Clinton dissolved the Cabinet-level National Space Council as part of staff cuts to reduce the budget. The duties of the space council were to come under the umbrella of a broader policy-making group called the Office of Science and Technology Policy headed by new presidential science adviser Jack Gibbons. (H Chronicle, Feb 10/93; Space News, Feb 15/93) February 11: NASA announced that scientist Dr. Robert Watson would receive the Scientific Freedom and Responsibility Award from the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) on February 15.	The AAAS was to honor Dr. Watson, Director of the Process Studies Program Office in NASA's Earth Science and Applications Division, and Dan Albritton of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), for their contributions to the scientific and policy discussions on global ozone depletion. (NASA Release 93-26)	* NASA announced the selection of 11 new science mission concepts in the Discovery Program for further study during this fiscal year. The Discovery missions were selected from 73 concepts discussed at the Discovery Mission Workshop held last November. The potential projects were those thought to have the highest scientific value as well as a reasonable chance of meeting budgetary guidelines.	 Discovery missions were designed to proceed from development to flight in less than three years.		The 11 mission concepts to be studied were: Mercury Polar Flyby, Hermes Global Orbiter to Mercury, Venus Multiprobe Mission, Venus Composition Probe, Cometary Coma Chemical Composition, Mars Upper Atmosphere Dynamics, Energetics, and Evolution Mission, Comet Nucleus Tour, Small Missions to Asteroids and Comets, Near Earth Asteroid Returned Sample, Earth Orbital Ultraviolet Jovian Observer, and Wind Sample Return. In addition, three concepts were targeted for further consideration during the fiscal year: Mainbelt Asteroid Rendezvous Explorer, Comet Nucleus Penetrator, and Mars Polar Pathfinder. (NASA Release 93-027)   	* Astro D, a cooperative x-ray astronomy mission with Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS) and NASA, was scheduled for launching February 11 from the ISAS Kagoshima Space Center in Japan.	 The Astro-D project, which was to put a high-capability x-ray observatory into orbit, had been designed to help understand the physics of a variety of cosmic sources. During early operations, the observatory's four telescopes were to point at approximately two targets per day. This number would be increased to as many as six per day; the targets would include supernova remnants, stars, neutron stars, black holes, active galactic nuclei, and clusters of galaxies. (NASA Release 93-28)	* NASA completed its review of the flight readiness of Columbia Shuttle Mission STS-55, a mission dedicated primarily to the German Space Agency for research in life and microgravity sciences. During the review, inspectors decided to replace the Shuttle's high pressure oxidizer pumps. 	The replacement comes because officials were uncertain whether the retainers for seals in Columbia's high-pressure oxidizer pumps were a new and tighter kind or an old variety. If a retainer broke, a piece of it could damage the turbine blades and the engine could shut down, according to Larry Salter, a main-engine expert at NASA. A paperwork problem caused the confusion. NASA officials said that at least some of the eight Space Shuttle missions launched since March 1992 might have been put into orbit without proper inspection of the retainers. (NASA Note to Editors: N93-7; B Sun, Feb 11/93; USA Today, Feb 11/97; W Post, Feb 11/93; P Inq, Feb 11/93; AP, Feb 11/93; NY Times, Feb 12/93; Av Wk, Feb 15/93)	* The Russians have attempted to sell previously classified Soviet satellite pictures to American scientists and oil companies. The photographs were not taken by Soviet spy satellites but by other spacecraft, such as the Mir Space Station. Oil companies considering prospecting for oil in Russia were particularly interested, according to Sergey Vikhrov, of the All-Russian Foreign Economic Association on Geological Prospecting. (AP, February 11/93)February 12: According to reports, the Clinton Administration's new budget would cut funding for NASA's planned Space Station by 40 percent; the cuts were predicted to trigger another major restructuring of the project and more delays. Key Capitol aids said the House had approved $1.35 billion for the program in the next fiscal year, instead of the $2.25 billion NASA had requested, Clinton was reported to be troubled by the massive cost-overruns associated with the project. (W Post, Feb 12/97; AP, Feb 12/93, Feb 13/93; UPI, Feb 12/93, Feb 13/93)	* In 1989, NASA embarked on a vast program, the Mission to Planet Earth, which set out to monitor the effects of climate change on Earth's atmosphere, land surface, and oceans. The centerpiece of this program was to be the Earth Observing System, or EOPS, a group of 30,000-pound space platforms that could cost as much as $30 billion to build, launch, and operate. The platforms were projected to beam home one trillion bits of data each day, ranging from the flux of solar radiation into the atmosphere to the growth of plankton beneath the ocean surface.	Controversy had surrounded the EOPs program since its inception; critics argued that EOPS was a grandiose program that would produce huge amounts of undigestible data and would take money away from other--perhaps more useful--efforts at climate monitoring. Critics continued to maintain that long-term, continuous monitoring of crucial climate variables, monitoring that has been postponed until EOPS gets launched, would be more useful.	The EOS budget through the end of the century had been trimmed from $17 billion to $8 billion and the mission had been modified. If the budget got much tighter, NASA would have to completely rethink Mission to Planet Earth. (Science, Feb 12/93)     	* WorldView Imaging of Livermore, California, received a government license to launch small, inexpensive spy satellites. Worldview claimed that it could take super-sharp photos from 250 feet up and sell the photos for about half the $4,000 charged by the government's Landsat and France's SPOT Image. Possible uses included traffic monitoring, urban planning, and corporate spying. (USA Today, Feb 12/93; NY Times, Feb 12/93) 	 	* A panel of experts tasked with examining the Space Shuttle's main engines said that they were safe to fly provided that technical checks were made "vigorously and rigorously." The panel noted that the engines were so fussy that they needed constant maintenance. Such attention was one of the factors that had driven the cost of each Shuttle flight to about $500 million. The panel suggested that NASA continue to press forward on a number of technical improvements already in the works. (AP, Feb 12/93)	* According to officials at NASA, a bad lot of batteries made by Gates Aerospace Battery Company, might shut down several satellites, including the $3633 million Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) sooner than expected. To make sure that UARS would finish its minimum 18-month mission, NASA scientists had to adjust the satellite's hardware. Instead of gathering extra data from UARS for 10 to 12 years as expected, scientists now estimate that contact with the satellite would last only four or five years. (Science, Feb 12/93)	February 13: NASA released 45 photos of the Space Shuttle Challenger's smashed crew cabin, after they were given to the New York Times by a man who had obtained them under the federal Freedom of Information Act. The pictures were taken after the crew cabin was recovered from the Atlantic Ocean in 1986. (AP, Feb 15/93; B Sun, Feb 15; W Post, Feb 15/93; USA Today, Feb 15/93; P Inq, Feb 15/93; NY Times, Feb 13/93)  	* NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility at Edwards Air Force Base in California announced that nearly two dozen engineers from the center would visit 22 schools in the Antelope Valley next week to celebrate National Engineer's Week. (LA Times, Feb 13/93)	* In response to questions from reporters, President Clinton said that there might be some changes in the space program but that supporters of NASA should be pleased with his recommendations. He gave no details, but White House officials said the President would call for full funding for the Space Station when he addressed Congress February 17. John H. Gibbons, the President's science advisor, on the other had, said that big science projects would be cut back as the Administration searched for ways to pay for them. (AP, Feb 13/93, Feb 16/93; Space News, Feb 15-21; LA Times, Feb 13/93; USA Today, Feb 17/93)	* John Aaron, the project manager of the Space Station, resigned after Senator Bob Krueger, D-Texas, demanded Aaron's resignation in return for continued funding for the project. Krueger said Aaron must be removed because "precious tax dollars have been mismanaged. There is no question that a new management team must get to work immediately to increase efficiency and productivity." (UPI, Feb 13/93) February 15: A New York Times editorial suggested that if pain was to be spread fairly, the country's two biggest science projects, the $8.3 billion Superconducting Super Collider now being built in Texas and the $30 billion Space Station, had to be cut along with other vital programs. 	The editorial noted that some reviews have said that the Space Station had only one important goal that can't be met on Earth: it would serve as a base for biomedical studies of what happens to humans and animals who remain in space for long periods. That goal, the editorial suggested, could be met more cheaply. A harder call, according to the editorial, was the Super Collider because, according to all accounts, this was a pioneering research project designed to yield secrets of matter that could not be found nay other way. But in the end, big science must do its share. (NY Times, Feb 15/93) 	* NASA managers and engineers warned that infighting and confusion jeopardized the Space Station effort. Critics said that NASA must strengthen accountability, do away with bureaucratic constraints, and forge a more cohesive team. There was widespread disagreement among Space Station players over whether NASA should make some personnel changes or take a more radical path, for example, invest more authority in the program office in Reston, Virginia, or concentrate effort at a single NASA center. (Space News, Feb 15-21/93)	* Russian scientists from the Baikonur Center near Moscow and their U.S. colleagues from the NASA Ames Research Center, Stanford University, and McDonnell Douglas Corporation have been working to build more enthusiasm for exploration of Mars. Joint efforts were needed if exploration were to go forward said Dr. Louis D. Friedman, executive director of The Planetary Society, a Pasadena-based international space advocacy group. The society was a partner in the Russian mission to launch orbiters scheduled to carry robotic explorers to Mars in 1994 and 1996. (AP, Feb 15/93; W Times, Mar 14/93)	* Seven of the federal government's inspectors general last year accepted bonuses--up to $20,000--from the agencies they review. NASA's inspector general, Bill Colvin, received the biggest bonus, $20,000. Colvin said the cash wouldn't sway him. "If I've got an allegation against the head of my agency, he said, "the chips are going to fall where they may." (USA Today, Feb 15)February 16: NASA, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), and the Southern California Small Business Utilization Council were  scheduled to co-sponsor the 1993 High Technology and Small Business Development Procurement Conference on March 1-2 in Los Angeles. About 200 government prime contractors, federal agencies, and other large procurement organizations were expected to participate in the conference. (NASA Release 93-029)	* NASA announced that a mysterious glitch had caused the Ulysses solar explorer spacecraft to shut down its instruments and stop sending data over the weekend. Eight of the instruments were working by the Tuesday following the shutdown, and NASA predicted that the ninth instrument would be operational within days. A similar, still unexplained malfunction occurred in 1991. Ulysses was released from a Space Shuttle in 1990 on a $750 mission to study the sun's poles in 1994-95. (AP, Feb 16/93; W Post, Feb 17/93); USA Today, Feb 17/93; AP, Feb 17/93)February 17: NASA announced that a study at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, might lead to a reduction in the lightheadness astronauts feel after returning to earth from space. A reduced level of plasma was believed to contribute to the tendency to feel faint. (NASA Release 93-030)	* A spacewalk was added to Space Shuttle mission STS-57 aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour as part of a series of spacewalk tests NASA planned to conduct during the next three years to prepare for the construction and maintenance of Space Station Freedom. Endeavour was scheduled for an April launch. The main objectives of the STS-57 mission were retrieval of the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA) deployed during a Shuttle flight in August 1992 and the conducting of research in the Spacehab module. (NASA Release 93-31)	* Bernard A. Harris, MD, an African American, was set to make his first Shuttle flight aboard Space Shuttle Columbia in late February. He was scheduled to conduct experiments exploring the behavior of humans, living organisms, and materials.	The February launch would be Columbia's fourteenth voyage into earth orbit. The primary payload was Spacelab D2, a self-contained, space-based research laboratory carried inside the Shuttle's 60-foot-long cargo bay. (Philadelphia New Observer, Feb 17/93)	    	* The Clinton Administration decided to increase funding and continue work on the $8.2 billion Superconducting Super Collider under construction in Texas, according to Senator Bob Krueger, D-Texas, and other sources. Krueger said that Clinton's Office of Management and Budget had budgeted the project at $640 million for fiscal 1994, a 24 percent increase over the current year's spending levels. However, just before he left office last month, outgoing Energy Secretary James D. Watkins said that the 1994 funding level would have to be $1.2 billion to keep the project on schedule for completion by the end of the decade. (W Post, Feb 17/93)	* Speaking on CNN's morning news show, Senator Jim Sasser, D-Tennessee, chairman of the Senate Budget Committee, called the Superconducing Super Collider a $7 billion scientific pork barrel. He said he would propose cutting it out of the budget along with the Space Station. (AP, Feb 7/93)February 18: The President's 1994 budget request for NASA called for an increase over last year's budget and contained key provisions for the Space Station program and the development of important new technologies. The President was to propose a $14.7 billion budget for NASA for fiscal year 1994, up from $14.1 billion during the current year. 	President Clinton directed NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to redesign the Space Station. Golden said that NASA officials would come up with new designs, expected within 90 days, that increased the project's efficiency and produced "greater returns on our investment." (NASA Release 93-32; W Post, Feb 18/93, Feb 19/93; WSJ, Feb 17/93, Feb 18/93, Feb 19/93; NY Times, Feb 18/93, Feb 19/93; B Sun. Feb 18/93; P Inq, Feb 18/93; AP, Feb 18/93; UPI, Feb 18/93, Feb 19/93, Feb 20/93, Mar 3/93; AP, Feb 17/93; W Post, Feb 19/93; NY Times, Feb 19/93; WSJ, Feb 19/93; AP, Feb 19/93; AP, Feb 19/93; UPI, Feb 19/93; LA Times, Feb 22/93; Space News, Feb 22-23; AvWk, Feb 22/93)		* Speaking at a press conference at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, John Gibbon, President Clinton's science advisor, said that science and technology would take center stage as the dual engine for economic growth in the United States. He added that the Administration would need to make some hard choices about expensive projects such as the Space Station, find ways to gain more practical benefit from basic scientific research without limiting its creativity, and learn to be a true international partner. (CSM, Feb 18/93; W Post, Mar 3/93)	* According to NASA, President Clinton's plans for the Space Station could threaten some of the 125 Maryland jobs connected with the project. About $14 million was being spent in Maryland on station-related work. (B Sun, Feb 18/93)February 19: Nasa announced the selection of 111 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). These proposals and the 38 previously selected proposals came from 130 small, high technology firms located in 27 states. The SBIR program is intended to stimulate technological innovation by using small businesses, including minority and disadvantaged firms, to help meet federal research and development requirements and to encourage the commercial application of federally funded research innovations. (NASA Release 93-33; Washington Technology, Feb 25/93) 	  	* Russia's Mir Space Station celebrated its seventh anniversary in orbit on February 20. The Mir has given Russian cosmonauts much experience with extended periods in space. About half-dozen cosmonauts have made multiple flights and spent a total of more than a year in orbit. (AP, Feb 19/93)	* NASA announced that three engine pumps that had been removed from Space Shuttle Columbia for fear that the seal retainers in the pumps were an old variety that required inspection after each flight were a newer version that did not need automatic pre-flight inspection. The confusion stemmed from a paperwork mixup at the Rockwell International Corporation, maker of the engines. (NY Times, Feb 19/93)	* The White House released estimates of the number of job cuts faced by each federal agency. NASA was slated to lose 1,000 positions. ((W Post, Feb 19/93)	* George A. Burch, 62, an engineer who since 1960 had worked on various NASA projects, died of lung cancer January 25 at Greater Laurel-Beltsville Hospital in Maryland. Mr. Burch was employed by Bendix Corporation. (W Post, Feb 19/93)	* Writing in the Washington Post, Michael Schrage, a columnist for the Los Angeles Times, suggested that a dramatic and effective way to boost the nation's industrial competitiveness while sending a signal that the Cold War was over would be to cut in half the budget of the national laboratories. The move might shock the labs into more energetically redefining their mission, according to Schrage. The national labs include the University of California's Lawrence Livermore Lab, Los Alamos in New Mexico, and Brookhaven in New York. (W Post, Feb 19/93)	 	February 21: Arthur L. H. Rudolph, a German-born scientist who played a crucial role in developing the Saturn 5 rocket used in the American moon landings, lost his attempt to regain his American citizenship. He gave up his citizenship in 1984 when he faced deportation for Nazi war crimes.	After the war, Rudolph was one of 118 German scientists secretly brought to the United States to work in the American missile program. He became the space agency's program manager for the Saturn project. (NY Times, Feb 20/93) February 22: NASA announced that NASA and industry engineers had designed and built a new measuring device that would save American taxpayers more than $1 million on a NASA project. The device, an improved "inlet rake,"  measures the air flowing into one of the engines on the F/AS-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle (HARV), based at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. Engineers would be able to use the air flow data to help give fighter-type aircraft more power and better handling qualities. (NASA Release 93-035; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 19/93)	* NASA managers and industry contractors blamed Space Station cost overruns on the rush to redesign the effort in 1990 and 1991. Congress directed NASA in October 1990 to shave $6 billion from the Space Station over five years. NASA settled on a plan in early 1991 to shorten the pressurized modules and reduce the number of solar arrays. The agency also pushed back the date when the crew could occupy the Space Station by two years--to 1999--and reduced the crew size by half. In addition, NASA redid plans for the latticework structure that forms the Space Station's backbone and the Johnson Space Center's major responsibility in the program. According to Jack Boykin, Johnson's acting project director, the plan was too optimistic in its estimates of cost and technical complexity.	Robert Moorehead, NASA's deputy program director for the Space Station, warned his superior in writing on March 13, 1992 that the center's work was veering out of control. His concerns suggested that the Space Station's problems were recognized within the agency well before they became public. (Space News, Feb 22-28)	* An editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology, praised President Bill Clinton as generally being "on track" with  his space and aeronautics program. However, the author suggested that President Clinton needed to clarify his vision for the Space Station; decisive action was needed in a project that already had consumed $8 billion over nearly a decade. An editorial in the Orlando Sentinel urged President Clinton to keep his commitment to the Space Station but to do so with an "eye toward greater efficiency."  (AvWk, Feb 22, 1993; O Sen Star, Feb 22/93)	* Space News praised President Bill Clinton's space plan as a "rational, sound approach that will keep the station alive, head NASA in the right direction, and keep NASA Administrator Dan Goldin around."(Space News, Feb 22-28/93)	* Writing in the Wall Street Journal, Allan H. Meltzer, professor of economics at Carnegie-Mellon and visiting scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, said that if the Clinton Administration were serious about reducing spending it would eliminate the $30 billion Space Station, reduce entitlements, and cut wasteful projects. (WSJ, Feb 22/93)February 23: Kennedy Space Center spokesman Hugh Harris announced that former astronaut Brewster Shaw had told NASA that he would resign as deputy director of the Space Shuttle program in April. Shaw was responsible for approving Shuttle launches in the final moments of a countdown (W Times, Feb 23/93; AP, Feb 24/93)February 24: A Washington Post editorial had generally favorable comments regarding President Clinton's economic stimulus-deficit plan, noting that he had taken on some formidable interest groups. It suggested, however, that he  could have killed the Space Station as "unaffordable in present circumstances." A Washington Times editorial argued that both the Space Station and the Superconducing Super Collider should be cut. A Philadelphia Inquirer editorial called for a delay in building the Space Station because of funding issues. (W Post, Feb 24/93; W Times, Feb 26/93; P Inq, Mar 7/93)	* NASA announced that new information on the El Nino ocean current would be discussed at a briefing on the TOPEX/Poseidon satellite mission on February 26. The satellite was launched in August 1992 to map circulation of the world's oceans and study the oceans' role in climate. (NASA Release N93-08)February 25: NASA scientists reported in the British journal Nature that a supernova may have caused a huge void known as the "Local Bubble" that envelopes the solar system and many nearby stars. Researchers at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, said that evidence suggests that the bubble, an area about 300 light-years across, was formed by the supernova or explosion of a star about 340,000 years ago. The blast was strong enough that its radiation could have disrupted earth's protective ozone layer and caused extra sunburns on the ancestors of modern humans. (NASA Release 93-036; USA Today, Feb 25/93; NY Times, Feb 25; P Inq, Mar 5/93) 	* NASA announced that beginning in February, NASA would test "technology incubation," a new laboratory-to-market approach designed to help space technology contribute to U.S. industrial competitiveness. NASA was funding two centers, the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The three-year experiment, which was being operated by the University of Texas, Austin, was receiving funding of $800,000 this year. (NASA Release 93-037)	* The General Accounting Office (GAO) reported that the Superconducting Super Collider was millions of dollars over budget and that construction was behind schedule. According to the investigators, trend analysis suggested that the Collider could have a $650 million cost overrun; GAO also estimated that the project was 19 percent behind schedule. (W Post, Feb 25/93)	* Government officials reported that a high-altitude weather satellite borrowed from Europe had been positioned to monitor the weather over the United States. It joined the GOES-7 U.S. weather satellite, which had been working alone since its companion satellite failed in 1989. The addition of the European satellite  restored the normal system of having two weather satellites in orbit, one each over the East and West Coasts. (NY Times, Feb 25/93)	* Daniel S. Golden, NASA administrator, named Dr. Joseph F. Shea, adjunct professor of aeronautics and astronautics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and former NASA employee, to be in charge of the redesign of the Space Station. Golden also announced measures to conserve resources and restrict new spending during the redesign transition. (NASA Release 93-038; Space News, Mar 1-7; UPI, Feb 27/93; W Post, Feb 27/93)	* NASA announced funding for 11 mission concept studies that would attempt to design a solar system exploration mission for under $150 million each. A parachute-descending Venus atmospheric probe proposed by the University of Colorado was one of the ideas funded. (Washington Technology, Feb 25/93)February 26: NASA reported that data from the U.S.-French TOPEX/POSEIDON oceanographic indicated that the El Nino event off the western coast of South America was strengthening, which meant that the weather conditions associated with it were likely to continue. These conditions included wetter than normal weather in California, wetter and colder winters than normal in the eastern United States, and warmer and dryer summers than normal across the southern hemisphere. (NASA Release 93-39; B Sun, Feb 28/93)	* NASA announced that Russian cosmonauts Colonel Vladimir G. Titov and Sergei K. Krikalev were scheduled to meet with the media for interviews on Tuesday, March 9. The two cosmonauts were training as mission specialists for Shuttle mission STS-60 set to be launched in late 1993. (NASA Editors Note N93-9)	* Benson Edward Gammon, 76, a retired research scientist with NASA, died on February 24. Mr. Gammon worked with NASA and its predecessor agencies for 32 years. He served as chief of research and technology in the office of plans and program evaluation, where he worked on the proposal for a manned flight to Mars. (W Post, Feb 26/93)February 27: NASA announced that it had notified all its contractors to discontinue all overtime on Space Station work and said that it would "restrict new spending." (W Times, Feb 27/93)	* Jet Propulsion Laboratory Director Edward Stone announced that the laboratory expected to eliminate l,000 of its 7,500 jobs in five years. The cuts resulted from the "realities of the federal budget" and the drop in aerospace work from defense contractors, according to Stone. (W Times, Feb 27/93)	* NASA announced that a German-chartered Space Shuttle mission was scheduled for launch March 14 after a delay of more than two weeks. NASA said the delay was caused by a false alarm with the space shuttle Columbia's main engines, which were suspected of containing outdated parts. (W Times, Feb 27/93)	* The New York Times reported that an Orion rocket being prepared for launch at the European Space Range in Kiruna, Sweden, ignited while on its flatbed and shot through two buildings, killing a technician and injuring three others. The 20-foot rocket was to have measured the earth's ozone layer, using equipment from a German Space organization. (NY Times, Mar 1/93; RT, Feb 27/93)MarchMarch 1: Texas Monthly reported that Forrest M. Mims III, an amateur scientist who daily measures ozone readings with a pair of hand-held instruments put together for less than $500, had convinced NASA that its multimillion-dollar spectrometer was off by about 1.7 percent. NASA's 14-year-old spectrometer, the Nimbus-7, apparently had drifted slightly in its orbit. It was scheduled to be replaced in 1994; until it was replaced, NASA scientists would have to compensate for the error. (Texas Monthly, Mar 1/93)	* Government Computer News reported that NASA had designated Laurie A. Broedling, an associate administrator for continual improvement, to take charge of the agency's Total Quality Management (TQM) program. In addition, NASA established a quality steering team of senior officials and a continual improvement council. (Government Computer News, Mar 1/93)  	* The Clinton Administration announced that it was moving the management team for a Space Shuttle contract from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The decision affected 90 engineering and management employees. According to the Wall Street Journal, the move was meant to discipline Alabama Senator Richard Shelby, who, after lobbying the Administration to continue funding the Space Station, had publicly criticized the President's economic program for failing to cut more from federal spending. (WSJ, Mar 1/93; Newsweek, Mar 8/93)	* Writing in the Christian Science Monitor, James Oberg, a professional space engineer and a specialist on Russian aerospace, hailed the success of Russia's manned Space Station, Mir. He noted that the Mir, launched in 1986, had been continuously occupied since mid-1989 by successive teams of cosmonauts. 	According to Oberg, American space engineers who visit Russia's space center have been impressed with the program's "sound, intelligent space hardware." Yet, Oberg noted, the Western press pays very little attention to Russian accomplishments in space. He suggested that awareness of what the Mir had accomplished could be useful in the upcoming round of political debate on whether the U.S. is "too poor to run a manned Space Station." (CSM, Mar 1/93)  	* Several life science researchers questioned whether a redesigned Space Station would accomplish enough life science objectives to be worth the investment. Researchers at a meeting of the NationaL Research Council's Space Studies Board said that they expected a redesign to either shrink or reduce the centrifuge, a set of spinning modules designed for precise gravity experiments on animals aboard the station. Harold Guy, a professor at the University of California's School of Medicine in LaJolla, California, said that without a large centrifuge, much of the station's experimental value for life scientists would be lost. "The life science community may bail out," said Fred Turek, a neurobiologist and chairman of the space biology and medicine committee on the National Research Council's Space Studies Board. (Space News, Mar 1/93)	* An article in Space News on Daniel S. Golden's decision to remove Leonard Fisk as manager of the agency's space science program discussed Fisk's managerial style, Last October Golden changed Fisk's title to chief scientist, a position without management authority. According to the article, many scientists viewed Fisk as synonymous with advocating and delivering quality space science missions; others said that his record for delivering missions on budget and on time was mixed and that NASA could no longer afford to sacrifice cost and schedule to deliver the biggest science possible to space. (Space News, Mar 1-7/93)	* Edward Frieman, who served as chairman of the White-House-led Earth Observing System Engineering Review Committee, said that NASA needed to institute an outside review process for its science missions. NASA's internal review process tended to bloat rather than streamline science missions, he said. "They're really not review teams, they're the advocates, said Frieman, director of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in LaJolla, California. (Space News, Mar 1-7/93)	* Space News reported that European space officials were monitoring news about the fate of the United States Space Station under the Clinton Administration. The 13-nation European Space Agency (ESA) had agreed to spend about $2.8 billion on its Columbus Space Station program. The European program included a habitable laboratory that was to be attached to the Station and related ground equipment. (Space News, Mar 1-7/93)	* Operators of Biosphere 2, the world under glass experiment, named John B. Corliss, a NASA consultant, to head research for the $150 million private venture. (AP, Mar 1/93)	* Federal Computer Week reported that a small woman-owned Florida firm had protested Marshall Space Flight Center's decision to let companies with up to 1,500 employees bid on a small, disadvantaged business (SDB) set-aside program there. Challenger Engineering Inc., St. Petersburg, Florida, maintained that NASA's procurement policy was unfair to smaller minority-owned firms that could not compete with larger companies. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 1/93)  March 2: Retired Admiral Thomas H. Moorer, former chairman of the Joint chiefs of Staff, writing in the Washington Times, suggested that using a floating, or "Hydra," launch system would massively lower the cost of space launches for commercial concerns and break the current space launch bottleneck. Commercial launches now can be preempted by government launches. He noted that the Soviet Navy had used the Hydra technique to launch its nuclear armed ballistic missiles from submarines for more than 25 years. (W Times, Mar 2/93)	* French scientists, led by Dr. Jacques Laskar of the Bureau des Longitudes in Paris, writing in the journal Nature, and Dr. Jack Wisdom, an astronomer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, writing in the journal Science, described the implications of chaos in the solar system. New computer simulations have revealed that over great spans of time, small gravitational disturbances from neighboring planets, combined with their own wobbly rotations, can cause significant fluctuations in the orbits and orientations of the planets, leading to, for example, great temperature fluctuations. Mars, for example, is still undergoing great variations. According to scientists, Earth may be spared such variations because of the stabilizing influence of the moon, the only large satellite in the inner solar system. (NY Times, Mar 2/93; Time, Mar 8/93)	March 3: Congress held an oversight hearing March 2, in which members of Congress attempted to determine what had led to a potential $1 billion overrun in the Space Station program. Space Station managers testified on how the overruns had developed and how they planned to fix them. At the hearing, NASA officials said they had offset all but about $500 million of the potential cost overruns for the next three year; they had done so largely by cutting management jobs and replacing consultants with government employees. (W Post, Mar 3/93; LA Times, Mar 3/93; USA Today, Mar 3/93; AP, Mar 3/93; Space News, Mar 8-14/93; AvWk, Mar 8/93; H Post, Mar 3/93)	* NASA announced that when the first U.S. commercial rocket lift off in May, its main fuselage and booster rocket were scheduled to carry the logo, "Last Action Hero," the title of a Columbia Pictures summer movie release starring Arnold Schwarzenegger. Columbia paid $50,000 for the ad, which was to be orbiting earth for more than two years. (WSJ, Mar 3/93; B Sun, Mar 3/93; W Post, Mar 3/93; LA Times, Mar 3/93; USA Today, Mar 3/93; UPI, Mar 3/93; AP, Mar 3/93)	* Speaking at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, George Smoot, an astrophysicist at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in Berkeley, California, described his cosmic research work  Using the space-time ripples that were discovered a year ago, Smoot and his group want to explore backward in time toward the universe's origin and forward to the universe of today. In its investigation, the group uses one of the instruments on the Cosmic Background Explorer Satellite to study the microwave radiation that permeates the cosmos. Cosmologists now have what Smoot compares to "a baby photograph of the universe at about five hours into a human lifetime."  That snapshot contains enough information to allow investigators to work backward and forward in time. (CSM, Mar 3/93)	* Senator John Warner, R. Virginia, introduced legislation to kill NASA's manned Space Station project. Calling the Space Station "wasteful and unnecessary," the senator urged President Clinton to kill the project. (W Post, Mar 3/93, Mar 4/93)	* NASA announced at least a two-day delay in the planned March 14 launch of Space Shuttle Columbia because of a ruptured hydraulic hose that had sprayed fluid in the engine compartment. This was the second delay in three weeks for the German Spacelab mission. (AP, Mar 3/93, Mar 4/93; UPI, Mar 3/93; P Inq, Mar 4/93; USA Today, Mar 4/93; RTw, Mar 3/93)March 4: NASA announced that it had chosen the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas to become the NASA Specialized Center of Research and Training in Integrated Physiology. The new center would focus on arriving at a better understanding of how different organ systems of various species react to space flight. (NASA Release 93-040)	* Analysis of measurements from NASA's Earth Radiation Budget Experiment (ERBE) satellite confirmed that Mount Pinatubo's eruption in the Philippines in June 1991 had resulted in a temporary cooling of the Earth that equated to a decrease in global surface temperature of approximately 1 degree Fahrenheit (0.5 degree Celsius). The data provided the first conclusive evidence of a significant change in global energy caused by a volcanic eruption. (NASA Release 93-41; P Inq, Mar 5/93; B Sun, Mar 5/93; NY Times, Mar 9/93)March 8: Launch of the Commercial Experiment Transporter (COMET), which was scheduled to lift off March 31, was postponed for at least two months. NASA contributed $85 million toward three launches of the COMET; the spacecraft was to carry ll experiments from NASA's commercial space development centers. COMET was also serving as the first space billboard. Columbia Pictures paid $500,000 to advertize an upcoming Arnold Schwarzenegger movie on the rocket. (Space News, Mar 8-14; AP, 9/93, Mar 10/93)	* NASA announced that it had awarded Government Technology services Inc. of Chantilly a contract to provide Unix work station products to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland (W Times, Mar 4/93)	* NASA announced that an ER-2 aircraft, an updated version of the U-2 spy plane, would spend seven months next year researching the ozone hole over Antarctica. The study, part of a joint New Zealand-U.S. atmospheric study into ozone depletion, would explore the extent of the hole in the ozone layer. NASA research pilot Jim Barrilleaux was to fly the NASA-owned ER-2 aircraft. The work was scheduled to begin in late March 1994. (RTw, Mar 4/93) March 5: NASA announced that it had postponed the Space Station Freedom Utilization Conference, planned for June 21-24 in San Francisco, California. NASA managers decided to postpone the conference because of recent instructions to redesign the Space Station. (NASA Media Advisory)	* NASA announced that Mae C. Jemison, M.D., the first woman of color in space, had resigned to pursue interests in "teaching, mentoring, health care issues, and increasing participation in science and technology of those who have traditionally been left out."  Jemison, who joined the astronaut program in 1987, was a science mission specialist on STS-47, Spacelab-J, in September 1992, a cooperative mission with the Japanese to study life sciences and materials processing. (NASA Release 93-043; P Inq, Mar 7/93; B Sun, Mar 7/93; W Post, Mar 8/93; W Times, Mar 7/93; AP, Mar 6/93; UPI, Mar 6/93; USA Today, Mar 9/93; People Magazine, Apr/93)	* Europe's Arianespace Inc announced that it had signed a launch contract for two intelsat VIII satellites. The satellites were to be built by General Electric Corporation's Astro Space Division and launched in 1996 from a site in French Guiana. (W Times, Mar 5/93)	* Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, attempted to smooth over "strained" relations with top NASA management, upset over a letter that he had written to a House subcommittee investigating space station funding. In part the letter read,"I have been concerned with regard to the validity of the present cost and schedule estimates." NASA officials scheduled to testify before the subcommittee said that Goldin's comments seemed to discredit what they had to say even before they said it. Yesterday, Goldin denied that he distrusted his top managers. (W Post, Mar 5/93)	* The French National Space Agency announced that Western Europe's first Ariane-5 solid-fuel rocket booster had undergone successful tests at a launch center in French Guiana. (RTw, Mar 6/93)March 7: Atmosphere researchers urged government science agencies to speed up their evaluation of the large pilotless drone called the Condor, fearing that the aircraft would be scrapped if the government did not buy it. The drone, which cost an estimated $300 million, was built as a prototype spy aircraft for the Pentagon by Boeing Corporation. It can fly more than 20,000 miles without refueling. Converting the drone from military to civilian use would cost an estimated $70 to $100 million. (NY Times, Mar 7/93)March 8: The Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce announced that it had awarded NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, U.S. Air Force Lt. General Edward Barry, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) its Kitty Hawk, Sands of Time Award. The chamber annually recognizes individuals and companies in the aerospace industry as a means of promoting the industry. (Space News, March 8-14/93)   	* General Dynamics Space Systems Division of San Diego proposed returning to the moon for a 21-day, two-person mission in 1999. The mission would use a capsule and return vehicle transported by the U.S. Space Shuttle and a Titan 4 rocket with a Centaur upper stage; the proposal did not call for the construction of a new launcher. However, NASA's head of exploration called many of the calculations in the proposal overly optimistic. NASA's own rough draft for a lunar base program entailed construction of a new launcher and higher costs than those projected in the General Dynamics proposal. (Space News, March 8-14/93)   	* NASA announced that a hydraulic hose that ruptured in Columbia's engine compartment during a launch-pad test had a manufacturing defect; the defect was also found in nine other lines in the Shuttle. The problem  delayed Columbia's German Spacelab mission, scheduled for March, by at least five days. (AP, Mar 8/93)	* Clinton Administration officials said that the fate of the U.S. Space Station depended on finding a new design that would not absorb NASA's entire budget. Dr. John H. Gibbons, head of the Office of Science and Technology Policy in the White House, said that the Administration had ordered the redesign after it discovered that the rising costs of the project threatened all the other civilian space and aeronautics research programs. (AP, Mar 8/93, Mar 9/93; W Times, Mar 9/93; USA Today, Mar 9/93; AvWk, Mar 8/93)	* Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that Lockheed was leading a six-member industry team in an effort to develop an unsolicited National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) proposal for the Air Force. The team was to recommend scrapping the NASP in favor of a much lighter hypersonic research vehicle called NORA, for National Orbital Research Aircraft. NORA's $5 billion price tag was far less than the $10-15 billion slated for the NASP. (AvWk, Mar 8/93) March 9: The Washington Post reported that Sally K. Ride's name kept coming up as a possible candidate to run NASA but that Ride had apparently said that she was not interested in the job. (W Post, Mar 9/93)	* NASA awarded the Arlington, Virginia-based Analytic Services Inc. a one-year grant to help study opportunities for cooperation among nations with space programs. (W Times, Mar 9/93) 	* Two Russia cosmonauts training for a U.S. Shuttle flight said that they were eager to try out America's spaceship. The two cosmonauts had two and one-half years of space experience between them. (AP, Mar 9/93; W Times, Mar 10/93)March 11: NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a number  of organizational changes in the agency. He named John R. Dailey to be Acting Deputy Administrator and said that Dr. Joseph Shea, recently named as Assistant Deputy Administrator for Space Station Analysis, would have oversight over all Space Station related development activities. 	Goldin also reorganized the agency's science divisions: Harry C. Holloway, deputy dean of the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences in Bethesda, Maryland, was scheduled to become NASA associate administrator of the new Life and Microgravity Science office. Assisting him was to be Bonnie J. Dunbar, a NASA astronaut, who has a doctorate in biomedical engineering. Others named included Deidra A. Lee, appointed associate administrator for procurement. (NASA Release 93-044; W Post, Mar 15/93; Space News, March 16-21)	* The first flight of NASA's Small Expendable-tether Deployer System (SEDS) was scheduled to be launched aboard a U.S. Air Force Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, no earlier than March 18. The SEDS tether system would be a secondary payload on the Delta 2 launch vehicle. (NASA Advisory, Mar 11/93)	* NASA announced that the Galileo spacecraft's main antenna remained jammed following an increase in the spacecraft's spin rate, a maneuver that was executed as a test for a future mission but also had a possibility of releasing the stuck antenna. NASA gave up any real hope of fixing the problem in January after hitting the stuck antenna dish 13,320 times with motors that were designed to open the device.	The jammed antenna was expected to hamper the ship's $1.4 billion mission to Jupiter because the spacecraft would have to use a much small antenna dish to transmit data. NASA said it expected to accomplish 70 percent of the mission's scientific goals. (AP, Mar 11/93)  	* Officials at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, announced that an SR-71 Blackbird reconnaissance aircraft, once used as a spy plane, took off this week on its maiden science flight. The plane was equipped with an ultra-violet camera to study stars and comets.	The plane, one of six planes decommissioned by the Air Force two years ago and turned over to NASA, was operated by NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility and was expected to be flown an average of once a month for the rest of the year. (NASA Release 93-071; RTw, Mar 11/93;AP, Mar 22/93; Antelope Valley Press, Mar 13/93)  March 12: Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, announced that following a White House directive, NASA had begun a redesign of the proposed Space Station to make it simpler, smaller, easier to build, and cheaper to operate. The redesign team planned to present three proposed models to the Clinton Administration by June 1. Goldin said that the agency would make maximum use of the $8.5-billion worth of work that had gone into designing and planning the Space Station since the mid-198s. (NY Times, Mar 12/93; W Times, Mar 12/93; LA Times, Mar 12/93; B Sun, Mar 12/93; AP, Mar 11/93, Mar 12/93; WSJ, Mar 12/93; Space News, Mar 15-21; AvWk, Mar 15/93; H Post, Mar 8/93, Mar 12/93)	* Henry Knight Bradford, 88, a retired engineer with NASA's Goddard Flight Center, died March 10 in California. He had Parkinson's disease. Mr. Bradford joined NASA in 1960; he retired in 1972. (W Post, Mar 12/93)March 13: NASA announced a March 21 launch date for Columbia's German spacelab mission. The launch was delayed twice because of mechanical problems with the Shuttle. (P Inq, Mar 13/93; W Post, Mar 14/93; UPI, Mar 12/93, Mar 13/93; RTw, Mar 12/93)March 14: According to a report in Reuters, the Arianespace consortium continued to be the world leader in number of commercial satellite launches. Ariane filled the void when NASA stopped launching commercial payloads after the Space Shuttle Challenger exploded in January 1986. U.S. launchers, especially the General Dynamics Atlas series, which has the capacity to launch large payloads, were fighting for each launch contract. (RTw, Mar 14/93)March 15: Researchers writing in the current issue of the journal Nature announced that they had detected a guitar-shaped nebula attached to the fastest known star in the galaxy; the star is at the tip of the neck of the "guitar." The speed of the star, a pulsar, which scientists calculated travelled at least 500 miles per second through the Milky Way galaxy, created a "bow-shock" wave in the rarified gas of outerspace. The shock wave heated the gas it encountered and made it give off energy, now appearing as the outline of the star's wake. The wake was detectable only with the world's most powerful telescope, according to Cornell University astronomer James M. Cordes. (W Post, Mar 15/93; Time, Mar 22/93)       	* Speaking to a meeting of the American Astronautical Society, Representative Alan Mollohan warned that unless NASA could prove it contributed to U.S. economic competitiveness, politicians would view it as a "Cold War anachronism." According to an article in Space News, Mollohan's comments reflected the view of both the White House and members of Congress. The message: change or become irrelevant. (Space News, March 15-21)	* Europe, Japan, and Canada--the United States's partners in the Space Station project--rejected NASA's move to redesign the project. They instead demanded that the team begin by considering revisions to the current plan. They warned that they might be forced to pull out of the program if the United States changed the plan significantly. (Space News, March 15-21/93)	* According to Space News, in a March l0 letter to Vice President Gore, Senator Howell Heflin, D-Alabama, argued against canceling the Advanced Solid Rocket Mojtor program. Heflin said he opposed a proposal to close the rocket motor plant in Iuka, Miss; those opposing the closing hoped that the plant eventually would be used to build a hybrid rocket motor for a National Launch Center. (Space News, March 15-21/93) 	* Representative George E. Brown Jr, chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, warned the Clinton Administration that ordering a redesign of the Space Station might doom not only the space station but also other international "big science" projects. He also sent a letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin cautioning him against abandoning the current design, which had cost $8 billion so far. (W Post, Mar 16/93)March 16: NASA announced that under a recently signed agreement NASA engineers and Learjet Inc. engineers, based in  Wichita, Kansas, would work on the development of a new high performance business jet. The engineers were to study aircraft size and aerodynamics to create the plane; they would use state-of-the-art supercomputers and wind tunnels at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 93-46; AP, Mar 15/93)	* NASA and the seven Central America nations began a program to study, preserve, and protect the  region's rain forest by expanding the use of satellite data by Central American scientists. Under an agreement with the Central American Commission for Environment and Development, NASA would train and provide equipment to scientists from all the Central American countries. By using data from the Advanced Very High-Resolution Radiometers flying aboard several U.S. weather satellites, the scientists would be able to estimate the amount and type of vegetation cover and forest cover in the region and to conduct costal studies. (NASA Release 93-47)March 16: NASA announced that NASA personnel had moved the Space Shuttle Discovery to the launch pad on Monday March 15. Discovery was scheduled to be launched in April on an atmospheric research mission. Meanwhile preflight work resumed on Columbia, which was scheduled to be launched in less than a week. (W Times, Mar 16/93; USA Today, Mar 16/93; AP, Mar 15/93)	* G. Joseph Minetti, 85, died of heart failure on March 13. He served on the Civil Aeronautics Board for 22 years, leading the panel during years of enormous expansion and change in the aviation industry. (W Post, Mar 16/93)	* The Clinton Administration announced that it had launched a complete review of U.S. policy toward cutting global-warming pollution, but had not yet abandoned the stance taken by the Bush Administration. (B Sun, Mar 16/93)    March 17: NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) were cooperating on an experiment that involved three spaceships "listening" for passing gravitational waves. The spacecraft, now travelling to separate destinations in the solar system, were  NASA's Mars Observer, Galileo, and the ERS's Ulysses spacecraft.	Such waves of gravity have never been directly detected, although their existence was predicted decades ago in Einstein's theory of relativity. The joint NASA-ESA experiment would be the first time three spacecraft would make observations simultaneously, thus greatly increasing the reliability of any detection. (NASA Release 93-38; AP, Mar 22/93)March 18: The Washington Post reported that a subcommittee of the House Administration Committee had approved the extension of the National Air and Space Museum at Dulles International Airport. The two bills were forwarded to the full committee. The legislation called for an appropriation of $8 million in fiscal year 1994 for the start-up of the air and space extension (W Post, Mar 18/93)	* A spokesman for Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California said that a pressure buildup ripped apart an experimental supergun designed to fire objects into space. The accident delayed a demonstration scheduled for this spring. Scientists hoped to use the gun, which is like an enormous air rifle, to shoot payloads into space at a fraction of the cost of sending them into orbit via a Space Shuttle. (AP, Mar 18/93; USA Today, Mar 18/93;  	* NASA announced that 14 astronauts who orbited the Earth during Project Gemini were installed in the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame. The new inductees were John E. Young, James A. McDivit, the late Edward H. White II, Charles Conrad Jr., Frank Borman, James A. Lovell, Thomas P. Stafford, Neil A. Armstrong, David R. Scott, Eugene A. Cernan, Michael Collins, Richard F. Gordon Jr, and Buzz Aldrin. (UPI, Mar 18/93, March 22/93; Reuters, March 22/93; AP, Mar 22/93; P Inq, Mar 21/93)	* Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Columbus were to be injected with a saline solution and wired with catheters during next week's research mission in an attempt to help doctors understand the effects of weightlessness on the body. The two German astronauts on board would also have catheters in their veins during the launch in order to measure blood pressure. 	 Eighty-eight experiments involving 200 scientists from around the world were planned during the nine-day German-sponsored research flight. All the science would be managed from a control center in Germany. NASA was scheduled to handle everything else. (AP, Mar 18/93; Reuters, Mar 17/93)	* NASA was scheduled to launch an unmanned Delta rocket with a military navigation satellite and NASA's tagalong tether experiment. The 12 1/2-mile tether, which is just three-hundredth of an inch thick--is wound around a spool. One end of the cord is tied to a 57-pound aluminum box. Everything is mounted on the rocket's second stage. NASA planned to pop the box off the spent booster an hour after the launch. As it shoots away, the box should cause the tether to unwind. Instruments on board would record the speed and tension of the tether and send the data to earth. (AP, Mar 18/93)	* NASA said that the Mars Observer spacecraft fired four of its 24 thrusters as a means of adjusting its course so it could begin orbiting Mars on August 24. This was the third correction maneuver since the spacecraft was launched September 25 from Cape Canaveral, Florida. (APn, Mar 18/93)	* In its annual report, NASA's Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel said that the Space Station had "progressed considerably in the past year." The report went on to say that the effort "exhibits a degree of stability and continuity that has previously been absent." (APn, Mar 18/93) March 19: NASA announced that Leonard Nicholson was leaving his position as Space Shuttle Program Manager to assume the position of Acting Director of Engineering at Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. Brewster Shaw, currently NASA's Deputy Shuttle Director, was scheduled to take over the duties formerly performed by Nicholson. (NASA Release 93-49; AP, Mar 22/93)	* NASA announced that the agency had selected GE Government Services, Houston, to begin final contract negotiations for the Science Payloads Development, Engineering and Operations Contract. (NASA Release C93-d)	* NASA announced that bad weather had forced the military to postpone launch of a rocket scheduled to unfurl a tether in space and that the delay had forced NASA to bump the launch of shuttle Columbia from Sunday to Monday. (RTw, Mar 19/93; AP, Mar 19/93; UPI, Mar 19/93; W Post, Mar 19/93)March 22: NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, and the Ohio Aerospace Institute were scheduled to host a conference in Cleveland, March 30 and 30, focusing on the new world of Cyberspace. The conference, called the Vision 21 Symposium on Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering in the Era of Cyberspace, would provide "a panoramic view of the research and technology that will assist humans in exploration activities," said Dr. Sheila Bailey, conference chairperson. (NASA Release 93-50)	* After a month of delays, NASA prepared for launch  of the Shuttle Columbia's German mission. Forecasters were predicting a 70 percent chance of favorable lift-off conditions. The flight would be Columbia's 14th in 12 years.	The Shuttle was to take two German physicists into orbit to perform low gravity experiments inside the cargo bay of the $1 billion research module spacelab. Five NASA astronauts were to accompany them on the nine-day flight. The German-sponsored research program touched a wide range of fields, from electronics and fluid physics to biology and astronomy. The astronauts also planned to test a robot arm mounted in the Spacelab module. (P Inq, Mar 22/93; W Times, Mar 22/93; UPI, Mar 22/93; Reuters, Mar 22/93; AP, Mar 22/93)  	* The Freedom Forum, a group that funds journalism programs, presented a $100,000 grant to the Mercury Seven Foundation to establish a lecture series about space. The series, which was intended to help improve public understanding of space issues, was to be held annually in Florida's Brevard County, the location of the Kennedy Space Center. (AP, Mar 22/93) 	The Air Force canceled its planned launch of a rocket with a navigation satellite and tether experiment because of problems with ground support equipment. A damper on the launch pad became stuck in the final minutes of Friday's countdown, causing rocket valves to freeze. Although workers fixed that problem, the temperature of the helium needed to pressurize the fuel tanks did not rise back up fast enough to permit the launch. (AP, Mar 22/93)	   	* NASA announced that it had banned news organizations from covering meetings about the redesign of Space Station Freedom. NASA said the meetings would be closed because they involved mainly NASA employees, not outside advisers. NASA has formal advisory committees, which meet openly in compliance with a 1972 law governing such meetings. (Space News, March 22-28/93)  	* A NASA safety panel reported that inspection of recovered Space Shuttle solid rocket motors had found traces of soot on O-rings and recommended a redesign of one of the motor's main joints. The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP) warned NASA on March 18 that the possibility of a problem was "sufficiently high" to warrant the joint's redesign. (Space News, Mar 22/93)	* According to a report in Space News, NASA and White House officials agreed last week to consider partner concerns about the Space Station design effort. The U.S. Government would give their European, Japanese, and Canadian partners greater representation in the project and ensure that any alternative design did not exclude their hardware. The agreement was laid out in a March 19 document. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)	* According to a report in Space News, senior NASA managers testified about cost increases in a March 17 hearing called by Representative Louis Stokes, D-Ohio, chairman of the House appropriations subcommittee that has NASA oversight. The subcommittee examined in detail six NASA projects that cost far more than the agency estimated originally: Advanced Solid Motor, Advanced Turbopump, Transfer Orbit Stage, Mars Observer, Space Station, and the Space Shuttle waste collection system.	Daniel S. Goldin promised the subcommittee that he would press forward with management reforms to battle the cost growth seen in many space agency projects. In return, the chairman of the committee signalled Congress' willingness to provide NASA with a lump cum covering several years--rather than just annual appropriations--to conduct some space science efforts. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93; AvWk, Mar 22/93)	* According to Space News, seven months after a NASA-appointed Management Review Team reported that lax security had created a high risk of espionage at the Ames Research Center in Northern California further investigations by the FBI and NASA's inspector general had not substantiated those charge. In the meantime, however, Ames had implemented many of the team's recommendations. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)	Space News reported that Congressional lawmakers who supported NASA's Space Station were attempting to stop the White House from scaling back the program. Democrats appeared to be seeking a compromise while Republicans were threatening a public fight. (Space News, Mar 22-28; AvWk, Mar 22/93) 	       	* NASA reported that the launch of Space Shuttle Columbia had been halted three seconds before liftoff because of a main engine failure caused by a malfunctioning engine valve. When the Shuttle's computers detected a faulty valve, the safety system shut down the Shuttle's main engines. Officials stressed that the crew on the $1 billion German-charted research mission was never in any danger because of the aborted liftoff. Repairs were expected to take about three weeks. The shutdown was the third launch pad abort in Shuttle program history. (Reuters, Mar 22/93, Mar 23/93; AP, Mar 22/93; UPI, Mar 22/93; B Sun, Mar 23/93; P Inq, Mar 23/93; CSM, Mar 23/93; NY Times, Mar 23/93; USA Today, Mar 23/93; W Post, Mar 23/93; W Times, Mar 23/93; WSJ, Mar 23/93) 	* In a Space News interview, John Gibbons, director of the Office of Science and Technology, defended the White House decision to require NASA to redesign the Space Station; he also  said that he did not think that space would have a lower priority in the Clinton Administration as a result of the space council's being folded into the Office of Science and Technology. Among other topics, the interview touched on whether NASA would handle commercial and military, as well as civilian, space issues; how space issues would be coordinated among federal agencies; Earth observation programs; and the function of a Space Station. (Space News, Mar 22-28/93)	* An article in Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that Europe was about to decide how to parcel out $1.5 billion in new science and exploration space missions. Roger Bonnet, director of science at the European Space Agency (ESA), was reported as saying that ESA would focus on "all European" programs in order to distance itself from the troubles and uncertainties of space cooperation with the U.S. He noted, "We will now study missions in the context of a European framework to be sure we can handle them in ESA, then define cooperation afterward." 	The biggest European decision would focus on development of a $600- 700-million infrared telescope that could detect the most primitive matter in the universe and Project Rosetta, an $800-million mission that would be the first to sample the surface of a comet. (AvWk, Mar 22/93)	 March 24: NASA announced that the most recent findings by the Pioneer Venus Orbiter spacecraft strongly suggested that planet Venus once had three and a half times more water than thought earlier--enough water to cover the entire surface between 25 and 75 feet deep. The findings supported the possibility of the presence of lightning on Venus and discoveries about the ionosphere and top of the atmosphere of Venus. Venus, considered Earth's twin planet, today is very dry and hot. (NASA Release 93-51)	* NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz as the Deputy Associate Administrator for the agency's new office of Space Science, effective immediately. During his career at NASA, Diaz served as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, managed the Galileo and Ulysses programs in the Solar System Exploration Division, and developed space science programs for Space Station Freedom. (NASA Release 93-53)	* Scientists reported that a periodic comet named Swift-Tuttle might hit Earth on August 14, 2126. Later calculations suggested that Swift-Tuttle would not be a threat on that date but would be a definite threat in 3044. (Smithsonian Magazine, March/93)	* The Washington Post reported that Maxime Faget, chairman and founder of Space International Inc., had resigned from his position as consultant to the Space Shuttle redesign team. Some NASA employees questioned Faget's objectivity because his company had earlier proposed its own alternative Space Station and design and because the company would likely bid on any new design proposal. Faget's resignation "was determined by both NASA and Space Industries as necessary." (W Post, Mar 24/93)	* NASA unveiled a $300 million radar system that can take color pictures of Earth's damaged environment from a Space Shuttle. According to NASA project scientist Diane Evans, "In many case, radar is the only way scientists can explore unaccessible regions on Earth's surface." The camera was scheduled to fly on the Shuttle three times, in 1994, 1995, and 1996. NASA and the German and Italian space agencies cooperated on the project. NASA paid half the cost. (AP, May 14/93)	* NASA removed scientific samples and volatile fuels from the Space Shuttle Columbia on Tuesday. The Shuttle was grounded for at least three weeks because of an engine shutdown that had occurred three seconds before liftoff. (AP, Mar 24/93; UPI, Mar 24/93)March 25: NASA announced that the Langley Research Center, Hampton, Virginia, would lead a multi-year research program effort to develop technology for a future high-speed civil transport. According to Louis Williams, Director of the High-Speed Research Division, NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., "The program is laying a technical foundation for an environmentally compatible, economically practical commercial transport that could contribute up to 140,000 jobs and $200 billion to the national economy in the next century." (NASA Release 93-52; Daily Press, May 24/93)	* NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the activities of the Office of Exploration would be absorbed by the Office of Space Science, effective immediately. (NASA Release: 93-54)March 29: Federal Computer Week recognized three NASA employees for their work in procurement. Don Lovall, Chief, Technical and Information Systems, Design engineering Directorate at the NASA Kennedy Space Center, was recognized, together with his team, for awarding the Personal Computer Acquisition Contract (PCACP), an innovative contracting vehicle and NASA's First consolidated microcomputer buy. PCAC was unusual because it fostered competition among three chosen vendors throughout its five-year life. Skip Kemere, ADP Procurement Branch Chief, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, was also recognized. He devised NASA's winning strategy in the SEWP BOWL, its first agency wide buying vehicle for high-powered work stations. Darleen A. Druyun, Associate Administrator for Procurement at NASA, was recognized for her action on the awarding of NASA's Earth Observing System Data and Information System core contract. Instead of accepting low-ball bids from major firms, she sent the bids back to the bidders and asked that they be adjusted--upward--to reflect more realistic costs. (Federal Computer Week, Mar 29/93)March 30: NASA announced that it had awarded a contract to Hughes Applied Information System. Inc., Seabrook, Maryland, to design, develop, integrate, maintain, and operate the NASA Earth Observing System Data and Information System (EOSDIS) Core System. The system would support the acquisition, processing, archiving, and distribution of data from U.S. Earth-observing spacecraft. NASA estimated that thousands of scientists around the world would eventually study and analyze data provided by the new system. (NASA Release 93-56; W Post, Apr 1/93)	* NASA announced that the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and California wine growers would use aerial and satellite images to battle an insect problem encountered by California's wine industry. Sensitive electronic scanners on aircraft and satellites would help a group from government, industry, and several universities map and analyze root louse damage in northern California's wine growing region this summer. (NASA Release 93-55; UPI, Mar 31/93; SF Chron, Mar 31/93; P Inq, May 2/93)	* A Delta 2 rocket successfully ejected a television-size satellite on 12 and 1/2 miles of cord. The experiment demonstrated that tethers could be used to deploy small payloads in space, NASA said. The tether, which was thin as a kite string, dangled the 57-pound box for 90 minutes at an altitude of 450 feet. (W Post, Mar 31/93; NY Times, Mar 31/93; P Inq, Mar 31/93)	* NASA announced that the Space Shuttle Discovery would be sent on its eight-day atmospheric research mission next week, pushing Columbia's German-sponsored science flight into late April. The Columbia was scheduled for launch April 24. (UPI, Mar 30/93; W Post, Mar 31/93; RTw, Mar 31/93)AprilApril 1: NASA announced that findings by scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, challenge the theories of how galaxies evolve. The  U.S. team included a scientist from the Max Planck Institute, Heidelberg, Germany.  	Scientists observed huge amounts of microscopic diamonds in star-forming clouds in the Milky Way galaxy. They also observed softer hydrocarbons in the thin space between clouds. The observations of these two independent and very different types of interstellar hydrocarbon dust suggest that the materials are not mixing as generally assumed. Lou Allamandola, head of the science observation team, said that the "team's observations support the  theory that meteoritic diamonds form in many regions of space, either in carbon star atmospheres or as the result of carbon grains colliding at high speeds in interstellar space." (NASA Release 93-58; Time, Apr 12/93; UPI, Apr 12/93; AP, Apr 4/12) 	* NASA named representatives from government and industry and academic experts from across the country to take part in an independent review of NASA's Space shuttle redesign options. A total of 16 individuals were invited to serve on the committee. Charles M. Vest had previously been named by Vice President Albert Gore to head the Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station. The Advisory Committee was to submit its recommendations in June. (NASA Release 93-59)	* NASA announced that April marked the 10th anniversary of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), a space-based network developed to meet telecommunications needs of Space Shuttle, Space Station, and other low Earth-orbiting spacecraft missions. The TDRSS is equipped to support up to 24 user spacecraft, including the Space Shuttle, simultaneously. (NASA Release 93-60)	  	* NASA spokeswoman June Malone said a broken pin was responsible for a leaky engine valve removed from Space Shuttle Discovery, scheduled to lift off on an atmospheric research mission next week. The alignment pin broke while technicians were removing plumbing from around the valve for leak tests ordered after the March 22 main engine shutdown of Columbia. (AP, Apr 1/93)April 2: NASA and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) announced that Sergei K. Krikalev would be the prime mission specialist and Vladimir G. Titoyov the backup mission specialist on the STS-60 mission currently scheduled for launch in November 1993. The two cosmonauts had been in mission specialist training at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, since early November 1992. (NASA Release 93-61)	* NASA and the Russian Space Agency (RSA) announced that they had signed a contract to fly two U.S. Mars Oxident Experiment (MOX) instruments on the Russian Mars '94 Mission. The contract had a potential value of $1.5 million. The Mars '94 Mission, scheduled to be launched in November 1994, would deploy small landing stations and penetrators and carry instruments to study the surface and atmosphere of Mars. (NASA Release 93-62)April 3: The Itar-Tass news agency reported that the United States and Russia planned a joint mission to Mars in October of 1994. According to the report, the Russian Space Agency and NASA signed an agreement on the Mars-94 project late last year. Scientific equipment on board a Russian space craft would include two small landers with probes for analyzing the Martian surface and atmosphere. The oxidization capability of the Martian soil would also be measured, Tass said. (RTw, Apr 4/93) 	* The Space Shuttle Discovery, with five astronauts on board, was scheduled to lift off at 1:32 a.m. April 6 to study the condition of the Earth's ozone layer and sample 30 to 40 other gases. Three instruments in the Shuttle cargo bay would measure ozone, and four others would probe solar energy. A nighttime launch was necessary to put Discovery on the desired course for observing sunrises in the Northern Hemisphere. Meteorologists predicted an 80 percent chance of good weather. (W Post, Apr 5/93, Apr 6/93; W Times, Apr 5/93; LA Times, Apr 5/93; NY Times, Apr 4/93; AP, Apr 5/93; UPn, Apr 3/93; RTw, Apr 3/97)  	* Astronaut Ellen Ochoa, scheduled to be aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery when it was launched in April, would be the first Hispanic female to fly in space. Ochoa, an expert with the shuttle's 50-foot-long robot arm, was scheduled to deploy and retrieve a $6 million spacecraft while on the mission. (FL Today, Apr 3/93)April 4: According to an article in the Washington Times, scientists from NASA and the National Science Foundation were using the Antarctica as a model for Mars in the Antarctic Space Analog Program. The program used the harsh Antarctica terrain to test technology and techniques that might work on Mars. Sophisticated robots, already being used in Antarctica, would pave the way for human exploration of Mars. A spaceflight may carry a small robot to Mars as early as 1997. (W Times, Apr 4/93)April 5: NASA reported that the new joint U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon satellite  had observed giant waves measuring up to 40 feet high in the North Atlantic on March 14. The satellite's mission was "to study the dynamics of the currents of the world's oceans by measuring the sea level using a radar altimeter." (W Post, Apr 5/93)April 6: NASA announced that NASA scientists had direct evidence that red supergiants--the largest stars known--end their existence in massive explosions known as supernovae. Until this week, astronomers could only speculate that these explosions represented the death of such stars. NASA's international Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE) satellite obtained the new evidence through observations of a new supernova on March 30. (NASA Release 93-63)	* John H. Gibbons, Director, Office of Science and Technology Policy, outlined to the members-designate of the Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station, three budget options. The three options are a low option of $5 billion, a mid-range option of $7 billion, and a high option of $9 billion. Each option would cover the total expenditures for the Space Station from fiscal year 1994 through 1988. (NASA Release 93-64)	* Bryan O'Connor, a former astronaut and deputy director of the redesign team and deputy associate administrator of the office of space flight at NASA, said that NASA engineers planned to have three new design options ready by June. O'Connor said that two plans could cut the cost of the project by 50 percent or more. The third plan, which would be based on the current Space Station Freedom concept, would cost more. Whether the redesign effort could be done quickly and cheaply was still in doubt, O'Connor said. (AP, Apr 6/93; W Post, Apr 6/93)	* The Wall Street Journal reported that NASA's Langely Research Center in Virginia was searching for an easy-listeningsonic boom. The search was a key part of early U.S. research efforts to design a new airliner to fly twice as fast as sound.	Sitting inside a foam-lined cinder-block box the size of a toddler's playhouse, more than 30 volunteers were being paid $30 for the afternoon to judge how "annoying" different sonic booms were compared to other aircraft noise. If researchers can solve the sonic boom problem, the economic rewards could be significant. (WS Journal, Apr 6/93)	* An article in the journal Nature reported that when the European-American spacecraft Ulysses flew by Jupiter in February 1992, it detected puffs of planetary dust coming from the planet. Six times an instrument on Ulysses recorded bursts of tiny dust grains striking the craft, coming at intervals of about 28 days. The same spacecraft also discovered dust grains from beyond the solar system in the environs of Jupiter. (NY Times, Apr 6/93)	* An article in the Washington Post discussed the failed launch of the 14-story Atlas-Centaur rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida on March 25. The rocket partially lost power 24 seconds after liftoff and sent its military communications satellite into a useless orbit. This was the third problem-filled General Dynamics launch in two years. Future launches were placed on hold until completion of investigation of the failed launch. (W Post, Apr 6/93)	* The launch of Space Shuttle Discovery's eight-day scientific mission, scheduled for 2:32 a.m. April 6 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, was aborted 11 seconds before liftoff when computers detected a problem. It was the second aborted launch in two weeks for the Shuttle program. The previous launch, involving the Shuttle Columbia, was halted three seconds from liftoff on March 22.	The likely cause of the shutdown was a computer circuit problem. Computer data indicated a valve had not closed in Discovery's main propulsion system, raising the danger of a hydrogen fuel spill and a possible explosion. Engineers, however, believed that the valve had closed properly and that a faulty sensor switch or broken wire prevented that information from being received by the on-board computers. NASA hoped to launch Discovery on April 8. (AP, Apr 6/93, Apr 7/93; UPn, Apr 4/93; W Post, Apr 7/93; NY Times, Apr 7/93; W Times, Apr 7/93; B Sun, Apr 7/93; UPI, Apr 7/93)	* John H. Gibbons, director of the White Office of Science and Technology Policy, said that the United States and its international space station partners--Europeans, Canadians, and Japanese--have agreed to give "full consideration" to use of Russian space technology and experience in the redesign of the American Space Station Freedom. Gibbons said that Russian help would be requested "on an as-needed consulting basis" if NASA found that Russian expertise and equipment could save money for the United States. Russia had been operating the Space Station Mir for more than a decade. (W Post, Apr 7/93, Apr 13/93; NY Times, Apr 7/93, Apr 8/93, Apr 11/93, Apr 13/93; LA Times, Apr 7/93; AP, Apr 6/93; Reuters, Apr 6/93; CSM, Apr 8/93; RTw, Apr 11/93; P Inq, Apr 13/93; B Sun, Apr 13/93)	* The New York Times reported that a new exploding star, or supernova, was discovered on March 28 by an amateur astronomer in Spain. The new supernova lies about 12 million light years from the Earth. Describing the supernova, Dr. Alex Fillipenko of the University of California at Berkeley, said, "This is the brightest supernova explosion the Northern Hemisphere has seen since 1937."  Scientists hoped that the star would provide more clues to the universe. (NY Times, Apr 7/93; W Post, Apr 12/93; AP, Apr 5/93, Apr 13/93; RT, Apr 12/93; APn, May 5/93)April 8: In a speech delivered April 2 at the annual conference in Washington of the National Association for Equal Opportunity in Higher Education, Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, outlined what NASA was doing to emphasize cultural diversity within the organization.	 In the address, Goldin announced a plan to double support for Historically Black Colleges and Universities. He also said that the agency had set a goal of awarding at least 8 percent of its contracts to small and disadvantaged women-owned businesses by 1994, that the agency had established a $310 million set-aside for high tech work by small and disadvantaged firms, and that the agency would sponsor 27 conferences for small and disadvantaged businesses in 22 cities this year. In addition, he outlined agency incentives for the space industry to exceed small and disadvantaged business subcontracting goals. (NASA Editor's Note N93-19) 	* NASA announced details of regional meetings planned for April under the auspices of the White House Technology Reinvestment Project. NASA was scheduled to collaborate with other government agencies in a $471 million interagency effort to develop dual-use technologies and to help small defense firms make the transition to commercial manufacturing projects. (NASA Release 93-65)	*  NASA awarded the Applied Research Corporation, a Landover, Maryland, high-tech firm, a one-year, $95,401 contract to study archival ultraviolet and infrared data. (W Times, Apr 8/93)	* Scientists at a Global Warming Conference warned that global warming might unleash a variety of deadly diseases on the world population. The scientists said that outbreaks of malaria, cholera, diseases born by various parasites, dengue and yellow fever, and other potential epidemics were likely to become more common if the burning of fossil fuels enhanced the greenhouse effect and heated the Earth. (B Sun, Apr 8/93)      	 	* Shuttle Discovery lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 1:29 a.m., ET, on an eight-day mission to study Earth's endangered ozone layer. Thursday's liftoff followed an earlier aborted launch. According to reports, the Shuttle, which carried a crew of five, lit up the night like a huge blowtorch as it rocketed into orbit. (AP, April 4/93; RT, Apr 8/93; RTw, Apr 4/93; UPI, Apr 4/93; USA Today, Apr 8/93; W Post, Apr 8/93; B Sun, Apr 8/93)	* Shuttle astronaut Mae Jemison was scheduled to make a guest appearance on a "Star Trek: The Next Generation" episode during the week of May 31. Very much in demand as a speaker when she was with NASA, Jemison also has had a school named after her in Detroit. (Ap, Apr 4/93, Apr 19/93, May 24/93, May 26/93)April 9: NASA announced that the Clementine mission to orbit the moon and to visit an asteroid would be headed by Dr. Eugene Shoemaker of the U.S. Geologic Survey, Flagstaff, Arizona. Clementine, sponsored by the Strategic Defense Initiative Office (SDIO), was scheduled to launch a small spacecraft in January 1994 to orbit the moon for several months. The mission would test new, lightweight sensors in a space radiation environment and demonstrate autonomous navigation and spacecraft operation. (NASA Release 93-66)	* NASA said that two ozone monitors aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery were having difficulty sending measurements to ground controllers. Two monitors--one German and the other American--had trouble sending measurements to the ground. The U.S. monitor, which was supposed to supply most of the atmospheric research data, was also in danger of losing information. Timothy Miller, mission scientist for NASA, said a backup recorder for the U.S. ozone instrument could hold just over half the amount of data sought. Nasa ground controllers were attempting to solve the problem. (B Sun, Apr 9/93; NY Times, Apr 9/93; USA Today, Apr 9/93; W Post, Apr 9/93; UPI, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 9/93)    	* Speaking at a news conference, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA intended to close an office in charge of planning American voyages to the moon and Mars and to shift research to airplanes. The agency was also dropping work on a huge new launch vehicle and turning to simpler, less expensive communications satellites. Golden said the agency was merely "taking a pause" in its pursuit of earlier space exploration goals. (W Times, Apr 9/93; AP, Apr 4/93; C Trib, Apr 11/93; LA Times, Apr 9/93)	* The White House provided more details on President Clinton's plans to shift spending from defense to domestic "investment" priorities. The 1994 NASA budget request moved the agency away from big space flight projects involving humans toward development of new technologies with potential for practical use on the ground. The agency's total budget would go to $15.27 billion, an increase of almost $1 billion. Most of the increase would be spent on aeronautics and other technologies, for example, development of a fleet of high speed planes for public transport and high speed computing. (W Post, Apr 9/93)April 11: Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts released a spacecraft that was to study the solar wind and the sun's corona. The spacecraft would be picked up by Discovery after two days. 	  		Using the Space Shuttle's robot arm, astronauts Ellen Ochoa lifted the $6 million Spartan satellite, which is about the size of a large air-conditioning unit, from its position in Discovery's cargo bay and threw it into space.	Spartan carried two telescopes that would study the Sun's halo: a white-light coronagraph to examine electrons and an ultraviolet spectrometer that would study protons and hydrogen atoms. The spacecraft was to investigate how the solar wind is generated in the Sun's corona. The wind frequently disrupts navigation, communication, and electrical systems on Earth.	Another highlight of the Discovery mission occurred when Discovery astronaut Michael Foale chatted by ham radio with a crew member on the Russian Space Station Mir. The contact was the first ship-to-ship conversation in the Shuttle program.	Meanwhile, a data relay problem affecting one of the main ozone monitoring instruments on board Discovery was solved, and monitor readings were successfully sent, although at a much slower rate. Flight director John Muratore said such transmissions could free the recorder's tape and allow scientists to obtain all their required data. (AP, Apr 11/93; RTw, Apr 11/93; NY Times, Apr 12/93; USA Today, Apr 12/93; W Times, Apr 11/93; P Inq, Apr 11/93, Apr 12/93; W Post, Apr 12/93)  	    April 13: Scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and the California Institute of Technology announced that they had developed a computer software system to catalog and analyze the estimated half billion sky objects in the second Palomar Observatory sky survey. (NASA Release 93-067)	* NASA scientists reported that ozone-destroying forms of chlorine had  existed for much longer in the Arctic stratosphere this winter than last. Northern Hemisphere ozone abundance also was observed to be some 10 percent below that measured during the same period last year, with some areas 20 percent lower. NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) provided the information. (NASA Release 93-068; NY Times, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 14/93)	* NASA reported that Space Shuttle Discovery's astronauts had retrieved the $6 million satellite, called the Spartan, that they had released into space two days previously. When the Shuttle came to within 35 of the satellite, astronaut Ellen Ochoa grabbed it with the arm of the Space Shuttle's robot and placed it in its cradle in the Shuttle bay. The Spartan spent about 50 hours as a free-flying satellite with two automated telescopes gathering data about the sun and the solar wind streaming from it. (AP, Apr 13/93; RT, Apr 13/93; NY Times, Apr 13/93; W Times, Apr 13/93, Apr 14/93; W Post, Apr 14/93; B Sun, Apr 14/93; P Inq, Apr 14/93; UPI, Apr 13/93; RT, Apr 13/93; USA Today, Apr 13/93, Apr 14/93, Apr 15/93; C Trib, Apr 15/93)	* Scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (M.I.T.) reported that a powerful new x-ray camera had been shot into orbit just in time to focus on the newly discovered supernova. The scientists reported that the camera was providing very detailed information about the cosmic explosion. The M.I.T. camera was one of several Japanese and American instruments put into orbit aboard a Japanese spacecraft launched on February 20. (NY Times, Apr 13/93)	* Martin Marietta Corporation reported that its Martin Marietta Astronautics Group had received a $35 million contract from NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory to build the propulsion module subsystem for NASA's Cassini spacecraft mission that was to study Saturn, its moon Titan, and the rest of the Saturnian system. The Cassini was scheduled for launch in October 1997. (W Times, Apr 13/93) April 14: A leading astrophysicist, Dr. George F. Smoot of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in California, reported in a lecture at the Carnegie Institution of Washington that radio receivers in space and on the ground might be recording the passage of cosmic gravity waves, huge movements of space that echo the expansion of the universe 15 billion years ago. If he is correct, scientists would have a powerful new tool for studying the birth of the universe. (NY Times, Apr 14/93)       	* The head of the Japanese space agency's office of space utilization said that Japan was unhappy with cutbacks to the Space Station Freedom project. Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa may bring up the issue at a meeting with President Clinton, scheduled to be held in Washington this week. (LA Times, Apr 14/93)	    	* Space Marketing Inc. of Rosell, Georgia, planned to launch the first space billboard in 1996. The orbital advertising sign was being produced in collaboration with engineers at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and the University of Colorado. The project triggered angry reactions from scientists and environmentalists. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 14/93; W Times, Apr 15/93; NY Times, May 4/93) April 15: NASA announced that Nasa technology developed to keep astronauts cool on the lunar surface and a NASA patient-monitoring device, originally designed for astronaut heart rate transmittal, were scheduled to be inducted into the U.S. Space Foundation's Technology Hall of Fame on April 16. (NASA Release 93-069)	* The Washington Post reported the White House was seeking to quell expectation about U.S. and Russian cooperation on Space Station Freedom. In an April 13 letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, White House science advisor John H. Gibbons stated that the "White House has made no policy decision to focus our Space Station redesign effort around present or future Russian capabilities."  He went on to say that "NASA should not limit its redesign options to those compatible with the orbit of the Russian Mir Space Station." (W Post, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 15/93)	* According to a report in the Baltimore Sun, Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off with a pair of pliers stuck on a rocket booster. Officials said the pliers posed no danger during liftoff, but the incident was getting much attention in management circles. A Kennedy space center spokeswoman said that the pliers were noted missing in a daily tool inventory at Discovery's launch pad on April 2 but that a proper lost-and-found report, which would have prompted a search, was not filed. Nasa was also investigating how a foot-long metal scrap that could have set off an explosion became lodged in one of four launch-pad posts that held up one of Shuttle Discovery's rocket boosters. (B Sun, Apr 15/93; AP, Apr 15/93)    	Writing in the Los Angles Times, columnist Michael Schrage noted that "the Space Age is dead." An article in the Washington Post seemed to arrive at the same conclusion. A space analyst noted that "the technologies no longer define our times, and the public has grown weary of multibillion-dollar celestial investments that yield minimal psychic or economic rewards." Other commentators agreed that space as something special--as something that "embodies American values and self-image"--was dead. The emphasis was on programs that were fast, cheap, and cost-effective. (LA Times, Apr 15/93; W Post, Apr 19/93)    			* The Washington Post reported that ozone layer problem appeared to be on the way to a solution. Thanks to the Montreal Protocol, an international treaty obligating signatory countries to phase our ozone-destroying chemicals, scientists expected the threat of ozone destruction to peak in 2000. In that year, according to the latest scientific projections, the ozone layer should start slowly getting thicker and better able to block the sun's harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays. (W Post, Apr 15/93) April 16: In a speech to the National Space Symposium, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin pledged to make the space program relevant to all Americans. He said he wanted everything smaller, faster, cheaper, and more varied. And he wanted to take more risks. 	Commenting about the Space Station project, Goldin said that he wanted one that would cost half as much to develop and half as much to operate but would do more. He also urged the United States to enter into an international partnership with the Russians to put Freedom Space Station into orbit. (Gazette Telegraph, Apr 16/93; Denver Post, Apr 17/93)  	* A fighter plane shaped like an arrowhead flew into NASA's Langley Research Center this week. The plane, a heavily modified version of the Air Force F-16 fighter, has a wing that is narrow near the front of the plane and flares out near the tail. The plane was part of a program to build an efficient supersonic jetliner. (Daily Press, Apr 16/93) April 17: The Shuttle Discovery landed at the Kennedy Space Center after a day's delay caused by stormy weather. Brewster Shaw, deputy Space Shuttle program manager," pronounced the mission "very successful." The landing cleared the way for launch preparations for Shuttle Columbia's second launch attempt, scheduled for April 14, just seven days after the Discovery landing. This was shortest time between manned missions in the history of American space travel. Columbia's first launch attempt was aborted by an engine shutdown on March 22. Columbia was to carry scientific experiments sponsored by Germany. (RTw, Apr 17/93; Ap, April 17/93; UPI, Apr 4/17; W Post, Apr 18/93; NY Times, Apr 18/93; P Inq, Apr 18/93; USA Today, Apr 18/93; Reuters, Apr 22/93)	* Brain Marsden, the director of the Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams, an agency in Massachusetts that reports on discoveries in astronomy, announced that a big comet had broken into at least 20 chunks and were now orbiting Jupiter. Astronomers said the situation was reminiscent of the catastrophe that occurred 65 million years ago when the Earth was bombarded with debris from a heavenly body. It was that bombardment, they maintain, that destroyed the dinosaurs and many other species. Calculations show that the original comet probably broke up under the force of Jupiter's gravity last May when it apparently was within 659,000 miles of the planet. (NY Times, Apr 17/93, June 1/93)April 18: Writing in the New York Times, Robert L. Park, professor of physics at the University of Maryland, suggested that now that the Cold War was over and there was no longer any need to demonstrate U.S. space superiority over the Soviet Union, the time had come to "put Space Station Freedom out of its misery." Parks noted that there was very little one could do in a Space Station; he added that the scientific accomplishments of the Russian cosmonauts in Russian Space Station Mir had been meager and that there was little expectation that U.S. astronauts would do any better. He noted, further, that the costs connected with the station were enormous. (NY Times, Apr 18/93)April 19: The new Keck Telescope in Hawaii, the world's largest optical and infrared telescope, revealed unprecedented detail in an image of the farthest known galaxy in the universe. The image showed a galaxy in the constellation Lynx, near the Big Dipper, that was thought to be 12 billion light-years away. (W Post, Apr 19/93; B Sun, Apr 18/93)     	* The New York Times reported that a dispute had broken out in the Clinton Administration over Vice President Al Gore's attempts to convince President Clinton to fulfill a campaign pledge to reduce the threat of global warming. Gore urged	the President to commit the United States to freezing at 1990 levels the amount of global-warming pollution stemming from cars, trucks, and factories; the standard would be reached by 2000. Other Administration officials, principally Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen and Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary, contended that the Administration had not adequately studied how such a mandate would affect American industry. (NY Times, Apr 19/93)  		* Russian officials announced that two Russian cosmonauts had taken a space walk to rearrange solar panels on the outside of the Mir Space Station in order to increase the panels' efficiency. The rearrangement also would prepare the Mir for an eventual docking by the U.S. Space Shuttle. The cosmonauts encountered several problems during the walk and had to stay outside their capsule longer than planned. (AP, Apr 4/19, Apr 4/20; RTw, Apr 20/93; USA Today, Apr 20/93)	* NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Jeff Lawrence, a senior congressional staff aide with experience in space and aeronautics matters, as the agency's Associate Administrator for Legislative Affairs. (NASA Release 93-70; W Post, Apr 21/93)April 21: According to news reports, Russia was scheduled to launch an Israeli-made communications satellite in 1995. This was the first such agreement between the two countries. (AP, Apr 21/93)	* Russian experts were expected to arrive in Washington this week to act as consultants to the U.S. Space Station redesign team. NASA selected the East-West Space Science Center at the University of Maryland to coordinate the effort under the direction of Dr. Roald Sagdeev. Arnold Aldrich, NASA associate administrator for space systems development, noted that an ambitious joint spaceflight program already was in process. Two Russian cosmonauts were training at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, for example, and early next year two American astronauts would go to Russia for training. (CSM, Apr 21/93; B Sun, Apr 21/93)	* NASA announced that Shuttle Columbia, with a science mission paid for and directed by Germany, was scheduled to be launched on April 24. The launch was scheduled to take place just seven days after Discovery's return from an atmospheric research flight. An engine shutdown March 22 halted Columbia's launch with just three seconds to go. (AP, 4/21; 93; RTw, Apr 4/93; UPI, Apr 21/93; USA Today, Apr 22/93; W Post, Apr 22/93)April 22: Measurements taken recently in Barrow, Alaska, one of several ozone monitoring stations, revealed the first signs of ozone depletion over North America. The depletion, however, was far less severe than that found over Antarctica. (USA Today, Apr 22/93)	* Fourteen scientists, most of them from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), said that world ozone had dropped to its lowest levels since scientists began monitoring the protective layer. The drop might be a delayed effect of the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in 1991. The scientists emphasized that the findings did not mean that the Northern Hemisphere was experiencing an "ozone hole" like the one that forms over the South pole, and that the ozone hole did not pose a significant health threat. The new findings were based on observations by several Earth-orbiting satellites operated by NASA and NOAA and confirmed by ground-based ozone monitoring instruments. (NASA Release 93-74; AP, Apr 22/93, Apr 23/93; USA Today, Apr 23/93; W Post, Apr 23/93; B Sun, Apr 23/93; WSJ, Apr 23/93; NY Times, Apr 23/93)	  	* NASA announced that an American satellite had detected the most intense flash of gamma radiation observed in the two years of its operation. The burst, known as "the super bowl" event because it occurred on the day of this year's National championship game, appeared to produce 10 times more energy than any previously observed gamma-ray burst. The burst also led scientists to say that the bursts were not the product of merely hot "cooking objects, but of particles being accelerated to near the speed of light and being emitted in focused beams, or jets. The new findings suggested that the bursts originated far beyond the Milky Way galaxy. (NASA Release 93-72; Reuters, Apr 22/93; W Post, Apr 23/93; NY Times, Apr 23/93; B Sun, Apr 23/93; APn, Apr 4/23)  	* NASA announced that a NASAF-15 research aircraft made a touchdown on April 21, using only engine power for control. The plane landed at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The flight was part of NASA's attempt to develop a computer-assisted engine control system that lets a plane land safely with only engine power if its normal control surfaces are disabled. (NASA Release 93-75)	* NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that Bryan O'Connor, Deputy Director of the Space Station Redesign Team, would take over management of the Space Station effort in order to accommodate a request by the team's leader, Joseph F. Shea, that his workload be reduced. Shea submitted his resignation as Assistant Deputy Administrator for Space Station Analysis; he was to serve as Special Advisor to the Administrator and advisor to O'Connor. (NASA Statement on Advisory Committee Meeting)April 23: NASA announced that the December flight of the Endeavor Space Shuttle mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope was scheduled to last ll days and to involve a record five spacewalks, with the possibility of two additional walks, if needed. (NASA Release 93-76; W Times, Apr 25/93)	* Richard T. Barrett, a senior design engineer at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, was awarded the Federal Laboratory Consortium Award of Excellence in Technology Transfer for 1993. (NASA Release 93-73)April 24: NASA canceled the Space Shuttle Columbia launch, scheduled for April 24, because of problems with a key navigational aid. The launch was rescheduled for 10:50 a.m. April 26. (UPI, Apr 24/93; RTw, Apr 24/93; P Inq, Apr 25/93; NY Times, Apr 25/93; B Sun, Apr 24/93)	* U.S. Senate candidate Richard Fisher called Space Station Freedom a "pork barrel" project in a speech on Friday. Fisher, a Texas investor, was running as a Democrat in a special May 1 election. Fisher had advised the independent presidential campaign of Ross Perot, who had criticized the lack of spending controls on the Space Station project. Fisher, who in the past had voiced support for the Superconducting Super Collider, said that he was still studying the project's worth. (H Chron, Apr 24/93)April 25: NASA officials announced on April 25 that a three-month review of the development of Space Station Freedom's Work Package 1 had been successfully completed. The work package involved work on laboratory and critical subsystems. The Marshall Space Flight Center and its main contractor Boeing Defense & Space Group were responsible for the work, which included many elements considered the core of the Space Station. (UPI, Apr 25/93)	* Space Shuttle Columbia was fueled for the third launch attempt of a science mission chartered by Germany. The mission, which was years behind schedule, was scheduled for launch Monday, April 26 at 10:52 a.m. (UPI, Apr 25/93; AP, Apr 26/93; NY Times, Apr 26/93; USA Today, Apr 26/93; RTw, Apr 26/93	* The Washington Post reported that NASA, under White House instructions to cut the budget of Space Station Freedom, was attempting to push the McDonald Douglas Corporation out of the $30 billion Space Station contract. McDonald Douglas was the prime contractor in the project, which had cost overruns of between $300 million and $1 billion. (W Post, Apr 25/93)	* In a letter to the editor of the Washington Post, Michael Oppenheimer, senior scientist at the Environmental Defense Fund in New York, took issue with an April 5 Washington Post article on ozone depletion. Oppenheimer charged that the article failed to "convey the seriousness of the ozone depletion problem." (W Post, Apr 25/93)	* The Los Angeles Times reported that NASA was using a new x-ray machine, called the Reverse Geometry x-ray system, to examine parts of the Space Shuttle. The new technology, produced by the Digiray Corporation, eliminates fuzzy images and displays a 3-D picture almost instantly. (LA Times, Apr 25/93; AP, May 24/93)April 26: Space Shuttle Columbia was launched on Monday, April 26, on a German science mission that had been delayed for over two months. This was the third attempt at launching theColumbia mission. By launching the mission only nine days after the return of Shuttle Discovery, NASA broke the record for the shortest interval between U.S. human space flights.	The flight was dedicated to German scientific research, including studies of how the human body reacts to the reduced gravity in space. The mission featured 88 experiments in materials, science, medicine, biology, astronomy, Earth observation, and robotics. (UPI, Apr 26/93; RTw, Apr 26/93; Ap, Apr 27/93; P Inq, Apr 27/93; B Sun, Apr 27/93; USA Today, Apr 27/93; W Post, Apr 27/93; NY Times, Apr 27/93; W Times, Apr 27/93)April 27: The New York Times reported that 1993 had become the year of the supernova for astronomers and astrophysicists. The appearance on March 28 of a rare and very bright supernova named SNI993J led to a great deal of information. Researchers also made many discoveries about supernova by conducting laboratory experiments and by using powerful supercomputers to test competing theories. The former investigations were conducted  by research teams at the TRIUMF national Laboratory in Vancouver, British Columbia, and Yale University. The Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California used its supercomputers to pick out the theory that appeared best to explain what astronomers see when a supernova explodes. (NY Times, Apr 27/93)	* The journal Science reported that the brightness of a full moon, thought to be caused by a process called shadow hiding, in which the sun shining directly on the moon minimizes shadows, is really caused by a phenomenon known as coherent backscatter.	Coherent backscatter involves "reflection of light rays from the surface of the moon, which combine with light from the sun to create a brighter lunar appearance as seen from Earth," according to Robert M. Nelson, an astronomer at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, and the author of the new study. (NY Times, Apr 27/93)   	* Astronauts aboard Shuttle Columbia left their medical and scientific studies on Tuesday, April 27, to work on repairing a malfunctioning toilet and waste-water system. Engineers believed that a device that squirts waste overboard from a storage tank got stuck and caused the tank to spring a small nitrogen leak. The astronauts rerouted the waste into two rubber-lined storage bags until the problem could be fixed. NASA said that the problem would not endanger the nine-day mission.	Earlier in the day, the astronauts carried out a series of medical and scientific experiments. (UPI, Apr 27/93; AP, Apr 28/93; RTw, Apr 27/93, Apr 28/93; NY Times, Apr 28/93; C Trib, Apr 28/93)April 27: Reinhard Furrer, a former German astronaut, criticized the German government for planning to cut funds for manned space flights such as the U.S.-German Shuttle mission now orbiting the Earth. Furrer flew on a joint U.S.-German scientific mission in 1885. (RTw, Apr 27/93)	* During Take Our Daughters to Work Day on April 26, daughters of Johnson Space Center employees got to see where astronauts prepare for space flights and were even able to test the pressurized spacesuit gloves worn by astronauts. Daughters were also welcomed at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility, where they toured the control room, investigated an SE-71 cockpit, and crawled around inside a modified Boeing 747. (AP, Apr 27/93; W Times, Apr 29/93; Antelope Valley, Apr 29/93) April 28: An article in the Christian Science Monitor reported that scarce NASA funding jeopardized the Space Station and manned flights. NASA had asked for a $1 billion increase over fiscal year 1993; however, Representative Ralph Hall, D of Texas, the chairman of the House space subcommittee, told Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, that a billion-dollar increase was not very likely. (CSM, Apr 28/93)	* NASA announced that Marta Bohn-Meyer, an aeronautical engineer at NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility, was one of 10 federal government employees chosen to receive the 1992 Arthur S. Flemming Award. The reward "recognizes U.S. government employees for outstanding and meritorious work," according to NASA.(Antelope Valley Press, Apr 28/93)	April 29: The media reported that the crew aboard Shuttle Columbia had succeeded in flushing urine and other waste water into space from a backup storage system. This was the first time crew members had attempted to dump fluid overboard from contingency containers. Later in the day, the astronauts repaired a nitrogen gas line, restoring the shuttle's normal water pressure, which had dropped as a result of the Shuttle's plumbing problems. The mission's science experiments continued as planned.	Late Wednesday, April 28, German astronaut Hans Schlegel turned on a 2 1/2-foot-long robot arm and got it to move as planned after adjusting a joint that NASA scientists said might have been bumped out of place during launch. Later, NASA ground controllers maneuvered the robot to demonstrate how robots perform in microgravity. (W Post, Apr 29/93; B Sun, Apr 29/93; USA Today, Apr 29/93; P Inq, Apr 29/93; RTw, Apr 29/93; AP, Apr 29/93; UPI, Apr 29/93)	* NASA announced that the National Technology Transfer Center (NTTC), Wheeling, West Virginia, had entered into an agreement with the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization (SDIO) to assist SDIO in the operation of its Technology Applications Information System and to help identify items that should be included in the technology applications database. (NASA Release 93-77)April 30: The Wall Street Journal reported that a cable-television venture by NASA was becoming very popular among space buffs nationwide. Called NASA select, the channel provides a variety of coverage, ranging from routine news briefings on space issues to reports on the current Columbia space mission. Viewers said that they were especially excited by the spectacular vistas beamed down from space. The channel airs as a public service on local cable-TV systems Monday through Friday from noon until 4 a.m. (WSJ, Apr 30/93; C Trib, May 2/93)	* The media reported that Columbia's astronauts were attempting to find a slight air leak that NASA said posed no danger to the crew. The leak had been detected the previous evening. According to NASA sources, the leak would not affect the duration of the space mission. (AP, Apr 30/93)	* Writing in the Washington Post, columnist Michael Schrage reported that physicist John H. Gibbons, White House science and technology policy advisor, was facing some tough choices. He soon had to decide whether science and technology would play a leadership role in the Clinton Administration's economic agenda or merely a supporting one. That choice appeared to be as yet unmade. (W Post, Apr 30/93)MayMay 2: NASA rewarded the Columbia astronaut's energy-conservation efforts by adding a day to the Space Shuttle's mission. The extra day would allow scientists to meet and possibly exceed mission goals, which had been jeopardized by equipment problems. 	German researchers announced that their robot arm had successfully grabbed a free-floating object in space under remote control from Earth. They also reported that some of the larval fish and tadpoles aboard the Shuttle were dying. 	Among other experiments undertaken on the last days of the flight was the injection of two German astronauts with nearly a half-gallon of saline solution each in an experiment intended to test how to fight dehydration in space. (AP, May 2/93, May 3/93, May 4/94; RTw, May 3/93, May 4/93; UPI, May 3/93; W Post, May 2/93, May 3/93; W Times, May 1/93; B Sun, May 2/93, May 3/94; USA Today, May 3/93; NY Times, May 2/93, May 3/93)May 3: William F. Ballhaus Jr. was named president of the Martin Marietta Corporation's Aero & Naval Systems division in Maryland. Ballhaus was director of NASA's Ames Research Center for a number of years. (B Sun, May 3/93)	* NASA announced that the Mars Observer spacecraft had returned to normal operations after its main antenna failed to point at Earth for the third time in about four months. Engineers were fairly certain that the glitch had been caused by a computer-programming problem. (AP, May 3/93; W Times, May 4/93)May 4: The Houston Post reported that the two committees charged with redesigning Space Station Freedom were behind schedule. The two groups, a technical resign team mainly made up of NASA employees and a team of outside experts, had been faced with much infighting at NASA and a barrage of criticism from Congress and the foreign countries participating in the Space Station project. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin asserted that the work would be finished on time. (H Post, May 4/93; AvWk, May 3/93; H Chronicle, May 6/93)	* The Washington Times reported that a group of five investors, headed by retired Navy Admiral Thomas H. Moorer, had signed a joint venture agreement with Russia's Association for the Conversion of Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missiles. The group planed to use Russian missiles to put satellites into low orbits to transmit telephone calls or computer data or carry out scientific experiments. (W Times, May 4/93)   	* NASA reported that it had lost all contact with Shuttle Columbia for 80 minutes on May 4 because of an erroneous computer command sent to the Shuttle. The blackout led to the loss of some science data but did not cause any major problems; NASA officials, however, reviewed procedures for creating and sending commands to the Shuttle antenna.	 During a briefing for Mayo clinic physicians, Bernard Harris Jr., a doctor-astronaut aboard Columbia, said that the human heart shifts inside the body in zero gravity. Space travel also leads to swollen faces, engorged eye blood vessels, and space motion sickness, said Harris. (UPI, May 4/93; RTw, May 4/93; W Times, May 5/93; USA Today, May 5/93; B Sun, May 5/93; NY Times, May 5/93)		May 5: Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Columbia prepared for a May 6 landing at Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The Shuttle was scheduled to land at 9:03 a.m., ten days after launch.	Columbia's astronauts flexed a life-size robot one last time in space and completed as many laboratory experiments as possible before getting ready to return home. (UPI, May 5/93; RTw, May 5/93; N Times, May 6/93; W Post, May 6/93; USA Today, May 6/93; P Inq, May 6/93; B Sun, May 6/93)	* The Prince William Journal reported that Daniel Goldin, NASA Administrator, had decided that NASA should spend $90 million for the development of the Perseus aircraft, a remote-controlled drone that NASA had contracted with Aurora Flight Science Corporation of Manassas to build. The unmanned aircraft would be used for environmental studies of the upper atmosphere. (Prince William Journal, May 5/93; LA Times, May 9/93; UPI, May 14/93)   May 6: The Wall Street Journal reported that technical problems had delayed until August the launch of the unmanned Comet space rocket on which Columbia Pictures had a giant outer-space billboard advertising its major summer movie, "Last Action Hero." (WSJ, May 6/93; W Times, May 7/93; NY Times, May 11/93)	* The media reported that House of Representative lawmakers had charged that NASA and the Department of Defense were dragging their feet in getting a hypersonic airplane, the National Aerospace Plane (NASP), out of the design stage. House members complained that the $2 billion invested so far in the NASP had not brought the project any closer to fruition. Experts maintained that the NASP would be the fastest aircraft in the world and would revolutionize space travel as well as make the nation more economically competitive. (Antelope Valley Press, May 6/93; Washington Technology, May 20/93)      	* According to the Wall Street Journal, five aerospace companies were proposing to revive planning for a advanced new rocket to carry satellites and other commercial payloads into space. The companies had asked NASA to join in planning and researching the project; they anticipated that it would help the U.S. gain a greater share of the commercial launch business now dominated by Arianspace, a European joint venture. (WSJ, May 6/93)  May 7: The W Times reported that a joint U.S.-German experimental fighter jet had completed a revolutionary rapid turn in flight. The aircraft slowed from a speed of about 300 miles an hour and reversed direction in only nine seconds using a tight, looping turn. According to the Pentagon, the turn was far beyond the aerodynamic capability of any conventional fixed-wing aircraft. The test flight took place at Edwards Air Force Base, California.(W Times, May 7/93)	* The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that it had picked two Germans, a Spaniard, and a Swede for its first joint missions with Russian astronauts to the Mir-1 Space Station in 1994 and 1995. The ESA had reserved one slot each for the two flights. A decision on which two men would participate would be made in the weeks before the flight. (RTw, May 7/93)	* At a news conference during the annual Naval Aviation Symposium, astronauts Eugene Cerman, Alan Shepherd, Neil Armstrong, and James Lovell spoke of the importance of continued exploration of the moon. Cerman, the last man to walk on the moon, said, "We are going to go. It's man's intuitive spirit to go back and go on to Mars." (AP, May 7/93)	* The media reported that the Space Shuttle Columbia landed May 6 at Edwards Air Force Base, California, after low clouds at Cape Canaveral, Florida, forced it to divert to California.	NASA called the Columbia's return "a significant milestone" because shuttles have now spent a total of more than a year in orbit since the first one was launched in 1981. However, John Pike, a space analyst for the Federation of American Scientists, said he wondered if the Shuttle flight was worth what it cost. There are "good reasons for flying in space, but science isn't one of them," Mr. Pike said. (APn, May 5/93; USA Today, May 7/93; W Times, May 7/93; N Sun, May 7/93; LA Times, May 7/93; NY Times, May 7/93; W Post, May 7/93)May 9: The New York Times reported that astronomers were worried about growing light pollution, which makes it very difficult for even the strong 200-inch telescope on Mount Palomar in California to pick up faint galaxies. Some cities, hoping that brighter lighting would deter crime, were installing white street lights as opposed to low-pressure sodium lamps, which are easily filtered from telescopes. In addition, a Georgia company announced plans to put a one-mile-reflective panel into space some time in 1996; the satellite, which would appear nearly as large as the moon, would add to the light pollution. (NY Times, May 9/93)     May 10: The Washington Post reported that NASA had selected three design concepts from among the many that had been proposed since the White House told the agency to come up with a new, half-price plan by early June. White House guidelines called for NASA to design a long-duration laboratory in orbit that would use the weightlessness of space as a tool for research on materials and living things, as a means of developing technology and engineering skills for advanced human and robotic space systems, and as a way to encourage international cooperation. (W Post, May 10/93)	* The Houston Chronicle  announced that NASA, responding to criticism of its cost overruns and the quality of its projects, had announced major reforms in the way it did business. In addition to other changes, procurement reforms would levy greater penalties on contractors that deliver defective products, continually exceed cost estimates, or fall behind schedule. (H Chron, May 10/93; Federal Computer Week, May 24/93) 	* In an address to the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA), Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, said that the redesign effort for Space Station Freedom was making "great progress." (AvWk, May 10/93)	* Gregory M. Reck, NASA's Acting Associate Administrator for Advanced concepts and Technology, announced that the first flight of Comet, the Commercial Experiment Transporter, would slip from mid-June to at least July or August. The launch had already been delayed for two months because of technical difficulties. (AvWk, May 10/93)      	    May 11: NASA announced that the agency would design and install an acoustic lining in the wind tunnel at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The improved wind tunnel ultimately would help U.S. industry design quiet engines for a future high-speed civil transport and for new helicopters. (NASA Release 93-81; San Francisco Examiner, May 9/93) 	* NASA announced that it and the National Center for Manufacturing Sciences (NCMS) had signed an agreement that would allow the two organizations to propose joint research projects. The NCMS is a non-profit research consortium created by U.S. industries to conduct, sponsor, fund, and otherwise promote development of technologies or scientific applications that would improve manufacturing in the United States and Canada. (NASA Release 93-82) 	* The LA Times announced that Russian space officials had signed a contract in late April for the first commercial launch of a Western-built satellite by a Russian rocket. The agreement was signed with Inmarsat, a 67-country consortium that puts up satellites for mobile communications. (LA Times, May 11/93)	* The NY Times reported that after examining the problem for more than a year, a supercomputer had concluded that the Theory of Quantum Chromodynamics was probably correct. The theory accounts for the relationships between fundamental particles called hadrons. (NY Times, May 11/93)   	* European space officials in Paris announced that Western Europe's Ariane rocket had deployed a U.S.-built television satellite on Wednesday after a launch from French Guiana. (RTw, May 11/93)  May 12: USA Today reported that scientists on the Space Shuttle Columbia during its fall mission were scheduled to behead five white rats. Space program scientists Frank Sulzman said that killing the rats in orbit would give researchers better information on the effect of weightlessness on the animals. (USA Today, May 12/93)	* The Christian Science Monitor reported that astronomers who study the evolution of the cosmos hoped that the Hubble space telescope, if it could be repaired as planned this December, would help them resolve a paradox relating to the universe's age. Current research implies that the universe is younger than the oldest stars. One of the Hubble's key missions was to refine what had become the foundation for many cosmic distance scales. (CSM, May 12/93)May 13: The media reported that a 23-year-old computer hacker had penetrated the top-secret computer files of NASA, forcing the closure of the system for 24 hours. The hacker, Richard Martin Jones, also helped another computer buff enter the NASA files.(UPI, May 13/93; RTw, May 13/93)May 14: NASA announced that scientists at its Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, would use a satellite video link to attempt to maneuver a Russian robotic "rover" in a Moscow laboratory. (NASA Release 93-84)	* The Associated Press announced that NASA engineers had searched for the source of a mysterious "bang" in Shuttle Endeavour's engine compartment. The sound was heard as the Shuttle was being prepared for a June 3 launch. (AP, May 14/93)	* NASA announced the solicitation of proposals for the Technology Reinvestment Project, a $471 million federal interagency effort to develop and deploy dual-use technologies and at the same time give a competitive advantage to American companies. (NASA Release 93-85) 	* The media reported that NASA administrators were seeking to quell the concerns of European space officials over the redesign of the planned U.S. Space Station. Clinton's decision to redesign the project could have "disastrous effects' if it results in an orbiting lab unsuitable to foreign partners, a German executive said. (WSJ, May 14/93; AP, May 13/93)	* Defense Secretary Les Aspin announced that the Clinton Administration would continue work on anti-missile weapons but that Reagan's "Star Wars" program was being reduced to small-scale research and renamed the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization. In California alone, the cutback threatened more than $1 billion in annual contracts and thousands of jobs, according to economists in the area. (NY Times, May 14/93; LA Times, May 14/93)	* President Clinton named David R. Hinson, an aerospace executive and former Navy fighter pilot, to head the Federal Aviation Administration. Mr. Hinson was founder of Midway Airlines. In his new job, Hinson would oversee the safety of the aviation industry and be responsible for initiating and enforcing safety regulations and operating the air traffic control system. (NY Times, May 14/93; USA Today, May 14/93)May 17: NASA announced that researchers at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, had developed an ion exchange material that in laboratory tests effectively removed contaminants from water. Tests showed that the new material was easy to use and inexpensive to produce. (NASA Release 93-86)	* The media reported that NASA and the astronomical community had differing views on an orbiting billboard that would beam a moon-sized message back to Earth. NASA spokesman Charles Redmond said that the "space billboard" was in line with the space agency's aims, that is, to encourage commercial development of space. A quite different view was expressed by Carl Sagan, a well-known U.S. astronomer and university professor, who called the project an "abomination" and said that it was "the thin edge of a wedge which may  destroy optical ground-based astronomy...."  An American Astronomical Society spokesman said the billboard would hamper Earth-based astronomy, add to the growing pollution of the night sky by light, and even infringe on everyone's enjoyment of nature's sunsets." (RTw, May 17/93)  	* NASA announced the formation of an International Mars Exploration Working Group. In addition to NASA, members included the European Space Agency, the Russian Space Research Institute, the Italian Space Agency, the German Space Agency, and the French Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales. The group would focus on producing an international strategy for the exploration of Mars after the year 2000. (NASA Release 93-87)	* NASA announced that it had joined with American Bio-Technologies Inc. of Cambridge, Massachusetts, in an attempt to arrive at a better understanding of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). The goal was to use advanced x-ray technology and expertise developed by NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, in Huntsville, Alabama, to advance knowledge of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and AIDS, to develop new therapeutic approaches for HIV and AIDS, and to develop superior biological materials for vaccine development and HIV detection. (NASA Release 93-88)	* The Associated Press reported that the Everglades-style airboat used to maintain navigation lights at the Space Shuttle's California landing site had been named "Puddle shuttle," after a contest among workers. (AP, May 17/93)	* The Washington Post reported that NASA's dream of building a permanent human outpost in space was generating much controversy. President Clinton's decision to shrink Space Station funding and his mandate that the station be redesigned added to the controversy. (W Post, May 17/93)May 18: NASA announced that the Magellan spacecraft would dip into the atmosphere of Venus beginning May 25 in an "aerobraking" maneuver that would slow the spacecraft and allow it to circularize Magellan's orbit. Currently Magellan was looping around Venus in a highly elliptical orbit. The new orbit would make possible better measurements of Venus's gravity fields.(NASA Release 93-89)	* A Christian Science Monitor editorial urged the Clinton Administration to rethink its civilian space program, noting that the program had drifted without overall purpose since rivalry with the old Soviet Union had ceased to be a significant factor. The editorial urged the Administration to define what the United States should accomplish in space and outline a realistic program to do it. (CSM, May 18/93)	* The  Washington Times reported that the former Soviet military had welcomed the U.S. decision to scrap most of the Strategic Defense Initiative. Russian Defense Minister Pavel Grachev called the decision a "reasonable decision" and said that "it seems there's no reason to raise the possibility again" of putting weapons in space. (W Times, May 18/93)	* The Baltimore Sun reported that researchers believed that a meteorite that crashed through a Japanese home in December probably was a piece of the same space object as a falling star that landed in Japan more than a thousand years ago. (B Sun, May 18/93)	* A NASA spokesman announced that the Mars observer spacecraft had spent eight days pointing the wrong direction but engineers thought that they now had the problem under control. It was the Observer's fourth such malfunction. Mars Observer was scheduled to go into elliptical orbit around Mars on August 24. (AP, May 18/93)	* Robert T. Dulaney, a salesman who sold foreign-made fasteners to a NASA contractor in violation of a federal law that required that all fasteners purchased by NASA be domestic in origin, was sentenced to five years probation, including 60 days home confinement. Dulaney was also ordered to repay $26,567.73 to NASA. (UPI, May 18/93)    	* NASA engineers believed that they had identified the source of a mysterious "bang" in Shuttle Endeavour's engine section. A Kennedy Space Center spokesman said that probably a  ball inside a flexible joint on a fuel line had gotten pinched. (AP, May 18/93)	* U.S. and European space officials announced that they had postponed a planned rocket firing intended to move the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA) to a position where it could be retrieved by a Space Shuttle next month. An apparent gyroscope problem aboard the orbiting research satellite forced the postponement. (RTw, May 18/93)	* An article in Flight International featured the U.S. Spacehab, the world's first privately owned, manned microgravity-laboratory. The Spacehab was scheduled to be lifted aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour mission on June 3. 	The Spacehab was funded partly by a $185 million contract from NASA that enabled the agency to use two-thirds of the Spacehab's capacity during the first six flights. The Spacehab, however, would need the commitment of commercial customers in order to survive, according to the author of the article. (Flight International, May 18/93)    	  May 19: NASA reported that the agency was working with the nation's large aerospace companies to determine how NASA computer programs could help industry design and produce aircraft more efficiently. The ultimate goal was to integrate all the factors involved in aircraft design and production in order that aeronautical engineers would be able to design aircraft systems simultaneously rather than separately as is done now. (NASA Release 93-90)	* NASA announced a new initiative to commercialize NASA inventions by using top graduate students at Case Western to come up with new product ideas and strategies. NASA's Lewis Research Center, the Battelle Memorial Institute, and Case Western Reserve University, all based in Cleveland, Ohio, were involved in the program. (NASA Release 93-91)	* The media reported that a Naval panel inquiry into the crash of the V-22 experimental aircraft, nicknamed the Osprey, in the summer of 1992 had found evidence that an improperly installed seal may have permitted gearbox oil to leak, possibly contributing to the crash. The panel also noted that the pilot, under strong pressure to arrive on time for a ceremony at Quantico Marine Base, had skipped a scheduled refueling stop and ignored a warning that might have forced him to ground the plane for a maintenance check. The Navy authorized resumption of flight testing of the Osprey after release of the final report. (W Post, May 19/93; P Inq, May 19/93; USA Today, May 19/93)	* The Washington Times reported that the journal Science had added its voice to those who maintained that the ozone-depletion threat had been overestimated. In an earlier article, the Washington Post, which in the past had editorialized strongly for worldwide controls on ozone-depleting substances, also concluded that many scientists, including some in the environmental movement, agreed that the ozone threat had been overestimated. Not all experts agreed with the position taken by the authors of the articles in Science and the Post, however. (W Times, May 19/93)May 20: NASA announced that a 50-monitor videowall would be featured at the NASA exhibit at the 40th Paris Air Show, Le Bourget, France, June 10-20. The video presentation featured interviews with Carl Sagan, James Mitchener, and Roald Sagdeev, among others. (NASA Release 93-92)	* Washington Technology reported that at a May 11 appearance before the annual meeting of the National Center for Manufacturing Sciences (NCMS), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin emphasized his commitment to NASA's technology-transfer outreach to industry. At the meeting, Goldin announced a memorandum of understanding that allowed NASA and the NCMS to propose joint research projects. (Washington Technology, May 20, 1993) 	* NASA announced that scientists at the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were measuring how the human body reacted to exercise done on Earth and comparing those measurements to the exercise measurements of astronauts working in the microgravity environment of space. The goal was to try to improve the productivity of astronauts involved in space walks. (NASA Release 93-93)May 21: NASA announced that June 3, 1993 had been set as the target date for the STS-57 mission of Space Shuttle Endeavour. The mission would be highlighted by the retrieval of the European observation satellite EURECA and the first flight of Spacehab, a commercial spacelab facility. (NASA Editors Note N93-28) 	* In his keynote address at the inaugural University of Southern California Engineering Day, Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, emphasized that space exploration involved risks but that they were worth taking. He also said that NASA's specific challenge was to "win back our credibility through performance." ( LA Times, May 21/93) 	* The media reported that Representative George E. Brown, chairman of the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee, told a news conference that NASA's effort to save Space Station Freedom was doomed unless the project continued with a scaled-down version of the current design. Although the streamlined model of Freedom was the most expensive of the three options being analyzed, Brown noted that it was also the one with years of experience and $8 billion in development costs behind it. (WP, May 21/93; H Chron, May 21/93; LA Times, May 21/93; W Times, May 21/93; NY Times, May 21/93; W Post, May 21/93; AvWk, May 24/93)	* Writing in the Philadelphia Inquirer, Daniel S. Greenberg noted that "times are bad" for the so-called mega projects of our era: Star Wars, the Space Station, and the super atom smasher in Texas. He, warned, however that big-science mobilization should not automatically be suspect, suggesting, for example, that the country would benefit from an all-out effort on a project such as the electric car. (P Inq, May 21/93) May 23: The Washington Times reported that the launch of a rocket with a "star wars" payload had been scrubbed on May 22, just a minute before its scheduled launch. The Air Force blamed the failed launch on a power outage in a computer. The launch was rescheduled for May 23. (W Times, May 23/93) May 24: The ITAR-Tass news agency announced that a cargo ship loaded with food, water, fuel and equipment had docked with the orbiting Space Station Mir. The cargo ship also delivered a landing capsule to the two Mir astronauts, who had been aboard the Mir for four months. (AP, May 24/93)	* Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that a NASA advisory panel had found that the Hubble Space Telescope would have had even more component failure in orbit if the launch had not slipped from 1986 to 1990 as a result of the Challenger accident. The delay enabled technicians to do additional testing that revealed suspect parts. (AvWk, May 24/93)	* The AP reported that the nonprofit group SatelLife, based in Cambridge, Massachusetts, last year had launched a low-orbiting satellite that "talks" to the Internet and coordinates the Healthnet message-relay service connected with the satellite. The service makes it possible for remote regions of the world to receive much-needed medical advice. (AP, May 24/93)	* NASA announced that a NASA F/A-18, modified to test the newest and most advanced system technologies, made its first research flight on May 21 at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The Systems Research Aircraft (SRA) was evaluating technologies that would benefit both civilian and military aircraft. (NASA Release 93-95; Mojave Desert News, May 27/93)	* A commentary in the Houston Chronicle, applauded NASA's decision to financially penalize contractors who delivered defective products, did not meet schedules, or continually exceeded cost estimates. NASA's proposed procurement reforms would do away with the "cost-plus" contracts under which the government typically negotiated costs as a project moved along, rather than seeking bids and holding contractors to them. (H Chron, May 24/93)May 25: NASA announced that the location of a third radiation belt of cosmic rays had been pinpointed several hundred miles above the Earth. A NASA satellite, orbiting 375 above the Earth, had mapped a portion of the new belt. (NASA Release 93-94; AP, May 25/93; B Sun, May 26/93)	* NASA announced that a task force established by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to review plans for the Hubble Space Telescope servicing mission had concluded that "the mission is achievable." The servicing mission was currently scheduled for December 1993. (NASA Release 93-96)	* NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had looked into the nucleus of a galaxy created by the collision of two galaxies and had discovered a pinwheel-shaped disk of gas surrounded by clusters of young stars born as result of the collision. "This may unlock the key for understanding how all globular clusters formed in ellipticals," said Dr. Brad Whitmore of the Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland. (NASA Release 93-97; USA Today, May 26/93; NY Times, May 26/93; W Post, May 26/93; UPI, May 25/93)	* The Washington Times reported that a conference of scientists and policy makers had discussed the question of what to do with the "junk science" that makes its way into public policy. The conference, which was held in the Washington, DC area, was sponsored by the International Institute of George Mason University and the Science and Environmental Policy Project. (W Times, May 25/93) 	* The Houston Chronicle reported on a new nationwide poll of registered voters conducted by Yankelovitch Partners and sponsored by NASA contractor Rockwell International Corporation. The poll revealed that 70 percent of American voters supported the construction of a permanently staffed Space Station and 63 percent believed that the United States should spend "whatever is necessary" to preserve its lead in space activities. Some of the poll results, however, reflected wide swings of support for the space program. (H Chron, May 25/93)    	* The Plain Dealer reported that a group of African-American employees at NASA's Lewis Research Center had charged that the materials used in a pilot program intended to promote better communication between employees of differing cultural groups instead fostered racism. NASA was investigating. (The Plain Dealer, May 25/93; Space News, May 31-June 6/93)		* NASA announced that the Magellan spacecraft had successfully completed its mission of radar-mapping the planet Venus and was beginning a new 80-day maneuver that would put it in a more circular orbit around Venus. The new mission would give scientists a better understanding of the planet's interior and its atmosphere. (NASA Release 93-98; RTw, May 25/93; AP, May 25/93; NY Times, May 27/97)	* An improperly etched spring in one of Space Shuttle Endeavour's three oxygen turbopumps could delay next week's planned launch of the Space Shuttle. The inspection stamp was etched in a high-stress area rather than in a spot with minimal stress, NASA officials said. The spring holds the pump bearings in place. If the improperly marked spring broke at liftoff, the affected bearing cage could come loose. (AP, May 25/93)	* A NASA panel recommended that the space agency plan two Space Shuttle missions rather than the scheduled one to repair the Hubble telescope. The panel agreed that the repairs could be done, but suggested that because of the complexity of the task, a back-up mission should be planned. (UPI, May 25/93; AP, May 25/93)May 26: NASA announced that almost 15 years after they were launched, the Voyager 1 and 2 spacecraft had discovered the first direct evidence of the heliopause, the boundary that separates Earth's solar system from interstellar space.	Since August 1992, radio antennas on the spacecraft had been recording intense low-frequency radio emissions coming from beyond the solar system. Scientists concluded that the radio waves had been produced by electrically charged gases, or plasma, from the Sun interacting with cold gases from interstellar space at the edge of the solar system, a boundary known as the heliopause. A member of the Voyager science team said, "Our assumption that it is the heliopause is based on the fact that there is no other known structure out there that could be causing these signals." (NASA Release 93-099; USA Today, May 27/93; NY Times, May 27/93, May 30/93; W Times, May 27, 1997; AP, May 27/97; UPI, May 26/97; RTw, May 26/97; W Post, May 31/93; B Sun, June 8/93)May 27: NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, announced that it had selected NSI Technology Services Corporation, Fairfax, Virginia, for negotiations leading to the award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract for integration and test support services. The contract, which covered seven years, had an estimated value of $200 million and would provide services to all of Goddard and portions of NASA's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia. (NASA Release C93-e)		* The Washington Post reported that NASA had requested an 18 percent increase in 1994 for aeronautics research. If granted this amount would be the largest jump for aeronautics in decades.Increased funding would be used to increase funding on a "environmentally friendly" supersonic jetliner, new materials and methods to make routine air travel safer and cheaper, advances in supercomputers, and upgrades to old wind tunnels to be used by U.S. companies for testing. (W Post, May 27/93)May 28: Reuter reported that Arianespace had signed a contract for the launching of an Israeli Amos-l telecommunications satellite by an Ariane rocket in 1995. (RTw, May 28/93)	* The magazine Science reviewed the three main redesigns of the Space Station, noting that the White House's mandate that NASA produce a less costly station design had upset the U.S.'s international partners. (Science, May 28/93)	* Science reported that NASA had agreed that NASA and Russian scientists would cooperate in several research projects aboard the Russian Space Station Mir in 1994. The joint effort would be part of a scientific exchange signed by the United States and Russia last July. (Science, May 28/93) May 29: The Washington Times reported that a Russian communications satellite had been lost in a low orbit after the booster rocket apparently ran out of fuel. (W Times, May 29/93)May 30: In an article in the Washington Post Magazine, entitled "Has NASA Lost Its Way?," author Peter Carlson described his viewing of a Shuttle launch, which he called inspiring," and reviewed the history of Space Station Freedom. About the Space Station, he concluded, "So if they can cut the waste and trim the fat, if they can really do it cheaper, faster, better, then let them do it." (W Post, May 30/93)May 31: Reuter reported that Australian rocket scientists had completed the world's first successful test flight of a model scramjet, a supersonic air-breathing engine that might make sub-orbital space flight common. (RTw, May 31/93) 	*  The Washington Post reported that the Space Station Freedom redesign team was struggling over a key issue: how to cut the facility's costs while retaining enough power to make the facility worth building. In 1985, NASA engineers envisioned a power system that supplied 135,000 kilowatts (kWs), far more than any other spacecraft. The basic outline of the original plan remained, but the planned capacity had dropped to about 57kW. President Clinton could select a new space design by mid-June. (W Post, May 31/93; USA Today, June 2/93)	* The Washington Times printed a letter from Richard A. Kerr, senior writer at Science and author of an article on ozone depletion in the magazine, in which he disputed the Times' coverage of his article. Contrary to what the Times said, Kerr maintained that he did not in any way question the fundamental fact of ozone depletion, which, Kerr said, continues at a pace far faster than imagined 10 years ago. (W Times, May 31/93)In May: The Aviation Safety Journal summarized some of the significant findings from the NASA Ames Fatigue Countermeasures Program. The research program was initiated in response to a NASA workshop requested by Congress in 1980 to examine possible safety problems caused by fatigue in air transport operations. The Ames study was continuing. (Aviation Safety Journal, Vol.3, No.1/93)	* NASA reported that NASA's Shuttle Mission, STS-57, scheduled for launch in early June, would highlight the beginning of a new era in the commercial development of space. The Endeavour's six-person crew was scheduled to retrieve a European satellite and also was scheduled to use experiments designed by and for students, operate a payload that might improve crystal growth techniques, and demonstrate possible on-earth refueling techniques. (NASA Release 093-78)    JuneJune 1: The New York Times reported that astrophysicist Dr. E. Miles Standish Jr., writing in the Astronomical Journal, had concluded that astronomers could quit looking for the elusive "Planet X" because it was not there. The planet's existence was inferred from what seemed to be irregularities in the orbital motions of several known planets. Standish's analysis, however, demonstrated that the old calculations were erroneous. He was the first to make use of a new measurement of Neptune's mass made by Voyager in 1989. (NY Times, June 1/93)	* NASA announced that a remote-control technology used by agency scientists to guide a robot in a recent cross-country test was being licensed to a private firm for commercial development. The name of the firm was not revealed. (NASA Release 93-100)	* NASA announced that the agency was accepting applications for mission specialist and pilot astronaut positions effective immediately. The cut-off date for applications was July 1, 1993.(NASA Release 93-101)	* UPI reported that a solar-powered drill used to bore into icecaps on Earth could be used on a mission to Mars to collect ice samples from Mar's north pole. The drill would sample a core about three feet deep. The drill was scheduled to be used this summer to sample two ice caps in the Peruvian Andes. (UPI, June 6/93)	* The Washington Post reported that the U.S. Space & Rocket Center was operating two nonprofit Space Camps, one in Huntsville, Alabama, and the other in Florida, near the Kennedy Space Center. The programs at the camp were designed to encourage young people to think about careers in science, technology, and the aerospace industry when they grow up, or to encourage them to try to become astronauts. Since the program began in 1982, more than 150,000 students have graduated from the program. (W Post, June 1/93)June 2: USA Today reported that the world's average temperature rose about 1 degree during the past year. Scientists writing in the National Geographic Society's Research & Exploration continued to disagree on the cause and effect of the temperature rise. (USA Today, June 2/93)   	* Writing in the Baltimore Sun, Gwynne Dyer, syndicated columnist, described the plan for "terraforming" Mars held by a group of scientists loosely called "The Mars underground."  One of the leaders of the group was Christopher McKay of NASA's Ames Research Center in California.	The group had worked out a plan, based on currently available or at least easily imaginable technology, for turning Mars into a second Earth over a period of 280 years. Dyer concluded her discussion by noting that unless we take more care of our own earthly environment, we might well have to use some of the technology envisioned for Mars to maintain our own planet. (B Sun, June 2/93)	* NASA announced that the material that keeps the Space Shuttle from burning up when it returns from space may help treat medical problems on earth. Researchers from NASA's Ames Research Center in California were working with physicians in San Antonio to determine whether the Space Shuttle's ceramic surface insulation materials could be used in bone transplants. (NASA Release 93-102)   	* NASA announced that a new camera to fix the Hubble Space Telescope's blurry vision had been shipped from Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, where it was built, for testing at Goddard Space Flight Center in Maryland. It was scheduled to be sent into orbit later in the year. (AP, June 2/93)	* NASA said that the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour would be delayed for at least two weeks because the Shuttle's engine maker, Rocketdyne, had failed to correctly document whether one of the engine's parts was reliable. In a review of Rocketdyne's operation, NASA discovered many problems with how the company documented its work. In one case earlier in the year, a paperwork problem made it impossible for NASA to determine whether a Shuttle's engines contained proper seal retainers or older, phased-out models.	In addition, the review found cases where the general engineering drawings and instructions to Rocketdyne's assemblers were not as specific as they should have been. The situation led to "several hundred" discrepancies between engineering drawings and employees' workshop manuals. A company spokesperson said that some workshop manuals were being rewritten to eliminate discrepancies and ambiguities. (O Sen Star, June 2/93; LA Times, June 3/93)    June 3: Richard Martin Jones, an Australian computer hacker who closed down NASA's computer system for 24 hours, was placed on a good behavior bond. He was also ordered to complete 300 hours of unpaid community work. (RTw, June 3/93)	* The U.S. Postal Service unveiled a new $2.90 stamp featuring the image of a futuristic spaceship. Deputy Postmaster General Michael Coughlin and ex-astronaut Robert Crippen, director of the Kennedy Space Center, dedicated the stamp at a brief ceremony that was to have occurred the same day as the launch of Shuttle Endeavour. That launch was delayed for two weeks because of engine problems. (AP, June 3/93)	* A NASA official said that Rocketdyne might lose as much as $29 million in profits on its Space Shuttle engine program because of manufacturing problems at its Canoga Park plant. The company could lose the funds, known as award fees, if NASA determined that the company had performed poorly between November and April. NASA was completing a review of Rocketdyne's space shuttle engine manufacturing operation. (Daily News, June 3/93) 	* NASA announced that it had begun testing a powerful new engine for large subsonic passenger jets. The engine could cut fuel consumption up to 12 percent and significantly reduce engine noise. A NASA spokesperson said that the Advanced Ducted Propulsor (ADP) should be ready for use in commercial transport aircraft by the turn of the century. (NASA Release 93-103; UPI, June 3/97)	* An editorial in the Houston Chronicle criticized political opponents of a permanent U.S. Space Station, arguing that the Space Station's detractors risk costing this nation its scientific and technological preeminence for decades to come. (H Chron, June 2/93)  	* Thirteen high school students from Laurel, Maryland, took control of a 400-pound, $20 million satellite as it beamed information for a solar particle study to NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. To be on the safe side, a team of engineers stood by to make sure nothing untoward happened.	The day was the culmination of a two-year project designed to get more students interested in space; students had studied for two years before being allowed to operate the controls. (AP, June 3/93)	* The Christian Science Monitor, noting that Space Shuttle Endeavour's mission would symbolize what NASA called "the year of commercial space," reported that companies had been slow to exploit the commercial possibilities of space. For example, although NASA had leased 200 of the 300 locker spaces available on Spacehab's first six flights, the agency had few customers for the other 100 lockers. (CSM, June 3/93)June 4: NASA announced that the Space Station redesign team would submit its final report on three design options to the White House Advisory Committee on the Redesign of the Space Station on Monday, June 7. The three options included a modular concept that would use existing flight-proven hardware, a derivative of the current Space Station Freedom design, and a Space Station that could be placed into orbit with a single launch of a Shuttle-driven vehicle. (NASA Release 93-104; UPI, June 6/1993; AP, June 7/93; NY Times, June 6/93; W Post, June 6/93; B Sun, June 6/93) 	* The magazine Science reported that some researchers were complaining that NASA was overselling its satellites' products. They cited as an example news stories that fueled excitement about images of what NASA called black holes. Referring to an image featured on the front page of a November issue of the New York Times, one expert said that labeling the pictured cloud of dust a black hole was largely wishful thinking on the part of the observers and the backers of the space telescope. Science noted that outside astronomers often criticized NASA press releases, charging that they were misleading. (Science, June 4/93)    	* The  Washington Times reported that workers had replaced an engine pump on the Shuttle Endeavour in preparation for a planned mid-June launch. Endeavour had been scheduled for liftoff on June 3, but the launch was delayed because of engine problems. (W Times, June 4/93)	* NASA announced that Salisbury State University had become the first college in Maryland named to participate in a joint study program with NASA. The university was expected to receive a $110,000 grant over three years from NASA's Joint Venture Institutions program. (B Sun, June 4/93)June 7: NASA announced that June 20, 1993, had been set as the new launch date for the next flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour. The launch originally had been scheduled for June 3. (NASA Launch Advisory)	* NASA announced that recent discoveries from the agency's Extreme Ultravioilet Explorer (EUVE) would be presented at the National Meeting of the American Astronomical Society, University of California at Berkeley on June 7 and 8. 	The new results included discovery of elements that blanket the light from white dwarf stars, the detection of ionized helium in the local interstellar gas, the detection of an extreme ultraviolet shadow in the local interstellar medium, and new findings on the mysteries of rare extragalactic objects. (NASA Release 93-105; AP, June 8/93)	* A Russian would-be cosmonaut, now in the United States pursuing a doctorate in space policy at American University in Washington, was in Houston for three months on a U.S. government subcontract, helping two Russian cosmonauts prepare for flights in U.S. spaceships in 1993 and 1995. (LA Times, June 7/93) 	* The Wall Street Journal reported that critics were warning that President Clinton's plan to redesign the Space Station might inadvertently end up killing the program because of concerns about cost estimates and technology. "I believe there's a real possibility [the Space Station] may not survive because of political considerations," said John Winch, a Boeing Company vice president. (WSJ, June 7/93)June 8: NASA announced that its astronomers investigating how stars are born were using new instruments to observe clumps of interstellar gas that were about to become new stars and planetary systems. The astronomers were using instruments developed for NASA's High Resolution Microwave Survey (HRMS), which was searching for radio signals that might be coming from technological civilizations on planets orbiting distant stars. (NASA Release 93-106)	* NASA announced that scientists had found water molecules frozen in the surface ices of Jupiter's moon Io. According to Dr. Farid Salama, University of California, Berkeley, who led the project at NASA, "This is the first strong evidence of solid water on the surface of this satellite." (NASA Release 93-107; NY Times, June 15/93)  	* The media announced that NASA had unveiled four designs for a scaled-down Space Station. None of the designs, however, could be built as cheaply as the White House had requested and still meet the orbital laboratory's main goals. The team presented cost figures ranging from a low of $11.9 billion to $13.3 billion to build the design that more completely resembled the Space Station Freedom. Three of thee options were similar to the original design of the Space Station but achieved savings through reduction in hardware, management, and capability.	The design team also reported that NASA's estimate for the present design of the Space Station had been understated by some 10 percent because of costs that had been hidden throughout the agency's budget. (W Post, June 8/93;  NY Times, June 8/93; LA Times, June 8/93; W Times, June 8/93; B Sun, June 8/93; USA Today, June 8/93; AP, June 8/93; RTw, June 7/93; UPI, June 7/93; WSJ, June 8/93)  	* The New York Times reported that at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society, Dr. Douglas N.C. Lin of the University of California at Santa Cruz had described the Milky Way as practicing "galactic cannibalism." Lin explained that the gravitational force of matter in the vast halo encompassing the Milky Way galaxy was causing the Milky Way to consume the stars and gases of its nearest galactic neighbor, the Large Magellanic Cloud 160,000 light-years away. (NY Times, June 8/93; LA Times, June 8/1993; USA Today, June 8/93; B Sun, June 8/93; P Inq, June 8/93)	* The Washington Post published a letter from James E. Hansen, Director, NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies, in which he charged that a Washington Post article, "Greenhouse Effect Seems Benign So Far" [front page, June 1], misrepresented his views. The article depicted the scientific understanding of the human-made greenhouse effect as a retreat from earlier predictions that global warming threatened the Earth's environment. In fact, according to Hansen, computer models confirmed that the Earth's climate is "sensitive and can be expected to warm about 5 degrees Fahrenheit when human-made greenhouse gases reach an amount equivalent to a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide." (W Post, June 8/93) 	* The newly released proposals to redesign Space Station Freedom drew mixed reviews on Capitol Hill, with supporters praising the effort and detractors citing the cost of the project as further evidence that it should be abandoned. (W Post, June 9/93; LA Times, June 9/93; USA Today, June 9/93; P Inq, June 9/93; AP, June 9/93; APn, June 8/93; RTw, June 8/93; H Chron, June 9/93; H Post, June 10/93)June 9: NASA announced that astronomers working with the Hubble Space Telescope had some success in their attempts to measure the Hubble Constant and the age of the universe. The Hubble Constant (HO) is the ratio of the recession velocities of galaxies to their distances in the expanding universe. The age of the universe can be estimated from the Hubble Constant and currently is thought to lie between 10 and 20 billion years. A more precise measurement of the Hubble Constant is required to narrow this range. (NASA Release 93-108; P Inq, June 10/93; RTw, June 9/93)	* NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) discovered a group of stars that apparently had been cannibalized of their cooler outer gas layers by other passing stars, resulting in stellar "naked cores" with surface temperatures five times hotter than Earth's sun. (NASA Release 93-109; NY Times, June 10/93; P Inq, June 10/93; B Sun, June 10/93; LA Times, June 10/93; AP, June 10/93; Science, June 14/93)	* The Washington Post reported that the panel advising the White House on redesigning the Space Station had suggested that the proposed astronaut outpost be launched into a "world orbit" where it could be reached not only by American Space Shuttles but also by Russian, Japanese and Chinese rockets. (W Post, June 9/93)	* USA Today reported that the Superconducting Super Collider, a 53-mile circular funnel being build outside Dallas, might not survive the Congressional budget cutters. The 11 billion, over-budget science project was being targeted by Congressional Democrats. (USA Today, June 9/93)	* The Washington Post reported that two separate investigations of a failed Atlas rocket launch last March had concluded that the mishap was caused by the loosening of a tiny screw that helps regulate the flow of liquid oxygen propellent. The completion of the investigations allowed General Dynamics Corporation, the company that built the rocket, to resume launches. (W Post, June 9/93; USA Today, June 9/93; H Chron, June 9/93)	* NASA described the STS61 Space Shuttle Endeavour mission, scheduled for December, as the "most complicated repair mission ever attempted." The seven astronauts aboard Endeavour were scheduled to attempt to service and repair the Lockheed-built Hubble Space Telescope. Crew members were to repair the telescope's primary mirror, which had a distorted spherical mirror, as well as do regular maintenance work on the telescope. (Flight International, June 9-15/93; B Sun, June 17/93)June 10: The House Space, Science, and Technology Committee passed a $15.16 billion authorization for NASA, in effect rejecting the attempt to kill the Space Station. The authorization would give the Space Station $1.9 billion a year for the next six fiscal years and $1.3 billion in the fiscal year 2000. Congressional opponents of the station, however, vowed to take the fight to the House floor. (NY Times, June 10/93; LA Times, June 10/93; USA Today, June 10/93; AP, June 10/93)	* The Federal Aviation Administration authorized civilian pilots to use a satellite-based navigation system that would enable them to choose direct routes without relying on navigational aids on the ground. The system, the Global Positioning System, uses a network of 24 satellites orbiting 11,000 miles above the Earth. Each satellite sends out a continuous signal that can be computed by receivers to determine an exact position. (NY Times, June 10/93)	* A Deutsche Aerospace AG (DASA) executive called on Europe and the United states to cooperate in setting quotas for launches of Russia's Proton booster rocket until such time as market economy conditions prevailed in Russia. Werner Heinzmann, president of DASA's space systems group, told a news conference that currently the Proton costs only a fraction of a Western launcher because of the value of the rouble. (RTw, June 10/93)	* The press reported that the House Appropriations Sub-Committee on Energy and Water had appropriated $629 million for the Superconducting Super Collider for fiscal year 1994. The Clinton Administration had requested $640 million for the Collider. (UPI, June 10/93)June 11: NASA announced that on June 13 Pioneer 10 would celebrate the 10th anniversary of becoming the first spacecraft to explore beyond the orbit of Pluto, the most distant solar system planet as yet discovered. (NASA Release 93-110; W Times, June 12/93)	* Sky and Telescope magazine sponsored a contest to choose a more accurate name than "big bang" to describe the creation of the universe. (NY Times, June 11/93; AP, June 11/93; LA Times, June 11/93; W Post, June 16/93)	* The Los Angeles Times reported that congressional supporters of the proposed Space Station were warning that the project would face serious trouble if President Clinton supported a radical, low-cost design. Supporters of the Station made it clear that they supported the most elaborate and expensive of the three redesigns developed by NASA. This design, which would cost $13.3 billion over the next five years, would cut more than $4 billion from the cost of the Station, yet it would keep most of the Station's capabilities and make use of much of the work that NASA had done on the project over the last nine years. (LA Times, June 11/93)  June 12: In a report delivered to the White House, a panel appointed by the President said it found the two cheaper options for a Space Station to be the "most deserving of further support." However, according to press reports, the most expensive option and the one that most resembled Space Station Freedom was the design favored by the majority of the members of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology. (W Times, June 12/93; C Trib, June 13/93)	* Intelsat and Martin Marietta reached a tentative settlement of lawsuits connected with a communications satellite that Space Shuttle astronauts rescued after it was stranded in low orbit. The lawsuit stemmed from Martin Marietta's 1990 launch of a $157 million Intelsat satellite, which went into a low, useless orbit after a Martin Marietta rocket launcher failed. Spacewalking astronauts attached a new rocket booster package to the satellite in May 1992, and the satellite then fired itself into its proper orbit. (W Times, June 12/93; W Post, June 12/93) June 13: Two NASA scientists told a meeting of the American Astronomical Society that a cosmic collision as powerful as the one that many scientists think killed all the dinosaurs on Earth 65 million years ago may take place on the planet Jupiter in 1994. The scientists speculated that the impact might come from the comet Shoemaker-Levy, which last year came so close to Jupiter that the planet's powerful gravitational field shattered the comet into about a dozen large chunks. Recent calculations show that most of the comet's remaining chunks may hit Jupiter in July 1994. Because of uncertainties about the comet's orbit, however, it was possible that the collision might not occur at all. (C Trib, June 13/93; P Inq, June 20/93; W Post, June 28/93)	A memorial service was scheduled for June 19 at the Johnson Space Center. (UPI, June 13/93; RTw, June 13/93; NY Times, June 14/93; W Times, June 14/93; USA Today, June 14/93; W Post, June 14/93, June 20/93; B Sun, June 14/93; P Inq, June 14/93; WSJ, June 14/93; AP, June 14/93)June 14: NASA announced that it had selected the Universities Space Research Association, Columbia, Maryland, to negotiate a cost-plus-fee contract for the Visiting Scientists Program at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. The five-year contract was expected to take effect September 1, 1993; the proposed cost for the five-year period was $31 million. (NASA Release C93-g)	* USA Today reported that an article in Florida Today suggested that cuts in quality-control staffs at NASA and workers' fear of admitting error were creating potentially deadly problems for the Space Shuttle program. (USA Today, June 14/93) 	* NASA announced that the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, had selected Fairchild Space and Defense Corporation of Germantown, Maryland, for negotiations leading to the award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract. The seven-year, $91 million contract would provide instrument support services to the Engineering Directorate at Goddard. (NASA Release C93-h; W Post, June 15/93)   	* Donald K. Slayton, one of the original seven American astronauts, died June 13 at his home in League City, Texas, of brain cancer. He was 69.	Mr. Slayton, known by the nickname Deke, was assigned to fly the second Mercury mission in orbit in May 1962 but was grounded two months before the mission because of an abnormal heartbeat. His heart condition cleared up in 1971, enabling him to qualify for the last available seat on the last Apollo mission.	The New York Times notes that other astronauts and space officials say that Mr. Slayton probably had a greater influence on the American space program over a longer period of time than any other single astronaut. For many years, he served as chief of flight operations at the Johnson Space Center and in that position was in charge of astronaut training and chose crews for nearly all missions. He retired from NASA in 1982. At the time of his death, he was director of Space Services Inc., a company that launched small satellites.	* Ten years ago this week, the United States sent its first woman, Sally Ride, into space. Ride, who flew in space twice, is a physics professor and director of the California space institute. (AP, June 14/93)      	* Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine reported that the White House had begun to review the various options for redesign of the Space Station. There were reports that the President might be wavering in his support for the Station and perhaps would be willing to sacrifice it for his broader economic goals. (AvWk, June 14/93)June 15: Space Shuttle Endeavour was scheduled to blast off June 20 on a seven-day mission that included an attempt to retrieve a science satellite, the European Retrievable Carrier (EURECA), and a spacewalk to prepare for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission. The Shuttle was also carrying the world's first commercial space laboratory, Spacehab, which had on board 22 experiments underwritten by NASA. (USA Today, June 17/93; B Sun, June 17/93; UPI, June 17/93; AP, June 17/93) June 16: The Los Angeles Times reported that, according to congressional aids, President Clinton had decided to push for construction of a sophisticated, orbiting space laboratory that would make use of much of the technology already developed for Space Station Freedom. The President appeared to hint at this decision in a June 15 press conference. (LA Times, June 16/93)	* NASA announced that a specially modified NASA F-15 research aircraft had arrived at the Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The F-15 was to be involved in a research program aimed at substantially advancing the cruising efficiency and flight maneuverability of future U.S. aircraft. (NASA Release 93-115)  	* Guion Bluford Jr., America's first African-American astronaut in space, was scheduled to leave NASA in July to join NYMA, Inc., a Greenbelt, Maryland, engineering and computer software company. (USA Today, June 16/93; NASA Release, 93-113)	* White House officials said that President Clinton had decided to proceed with a slightly slimmed down version of the original Space Station Freedom design. The Space Station was expected to cost about $10.5 billion over five years. (RTw, June 16/93; NY Times, June 17/93; USA Today, June 17/93; AP, June 17/93)	* A European Space Agency official said that a re-usable science satellite scheduled to be rescued during Space Shuttle Endeavour's mission next week would be mothballed after astronauts returned it to earth and experiments were removed from it. The satellite was scheduled to be flown four more times, but there was no budget for additional flights. (RTw, June 16/93)June 17: Scientists writing in the journal Nature suggested that multiple meteorites, rather than one big meteorite, might have caused the extinction of dinosaurs. (P Inq, June 17/93; NY Times, June 22/93)	* Writing in the New York Times, author John Lukacs called the proposed $8.4 billion Super Collider in Texas "super nonsense." He labelled as outdated the view held by proponents of the Super Collider that science might discover the smallest building block of the universe and that the universe could be explained by a Grand Unified Theory. (NY Times, June 17/93) 	* An editorial in the Baltimore Sun urged President Clinton to give a "strong go-ahead" to the building of Space Station Freedom. (B Sun, June 17/93)		* President Bill Clinton announced that he would ask Congress to support a scaled-down version of Space Station Freedom and would attempt to broaden international participation in the program. Clinton said that he would also support the Superconducting Super Collider project. (RTw, June 17/93; UPI, June 17/93; W Post, June 18/93; LA Times, June 18/93; USA Today, June 18/93; NY Times, June 18/93; W Times, June 18/93; B Sun, June 18/93; WSJ, June 13/93; AP, June 18/93)June 18: NASA announced the selection of 100 minority high school students to participate in a new NASA education program called SHARP PLUS Research Apprenticeship Program. The program is a collaborative effort between NASA, Historically Black Colleges and Universities, and aerospace and other industries to increase opportunities for minority students interested in careers in mathematics, science, and engineering by offering research apprenticeships. (NASA Release 93-116) June 20: NASA delayed the launch of Space Shuttle Endeavour, scheduled to blast off on June 20, because of poor weather at Cape Canaveral, Florida. A second launch attempt was expected for Monday morning, June 21. (RTw, June 20/93; UPI, June 20/93, June 21/93; Ap, June 21/93; NY Times, June 21/93; LA Times, June 21/93; W Post, June 21/93; USA Today, June 21/93; W Times, June 21/93; B Sun, June 21/93)	* Robert McClure of Dominion Astrophysical Observatory in Victoria, British Columbia, said that Canadian and U.S. astronomers had used a telescope on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, to obtain the first clear pictures showing galaxies colliding and merging on "a really grand scale." The pictures supported a theory that postulates that elliptical galaxies were formed by galactic mergers such as those observed. (W Times, June 20/93) June 21: The Astronomical Union in Cambridge, Massachusetts, said that an asteroid had come within 90,000 miles of Earth last month without being detected. This was the closest encounter ever recorded. The asteroid, named 1993 KA2, was discovered by asteroid hunter David Rabinowitz. (W Post, June 21/93; P Inq, June 21/93)	* The Danish industry ministry announced that Denmark was scheduled to take part in a scientific satellite project in cooperation with NASA in 1995. The project involved the launch of a small Danish satellite into orbit to study Earth's magnetic field. (RTw, June 21/93)  	* In mid-June a new breed of spacecraft, the Delta Clipper Xl (DC-X), was scheduled to be launched for a brief test. If things go according to plan, the craft would hover briefly 100 feet in the air, and then settle back in its launching pad. The spacecraft, built by McDonald Douglas Aerospace, was to take off vertically and land the same way. Some experts in the field suggested that the DC-X might mark the next phase of U.S. space exploration. (Business Week, June 21/93)	* NASA announced that it and the national Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders (NIDCD) had selected a proposal from a consortium of institutions to place the Center for Vestibular Research at Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois. The center would work on defining the contributions of the vestibular system to the control of balance, posture, and locomotion through ground-based and space-based studies. (NASA Release 93-111)	* NASA announced that 40 college students had started a six-week Space Life Sciences Training Program at NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida. The summer residence training program was for college students interested in life sciences, bioengineering, ecology, or related fields. (NASA Release 93-117)	* Space Shuttle Endeavour blasted into space on June 21, after a one-day launch delay. The shuttle's mission was multipurpose, featuring experiments in the world's first commercial research laboratory, Spacehab; the retrieval of a European science satellite; and a spacewalk geared to preparing astronauts for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for December. (UPI, June 21/93; AP, June 21/93; RTw, June 21/93; USA Today,June 22/93; NY Times, June 22/93; W Post, June 22/93; LA Times, June 22/93; W Times, June 22/93; B Sun, June 22/93)	* The House Science, Space, and Technology Committee voted June 9 to prevent NASA from moving about 90 Space Shuttle jobs from Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, to Johnson Space Center in Houston. (Space News, June 21-27/93)June 23: NASA announced that, despite transmitting problems, the on-board data recovery system of Space Shuttle STS-56 had captured 103 orbital sunrises and sunsets observed by the Atmospheric Trace Molecule Spectroscopy (ATMOS) instrument aboard the Shuttle. (NASA Release 93-118)	* President Clinton thanked the crew members aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour for giving "a great deal of credibility" to his attempt to save the Space Station. The President called the crew on Tuesday, June 22. (USA Today, June 23/93; NY Times, June 23/93; W Times, June 23/93)	* A New York Times editorial recommended that Congress eliminate the Space Station program because of the need to find deeper budget cuts and the fact that the program looked "more like pork-barrel spending for the aerospace industry than an exciting technological venture." The editorial noted that cutting the program would force the nation to reassess just what role humans should play in space. (NY Times, June 23/93)	* A Department of Energy draft report said that the Superconducting Super Collider program had racked up at least $216 million in unreasonable subcontractor expenses. (W Post, June 23/93)	. The House Appropriations Committee adopted a revised space budget that fully funded the redesigned Space Station but called for large cuts elsewhere in NASA's budget. (WSJ, June 23/93)	* The Washington Times reported that Space Shuttle Endeavour had to delay firing a jet to avoid possibly coming in contact with a piece of space trash, in this instance, a 27-year-old spent Russian rocket. This was the fourth time in two years that Shuttle astronauts had to take measures to avoid trash in space. There were hundreds of thousands of pieces of trash floating in space as a result of space missions. (AP, June 23/93; W Times, June 24/93; NY Times, June 24/93)  	* By a one-vote margin, the House of Representatives voted to fund Space Station Freedom. As a result of a 216-215 vote, the program escaped an attempt by budget-cutting lawmakers to scrap the multibillion-dollar project. (WSJ, June 24/93; NY Times, June 24/93; LA Times, June 24/93; W Times, June 24/93; USA Today, June 24/93; AP, June 24/93; UPI, June 23/94; RTw, June 23/93; W Post, June 24/93)June 24: NASA announced that a NASA-University of New Hampshire study had revealed increased tropical deforestation and adverse effects on tropical forest habitat since the late 1970s. (NASA Release 93-119)	* NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of two astronauts, William M. Shepherd and James D. Wetherbee, to senior management positions at NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. (NASA Release June 24/93)	* The Washington Post reported that a White House official had indicated that President Clinton intended to retain NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, a Bush appointee. The White House apparently had decided that Goldin was just the type of hard-nosed administrator that NASA needed. (W Post, June 24/93; UPI, June 24/93)	* Responding to an Op-Ed piece by John Lukacs in the New York Times that attacked both the Super Collider and the field of particle physics, Edward Farhi, Professor of Physics, M.I.T.,insisted that the Super Collider would open a new window on an energy range not yet explored by physicists, saying that it must be built if "progress is to proceed." (NY Times, June 24/93)   	* Some members of Congress have introduced a bill that would bar space advertising. The bill would prohibit the transportation secretary from issuing launch licenses for any vehicles carrying materials to be used as adds in space. (W Times, June 24/93)	* Writing in the journal Nature, scientists reported that they think they have discovered a belt of asteroids in orbits so close to the earth's orbit that many of them may hit our planet at some time or other. However, most of these asteroids are so small that they will explode in space without doing any damage. (NY Times, June 24/93)	* Western Europe's Ariane 42P rocket deployed an American communications satellite into space on June 24. The rocket, which was launched from French Guiana after a long series of delays, was owned by the Los Angeles based Hughes Space and Communications Company. (RTw, June 24/93)	* The House of Representatives voted to kill the $11 billion Superconducting Super Collider project. The project, which had President Clinton's support, was being built in Texas. The Super Collider, which was designed to discover sub-atomic particles that could provide clues to the origins of the universe, fell victim to political and budget pressures. (RTw, June 24/93; UPI, June 24/93; NY Times, June 25/93; B Sun, June 25/93; W Post, June 25/93) 		* Officials said that talks between Vice President Al Gore and Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin to discuss mutual space exploration had been put off indefinitely because of friction over a $400 million contract for Russia to sell rocket engines to India. (UPI, June 24/93; RTw, June 25/93)	* Writing in the Chicago Tribune, commentator Joan Beck called on Congress to kill the Space Station. She admitted that killing the project would cost jobs, but argued that doing so was necessary if progress were to be made in cutting back the deficit. (C Trib, June 24/93)June 25: After making a final series of engine maneuvers that brought it within reach of the European Retrievable Carrier (Eureca), a free-flying platform of science experiments, the commander of Shuttle Endeavour plucked the satellite out of space and stowed it in the Shuttle's cargo hold for return to earth.	Astronaut David Low fixed two stuck antennas on Eureca during a later spacewalk; during the walk, which was originally planned as an training exercise to prepare for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission, he also twirled another astronaut around to test how difficult it would be to move large objects in space. Astronauts also worked, unsuccessfully as it turned out, on repairing a clogged line in a water-recycling experiment. (W Post, June 25/93, June 26/93; LA Times, June 25/93, June 27/93; NY Times, June 25/93, June 29/93; AP, June 25/93; RTw, June 25/93; USA Today, June 25/93, June 28/93; B Sun, June 26/93; W Times, June 26/93; P Inq, June 26/93; P Inq, June 29/93)	* Satellite research supported by NASA found that far fewer trees had been cut in the Amazon rain forest than previously assumed. However, the same study also found that three times as many animal and plant species were being killed or were near extinction than previously had been estimated. (AP, June 6/25; W Post, June 25/93; RTw, June 24/93; NY Times, June 29/93)	* Western Europe's second Ariane-5 booster was tested in a jungle clearing in French Guiana, space officials announced. The first Ariane-5 rocket was scheduled for launch in 1996. (RTw, June 25/93)June 26: NASA unreeled 1,640 feet of cooper wire above Earth and conducted electricity through the line in a space tether test. When refined, such tethers could be used to dispel electrical charges from spacecraft and change spacecraft orbits. The tether spool was carried into space by a Delta 2 rocket launched by the Air Force. (AP, June 26/93; RTw, June 26/93; NY Times, June 27/93; W Post, June 27/93)	* Roald Sagdeev, director of the Space Research Institute in Moscow from 1973-1988 and now professor of physics at the University of Maryland, and Michael Nacht, dean of the school of public affairs at the university, argued in a New York Times article that NASA should solicit Russian design help and begin plans to modify the Space Station's orbit so that it could be reached by launch vehicles from both the Kennedy Space Center and the Baikonur Cosmodrome. The authors also noted that a University of Maryland study commissioned by NASA found that a wider use of Russian technology could reduce costs by up to a billion dollars a year after the station was operational. (NY Times, June 26/93)	* A satellite was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base carrying a military satellite designed to improve the accuracy of radars that track planes, missiles, space junk, shuttles, and other spacecraft. (AP, June 26/93)June 27: Space School, a method of teaching math and science that uses spaceage technology to beam educational "adventures" into classrooms across America, was scheduled to open August 30. Space School lessons, which were to be carried on a delivery system called "distance learning," would be broadcast from a studio in Spokane, Washington, beamed up to a satellite, down to a receiver, and transmitted to a television in the classroom. Space school was to be operated and partially financed by the Young Astronaut Council, a nonprofit organization started by the White House in 1894. (Parade, June 27/93) June 28: NASA announced that during the first six months of their mission scientists using the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon oceanographic satellite had recorded the most accurate measurements to date of global sea level changes. Oceanographers would use the data to calibrate computer models that help forecast future climate changes. (NASA Release 93-122)	* Writing in the Los Angeles Times, commentator James Flanigan made the case for funding the Space Station, reminding readers of the Vest Commission report, ordered last March by the White House. The report listed three main goals of the Space Station program: to learn about space travel, specifically how human beings and materials react to prolonged weightless exposure; to gather technological and engineering knowledge; and to further international cooperation. (LA Times, June 28/93)  	* The House of Representatives voted to maintain $2.1 billion in funding for the scaled-down Space Station Freedom by a 220 to 196 vote. NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin attributed the growing support to an intense lobbying effort by the White House and congressional supporters. The project's chance of surviving the Senate vote were seen as good. (RTw, June 28/93; UPI, June 28/93; APn, June 29/93; AP, June 29/93; W Post, June 29/93; LA Times, June 29/93; H Post, June 29/93; B Sun, June 29/93; W Times, June 29/93; NY Times, June 30/93)	* A National Research Council (NCR) study found that Space Shuttle computer software programs were flawed by lax attention to safety by NASA engineers. Nancy Leveson, who headed the NRC committee that prepared the report, said that "many of the same kinds of mistakes that played a role in the Challenger accident are now being repeated with the shuttle flight software." NASA, which requested the study, was considering some of the report's recommendations. (AP, June 28/93; USA Today, June 29/93; B Sun, June 29/93)	* Bad weather delayed the landing of Space Shuttle Endeavour at Kennedy Space Center. The landing was rescheduled for June 30, weather permitting. (UPI, June 29/93, June 30/93; W Post, June 30/93; USA Today, June 30/93; NY Times, June 30/93; B Sun, June 30/93; AP, June 30/93; RTw, June 30/93) June 30: NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin hired two astronauts to fill senior management positions: William Shepherd, an ocean engineer and veteran of three Space Shuttle flights; and James Wetherbee, a former test pilot who had flown two Shuttle missions. They were scheduled to help lead the agency's transition to a smaller, cheaper Space Station program. (W Post, June 30/93) 	* An editorial in the Washington Post noted that in light of the budget deficit it was difficult to quarrel with Congress's decision to kill funding for the Superconducting Super Collider. By that same token, however, the Space Station deserved to be killed, especially because the Super Collider had the potential to contribute to human knowledge while the Space Station did not. (W Post, June 30/93) 	* A team of Russian and French cosmonauts was scheduled to blast off to the Mir orbital Space Station on July 1, for a three-week mission during which the team would carry out a series of medical and scientific experiments. This was the fourth joint Russian-French space mission since 1982. The mission had been largely overshadowed by the space program's serious financial problems caused by the collapse of the Soviet Union. (RTw, June 6/30)July 	July  1: NASA announced that it had selected investigators to work on a new mission, called TIMED (Thermosphere-Ionosphere-Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics).  The mission was to study the atmospheric regions that lie roughly between 40 to 110 miles (60 and 180 kilometers above the Earth's surface. The investigators come from four different universities, two of NASA's research centers, and four non-profit research and/or industrial laboratories in the United States. (NASA Release 93-123)	* NASA announced that it had set July 17 as the launch date for the Space Shuttle Discovery's 17th flight.  The nine-day mission of STS-51 was to include deployment of an Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) and deployment and retrieval of the German-built ORFEUS-SPAS astrophysics free-flier.  A six-hour space walk by two astronauts was also scheduled.  (NASA Note to Editors N93-38)	* Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary harshly criticized the management of the $11 billion federal Superconducting Super Collider project scheduled to be built in Texas.  O'Leary said she was distressed by reports of wasteful expenditures, erroneous cost estimates, and the contractor's failure to cooperate with government auditors.  She said she would move to replace the principal contractor, Universities Research Association Inc. (URA), in the next 30 days. (W Post, Jul 1/93; NY Times, Jul 1/93)	* The Los Angeles Times reported that a dispute was brewing within NASA regarding who was to be assigned to the management team overseeing work on the redesigned Space Station.  NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin was said to be looking for new blood on the management team.  (LA Times, Jul 1/93)	* In letters to the editor of the Baltimore Sun, two Johns Hopkins University physics professors defended the importance of the Super Collider. Both writers said that the project represented basic research of the highest caliber and noted that its fate should not be tied to that of the Space Station. (B Sun, Jul 1/93)	* The Shuttle Endeavour landed at the Kennedy Space Center on July  1, after a two-day delay caused by bad weather. The Shuttle carried a science satellite the astronauts had retrieved in orbit.	Meanwhile, the crew of Shuttle Discovery was practicing for the Shuttle's next mission, scheduled to begin July  17. During the six-hour spacewalk planned for the mission, astronauts were to test Hubble Space Telescope repair tools. The Hubble repair mission was scheduled for December. (AP, Jul 1/93; RTw, Jul 1/93; UPI, Jul 1/93; USA Today, Jul 1/93; NY Times, Jul 2/93; W Post, Jul 2/93;  W Times, Jul 2/93; AkWk, Jul 5/93)	* NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin told a Senate panel that Space Station Freedom needed to be everything from a scientific laboratory to "an inspiration to children."  Disagreeing with Goldin, Robert L. Park, representing the American Physical Society, argued that the "Space Station is unlikely to make any significant scientific contribution." (AP, Jul 1/93, Jul 2/93)	* A team of Russian and French cosmonauts blasted off to the Mir orbital Space Station on July 1, for a three-week mission. The team was scheduled to carry out a series of medical and scientific experiments and undertake three space walks.  This was the fourth joint Russian-French space flight since 1982. (RTw, Jul 1/93; RT, Jul 1/93)    July 2: NASA announced that it had selected SYSCON Services, Inc., Washington, D.C., for negotiations leading to the award of a contract to provide technical and support services at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California.  (NASA Release C93-j)July 3: A Soyuz spacecraft with a Russian-French crew docked successfully with the Mir-1 orbiting Space Station on July 3. (RTw, July  3/93)July 5: NASA said that the U.S.-French Topex-Poseidon satellite had revealed that sea levels dropped 12 inches off the East Coast during the period between October 1992 to March 1993 as cold winter air chilled the Atlantic Ocean and made the water contract. The satellite also found that sea levels rose 12 inches in parts of the Southern Hemisphere, where warm summer air heated the oceans and made the water expand.	According to Lee Fu, chief scientist of the $706 million project at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, these measurements were the most accurate yet of global sea level changes and showed how sea levels were affected by both winds and seasonal temperature changes in ocean water. (AP, Jul 5/93)	* Donald Yeomans of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, said that "There is almost no question" that major chunks of the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 would hit the planet Jupiter in late July  of 1994. Astronomers planned to aim virtually every telescope in the world at Jupiter in late July  to see what happens when big chunks of a shattered comet crash into the largest known planet at almost 40 miles a second. Astronomers predicted that the chunks would explode with the energy equivalent to almost a billion megatons of TNT. (W Post, Jul 5/93; W Times, Oct 5/93)July 6: Senator James M. Jeffords and a group of House members last month introduced an amendment to the Commercial Space Launch Act of 1984 to prohibit the Department of Transportation from licensing a payload that would result in advertising from space.  The amendment was in response to a proposal by Space Marketing Inc. of Roswell, Georgia, to launch a mile-long inflatable billboard into space.  The company planned to stuff the billboard in a satellite; after the satellite reached orbit, it would open and the billboard would jump out like "a giant life raft."  	Opposition to the billboard was spearheaded by a lobbying effort, "Save Our Skies," put together by 30 state chapters of Public Interest Research Groups. (W Post, Jul 6/93; C Trib, Jul 7/93)	* John Bolton, a pioneer in radio astronomy, died  at Buderim in Queensland, Australia.  He was 71. Bolton was credited with having discovered, in 1947, the first radio "stars," galaxies that broadcast incredibly strong signals in radio wave length. (NY Times, Jul 20/93)	  	July 7: Shuttle builder Rockwell International Corporation announced that it would acquire Russian docking equipment for Space Shuttle Atlantis's planned linkup with Russia's Mir Space Station in 1995. Acquisition of the docking adapter was part of an agreement between the two countries that included flying a Russian cosmonaut on the Shuttle Discovery in November and sending an American astronaut to Mir for three months in 1995. (AP, Jul 7/93; H Chron, Jul 8/93))	* French Prime Minister Edouard Balladur said that European countries should attempt to cooperate on space projects because progress in technology was a way to assert themselves on the world stage. He made the comment after talking by satellite link with a French cosmonaut who was on a joint Franco-Russian mission.  (RTw, Jul 7/93)	* NASA announced that it had awarded contracts to three U.S. aerospace companies to develop materials and materials fabrication technology for a future U.S. high-speed civil transport. Contracts went to Boeing Commercial Airplane Group, Seattle, Washington; Lockheed Aeronautical Systems Co, Marietta, Georgia; and McDonnell Douglas Aerospace, Long Beach, California.  (NASA Release 93-124)July 8: Texas Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson pledged to fight for the survival of NASA's Space Station as she inspected a mockup of the proposed orbital base at the Johnson Space Center in Houston. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)	* Lowell Nesbitt, an artist who documented the Apollo 9 and 13 space launches for NASA, was found dead in his Manhattan studio on July 8. Death was attributed to natural causes. He was 59. (UPI, Jul 8/93) 	* In an ironic twist, Space Station Freedom's "program Office" in Reston, Virginia, which led the charge to cut waste and inefficiency in the space program, including warnings of cost overruns at Johnson Space Center in Texas, was said to stand the best chance of being eliminated as NASA attempted to streamline the management of the Space Station program. (H Chron, Jul 8/93)	* Fred E. Weick, a pioneering aviation engineer and designer died of heart disease on July 8 in Vero Beach, Florida.  He was 93. 	NASA officials said that Mr. Weick's "genius touched almost every aeronautical discipline" for half a century. His career was devoted to making planes more aerodynamically efficient, safer, and easier to fly.  A major innovation was his stable, tricycle-like landing gear, which became standard for virtually all aircraft, including the space shuttle. (NY Times, Jul 11/93)July 9: NASA announced that it would participate in the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People's (NAACP) national Afro-Academic Cultural, Technological, and Scientific Olympics (ACT-SO) competition, to be held in conjunction with the groups's annual convention in July.  Two thousand high school students, representing 600 cities, were scheduled to compete for national honors.  NASA scientists and engineers were to participate as science fair judges.  National winner would receive certificates from NASA and a sponsored visit to a NASA field center.	Astronaut Bernard Harris, M.D., who completed his first Space Shuttle in May, was also scheduled to participate in several convention activities. (NASA Media Advisory)July 11: Writing in the Washington Times, Representative George E. Brown, California Democrat and chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, argued that critics of the Space Station were themselves partially responsible for the delay, confusion, and high costs of the Station because of the annual sniping, redrafting and retrenchment to which they have subjected the  Space Station. Brown maintained that the United States needs the jobs provided by the Space Station, needs the scientific challenges of space-based design and engineering, and needs the emotional satisfaction of exploration and discovery. 	Arguing the counter position, Representative Zimmer, New Jersey Republican, said that the Space Station is "simply not worth the billions of dollars we have been asked to spend on it." He argued that many worthwhile scientific projects had suffered from lack of funding because money was being poured into the Space Station. (W Times, Jul  11/93)	* The state of Louisiana and NASA signed an agreement on June 24 in Baton Rouge reaffirming the commitment to transfer technology developed by NASA to businesses, industries, academic institutions, research labs, and individuals in Louisiana.  The goal of NASA's technology transfer program is to ensure the widest possible information to potential beneficiaries. (Picayne, Jul 11/93)   	July 12: NASA and Supra Medical Corporation, Chadds Ford, Pennsylvania, announced that they would jointly develop advanced ultrasound instrumentation. NASA planned to use the instrumentation for non-destructive evaluation of a new class of woven composite materials, and Supra Medical planned to use it to extend its high resolution capability for the non-invasive examination of the breast. (NASA Release 93-125)	* Writing in Sports Illustrated, Robert H. Boyle took to task those members of the media who have asserted that environmental problems such as depletion of the ozone layer and acid rain don't exist, that they were cooked up by scientists greedy for funding. Boyle pointed the finger at talk show host Ross Limbaugh but said that mainstream publications such as the Washington Post and the Wall Street Journal had also been guilty of misrepresenting environmental problems.  (Sports Illustrated, Jul 12/93)July 13: NASA announced that it had restructured the agreement under which Columbia leases the commercial C-band capacity on board two of NASA's Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS)Under terms of the restructured agreement, Columbia would share with NASA all revenues received from leasing capacity to third parties. (NASA Release 93-126)	* The United States and Russia appeared to be nearing a compromise in a dispute over a proposed Russian sale of rocket engines and associated technology to India. Under the expected compromise, Washington would allow Moscow to sell the rocket engines to India but halt the transfer of some associated technology that initially was to be a key part of the deal. The technology was meant to give India the capability to manufacture its own ballistic missile engines, which could be used for either military or commercial space launch vehicles. (AP, Jul 13/93; W Post, Jul 14/93; UPI, Jul 14/93)	* Guy Bluford, the nation's first African American astronaut in space, was scheduled to retire later in the month.  Bluford, 50, who went on four Shuttle missions, planned to work for a Maryland aerospace company. (AP, Jul 13/93) July 14: Writing in the journal Nature, U.S. scientist Walter Jaffe said that his team had taken pictures of a so-called nuclear accretion disk, which scientists have long theorized surrounds a black hole.  The idea is that matter swirls around the black hole as it is being pulled in, forming an accretion disk, a flat ellipse resembling a round Danish pastry.  The disk was discovered through use of the planetary camera on the Hubble Space Telescope. (RTw, Jul 14/93)	* NASA began the countdown for the planned weekend launch of Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite-delivery and spacewalking mission. During the nine-day mission, the astronauts were to release an experimental communications satellite destined for a 22,300-mile high orbit and an ultraviolet telescope to be retrieved six days later and returned to Earth.  They also planned to test new navigation equipment and conduct a spacewalk to try out tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission in December. (AP, Jul 14/93; RTw, Jul 14/93; USA Today, Jul 15/93, Jul 16/93; P Inq, Jul 15/93; W Times, Jul 16/93; NY Times, Jul 17/93) July 15: NASA's exhibit at the Experimental Aircraft Association Fly-in Convention and Sport Aviation Exhibition at Oshkosh, Wisconsin on July  29-August 6, was scheduled to focus on general aviation technology. The exhibit was to explain how NASA was addressing the challenges of aircraft in every speed regime. It also planned to stress how NASA's "customers," that is, the government, industry, universities, and, ultimately, the American taxpayer, benefitted from the agency's advances in aeronautics.  (NASA Release 93-128)  		* The Russians, eager to hawk their space wares to the West, were scheduled to hold a conference on the Mir Space Station July  27 to July  28 at the Dulles Hyatt in Herndon, Virginia.  Hosted by NPO Engergia, manufacturer of the Mir, the conference is scheduled to cover all aspects of the platform.  A large delegation was expected from the NASA Space Station redesign team. (Washington Technology, Jul 15/93) 	* A NASA-developed automated air traffic control tool that could save airlines hundreds of millions of dollars was to be presented to aviation industry representatives at a briefing co-hosted by NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration scheduled for July 19-20.	The Center/TRACON Automation System (CTAS) helps air traffic controllers schedule arriving aircraft more effectively, starting when planes are still about 200 miles from an airport. (NASA Release 93-127)	* Pollution of the world's atmosphere could trigger huge temperature changes like those before the last Ice Age, the British journal Nature reported.  Scientists examining glacier samples say that when temperatures during the last warm period rose an average of 3.8 degrees Fahrenheit above normal levels, they also started fluctuating by as much as 18 degrees Fahrenheit (USA Today, Jul 15/93; WSJ, Jul 15/93; W Post, Jul 19/93)July 16: NASA announced that a team of astronomers had reported that recent NASA Hubble Space Telescope observations of a class of active galaxies further supported the theory that they are fueled by a massive black hole at the center. (NASA Release 93-130; RTw, Jul 16/93; W Post, Jul 17/93)	* Aaron Cohen, Director of the Johnson Space Center, announced that he had accepted an appointment as the Zachry Professor of Engineering at Texas A&M University and would retire from NASA on August 20. Cohen joined NASA in 1962.  He became Director of the Johnson Space Center in 1986. (NASA Release 93-131; AP, Jul 17/93; RTw, Jul 16/93; UPn, Jul 16/93; W Post, Jul 17/93)		* The United States and Russia reached a last-minute agreement on the sale of rocket engines and related technology  to India.  The deal would allow some of the rocket engines to be transferred to India but would limit the transfer of technology and would not impose any sanctions on Russia, (Reuters, Jul 16/93; APn, Jul 17/93 	* Brazil was scheduled to begin a campaign in July  to fight the burning of the Amazon rain forest.  The months from July  to November make up the dry season in the Amazon, and clearing of the rain forest through burning largely occurs in that period.  NASA has agreed to monitor fires through its satellites and other equipment.  (Reuters, Jul 16/93)	* NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that he had appointed Margaret G. Finarelli to be Assistant for Strategic Planning.  Prior to her appointment, she served as NASA's Associate Administrator for Policy Coordination and International Relations. (NASA Release 93-132)July 18: India announced that it would develop powerful rocket technology that it said it had been denied as a result of an accord between Washington and Russia. In that accord, Russia agreed to sell some rockets to India but, bowing to  U. S. pressure, agreed not to provide India with the accompanying technology. (NY Times, Jul 18/93) July  17: NASA halted the countdown for Space Shuttle Discovery less than an hour before scheduled liftoff because of a bad electrical circuit controlling a set of launch pad safety locks.  A second launch attempt was expected to take place no earlier than late next week. (AP, Jul 17/93; UPn, Jul 17/93; RTw, Jul 17/93; USA Today, Jul 19/93; P Inq, Jul 18/93; NY Times, Jul 17/93; W Times, Jul 18/93; W Post, Jul 18/93)July 19: A team of astronomers using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope discovered a "double nucleus" in the center of the neighboring spiral galaxy M31, located in the constellation Andromeda.  Hubble shows that the M31 nucleus is much more complex than previously though, according to Dr. Todd R. Lauer of the National Optical Astronomy Observatories, Tucson, Arizona.(NASA Release 93-133; NY Times, Jul 20/93; CSM, Jul 20/93; AvWk, Jul 19/93).	* Responding to Alan Shepherd's June 19 letter on the DC-X (Delta Clipper), Charles Conrad Jr., a former astronaut and staff vice president at McDonnell Douglas Aerospace, defended the concept behind the vertical-takeoff, vertical-landing vehicle.  He also noted that by the time the vehicle would be operational it would not be a Shuttle replacement but would provide an adjunct to the space lift capacity in the 20,000-pound-payload category.  Conrad noted that the experimental vehicle was designed to be reusable, like aircraft.  (W Post, Jul 19/93)	* In a Time magazine essay, Dennis Overbye advocated cooperating with the Russians in building the new Space Station. He suggested  that the inclusion of Russia would breathe new life into the tired Space-Station project.  At the very least, he advocated that the Space Station go into a high-inclination orbit so that Russian spacecraft could visit from the Baikonur spaceport and perhaps perform rescue operations. (Time, Jul 19/93)	* After back-to-back failures, rocket-maker General Dynamics successfully launched a booster with a military communications satellite built to survive nuclear attack.  The 15-story Atlas blasted of from Cape Canaveral, Florida. (P Inq, Jul 20/93)July 20: As the Clinton Administration urged the Federal research complex into doing more to help American businesses, experts said that it should take a lesson from what had happened with the $600 million Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS), which was expected to be put into orbit shortly after the Space Shuttle Discovery got off the ground. Labeling the project a white elephant, critics said that the satellite had generated little or no interest among its main targets--American satellite builders, who said its gadgetry was either irrelevant to their needs or coming along far too late to be of any use. 	Analysts said that the government should tread very carefully when it tried to help industry technically and that any programs that did materialize should be structured so that businesses paid a substantial part of the costs, creating an opening for the discipline of market mechanisms. (NY Times, Jul 20/93)	* The Washington Post reported that firms that did work relating to the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) in the past were attempting to turn their SDI-related discoveries to commercial use.  For example, Photon Research Associates Inc., in Arlington, Virginia, worked on mapping the earth's oceans and land masses so that space-based sensors could differentiate between incoming enemy missiles and the earth in the background.  The company switched to developing sensors for NASA that would study the planet's natural resources and to monitor pollution.  (W Post, Jul 20/93)	* Writing in the Los Angeles Times, aerospace engineer James F. Glass advocated funding the Space Station, arguing that not only does NASA provide jobs and dreams, but it also keeps the country pulling together for America's future. He noted that when NASA, with all its faults, spends a dollar, the taxpayer usually receives a dollar's value.  Ultimately, in Glass's view, the country needs to focus on more than survival; it must reach for the stars. (LA Times, Jul 20/93)	* At a public hearing on July 20, the National Transportation Safety Board described a scene of confusion in the mission control room during the launch of a Pegasus rocket made by Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia. Control room operators at a NASA command center in Wallops Island, Virginia, ordered the launch of the Pegasus from a B-52 bomber, then ordered the launch aborted, only to rescind that order seconds later. Federal safety officials want stricter controls over commercial satellite launches. (AP, Jul 21/93)	* NASA announced that it had selected Computer Sciences Corporation, Applied Technology Division, Falls Church, Virginia, to negotiate a contract for scientific computing operations, maintenance, and communication services in support of the Center Scientific Computing Complex (CSCC) at the Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA (NASA Release C93-1; W Times, Jul 22/93))	* NASA managers set July  24 as the new launch date for Space Shuttle Discovery's Mission STS-51.  A problem with the Pyro Initiator Controller (PIC) unit on the launch pad caused the Kennedy Space Center launch director to abort the launch attempt on July 17. (NASA Launch Advisory)	* An official of Japan's Science and Technology Agency announced that it would spend $4.6 billion developing an unmanned Space Shuttle that would repair satellites, act as a space transporter, and serve as a laboratory for micro-gravity experiments. (Rtw, Jul 7/93)July 21: Charles H. Vermillion, chief of the international data systems office at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, was charged in a six-count indictment with violating federal conflict-of-interest laws and converting government property to his own use. Vermillion, who said he was innocent, was charged with taking NASA-developed plans for a programmable frame synchronizer, assembling the synchronizers at his own plant, and selling them privately. (W Post, Jul 23/93)July 22: Three cosmonauts, including one Frenchman, landed in the Central Asian republic of Kazakhstan after a successful mission aboard the Russian Space Station Mir.  The 22-day Russian-French mission was launched from the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan July  1 on board a Soyuz TM-17 craft and two days later docked with Mir. (UPI, Jul 22/93; AP, Jul 22/93)	* NASA announced that the agency, at the request of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), had flown specialized sensors mounted in an airplane over portions of the midwestern states in an effort to gather information on the flood-damaged Midwest.  FEMA planned to use the collected images to assist in charting flood-damaged areas, to boost the emergency management agency's computer data base on the region, and to update flood insurance maps. (NASA Release 93-134)	* NASA said that it would try again Saturday morning, November 24, to launch the Space Shuttle Discovery on a nine-day flight. The mission was to feature two satellite releases, the retrieval of one of those satellites, and a spacewalk to test tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission planned for the winter. ( AP, Jul 22/93; Rtw, Jul 22/93; NY Times, Jul 24/93)	* David Lux, project manager for the SR-71 "Blackbird" spy plane, which crisscrossed the globe on Cold War spy missions, said that the plane had a new job helping NASA generate a database to be used by people who do aircraft design.  He said that Blackbird would soon take to the skies to see if it were possible to eliminate or reduce sonic booms for future high-speed airliners. (UPI, Jul 25/93)July 24: Computers halted Shuttle Discovery's countdown only 19 seconds before launch when they sensed a problem with one of the spaceship's two booster rockets.  NASA said that the flight could not be rescheduled until sometime in the first week of August, after engineers had replaced a bad hydraulic power unit in the booster.  It was the second launch delay.  Five astronauts aimed to deploy an experimental communications satellite during the mission. (Rtw, Jul 24/93; AP, Jul 24/94; UPI, Jul 24/93; W Post, Jul 25/93; NY Times, Jul 25/93; W Times, Jul 25/93; USA Today, Jul 26/93)July 26: The Washington Post reported that U.S. and Russian scientists would meet in Washington during the week to discuss ways to cooperate on U.S. and Russian Space Stations and possibly merge the two stations in the late 1990s. The Post said that Vice President Al Gore was leading the White House initiative on this subject. (Rtw, Jul 26/93; W Post, Jul 26/93)  	* Writing in the Washington Post, Boyce Rensberger, identified two points of view on global warming. James Hansen, a Goddard Institute for Space Studies scientist, asserted that Earth's atmosphere has been warming since the mid-1970s. He said that his readings indicated that the lower atmosphere's average temperature rose by about a quarter of a degree Fahrenheit in the late 1980s before the eruption of Mount Pinatubo chilled the air.  Christy and Roy Spencer of NASA's Marshall Flight Center have a different opinion.  They maintain that, overall, there had been no warming trend.	Why the difference?  Christy Spencer said that their data came from satellite readings taken over the entire globe while the data used by Hansen came from thermometers, most in industrial areas, which can be "heat islands" and hence give artificially high readings.  Hansen countered that this factor had been taken into account in the readings and noted potential problems with the  accuracy of the satellite readings. Rensberger concluded that, given such ambiguous results, the clamor to "do something" about global warming remains largely an emotionally guided phenomenon. (W Post, Jul 26/93) 	* The Senate approved legislation during the previous week requiring the Smithsonian Institution to build a proposed annex to the National Air and Space Museum near Dulles International Airport.  The bill already had passed the House, and President Clinton was expected to sign it. (W Post, Jul 26/93)	* A NASA study of safety in the Space Shuttle program found that honest mistaken go unreported if workers fear blunders can cost their jobs.  The study found no major safety concerns but said managers had not bridged the communications gap identified in the investigation of the 1986 Challenger disaster. The report said that "exaggerated" news coverage of safety-related incidents led to the mistaken perception among workers that reporting incident and mistakes might result in punitive action. (Rtw, Jul 26/93)			* NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin notified employees in a memo distributed the previous week that the scaled-back Space Station would mean the loss of about 1,300 jobs among federal workers alone.  Space Station work involved 2,300 of NASA's 24,000 employees. (AP, Jul 26/93; Sp News, Jul 26-Aug 1/93; B Sun, Jul 27/93)	* NASA began airborne mapping of Napa to help winegrowers battle an aphid-like insect that nearly destroyed vineyards in France and California in the nineteenth century.  Officials said a single-engine Cessna fitted with an electronic sensor would map 50 acres of the Robert Mondavi vineyards infected by phylloxera. (AP, Jul 7/93)	* NASA announced an August 4 launch attempt for the Space Shuttle Discovery. (RTw, Jul 7/93; USA Today, Jul 28/93) July 27: NASA announced the assignment of Dr. John Cox as acting Deputy Director, Program and Operations, Space Station Freedom Program, and Robert Moorehead as Chief engineer for the Office of Space Systems Development (OSSD), NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC. (NASA Release 93-136)July 28: NASA announced that it was adapting an existing, cutting-edge x-ray system to improve inspections of aging aircraft while saving American industries money. The x-ray system, which combines TV-like scanning by x-ray beams with digital data acquisition, was originally intended for medical, dental, and other industrial purposes.  NASA was to adapt the system to inspect aircraft wings, turbines, and propeller blades for corrosion, cracks, and disbonding.  The system was developed by the Digiray Corporation. (NASA Release 93-137)	* Belgian scientists, using research from outer space, invented a new detection system they hoped would prevent crib deaths. Physics professor Manuel Paiva monitored the breathing of astronauts during a Space Shuttle mission two months ago by using a custom-made space suit with special sensors built into the garment. Paiva said that he had used the same technique for babies by attaching the electronic sensors inside pajamas.  The sensors are able to detect a range of respiration problems. Paiva said research had so far been promising but another six months were needed to complete the studies. (RTw, Jul 28/93) 			* Arkansas Governor Jim Guy Tucker and Thomas J. Lee, Director of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, signed a memorandum of understanding to conduct a joint effort to transfer NASA-derived and NASA-contractor-derived technologies to businesses, industries, academic institutions, research facilities, and individuals in the state. (NASA Release  93-138)July 29: NASA selected Hughes STX Corporation, Lanham, Maryland, to negotiate a five-year contract, proposed at $121,7 million, to provide support of computer systems management for Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. (NASA Release C93-m)	* NASA selected Allied-Signal Technical Services Corporation, Greenbelt, Maryland, for negotiations leading to a cost-plus-award-fee contract, estimated at $40.8 million, to provide Transportable Laser Ranging Systems for the Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland.  The contract was to directly support Goddard's Satellite Laser Ranging (SLR) Mission.  The SLR technique measures the round-trip flight time of very short laser pulses from ground-based stations to retro-reflector-equipped satellites. (NASA Release C93-n)	* A 240-pound Array of Low-Energy X-ray Imaging sensors (ALEXIS) satellite was launched into orbit April 25 aboard an Air Force Pegasus rocket for the Los Alamos National Laboratory in Mew Mexico. Officials at the New Mexico laboratory had hoped to demonstrate that they could handle space missions faster, better, and cheaper than NASA. However, one of the satellite's four solar panels was damaged during the launch, and the satellite was deemed a loss.	Unmanned satellites frequently diagnose their own maladies, make adjustments needed to survive, and allow themselves to be reprogrammed in orbit.  This is what happened to ALEXIS, which on July  5 was brought under control and a week later conducted its first experiment. Scientists now expect to get much of the data they seek from the damaged satellite. The craft uses six telescopes to capture x-rays that could reveal evidence of weapons proliferation, and it carries an experiment designed to determine how Earth's atmosphere distorts radio signals.  (LA Times, Jul 29/93)	* The House of Representatives passed an amendment to the National Helium Act of 1960. The amendment judged the helium program as a case of government waste and voted to end its monopoly on sales to the space program. The 1996 Act required NASA to buy its helium from the government-run reserve, even though it could be bought for as much as $10 less per 1,000 cubic feet on the open market. The Senate was still considering the amendment.	In the same session, the House passed a bill authorizing NASA to spend $30 billion over the next two years.  (W Post, Jul 30/93; AP, Jul 29/93; Jul 30/93; B Sun, Aug 23/93; NY Times, Sep 21/93)	* The Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, hosted six three-day sessions of Aerospace for Kids, designed to teach children about aerospace technology and Goodard this summer.  The program was to host 150 children over a six-week period this summer. (Prince George's Sentinel, Jul 29/93)July 30: NASA negotiated with PRC, Inc. of McLean, Virginia, a sole source contract extension to provide data processing and telecommunications support for NASA headquarters, Washington. (NASA Release C93-o)	* NASA astronaut Bernard A. Harris Jr., M.D. was scheduled to present a National Urban League (NLU) banner, flown on the STS-55 Space Shuttle mission, to NLU president John Jacob during the organization's opening keynote ceremony on Sunday, August 1, in Washington, D.C. (NASA Media Advisory)	* Arkansas Governor Jim Guy Tucker and Thomas J. Lee, Director of NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, signed a memorandum of understanding to conduct a joint effort to transfer NASA-derived and NASA-contractor derived technologies to businesses, industries, academic institutions, research facilities, and individuals in the state. (NASA Release  93-138)	* NASA postponed a scheduled launch of Space Shuttle Discovery until August 12 because of the Perseid meteor shower.  This was the third time the mission had been delayed.  The Perseid meteor shower occurs each August; it was expected to be more intense than usual this August, raising the possibility that a spacecraft in Earth orbit could be damaged by a piece of debris. (UPI, Jul 30/93; Rtw, Jul 30/93; AP, Jul 31/93; W Post, Jul 31/93; NY Times, Jul 31/93; B Sun, Aug 4/93; USA Today, Aug 10/93, Aug 11/93, Aug 12/93)	* Reuters reported that British television had shown rare film of a string of Soviet space disasters, most of which were kept secret at the time by the Communist leadership. The film, which became available after the breakup of the Soviet Union, shows the "Nedelin explosion" that killed a top Soviet official in 1960, rescue workers trying unsuccessfully to revive three cosmonauts killed after the Soyuz 11 landing in 1971, and the wreckage of the Soyuz 1, in which Vladimir Komorov was killed in 1967. (Rtw, Jul 30/93)AugustAugust 1: The media reported that NASA was working with the Federal Aviation Agency (FAA) and the manufacturers of aircraft to utilize new technology in general aviation in order to reduce the skill required for flying a light airplane. (Sunday Post Crescent, Aug 1/93 )August 2: The Wall Street Journal reported that the Grumman Corporation was under criminal investigation for allegedly overcharging NASA by as much as $8 million; the probe threatened the company's eligibility for new federal contracts.  (WSJ, Aug 2/93; AP, Aug 8/93; UPI, Aug 8/93; W Times, Aug 3/93; NY Times, Aug 3/93)	* Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin's shuffling of top Space Station officials had led to internal friction between NASA and officials at the Reston, Virginia, program office for the Space Station. NASA's international partners in the Space Station were also reportedly concerned that they were not fully involved in key decisions involving the Station. (AvWk, Aug 2/93)  	* Joseph R. Cipriano, associate director of the department's Energy Research office, recommended that the department fire the project manager for the $11 billion Super Conducting Super Collider, slash President Clinton's budget request, and "take a year... to fix problems." In a memo, Cipriano noted that morale was very low, confidence in existing management was practically nonexistent, and cost and schedule trends were worsening at an alarming rate.  A nonprofit group of research universities, Universities Research Association, Inc, was under contract to build the instrument. (W Post, Aug 2/93)   	* The Hook Telescope on Mt. Wilson in California, which once ranked as the world's biggest, was written off as an astronomical anachronism eight years ago. However, using the latest electronic sensors and image-enhancers, scientists and philanthropists led by Robert Jastrow of the Mt. Wilson Institute and the founder of NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Flight, were reported working to salvage the Hooker Telescope.  Jastrow had raised $250,000 for repairs and was seeking another $250,00 to make the telescope useful into the 21st century. (LA Times, Aug 2/93)	* A Titan 4 rocket carrying an expensive military spy satellite system exploded minutes after liftoff from Vandenberg Air Force Base.  This, the first failure of the four-year-old Titan 4 program, was a $2-billion accident, said John Pike, director of the space policy project at the Federation of American Scientists in Washington, a liberal group that researches classified aerospace projects. Pike consistently has criticized U.S. spy satellites. The accident wiped out most of the savings Congress took from the intelligence budget during the year. (RTw, Aug 2/93; AP, Aug 3/93; USA Today, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93; LA Times, Aug 3/93; W Times, Aug 3/93; NY Times, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93; W Post, Aug 3/93, Aug 4/93)	* August marked the tenth anniversary of the first use of NASA's Tracking Data and Relay Satellite System (TDRSS).  The system consists of several satellites plus a ground station at White Sands, New Mexico. (Onset Magazine, Aug 2/93)     August 3: NASA announced that astronaut James P. Bagian, M.D., P.E., was taking a leave of absence from NASA to work as Vice-President of Corporate Development and Medical Affairs at Somanetics Corporation, Troy, Michigan.  Bagian was scheduled to head up the company's clinical research activities. (NASA Release 93-139)	* NASA named Astronauts Tamara E. Jernigan, Thomas David Jones, James S. Voss, and Ellen Ochoa payload commanders on upcoming Space Shuttle missions. (NASA Release 93-140)	* NASA announced that scientists using the Earth-orbiting Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory had discovered a powerful pulsar that had become one of the brightest x-ray sources in the sky during the past two weeks. (NASA Release 93-141)August 4: NASA announced that Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, had selected Jackson and Tull Chartered Engineers of Washington, D.C. for negotiations leading to award of a cost-plus-award-fee contract for multidisciplinary research and development. (NASA Release C93-p)	* Writing in the Washington Post, writer Deborah Shapley predicted that the demise of the Superconducting Super Collider had brought to an end the United States' 60-year dominance in high-energy physics and, symbolically, in physical science in general. She reminded the reader of the importance of basic science and asked scientists to muster their courage and "argue ... that the most basic forces of matter and the birth of the universe are things worth studying in themselves and worthy of support." (W Post, Aug 4/93)	* The Houston Post reported that a faulty command from Mission Control during a Shuttle flight a month ago caused sparks aboard Endeavour and knocked out power to some of its equipment. The six astronauts aboard the Shuttle were in no danger, and power was restored in 10 minutes.  The incident, however, did lead NASA to convene a safety board meeting.  (AP, Aug 4/93; W Post, Aug 5/93; RTw, Aug 4/93; UPI, Aug 4/93)	* President Clinton signed legislation on August 2 authorizing $8 million for planning and design of a $162 million National Air and Space Museum building near Dulles International Airport. (AP, Aug 4/93) 	* The Russian foreign ministry announced that Russia had fully suspended a $359 million contract to sell India rocket engines and the technology needed to make them. (RTw, Aug 4/93)August 5: NASA's Mars Observer spacecraft returned its first image of Mars taken last week when the spacecraft was 3.6 million miles from the red planet.  Mars Observer was to orbit Mars on August 24, and global mapping operations were scheduled to begin December 16. (NASA Note to Editors N93-43)August 6: NASA announced that scientists from the University of Hawaii and NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had determined that the planet Pluto is covered with surface ices that are 98 percent nitrogen.  The scientists concluded that with such abundant nitrogen surface ice, Pluto's thin atmosphere must be primarily gaseous nitrogen. (NASA Release 93-142)	* A $67 million weather satellite to track storms, floods, and environmental damage went into orbit aboard an Atlas-E-rocket.  It also was scheduled to be used to pinpoint the sites of plane crashes and shipwrecks.  The NOAA-13 satellite reached its 541-mile-high orbit on schedule.  The new satellite, which eventually was scheduled to replace the aging NOAA-11 satellite, was to circle Earth every 103 minutes and view the entire planet twice daily. (NY Times, Aug 10/93; RTw, Aug 10/93	August 9: NASA ground crews began final preparations to launch the Space Shuttle Discovery on a satellite delivery mission.  The liftoff was scheduled for August 12.  Discovery was to carry two satellites.  Five astronauts were scheduled to put one satellite in orbit to conduct advanced communications experiments.  The other, a telescope, was to be let out of the cargo bay for several days of celestial observations, then captured and returned to Earth.  (Rtw, Aug 9/93; AP, Aug 9/93, Aug 10/93; W Post, Aug 10/93; UPI, Aug 8/93)	* Sotheby's auction house announced that it had agreed to sell more than 200 items from the Soviet space program, including the first moon rock fragments ever to go up for sale.  The items were being sold by family members of the top participants as well as the state factories that produced the space suits and capsules being offered for sale. The Russian government  was not involved in the sale.  ((Rtw, August 9/93; AP, Aug 11/93)		* NASA announced that researchers at the NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, had developed a new and unique group of ceramic processing chemicals that might revolutionize the ceramic industry.  The new processing chemicals might lead to high purity ceramic products that could better withstand temperatures over 2102 degrees F (1200 degrees Celsius). (NASA Release 93-143)August 10: Negotiations between Grumman Aerospace Corporation and federal prosecutors broke down as they sought to resolve long-standing allegations stemming from the "Ill Wind" defense contracting scandal.  Grumman agreed to pay about $20 million in penalties to settle a civil proceedings from the investigation, but said that the company wanted to simultaneously settle allegations that it had overcharged NASA on a computer contract.  The prosecutors refused to settle, pending a Justice Department investigation of the NASA sources. (W Post, Aug 10/93)	* Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Magellan Project officials announced the successful first-of-a kind experiment to "aerobrake" a spacecraft by dipping it into the atmosphere of a planet.  The Magellan spacecraft's orbit was changed from highly elliptical to nearly circular by dragging it through the top of the thick Venusian atmosphere repeatedly over a period of 70 days, ending on August 3, 1997.	 The maneuver required minimal use of thruster fuel.  Because fuel weight increases a spacecraft's launching costs and limits how many science experiments it can carry, aerobraking might allow NASA to save fuel and money on future spacecraft and conduct explorations that otherwise would not be possible, according to Magellan's deputy mission director. The experiment also made it possible to gain another year of science from an old craft already in space. 	Scientists said that the new orbit would give them an opportunity to analyze the rolling molten interior of Venus and study the planet's dense carbon dioxide atmosphere.  Continuing with the probe, however, was dependent on inclusion of the project in NASA's budget for next year.  (NASA Release 93-144; AP, Aug 10/93)	* The first test flight of a re-usable single-stage rocket, called the Delta Clipper Experimental, was scheduled to occur shortly at the White Sands test facility, a Federal site in the New Mexico desert.  The 42-foot, 20-ton prototype was built by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation for the Defense Department. (NY Times, Aug 10/93)	* The Wall Street Journal reported on the efforts of Japan to develop its own aerospace program, especially its work in developing advanced ceramic composite materials that could help protect future Japanese planes and spacecraft. (WSJ, Aug 10/93)	* Clinton Administration officials reported that the White House was completing plans to permit the export of U.S. rocket technology that had been restricted out of fear it would be used to develop ballistic missiles,  The proposal to allow the sale of space technology under strengthened safeguards was part of a review of export policy ordered by President Clinton. (LA Times, Aug 10/93)	* NASA announced that during the third week in July  it had delivered the first data sets from the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) to the National Space Science Data Center at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. As a result, researchers from around the world now have access to the COBE data that provided the scientific community with an unprecedented look at how the universe began. (NASA Release 93-145)	* Technicians re-entered the engine compartment of Space Shuttle Discovery to replace what was believed to be a bad temperature sensor. The problem delayed some launch countdown preparations but, according to Shuttle Test Director Mike Leinbach, posed no threat to the launch, scheduled for the morning of August 12. (B Sun, Aug 12/93; RTw Aug, 11/93, Aug 12/93; UPI, Aug 11/93; P Inq, Aug 12/93; W Post, Aug 12/93; USA Today, Aug 12/93)	* The San Francisco Chronicle reported that NASA was renewing its interest in aeronautics.  In 1992, aeronautics accounted for about 8 percent of NASA's $14.3 billion budget; if the agency got the funding it had requested, NASA planned to spend $8.6 billion on aeronautics from 1994 though 1998--an increase of 50 percent. (San Francisco Chronicle, Aug 11, 1993; LA Times, Aug 25/93)August 11: LTX Corporation announced that NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) had taken delivery of a Synchro mixed signal test system for use in the radiation effects and testing laboratory in Pasadena, California. (PR NEWSWIRE, Aug 11/93)August 12: The NASA Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, selected NYMA, Inc., Greenbelt, Maryland, for negotiations leading to the award of a contract for scientific, engineering, technical, administrative, and related support activities of Lewis' mission responsibilities. (NASA Release C93-q)	* Twenty-six Prince George's Country students with physical, mental, or learning disabilities spent six weeks in a jobs program at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, during the summer.  The program, which was under the auspices of the President's Commission on Employment for Persons With Disabilities, aimed to steer more young people into fields like science, engineering, and computer programming. (W Post, Aug 12/93) 	* Writing in USA Today, Senator Kay Bailey Hutchinson, R-Texas, noted that research planned for the Space Station program would help women. Research already scheduled for the newly redesigned Space Station would address several women's diseases, from osteoporosis to ovarian and breast cancer to immune-system disorders.  (USA Today, Aug 12/93)	*  In a letter sent to the White House, five senators  pressed the Clinton Administration to maintain tight restrictions on the export of space-launch technology that could be used to develop ballistic missiles. The letter was signed by senators Cliaborne Pell, D-R.I; Jesse Helms, R- N.C.; Jeff Bingaman, D-N.M.; John Glenn, D-Ohio; and John McCain, R-Ariz. (LA Times, Aug 12/93)    	* Onboard computers aborted the launch of Space Station Discovery just three seconds before liftoff. This was the fourth delay for Discovery, which was halted twice for technical problems in July  and rescheduled because of a meteor shower on August 11. NASA said the next try could come in three to six weeks. 	The cause of the problem was not identified, although space  officials suspected that a fuel sensor might have fed wrong information to the Shuttle's computers. If told that one of the three main engines was not receiving fuel, the computers would trigger an automatic shutdown. (RTw Aug 12/93; AP, Aug 13/93; W Times, Aug 13/93; USA Today, Aug 13/93; WSJ, Aug 13/93; UPI, Aug 12/93;NY Times, Aug 13/93; B Sun, Aug 13/93; W Post, Aug 13/93)	*  Eleven high school students participated in an eight-week Summer High School Apprenticeship Research Program (SHARP) at NASA's Dryden space center this summer.  Four days a week, the participants completed a regular eight-hour workday, working alongside engineers and others, learning firsthand what it takes to succeed in these careers.  The fifth day was spent in career exploration, perhaps a tour of different facilities at Edwards AFB or a visit to a university such as UCLA.  (Antelope Valley Press, Aug 12/93)August 13: NASA announced that it had tested helicopter rotor performance in icing conditions.  The tests were performed in the Icing Research Tunnel at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio.  The new experimental database resulting from these tests was to be used to further refine and validate a computer code that predicts helicopter rotor performance loss occurring when ice accumulates on the rotors during an icing encounter. (NASA Release 93-147)August 14: Under its High-Speed Research Program (HSRP), which began in 1990, NASA was doing basic research on developing a "clean" supersonic airliner, including preliminary studies of the potential of new materials. As part of this work, NASA was studying the atmospheric effects of supersonic aircraft in the stratosphere. The third report from this study, still in draft form and unlikely to be published in 1993, promised to dampen the optimism of previous research. (New Scientist, Aug 14/93)August 15: Technical breakthroughs in space have helped launch clinical advances on earth. Space Shuttle experiments, which focus on determining how best to maintain the health of astronauts aboard a future Space Station, continue to provide spin-offs for clinical medicine on earth, from programmable pacemakers to a better understanding of vestibular disorders. The cost, however, is very high, and the question remains whether the Space Station project represents a potentially giant leap for medicine or a small step for a select few. (Medical World News, Aug 15/93) August 16: NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPLA), Pasadena, California, announced the selection of two major aerospace companies as the associate contractors for the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR) Network Phase B1 study and MESUIR Pathfinder support effort.  The companies were Hughes Aircraft Company; Hughes Spacecraft & Communications , El Segundo, California; and Rockwell International Corporation, Space Systems Division, Downey, California.  (NASA Release C93-r) August 17: NASA announced that the Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, had awarded the Space Shuttle Orbiter Avionics Software contract to IBM Corporation, Houston.  The contract was for the development and maintenance of the primary avionics support software, tool development and maintenance, and certification of primary flight software. (NASA Release C93-s)	* The Delta Clipper-Experimental (DC-X) rocket's first flight was scheduled for August 18 at White Sands Missile Range in Southern New Mexico. The 42-foot-tall, bullet-shaped DC-X is a one-third scale prototype of single-stage, reusable rocket that would be light enough to reach orbit and return without needing expensive lower stages or boosters that get thrown away on every flight.  It would fire its engines to land vertically. The DC-0X was developed by McDonnell Douglas with funding by the federal Ballistic Missile Defense Organization. (AP, Aug 17/93)	* NASA  Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Johnson Space Center, Houston, had been selected as the host center for the new Space Station program, replacing the center at Reston, Virginia. About 220 NASA workers in Reston would be reassigned or offered incentives to retire, the space agency said. Local Virginia lawmakers said that they would continue to fight NASA's decision to move the headquarters to Houston. The Boeing Defense and Space Group, based in the Seattle area, was selected as the prime contractor. (NASA Release 93-148; H Post, Aug 17/93; W  Times, Aug 18/93; NY Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; LA Times, Aug 18/93, Aug 19/93; WSJ, Aug 18/93; USA Today, Aug 18/93; W Post, Aug 18/93; RTw, Aug 17/93; AP, Aug 17/93; UPI, Aug 18/93; H Post, Aug 19/93; Space News, Sept 13-19/93)	* The New York Times reported that a radio telescope spread across 5,000 miles had been finished.  The new telescope, called the Very long Baseline Array (V.L.B.A.), has 10 antennas scattered across United States territory from the central Pacific Ocean to the Caribbean. All 10 antennas are very well synchronized as a single telescope of gigantic size, an arrangement that gives the V.I.B.A. far sharper vision than that of any other telescope. The telescope's revolving power is such that an observer in New York City would be able to read a newspaper in San Francisco. The V.I.B.A. was to be used to probe the depths of time and space. (NY Times, Aug 17/93) August 18: Officials at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico announced that the Delta Clipper-Experimental rocket had successfully completed its first test flight, boosting backers's hopes that the single-stage design would be cheaper and more reliable than current space launch rockets. During the test flight, which lasted only about a minute, the rocket hovered briefly, flew about 350 feet to one side, and then touched down vertically on a landing pad. It was the first time a spacecraft had landed vertically on Earth.  A second test flight was tentatively set for Aug. 27. In that test, the rocket was scheduled to go up about 650 feet.  (AP, Aug 18/93; WSJ, Aug 19/93; H Chron, Aug 19/93; H Post, Aug 19/93; W Times, Aug 21/93; Time, Aug 30/93)	* NASA began replacing Space Shuttle Discovery's main engines in preparation for another launch attempt next month.  The third countdown for Discovery ended on August 12 with an engine shutdown three seconds before launch.  Engineers traced the problem to a sensor that was supposed to monitor the flow of fuel in main engine No. 2. (AP, Aug 18/93)	    * Late this month, the Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft was scheduled to visit a big chunk of rock named Ida, only the second asteroid to be explored up close.  Galileo, launched from a Space Shuttle in 1989, was scheduled to be within 1,500 miles of Ida in late August, on its way to its 1995 rendezvous with Jupiter. Galileo made the world's first asteroid encounter--with Gaspra--in October 1991.	The mission was successfully carried out on August 28, when Galileo photographed the asteroid from a distance of 1,500 miles.  The resulting mosaic of five photographs shows a narrow object 32 miles long, riddled with pockmarks. (NASA Release 93-149; AP, Aug 18/93; B Sun, Aug 19/93; NY Times, Aug 22/93, Sept 28/93)	* Several articles in the media discussed the planet Mars. An article in the Christian Science Monitor discussed Mars exploration, noting that the arrival of the Mars Observer spacecraft on Mars was just the beginning of a new saga of planetary exploration.      U.S News and World Report, in a cover story on Mars, suggested that exploration of the red planet would usher in a new space age; the article mentioned the upcoming missions to Mars, for example the NASA Mars Observer spacecraft, and then went on to identify key questions about Mars that explorations hoped to resolve. These questions concerned whether or not Mars has water, what the weather is like, and what gave Mars its shape.  The article also discussed where scientists are headed in their explorations of this planet. (CSM, Aug 18/93; U.S. News and World Report, Aug 23/93) August 19: Mars Observer was scheduled to zoom into orbit around Mars next week, as the United States returned to Martian skies for the first time in 17 years. Mars Observer, which was launched from Florida on September 25, was scheduled to reach Mars on August 24. After maneuvering a near-polar orbit, it was scheduled to turn on its instruments and make one complete photographic map of the planet during a month-long test. It was scheduled to formally start its exploration on December 16. (P Inq, Aug 19/93)			  August 23: NASA said that satellite controllers had lost contact with the NOAA-13 satellite on August 21, and preliminary indications were that the spacecraft's power system was not working.  NOAA was the newest in a series of polar-orbiting weather satellites. Designed to monitor the Earth's ocean and atmosphere, it collects meteorological and ocean data for direct transmission to users around the world and to central data processing centers. (NASA Release 93-151)	* The 1993-94 season of NASA's Update for Teachers telecasts was scheduled to feature presentations on astronomy, life sciences, research, high-speed aeronautical research, and the environment and global change. The telecasts, a series of four, one-hour, live and interactive education television programs, were broadcast via satellite to schools in all 650 states, Canada, Mexico, and Puerto Rico between 3-4 p.m. Eastern time.  (NASA Release 93-150) 	* Three days before the Mars Observer spacecraft was scheduled to begin orbiting the red planet, NASA engineers lost communications with the $1 billion probe. Radio contact broke off after engineers commanded the spacecraft to prepare for a crucial rocket firing on August 24 that was designed to send the spacecraft in orbit around the planet. Mars Observer was programmed to automatically fire its rockets, but NASA needed to hear from the spacecraft to be certain that had happened. If the commands were not received, the ship could fly past Mars completely. NASA officials expressed grave concern over the problem but said that communications could be restored at any moment. (UPI, Aug 22/93; AP/Aug 23/93; Rtw, Aug 23/93; WSJ, Aug 23/93; P Inq, Aug 23/93; B Sun, Aug 23/93; USA Today, Aug 23/93; W Post, Aug 23/93; NY Times, Aug 23/93; C Trib, Aug 23/93; LA Times, Aug 23/93; RT, Aug 23/93)	* Vigyan Corporation, Hampton, Virginia, last week asked the General Services Administration's Board of Contract Appeals to overturn what was thought to be the largest minority-set-aside contract ever, a $180 million pact with Nyma Corporation, Greenbelt, Maryland, for engineering support services at NASA's Lewis Research Center. Vigyan specifically charged both Nyna and NASA with conflict of interest, saying the company's winning proposal listed a current NASA employee "who possesses both proprietary and source-selection information" relevant to Vigyan's bid." (Federal Gomputing Week, Aug 23/93) 	August 24: NASA officials said that the Mars Observer mission could be a total loss if ground controllers failed to re-establish contact with the probe in time for the scheduled start of the orbit on August 24. Engineers suspected that a faulty flight clock aboard the craft might have caused communications to cease. New computer commands were sent telling Mars Observer to switch to a backup clock.  However the commands failed to restore contact with the spacecraft, suggesting that the clock theory was wrong. If contact could not be restarted, controllers would have no way of receiving scientific data or even confirming if the Mars Observer probe had made it into orbit. The Mars Observer project was the first U.S. Mission to Mars in 17 years; it was designed to pave the way for a new generation of international planetary exploration centered on Mars.	The prognosis was even worse for a $67 million weather satellite launched for NASA by the Air Force from California on August 9.  Officials said today that they were 90 percent certain that an electrical malfunction had killed the satellite, called NOAA-13. (AP, Aug 24/93: RT,Aug 24/93; USA Today, Aug 24/93, Aug 25/93; NY Times, Aug 24/93, Aug 25/93; P Inq, Aug 24/93, Aug 26/93; LA Times, Aug 24/93, Aug 25/93; W Times, Aug 25/93; WSJ, Aug 25/93; W Post, Aug 25/93; B Sun, Aug 25/93; RTw, Aug 25/93; UPn, Aug 24/93; C Trib, Aug 24/93)	* Some scientists, led by former CBS News science adviser Richard C. Hoagland, accused NASA of not doing enough to investigate surface features that may be signs of intelligent life. The critics say that computer-enhanced photographs taken by the 1976 Viking Mars mission show objects on the Cydonia Plain that they believe were left by an extraterrestrial civilization.  Mr. Hoagland said a "rogue group in NASA" might have sabotaged the Mars Observer mission to suppress information about the Cydonia Plain structures. NASA officials denied the charge.  (APn, Aug 24/93; LA Times, August 25/93; Weekly World, Sept 14/93)August 25: NASA announced that it would fund three new university research centers charged with fostering the next generation of researchers and engineers in hypersonic aeronautics--flight at more than five times the speed of sound.  Scheduled to receive $200,000 annually for three years were Syracuse University, New York; the University of Maryland, College Park; and the University of Texas at Arlington. (NASA Release 93-152)	* A study by James W. Elkins of the National Oceanic and  Atmospheric Administration found that worldwide emissions of the two worst ozone-destroying chemicals were slowing sooner than researchers had expected, and the gradual repair of Earth's ozone layer could begin by 2000. This news came as NASA satellite data indicated that the stratospheric ozone layer that shields the Earth from cancer-causing ultraviolet radiation had dropped to its lowest levels ever. A NASA official said that even with the peak in emissions of chlorofluorocarbons by 2000, it would take about a century for the ozone layer to recover to what it was before ozone-destroying chemicals began to be widely used in the 1960s and 1970s. (AP, Aug 25/93; USA Today, Aug 26/93; W Post, Aug 26/93; NY Times, Aug 30/93)August 26: NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Dr. Timothy Coffey, Director of Research at the Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C., to head the review board to investigate the loss of contact with the Mars Observer spacecraft. (NASA Release 93-153)	* NASA announced that a 12-member panel of experts from NASA and NOAA had been named to investigate the failure of the NOAA-13 meteorological satellite. (NASA Release 93-154) 	* The Mars Observer failed to call Earth on August 25, when a five-day timer should have had it send an emergency signal, lessening hopes that the mission could be salvaged. Observer was the latest reminder of the growing problems of the U.S. space program.  The Observer failure added to a string of expensive space failures: the loss earlier in August of a $500-million spy satellite, then of a $67-million weather satellite, and a series of mishaps with NASA's orbiting observatories and other planetary probes.  	In Washington, congressional strategies and private analysts suggested that NASA's latest failure was likely to make the agency more vulnerable to budget cuts as Congress considered the appropriations bill covering the space program. Ideas also were floated about new, cheaper ways to get a peek at Mars, for example, modifying small, inexpensive "Star Wars" satellites and hurling them toward Mars.  Another idea mentioned was closer collaboration with Europe and Russia.  (LA Times, Aug 25/93; WSJ, Aug 26/93, Aug 30/93; USA Today, Aug 26/93, Aug 30/93; W Post, Aug 26/93; W Times; AP, Aug 26/93; RTw, Aug 25/93; UPI, Aug 25/93; NY Times, Aug 29/93)	* Orbital Sciences Corporation of Chantilly, Virginia, unveiled the Orbcomm communications satellite, which was  designed to provide global personal communications service.  The company said it planned to initiate Orbcomm service in the United States by mid-1994 and planned worldwide service by 1995.  The Orbcomm system planned to provide low-cost, two-way data communications to users worldwide through a constellation of 26 small satellites. (W Times, Aug 26/93)          	* A senior NASA official who asked not to be named said that the agency was seriously considering attaching Space Station Freedom modules to Russia's Mir Space Station and helping refurbish the seven-year-old facility. NASA was also actively looking at combining Freedom with the next-generation Mir Station, which Moscow said it planned to launch around 1996. (Defense Daily, Aug 26/93) August 27: NASA announced that Kennedy Space Center Director Robert Crippen and Florida Governor Lawton Chiles had signed an agreement that would transfer benefits derived from the U.S. space program to the private sector and industries in Florida.  The two parties agreed to set aside $1 million each for the next two years to implement projects under this agreement. (NASA Release 93-155)August 28: NASA announced that the Galileo spacecraft had successfully explored the asteroid Ida located between Mars and Jupiter. Although hampered by a jammed main antenna, Galileo zoomed around 1,491 miles from Ida and took all but three of 21 planned photographs.  The three missing photos were the longest-distance photos and unimportant compared with the close-ups. The first photos were not scheduled to arrive at Earth for another two months; the others were to be transmitted in the spring of 1994.  (AP, Aug 28/93; RTw, Aug 28/93; USA Today, Aug 30/93; NY Times, Aug 29/93August 29: Russian Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin said that Russia would start selling foreign countries space technology without the machinery to launch nuclear missiles. Chernomyrdin spoke before leaving Moscow for an official visit to the United States that had been set for June but cancelled after a dispute with Washington over rocket technology sales to India.	Chernomyrdin began his U.S. trip in Houston, where his visit was to center on meetings Monday with U.S. business from the energy and aerospace industries and was to include a tour of the Johnson Space Center (RTw, Aug 29/93)	* The failure of the Mars Observer mission led to a debate over the need for big, costly space projects. Commenting on the loss of the Mars Observer, an editorial in the Christian Science Monitor advocated moving away from complex missions that take a decade or more to launch in favor of cheaper, simple spacecraft.  In this regard, the editorial suggested that NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and the Clinton Administration reconsider the Space Station program, which, in the editorial writer's view, robs NASA of the money needed for a broad effective space program.	Writing in the Baltimore Sun, Robert L. Park, professor of physics at the University of Maryland, College Park, expressed similar views. He traced NASA's current problems to the agency's abandoning of all existing launch systems for the expensive manned Space Shuttle.  Parks emphasized that a replacement must he developed for the Shuttle, that the excessive emphasis on human space flight must end, that the bureaucracy that is choking NASA must be streamlined, and that the old spirit of elan that once permeated the agency must be restored.	Doug Bandow, a senior fellow at the Cato Institute, also argued that the space program should be cut back. He noted that while NASA's recent failures were unfortunate, they would have a positive effect if they forced lawmakers to reconsider the justification for the multi-billion-dollar space program.  He said that U.S. budget priorities should lie much closer to home.  Writing in support of the Space Station, was ex-astronaut Alan Shepard, the first American to travel in space and the commander of the Apollo mission to the moon.	A commentary in the Philadelphia Inquirer outlined the issues involved in the debate over big missions versus small missions, while a commentary in Time magazine suggested that NASA "learn the fine art of lowering expectations." B Sun, Aug 29/93; CSM, Aug 32/93; W Times, Sept 1/93; P Inq, Sept 2/93; Time, Sept 6/93; W Times, Sept 15/93)August 30: Astronauts assigned to the Space Shuttle Columbia mission in the fall of 1993 were scheduled to conduct experiments on rats while in orbit. After beheading the rats, they were to dissect them. This would be the first dissection of an animal in space, to NASA's knowledge. The remaining rats aboard the Shuttle were scheduled for a similar fate once they returned to Earth.  NASA's Willy Hinds, a biologist and immunologist who is in charge of the project, said that "these tissues...are the biological equivalent of the moon rocks."  (AP, Aug 30/93; LA Times, Sept 5/93)	* Scientists failed in a new attempt to get the Mars Observer spacecraft to re-establish contact with Earth, NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory said. The spacecraft did not respond to commands to turn on its primary telecommunications equipment. A proposal to try to restart the Observer's central computer was rejected because it was thought to pose an unnecessary risk to telecommunications with other spacecraft. (RTw, Aug 30/93; W Post, Aug 31/93; AP, Aug 31/93l CSM, Sept 1/93)   	* The European Space agency, eager to boost its cooperation with Russia, said that it was studying the joint development of a new generation of space vehicles. Jean-Jacques Dorian, Director of Policy Planning, told journalists on the eve of Moscow's first aerospace show that the agency had contracts worth millions of dollars with a number of Russian firms. (RTw, Aug 30/93)August 31: Orbital Sciences Corporation said its Orbital Imaging Corporation unit had been awarded a two-year, $7 million contract to provide atmospheric research data to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center.  (W Times, August 31/93)		* People with temperature disorders have benefitted from suits developed by NASA for use by astronauts in very hot temperatures.  The suits have been modified for people who need help in keeping their body temperature down in hot weather.  The suits for children are vests stuffed with detachable "cold packs," much like those used to keep food cold in picnic coolers.  Other suits are powered by battery packs and fitted with tubes that circulate coolant. The suits are made of a material known as Thinsulate. (Fairfax County Journal, Aug 31/93)	* Moscow held its first international aerospace show in Moscow.  As many as 200 foreign aerospace companies and 250 enterprises from all over the former Soviet Union took part in the show, the largest event of its kind ever held in Russia.  Russian military space equipment was on show for the first time. (UPI, Aug 31/93; LA Times, Sept 1/93)	 SeptemberSeptember 1: NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the establishment of a study team at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, to explore possibilities for a return mission to Mars to recover some of the scientific objectives of the Mars Observer mission, if communications with that spacecraft could not be reestablished. (NASA Release 93-157; UPI, Sep 1/93; AP, Sep 1/93)	*  Rocketdyne, the Canoga Park unit of Rockwell International, was blamed for the last-minute blastoff delay of Space Shuttle Discovery.  The shutdown was traced to a faulty fuel sensor in one of Discovery's engines, built by Rocketdyne.  This was not the first time that Rocketdyne had been blamed for a day.  The company makes the Shuttle's main engines, which in 1993 year caused two last-minute aborted launches. They have also caused at least two more launch delays involving the Columbia and Endeavour Space Shuttles.  (LA Times, Sep 1/93)September 2: Vice President Gore and Russian Prime Minister Chernomyrdin signed an agreement to embark on a joint effort to design and construct an international Space Station. In a separate agreement, Russia also agreed to place export controls on missile technology, a precondition set by the Clinton Administration to cooperation in space. Russia also gained access to the lucrative international market for launching commercial satellites. (NASA Release 93-158; UPI, Sep 2/93; AP, Sep 3/93; NY Times, Sep 3/93; P Inq, Sep 3/93); WSJ, Sep 3/93; LA Times, Sep 3/93; W Post, Sep 3/93;  W Times, Sep 3/93; RTw, Sep 3/93; B Sun, Sep 5/93; CSM, Sep 14/93; National Journal, Sep 11/93)   September 3: Richard H. Kohrs, Director, Space Station Freedom, retired from NASA after 30 years of service. Kohrs was appointed Space Station Freedom Director on June 1, 1989. (NASA Release  93-160)	* NASA announced a ceremonial ground-breaking for two NASA projects at the Wheeling Jesuit College, Wheeling, West Virginia: the Classroom of the Future and the National Technology Transfer Center (NTTC).  	The Classroom of the Future is a leading-edge, educational technology initiative to improve the quality of science, mathematics, and technology education nationwide. It is a laboratory to develop stimulating, interactive multimedia curriculum materials and model pre-service and in-service teacher education programs. The NTTC operates a national gateway service that assists U.S. firms in rapidly locating federal laboratory technology and provides the associated technology transfer assistance. (NASA Release 93-158)	* Martin Marietta Corporation, which in one three-week period in August, saw one of its rockets explode soon after launch and two of its satellites lose contact with Earth, announced on September 3 that it was undertaking an internal investigation of all phases of its space division. (W Post, Sep 4/93)September 7: NASA reportedly was taking action to rectify the problems that had beset recent space missions. Led by Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, NASA was itself doing more rigorous quality testing, adopting Total Quality Management, and making contractors financially liable for shoddy work. (USA Today, Sep 7/93; B Sun, Sep 5/93)	* Using the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers have been able to see a double star whose existence they had known only by the intermittent bursts of x-rays recorded over the last 20 years. The binary star, made up of a neutron star and a white dwarf, is 30.000 light-years away from Earth. The report of the discovery was recently published in Astrophysical Journal Letters. (NY Times, Sep 7/93; W Times, Sep 5/93; W Post, Sep 13/93).	* A biography of Christa McAuliffe, the teacher-astronaut who was killed when the Space Shuttle Challenger blew up, is the subject of a new biography, written by her mother, Grace George Corrigan. The biography, A Journal for Christa, published  on September 7, by the University of Nebraska Press, lends weight to arguments that NASA pressed ahead with the high-profile flight to win mention of it in President Reagan's State of the Union Message, which had been scheduled for January 28, the day of the launch. (AP, Sep 7/93; NY Times, Sep 8/93; B Sun, Sep 8/93) September 8: NASA selected USN Commander James D. Wetherbee to command the STS-63 mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in mid-1994.  Other crew members picked were Major Eileen M. Collins, pilot; C. Michael Foal, Janice E. Voss, Bernard A. Harris, Jr., and Russian Air Force Colonel Vladimir G. Titov. Collins is the agency's first woman pilot.  	NASA announced that Shuttle Discovery was to conduct an unprecedented fly-around maneuver of the Russian Mir Space Station in June. Although the operation was not to include a docking of the two spacecrafts, it would help to establish the rendezvous procedures for a docking mission planned for June 1995. (NASA Release 93-161; H Chron, Sep 9/83)September 9: NASA settled a union grievance with Reston, Virginia Space Station employees and cleared the way toward opening a new office in Houston, Texas. (H Post, Sep 9/93)	* Space Station backers reportedly were worried about uncertainties about Russia's role in the proposed new Station.  Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, D-Md., who chairs the Senate appropriations subcommittee that funds NASA, said, "We support a cooperative effort with Russia, but we believe the Space Station effort, if approved by Congress, must be an American Space Station."	NASA presented the latest in a series of redesigns and down-sizing of the Space Station to President Clinton on September 7. The plan envisions attaching two Soyuz ships to the Station as "assured crew return vehicles." It also spoke favorably of using the Russian Salyut space tug for steering the Station, instead of a propulsion module developed by the Pentagon. (W Post, Sep 9/93; AP, Sep 9/93, Sep 22/93; CSM, Sep 10/93; AvWk, Sep 13/93; LA Times, Sep 16/93)  September 10: NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that Dr. France Anne Cordova, head of the Astronomy and Astrophysics Department, Pennsylvania State University, was scheduled to assume the responsibilities of NASA Chief Scientist effective mid-October. She was to be on extended detail from the University to NASA. (NASA Release 93-162)	* The Senate Appropriations Committee approved $1.9 billion for continued work on Space Station Freedom, but the project faced a fight in the full Senate, where opponents wanted to cut funding. (USA Today, Sep 10/93)September 11: The Delta Clipper-Experimental, a 42-foot prototype for a new generation of reusable spacecraft, climbed to about 300 feet, hovered, moved laterally about 350 feet, then made a vertical landing at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico.  This was the spacecraft's second successful test flight. (B Sun, Sep 12/93; National Journal, Oct 2/93)September 12: Space Shuttle Discovery was launched on a satellite-deployment mission after two months of delays.  The liftoff had been postponed five times for equipment failure, payload problems, and a meteor shower.  After a short delay caused by a minor communications problem, astronauts on board successfully deployed the $363 million Advanced Communication Technology Satellite (ACTS). The satellite could one day shrink the diameter of satellite dishes to one and one-half feet. 	On September 14, after a ninety-minute delay caused by a communications problem, astronauts placed in space a second satellite, an $80 million reusable craft made by Germany. The satellite, which had an ultraviolet telescope and a spectrograph to study interstellar gas, was scheduled to be retrieved by the astronauts in six days for the trip home. On September 16, two astronauts conducted a seven-hour spacewalk to test tools needed for the Hubble Space Telescope repair mission scheduled for December; and on September 19, using a 50-foot robot arm, they retrieved an orbiting German telescope loaded with nearly a week's worth of star observations. The retrieval of the satellite was the crew's last major job.	Discovery touched down at Cape Canaveral, Florida, on September 22, its return having been delayed one day because of bad weather. This was the first Shuttle landing in Florida at night. (RTw, Sep 12/93, Sep 13/93, Sep 14/93, Sep 15/93, Sep 16/93, Sep 19/93; P Inq, Sep 13/93, Sep 14/93, Sep 17/93; B Sun, Sep 13/93, Sep 14/93, Sep 17/93; NY Times, Sep 13/93, Sep 16/93, Sep 17/93; W Post, Sep 13/93, Sep 14/93, 15/93, Sep 17/93, Sep 19/93, Sep 20/93; USA Today, Sep 13/93, Sep 14/93, Sep 20/93; AP, Sep 12, Sep 14/93, Sep 15/93, Sep 16, Sep 17/93, Sep 20, Sep 22/93; UPI,Sep 12/93 Sep 13/93, Sep 14/93, Sep 16/93, Sep 17/93, Sep 19/93, Sep 22/93; RTw, Sep 22/93; W Post, Sep 23/93)September 13: Writing in Business Week, science writer John Carey predicted that Congress would ultimately keep alive the Space Station, which he labelled a boondoggle, and very likely kill the scientifically worthy Super Collider. Carney charged that the  Space Station was mainly being kept alive to preserve 15,000 mostly high-paying jobs in areas hard hit by defense cutbacks.  He viewed the cries of those who charged that the country couldn't afford the Super Collider as hypocrisy, noting that Congress funds much less worthy projects. (Business Week, Sept. 13/93)  September 14: NASA selected Recom Technologies, San Jose, California, a small disadvantaged business, for negotiations leading to award of a contract for Computational Administrative, Professional, and Engineering Services to support NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland. (NASA Release C93-t)September 17: A NASA SR-71 "Blackbird" research aircraft made the first triple-sonic flight test of a laser measurement system that could give pilots more accurate data on their air speed and aircraft attitude. (NASA Release 93-163)	* According to a USA Today/CNN/Gallop Poll, most Americans now feel the nation should cut or eliminate spending for the space program. Marcia Smith of the Congressional Research Service said that people are concerned about where to cut the budget, and NASA is seen as a discretionary program. The poll also revealed that people were losing faith in NASA's performance. (USA Today, Sep 7/93)	September 20: Two separate teams of astronomers reported finding what could be the first direct evidence of the existence of chunks of invisible matter that in theory form a massive, unseen halo around Earth's galaxy, the Milky Way. If the finding stands up, it is a significant breakthrough in the search for so-called dark matter. A U.S.-Australian team announced the discovery simultaneously with a French team. (W Post, Sept. 21, P Inq, Sep 21/93; NY Times, 1993; UPn, Sep 21/93)	* Over the next two decades, NASA planned to launch more than two dozen satellites for its "Mission to Planet Earth." These satellites were scheduled to collect information about clouds, ocean circulation, and ice and pollution in order to help scientists refine their predictions of global warning. (Newsweek, Sep 20/93)	* Marshall Engineers and Scientists Association President Wesley Darbro said that it appeared that the Marshall Space Flight Center would lay off about 478 workers, all associated with the Space Station program. (Huntsville Times, Sep 20/93)September 21: Air traffic controllers reported that their new  $839 million radar system has some serious flaws: planes vanish from screens, phantom images appear, and even a squirrel can chew up the network.  NASA said that it has received many complaints at its Ames Research Center at Moffett Field, California, home of NASA's aviation safety reporting system. (AP, September 21/93	* The Senate endorsed the Clinton Administration's plan to build the Space Station by refusing to cut funding for the 1994 program from $1,94 billion to $500 million.  The latter amount would have been used to shut down the program. (RTw, Sep 21/93; UPI, Sep 21/93; AP, June 22/93; LA Times, Sep 22/93; P Inq, Sep 22/93; NY Times, Sep 23/93) September 22: New software, the New Spectral Imaging Processing System (NEWSIPS), was giving researchers a remarkably improved look at data from NASA's International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE), the space agency's longest-running astronomical satellite in Earth orbit. (NASA Release 93-164)	September 23: NASA announced that researchers had recorded unexpected, huge flashes of light in the upper atmosphere that might affect atmospheric ozone and present potential problems for high-altitude research planes. The flashes occurred above a severe thunderstorm in the Midwest in the summer and were recorded aboard NASA's DC-8 Airborne Laboratory, based at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. (NASA Release 93-167; W Post, Sep 24/93; AP, Sep 23/93)	* NASA announced that results from a Spacelab crystal growth experiment flown aboard the Space Shuttle last summer had brought researchers closer to understanding the molecular structure of proteins; such understanding would aid scientists in developing more effective disease-fighting, anti-parasitic drugs. (NASA Release 93-166)	* NASA announced that flight tests with a NASA research aircraft last week had demonstrated the first precision automatic approaches and landings using Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) navigation satellite signals.  The procedures were carried out without using complex processing techniques. (NASA Release 93-165)   September 24: NASA announced the selection of four candidate Small Explorer missions: the Joint Ultraviolet Night Sky Observer (JUNO), the Positron Electron Magnetic Spectrometer (POEMS), the Transitional Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE), and the Wide-Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE).  The four proposed missions were scheduled to enter a ten-month definition phase.  After that phase, NASA planned to confirm two missions for development and flight and to launch the confirmed missions in 1997 and 1998. (NASA Release 93-168).  	* NASA officials announced that further testing on the Wide Field/Planetary Camera II (WF/PCII), an instrument scheduled to fly on the Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission in December, might be necessary. Tests had cleared the camera of suspicion that it was flawed, but NASA asked for one last independent review of the data just to make completely sure.  (NASA Release  93-169; W Post, Sep 28/93)September 27: Lt. Gen. James H. Doolittle, legendary Army aviator and World War II hero, died at the age of 96.  He was best known for leading "Doolittle's Raiders" in a daring bombing run on Tokyo and other Japanese cities in April 1942.  The raid brought the war home to Japan for the first time and lifted American morale when the country was still reeling from a string of Axis victories.  After the war, General Doolittle served as president of the Institute of Aeronautical Science and chairman of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, the forerunner of NASA.  (B Sun, Oct 1/93; AP, Oct 1/93; W Post, Oct 2/93)  September 28: Representatives from NASA, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and industry described how they had worked together to take windshear advance-warning devices from the drawing board to the commercial aviation marketplace in just five years.  The windshear reports, part of a NASA/FAA conference in Hampton, Virginia, detailed development of microwave radar, laser radar, and infrared sensors that provide up to 40 seconds warning of windshear. Now NASA and the FAA were considering whether pilots should have formal training to interact with these new instruments. (NASA Release 93-270 and 93-171; AvWk, Oct. 18/93)	* The Spacelab Life Sciences-2 (SLS-2) mission scheduled for October would offer scientists unprecedented opportunities to learn more about how life adapts to the microgravity environment of space flight.  For the first time in the history of space flight, scientists were to collect tissues during the mission.  Crew members were to draw blood samples from both themselves and rats and were to dissect five rats in space.  (NASA Release 93-173)September 30: NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) described innovative new aeronautics research programs that would let airports across the nation and around the world handle more planes with fewer delays while maintaining today's high level of safety. (NASA Release 93-172)        	* NASA's Hubble's Space Telescope's picture of Nova Cygni 1992 gave astronomers their earliest look at a rapidly ballooning bubble of gas blasted off a star.  Nova Cygni 1992, one of the brightest novae in 20, erupted on February 19, 1992. (NASA Release 93-174)	* The Senate voted to continue funding the multibillion-dollar Superconducting Super Collider project, which the House had voted to eliminate.  The issue now goes to a House-Senate conference as part of a $22.5 billion spending bill for fiscal 1994 energy and water projects. (UPI, Sep 30/93; W Post, Oct 1/93; NY Times, Oct 1/93)    	During September: A University of New Hampshire-NASA study revealed that tropical deforestation and adverse effects on tropical forest habitat have increased in the Brazilian Amazon Basin since the late 1970s. Data from the Landsat-4 and -5 satellites covering 1978-88 indicated that although the extent of deforestation was less than expected, deforestation had increased substantially and created adverse "edge-effects" that posed a substantial threat to the habitat of plant and animal species." (El Mundo Latino, Sep/93)  	* Commentaries appeared in the press both supporting and opposing funding for the Superconducting Super Collider. Supporters of the project noted that the Super Collider involved basic scientific research that would benefit society in countless ways.  Critics, admitting that the Super Collider might well advance science, argued that the cost of continuing the program was too high in the current budgetary climate. (LA Times, Sep 24/93; USA Today, Sep 28/93; W Post, Sep 29/93)OctoberOctober 1: House-Senate conferees killed NASA's program to search for signs of intelligent civilization beyond Earth and reduced funding available for a reflight of the agency's lost Mars Observer mission. In approving a total agency budget of $14.5 billion, the legislators barely preserved a program to build a more powerful rocket booster for the Space Shuttle and provided very little funding for developing new technology needed for the National Aerospace Plane.  The planned Space Station was fully funded at $2.l billion for fiscal 1994. (W Post, Oct. 2/93; AP Oct 2/93)October 4: NASA announced that NASA scientists were to spend October and November in Antarctica testing "telepresence technology" that might be used in the future to explore Mars. The research expedition was sponsored by a joint NASA-National Science Foundation Antarctic Space Analog Program and funded for NASA by the Offices of Space Science and Advanced Concepts and Technology. (NASA Release 93-178; LA Times, Oct 3/93; UPI, Oct 4/93)	* Hughes Aircraft and Perkin-Elmer Corporation agreed to pay $25 million to head off a threatened government lawsuit, charging them with liability for the defect that crippled the $2-billion Hubble Space Telescope, the Justice Department announced. (UPI, Oct 4/93; AP, Oct 5/93; NY Times, Oct 5/93; B Sun, Oct 5/93, Oct 8/93; W Post, Oct 5/93; WSJ, Oct 5/93; LA Times, Oct 5/93) 	* NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the recipients of the Minority Contractor and Subcontractor of the Year Awards in recognition of minority businesses that had made outstanding contributions to NASA. Hernandez Engineering, Inc., Houston, was named as Minority Contractor of the Year. AJT and Associates, Inc., Cape Canaveral, Florida, was named Minority Subcontractor of the Year. (NASA Release 93-177)	* NASA's Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory was to receive a scheduled boost to a higher orbit beginning on October 4, to prevent the spacecraft from reentering the Earth's atmosphere. The reboost was necessary to compensate for orbit decay, which is the result of solar activity slowly pushing the satellite toward Earth over a period of time, said NASA officials. (NASA Release 93-179)  October 5: A conference committee of the Senate and House eliminated $12.3 million earmarked for the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) project. Angry astronomers began seeking private funds to continue their work, which had been underway for barely a year. (SF Chron, Oct 6/93; NY Times, Oct 7/93; San Francisco Examiner, Oct 4/93)October 6: A $220 million Landsat 6 Earth Observation satellite was launched into the wrong orbit, and ground controllers were unable to make contact with the satellite, according to a mission spokeswoman for Earth Observation Satellite Company (ESAT). The satellite was supposed to go into orbit over the poles during a five-year mission studying the Earth's environment. An ESAT official said that the company hoped to get the satellite into the proper orbit by the end of the week.  (W Post, Oct 6/93; USA Today, AP, Oct 6/93)		* NASA's Inspector General told Congress that NASA is plagued with contractors who overcharge, receive bonus payments while running up huge cost overruns and employ workers who frequently sleep on the job. The agency currently has more than 400 criminal fraud investigations under way, the Inspector General told the House Government Operations Committee. (AP, Oct 6/93; NY Times, Oct 6/93, Oct 7/93; LA Times, Oct 7/93) 	October 7: U.S. space pioneer William H. Pickering was the first recipient of the $250,000 Francois-Xavier Bagnoud Aerospace Prize, the largest of its kind.  As director of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California, Pickering prepared the first U.S. satellite, Explorer 1, for launch in just 83 days following the launch of the Soviet Sputnik 1 in 1957. (W Post, Oct 7/93) 	* NASA reported that an explosive designed to free a satellite aboard Space Shuttle Discovery accidentally detonated while the Shuttle was in orbit last month, hurling shrapnel though the cargo compartment.  The five astronauts were never in any danger, a NASA official said. The damage would not delay Discovery's next flight in January. (RTw, Oct 7/93; AP, Oct 8/93; Fla Today, Oct 11/93, Oct 14/93) 	October 8: A recent Space Shuttle experiment on rats some day may lead to the discovery of the genes that direct bone cells to produce more bone.  The third Physiological and Anatomical Rodent Experiment (PARE-3) studied changes in the activity of bone-forming cells after nine days of spaceflight.  It also investigated whether these changes were reversed within three days of return to Earth. (NASA Release 93-181)October 12: NASA scientists were scheduled to test an "intelligent" computer on the 14-day Spacelab Life Sciences mission, scheduled for launch in early October. The computer, known as the Astronaut Science Advisor, was designed to help astronauts work more efficiently and improve the quality of science in space. (NASA Release 93-180)	* In the current issue of the journal Science, astronomers reported that refined analysis of spacecraft data had led them to estimate that the heliopause is somewhere from 116 to 177 times farther away from the sun than is Earth.  The previous calculations, announced in May, gave a lower estimate of 82 to 130 times. (NY Times, Oct 12/93)	*  NASA officials said that its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory had yielded three major breakthroughs, two of which would enable scientists to unmask hidden supernovae buried deep in the center of the Milky Way.  The third discovery pinpoints a source of the mysterious cosmic rays in this galaxy that have puzzled researchers since the rays first were detected more than 80 years ago. (NASA Release 93-182)	* NASA announced that it had received a request from Russian physicians treating victims of the recent emergency in Moscow for medical assistance from U.S. clinicians.  The medical consultations were to use a previously established U.S./Russian satellite telemedicine program known as "Spacebridge to Moscow." NASA first became involved in satellite telemedicine programs in the 1970s when a NASA satellite was used for medical consultation and health care delivery to remote sites in Alaska. (NASA Release 93-183)October 13: NASA announced the formation of an investigation board to examine the causes of a simultaneous detonation of two Super*Zip explosive cords, one primary and the other a backup, that occurred during the deployment of the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite(ACTS) and its Transfer Orbit State (TS) booster from Discovery during Shuttle Mission STS-51 (September 12-20, 1993). (NASA Release 93-184)	* NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas, selected Lockheed Engineering and Sciences Corporation, Houston, for the Engineering, Test and Analysis contract worth $12.5 billion over 10 years, beginning January 1, 1994.  (NASA Release C93-y)	* Miles "Mike" Ross, former deputy director of the Kennedy Space Center, died of cancer Wednesday at his home.  He was 74.  Mr. Ross joined NASA in 1967 as deputy director of the center's engineering and technical operations.  He became deputy center director in 1970. (Fl Today, Oct 15/93) October 14: A last-minute glitch in a computer system that monitors Shuttle takeoffs to ensure people's safety on the ground forced NASA to scrub the launch of Shuttle Columbia on a medical research mission. NASA said that it would try for an October 15 launch, if the weather cooperated. 	A small group of animal rights protesters carried signs at Gate 2 of the Kennedy Space Center on the day of the expected launch; they objected to the use of rats in experiments aboard the Columbia. (AP, Oct 14/93; UPI, Oct 14/93; NY Times, Oct 14/93, Oct 15/93; B Sun, Oct 15/93; W Post, Oct 15/93; P Inq, Oct 14/93, Oct 15/93; Fl Today, Oct 15/93; O Sen Star, Oct 15/93; USA Today, Oct 14/93) October 15: Scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and the Joint Astronomy Centre, Hilo, Hawaii, discovered an unexpected type of molecule in the ices of a star-forming cloud.  The scientists have detected large amounts of molecular hydrogen frozen into the ice grains in a dense molecular cloud in Rho Ophiuchus. Rho Ophiuchus is known as a stellar nursery, a region in the Milky Way galaxy where new stars are being formed. (NASA Release 93-187)	* NASA announced that the IC2 Institute, Austin, Texas, had appointed John S. Gee as the Director of the Ames Technology Commercialization Center (ATCC) located in Sunnyvale, California. IC2 Institute, a unit of the University of Texas, was contracted by NASA's Office of Advanced Concepts Technology, Washington, D.C, to assist NASA centers in the transfer of technology to the private sector.  (NASA Release 93-185)	* The NASA Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology selected 52 proposals for negotiations leading to Phase A awards to develop flight experiments in response to the 1992 In-Space Technology Experiments Program (IN-TEP) Announcement of Opportunity.  For the 1992 program, proposals were solicited in eight different technology areas: space communications; cryo fluid handling; human support; in-space construction, repair, and maintenance; space materials, coatings, and environmental effects; space power, science sensor, and sensor cooling; and vibration isolation (NASA Release 93-186) 	* NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin told Congress that the United States could save $3.5 billion by building the Space Station with the Russians.  He also testified that a joint Space Station could be finished and inhabited by U.S. astronauts by April 2001, two years earlier than without Russian cooperation. (WSJ, Oct 15/93; Huntsville Times, Oct 15/93) 	* A report by the General Accounting Office found that for years NASA had disregarded or misunderstood property regulations.  Under federal regulations, contractors doing business with the government must provide their own equipment unless their reasons are approved by the agency signing the contract.  But NASA rarely applied these tough regulations to its contractors, so that businesses have billions of dollars of taxpayer-purchased property. (Fla Today, Oct 15/93, Oct 18/93)October 16: Two Russian cosmonauts orbiting the earth since July  have been forced to extend their stay on the Mir Space Station by 49 days because of a delay in sending a relief craft, a space agency officials announced. (RTW, Oct 16/93)October 18: NASA officials announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had provided the most detailed look yet at comet Shoemaker-Levy 5, which was hurtling toward a July  1994 collision with the planet Jupiter.  Hubble's high resolution images showed that the approximately 20 objects that make up the comet are much smaller than originally estimated from observations with ground-based telescopes. (NASA Release 93-188; USA Today, Oct 15/93; S F Chron, Oct 15/93; RTw, Oct 14/93; W Post, Oct 25/93)	* NASA took action to limit expenditures on the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM) program.  NASA informed its field installations involved with the ASRM that if the pending appropriations bill becomes law, it would require termination of the ASRM program. (NASA Release 93-189)	* Antarctic ozone levels have reached record lows, according to data obtained by scientists at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Climate Monitoring and Diagnostic Lab, Boulder, Colorado.  Record low levels were recorded at the South Pole Station, Antarctica, at the end of September and early October 1993 and confirmed by satellite measurements. (NASA Release 93-190; B Sun, Oct 16/93; AP, Oct 18/93; NY Times, Oct 19/93; W Post, Oct 19/93; USA Today, Oct 19/93)	* The United States, Canada, Japan, and the European Space Agency (ESA) have invited Russia to help them build a new Space Station, according to an announcement by the ESA. (RTW, Oct 18/93; NASA Release N93-650)	* Space Shuttle Columbia, carrying seven astronauts, 48 rats, and a medical research lab, blasted into orbit for a record 14 days of experiments to learn more about keeping astronauts healthy during long voyages in weightlessness. The research was also expected to shed light on other health issues, including hypertension, anemia, and osteoporosis.  This mission was only the second mission in 58 Shuttle trips focused entirely on medical research.		For most of the planned investigations, astronauts were to serve as both experimenters and subjects, donating blood, saliva, and urine samples for post-flight analysis.  They also planned to participate in several tests to characterize changes in the vision, balance, perception, and other senses affected by the loss of gravity.				The launch, which took place four days late after two earlier launch attempts had been derailed by bad weather and technical problems, had a trouble-free countdown. The Shuttle was scheduled to land November 1 at Edwards Air Force Base. (UPI, Oct 18/93: RTw, Oct 18/93; AP, Oct 18/93, Oct 20/93; B Sun, Oct 19/93; USA Today, Oct 19/93; W Post, Oct 19/93; RTw, Oct 19/93; NY Times, Oct 20/03)October 19: By firing small jets 10 times in one-minute bursts, NASA engineers have raised the orbit of the giant Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory by 66 miles and saved it from crashing to Earth. The observatory was scheduled to travel around Earth in an egg-shaped orbit until late November when a second series of firings was to circularize its travels so that it would be at 280 miles altitude all around the globe. (AP, Oct 19/93)  	* The House of Representatives voted to deny funding requests for two science projects: President Clinton's request for $640 million for the superconducting Super Collider and $4 billion for NASA's request to build a more powerful Space Shuttle engine. (AP, Oct 19/93; W Post, Oct 20/93; USA Today, Oct 20/93, Oct 21/93; NY Times, Oct 20/93; W Post, Oct 21/93, Oct 22/93; C Trib, Oct 22/93; B Sun, Oct 25/93)	* NASA said that engineers have launched a review of the Space Shuttle Columbia's liftoff to identify debris seen near Columbia's three main engines.  A spokesman said that the Shuttle performed flawlessly during its ascent, but that officials were intrigued by video images that captured an object "of unknown origin" falling into the fiery engine plume about 45 seconds after liftoff. (RTw, Oct 19/93)October 20: NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that the Office of Space Flight would assume responsibility for management of the Space Station Program.  Jeremiah W. Pearson III, Associate Administrator of Space Flight, was scheduled to lead the integration of these major programs.  (NASA Release  93-1291; AP, Oct 20/93) 	* NASA announced that the mystery of the "fastest flickering" galaxy, Galaxy NGC 6814, had been solved. Astronomers discovered that the flickering is not related to the galaxy but rather to two stars that orbit each other near the line of sight between Earth and the galaxy.  When the two stars--called a binary system--become aligned with each other in relation to Earth, the galaxy image appears much brighter.  When the binary stars move out of alignment, the galaxy becomes dimmer. (NASA Release 93-192)	* The House of Representatives voted for the second time since June to reject financing for the Super Collider. Supporters said that the project appeared dead.  (NY Times, Oct 20/93; W Post, Oct 20/93)		October 21: NASA announced that it planned to launch Shuttle Endeavour and seven astronauts on December 1 on a  mission to repair the troubled Hubble Space Telescope. (UPI, Oct 21/93)  October 22: Scientists reported that NASA's Galileo spacecraft had detected changes in the interplanetary magnetic field as it passed the asteroid Ida on August 28. (NASA Release 93-193)October 25: Tests of a new NASA-developed, in-flight weather information system show that it could help airlines save nearly $6 million per year. The Cockpit Weather Information Needs (CWIN) system draws on several commercial data sources to create radar maps of storms and lightning and reports of surface observations.  In NASA simulations from March to July, pilots on 14 flight crews burned less fuel and flew fewer miles in avoiding bad weather using CWIN displays.  (NASA Release 93-194)October 26: NASA, the Alaskan Volcano Observatory (AVO) and Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, have agreed to a second robotic volcano exploration involving Dante, an eight-legged robot that attempted to explore Mt. Erebus in Antarctica earlier this year. (NASA Release 93-195; AP, Oct 26/93; W Times, Oct 31/93)	October 27: NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin announced that the United States plans as many as 10 Shuttle missions to the Russian Mir Space Station as the two countries prepare to join in the future development of a joint international Space Station. Goldin said that the plans for the dockings are contained in a NASA proposal for expanded cooperation in space with the Russians that he plans to submit to the Clinton Administration early next week. The proposal calls for U.S.-led construction of an international Space Station in Earth orbit beginning in 1997. (H Chron, Oct 28/93; NY Times, Nov 5/98, Nov 13/93; W Post, Nov 4/98; LA Times, Nov 5/98, AP, Nov 5/98; B Sun, Nov 5/98)October 28: A two-ton chunk of a Chinese reconnaissance satellite launched earlier this month fell into the Pacific Ocean 1,000 miles west of Peru, the U.S. Space Command said. (USA Today, Oct. 28/93, Oct 29/93; P Inq, Oct 28/93, Oct 29/93; W Post, Oct 28/93, 29/93; NY Times, Oct 26/93)	* Dinosaurs became extinct not as a result of a giant asteroid, as one theory holds, but because of an atmospheric change that left too little oxygen to support their inefficient respiratory systems, according to Gary Landis, a U.S. geological Survey geologist.  He was one of four scientists who presented the new theory at the Geological Society of America's annual meeting. (P Inq, Oct 28/93) October 29: NASA announced that it had begun flight tests of a fiber optic control system that could result in lighter, more fuel-efficient airplanes with more capable control and monitoring systems.  The tests, using the F/A-18 Systems Research Aircraft at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California, were developing fiber optic systems that weighed less and took up less space than the copper wiring in today's aircraft. (NASA Release 93-199)  	* NASA announced that starting in January 1994, the NASA Science Internet (NSI) would connect research sites in the United States with Russia's Space Research Institute (IKI) in Moscow.  Nine additional Russian space-related institutions were to be connected through what is called the Russian Space Science Internet (RSSI). (NASA Release 93-196)	* Preliminary results from a U.S. Russian scientific expedition have shed new light on the geology of eastern Russian.  The data was obtained in August and September by NASA and Russian scientists using NASA's Learjet Model 23 based at the John C. Stennis Space Center in Mississippi. The expedition studied a variety of sites on the Kamchatkan peninsula; the data were to be used to study the geologic evolution of the volcanoes on the peninsula as well as the impact of large volcanic eruptions on the atmosphere and its chemistry. The data were also to be used to model thermal and dynamical aspects of volcanoes. (NASA Release 93-198)  	* NASA announced that it had started flight tests of a fiber optic control system that could result in lighter, more fuel-efficient airplanes with more capable control and monitoring systems.  The tests, which used the F/A-18 Systems Research Aircraft, took place at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research facility, Edwards, California. (NASA Release 93-199)October 30: NASA announced a new initiative that would create Louisiana's first formal concentration of aerospace engineering courses at the historically black Southern University and A&M College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana. NASA's five-year, $2.5 million grant was intended to help the university develop an aerospace engineering undergraduate option in the Department of Mechanical Engineering.  (NASA Release 93-197)	* An article in New Scientist suggested that many failures in space are not the fault of electronics or software, but something more fundamental--the mechanics.  The article identified a number of space missions that had problems caused by mechanical failures. Examples include the mission involving the European Retrievable Carrier (Eureca); Germany's TVSAT1, a direct broadcast satellite launched in November 1987; and the Hubble Telescope. (New Scientist, Oct 30/93) NovemberNovember 1: Dr. David J. Larkin and team members from NASA's Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio, announced a new silicon carbide crystal growth process, called "site competition epitaxy," in a paper presented at the International Conference on Silicon Carbide and Related Materials in Washington, D.C.  The new growth process can be used to produce superior silicon carbide semiconductor electronic devices, which can withstand temperatures much higher than conventional semiconductors. (NASA Release 93-200)	* The Space Shuttle Columbia landed smoothly at Edwards Air Force Base after 14 days in orbit, ending the Shuttle program's longest flight with a wealth of new data on weightless in humans. Columbia's mission was only the second in U.S. history totally devoted to medical research.  The Shuttle logged 5.8 million miles and circled Earth 225 times during its journey, which began October 18.  Columbia performed well but sustained damage to thermal barriers around engine heat shields and to its protective tiles.  Both problems have occurred before and will continue to be investigated, a NASA spokesperson said. 	Shortly after touchdown, Columbia's seven crew members were taken on stretchers to a base lab, where they were to undergo new tests before their bodies had time to readjust to Earth's gravity. The crew, including two physicians, a biochemist, and a veterinarian, conducted medical research during the mission.  They pedaled bicycles, drew blood sample, dissected laboratory rats, and performed other tests in a self-contained space clinic.  The tests were designed to provide new clues on how harmful effects of weightlessness can be counteracted during long space voyages. The astronauts conducted more than 125 tests intended to help solve such medical riddles as why muscles weaken, bones soften, and red blood-cell production drops during lengthy space journeys. ( USA Today, Oct 20/93, Oct 27/93, Nov 1/93, Nov 2/93; NY Times, Oct 20/93, Oct 21/93, Oct 22/93, Oct 31/93, Nov 1/93, Nov 2/93; RTw, Oct 19/93; Oct 20/93, Oct 21/93, Oct 25/93, Oct 26/93, Oct 27/93, Oct 30/93, Oct 31/93, Nov 1/93; UPI, Oct 19/93, Oct 20/93, Oct 21/93, Oct 25, Oct 27/93, Oct 31/93, Nov 1/93; AP, Oct 20/93, Oct 21/93, Oct 22/93, Oct 25/93, Oct 26/93, Oct 27/93, Nov 1/93, Nov 2/93; Antelope Valley Press, Oct 22/93; W Times, Oct 25/93; Reuters, Oct 23/93; W Post, Oct 31/93, Nov 1/93, Nov 2/93; B Sun, Oct 31/93, Nov 2/93; Phil Inq, Oct 31/93, Nov 2/93; LA Times, Nov 2/93)November 2: A spokesman said that NASA had delayed loading the Hubble Space Telescope's replacement parts into Space Shuttle Endeavour because a fine, sandy substance had been found on two sealed plastic bags containing instruments needed to repair the telescope. A wind storm was thought responsible.  Officials were to inspect the instruments to make sure they had not been damaged. NASA did not believe the inspection would delay the mission's target liftoff of Dec. 1. (AP, Nov 2/93; RTw, Nov 2/93, Nov 4/98; B Sun, Nov 4/93)November 5: NASA and the Ozark Heritage Region, Southern Missouri, announced that they would sponsor a two-day conference to provide information to minority and women-owned businesses interested in contracting opportunities with NASA. The conference was scheduled for December 1-2, 1993, at the Civic Center, West Plains, Missouri. (NASA Release 93-201)November 8: NASA announced that it had officially kicked off Phase II of its High-Speed Research Program, a partnership with U.S. industry to develop technology that could enable the development of a next-generation supersonic airliner. (NASA Release 93-202)	* NASA announced that in one of the deepest celestial surveys yet made by the Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers had discovered a small group of previously unknown interacting galaxies estimated to be three billion light-years away. Because Hubble caught the galaxies in an early stage of evolution, they offer new clues as to how galaxies have changed over time. (NASA Release 93-203)	* Dr. John Peoples Jr., director of the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Illinois, was appointed to take over direction of the dismantling of the Superconducting Super Collider in Texas. Dr. Peoples was to replace Dr. Ray F. Schwitters, the Super Collider's founding director, who resigned last week after Congress decided to terminate the $11 billion project. (NY Times, Nov 9/93)	* NASA held a marathon, 59-hour dress rehearsal of the agency's $251 million mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope and repair its flawed vision. The 11-day mission aboard the Shuttle Endeavour was planned for December 1.	Despite its flawed mirror, the Hubble telescope has produced a steady stream of important discoveries. More than 290 Hubble-based scientific papers have been published around the world. (B Sun, Nov 7/93, Nov 9/93, Nov 15/93; W Post, Nov 22/93)November 9: NASA announced that sea surface measurements taken by the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon satellite have confirmed that conditions are ripe for development of an El Nino even in the eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean this winter. (NASA Release 93-205; USA Today, Nov 10/93)	* NASA said that it would headquarter its first-ever Small Business Outreach Program at the New Hampshire Technical College in Nashua. The outreach program is a pilot project designed to assist New England businesses competing for NASA contracts. (NASA Release 93-206)November 10: NASA researchers at Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the University of Hawaii have discovered a faint spot of infrared emission that moves across Jupiter in concert with the orbital motion of its moon Io. The image is caused by the electrical interaction between Io and Jupiter's magnetic field. (NASA Release 93-208)November 12: NASA announced the selection of 317 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase 1 contracts in NASA's 1993 Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR).  Over 2,850 proposals were submitted by small, high technology businesses from all parts of the United States. (NASA Release  93-207)November 13: NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and a team based at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which manages most planetary flights, have examined a variety of options for a new mission to Mars to achieve the scientific goals of the lost Mars Observer at less cost.  The flight would be launched no earlier than 1996. (W Post, Nov 13/93)  November 14: Funds for NASA's Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) have been cut from NASA's budget.(NY Times Magazine, Nov 14/93) November 15: NASA announced that Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, scientists have developed a multifunctional glass that detects pollutants in the air by a dramatic change in color.  Dr. Albert Stiegman, a JPL chemist, and his associates described the development in a paper in the journal Chemistry of Materials. (NASA Release 93-209)	* NASA awarded 20 universities grants for the first phase of a new training program that ultimately would create a cadre of young engineers skilled in multi-disciplinary design and analysis methods. Each university was to get about $50,000 to define a multi-disciplinary curriculum and graduate-level research program in the aeronautics field that would be accomplished with industry. The universities also were to prepare proposals for Phase II of the effort. (NASA Release 93-210)	* NASA announced that it had cleared the instruments scheduled to be used for the Hubble Telescope repair mission.  It was feared that the instruments had been contaminated by sandy  grit that had seeped into the cargo room where the equipment was being stored. The grit problem forced NASA to move the Endeavour to a different launch pad. (B Sun, Nov 16/93; W Times, Nov 16/93; USA Today, Nov 16/93; RTw, Nov 15/93)November 16: NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin told a Senate panel that the U.S. space program "is in chaos" because of congressional budget cuts. NASA's five-year budget plan dropped from $106 billion last year to $71 billion. Noting that NASA's budget changed every two or three months, Goldin called on Congress to institute a multiyear budget that would enable the agency to develop a strategic plan. (USA Today, Nov 17/93; W Times, Nov 17; Reuters, Nov 16/93, Nov 17/93; Fla Today, Nov 17/93)November 17: NASA announced that USN Captain Richard N. Richards would command the STS-64 mission scheduled for the fall of 1994 aboard Discovery. The STS-64 mission was scheduled to carry the LIDAR In-Space Technology Experiment (LITE), a project to measure atmospheric parameters from a space platform utilizing laser sensors, the Robert Operated Materials Processing System (ROMPS) to investigate robot handling of thin film samples, and the Shuttle Pointed Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy (Sparton-20l), a free-flying retrievable x-ray astronomy platform. (NASA Release 93-204) 	* NASA announced that the flight of Space Shuttle Endeavour on Mission STS-61 to repair the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was scheduled for December 1, 1993. The flight was the first in a series of planned visits to the orbiting telescope. The 11-day mission was designed to accommodate a record five spacewalks with the capability for an additional two if needed.	The first HST servicing mission was to have three primary objectives: restoring the planned scientific capabilities of the telescope (because of a manufacturing mistake, Hubble's primary mirror was too flat along its edge by about 1/50 of the thickness of a human hair, leading to blurry images); restoring the reliability of HST systems; and validating the HST on-orbit servicing concept. (NASA Release 93-204; NASA Note to Editors  N93-66; USA Today, Nov 18/93; RTw, Nov 17/93; APn, Nov 17/93; B Sun, Nov 17/93; P Inq, Dec 1/93)	* Yuri Koptev, head of the Russian Space Agency, said that Russia would definitely take part in the creation of a proposed Space Station with the United States. Work on the Station should start in 1997 and be finished by 2001. (Reuters, Nov 16/93; P Inq, Nov 26/93)	November 19: NASA announced that the Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, had been selected to design and build, in-house, the Space Station Furnace Facility, the first major element of Space Station scientific instrumentation and the focus of microgravity materials science research on the Space Station. (NASA Release 93-211)	* NASA said that it planned to launch a repair mission to the Hubble Space Telescope as planned next month despite a troublesome sensor on one of Shuttle Endeavour's wing flaps. The faulty sensor poses no safety problems, a Nasa spokesman said. (APn, Nov 19/93; RTw, Nov 19/93)November 22: NASA announced that it had chosen five finalists from among the hundreds of suggested new names for the planned Space Stations: Unity, Alliance, Aurora, Alpha, and Sigma.  Former President Reagan dubbed the proposed Space Station "Freedom" in 1988 but President Clinton asked NASA for a new name this year to go along with a new design, lower costs, and Russian involvement on the project. NASA Administrator Dan Goldin was scheduled to make the final choice in consultation with the White House. (W Times, Nov 22/93; Apn, Nov 19/93)	* NASA's $30 billion Space Station survived its third, and presumably final, vote in the House of Representatives, when members voted 248-184 to keep it from being grounded by budget-cutters (H Post, Nov 23/93; H Chron, Nov 22/93)	* NASA said that scientists at the NASA-Langley Research Center had developed a radar that can detect wind shear before pilots fly into it. The FAA considers the Langley device an improvement over other wind shear radar on the market, according to an FAA spokesperson. NASA nominated Langley's radar work for the 1993 Robert J. Collier Trophy, a national award given annually by he  National Aeronautics Association to those who have made the greatest achievement in aeronautics and astronautics. (Daily Press, Nov 22/93)November 28: The countdown began for the Hubble Telescope repair mission, considered by many to be NASA's biggest challenge in space since the Apollo moon landings. The Space Shuttle Endeavour was scheduled to lift off on the 11-day flight on December 1. (B Sun, Nov 28/93, Nov 29/93; USA Today, Nov 29/93; P Inq, Nov 29/93; NY Times Magazine, Nov 28/93; USA Weekend, Nov 26-28; W Post, Nov 28/93, Nov 29/93; RTw, Nov 27/93, 28/93; APn, Nov 27/93, Nov 28/93; UPn, Nov 26/93, Nov 28/93; W Times, Dec 1/93)November 29: NASA satellite data, used to study the expansion and contraction of the deserts and semi-arid lands of Africa, are the principle data source providing early warning of potential famine and desert locust swarms.  NASA announced that its Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland, and the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) were cooperating on a project to provide data to AID's Famine Early Warning system. (NASA Release 93-213)	* America's technological leaders were scheduled to meet  in Anaheim, California, from December 7-9 1993, to explore innovative ideas that could be used to solve engineering problems, create new products and industry opportunities, and facilitate the transfer of government-sponsored technologies to American industry. TECHNOLOGY 2003, the fourth annual national technology transfer conference and exposition, was sponsored by NASA, "NASA Tech Briefs" magazine, and the Technology Utilization Foundation. (NASA Release 93-212) 		* NASA announced that it had selected the team of General Electric Corporation, Cincinnati and United Technologies Pratt & Whitney Division, West Palm Beach, Florida, for final negotiations leading to award of a contract to develop critical propulsion component technologies for a future U.S. high-speed civil transport. (NASA Release C93-dd)November 30: NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA had awarded 8.5 percent of its 1993 fiscal year contracting budget to socially and economically disadvantaged firms, achieving a congressionally mandated goal of 8 percent for FY 1994 a year early. (NASA Release 93-214)DecemberDecember 1: Daniel S. Goldin, NASA Administrator, announced agency plans to use its nearly completed Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM) Yellow Creek facilities in Iuka, Mississippi, for manufacture of nozzles for the current Space Shuttle Redesigned Solid Rocket Motor (RSRM) program. (NASA Release 93-215)	* President Clinton declared his support for building a Space Station in partnership with the Russians and received support for the project from key figures in Congress during a White House meeting on November 29.  (W Post, Dec 1/93; RTw, Dec 1/97; AP, Dec 1/97; APn, Dec 1/93; NY Times, Dec 1/93; USA Today, Dec 1/93)December 2: Law enforcement sources said that the FBI has been conducting a wide-ranging "sting" investigation into allegations of fraud at NASA's Johnson Space Center, including the possible payment of bribes and gratuities for the placement of medical products on the Space Shuttle.  About six NASA employees, including an unidentified astronaut, about 15 contractor employees, and at least two major aerospace firms were potentially implicated, sources said. (W Post, Dec 3/93; AP, Dec 3/93; UPn, Dec 3/93; RTw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; WSJ, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93; C Trib, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 6/93; H Post, Dec 4/93; H Chron, Dec 7/93)	* After a one-day weather delay, Space Shuttle Endeavour lifted off before dawn on a mission to repair the out-of-focus $3 billion Hubble Space Telescope. Four members of the Shuttle crew, made up of six men and one woman, were to take five planned day-long spacewalks in an attempt to restore the full capability of the Hubble observatory. (WP, Dec 3/93; Dec 2/93; TRw, Dec 2/93; USA Today, Dec 3/93; B Sun, Dec 3/93; NY Times, Dec 3/93; APn, Dec 3/93; W Times, Dec 3/93; LA Times, Dec 3/93)  December 4: The Department of Justice filed a complaint accusing Paul Buchanan, director of NASA's Biomedical Operations and Research Office at Kennedy Space Center, of submitting false vouchers claiming lodging expenses for time spent in Washington, DC, while on temporary duty for NASA. (Fla Today, Dec 4/93; C Trib, Dec 5/93)  	* A New York Times article reported that a debate is going on over the degree of danger posed by the Space Shuttle's solid-fueled rocket boosters.  Repeatedly this year, the boosters have shown alarming variations in their thrust, prompting a number of quiet NASA investigations and accusations by critics that the problem is a time bomb waiting to go off.  (NY Times, Dec 4/93; Fl Today, Dec 7/93		* China's state-run media reported that China had reached its first agreement with the United States to rent payload space in the U.S. Space Shuttle program for scientific research projects.  Jian Jingshan, director of the Center for Space  Science and Applied Research at the Chinese Academy of Sciences, said his center had rented eight payload booths to carry equipment for experiments in space physics. (C Trib, Dec 5/93) December 6: NASA announced that the Ulysses spacecraft, which was on its way to explore the polar regions of the sun, had become the first spacecraft to reach further south than the most southerly dip of the sun's magnetic equator. Ulysses's observations revealed that the fast-moving stream of charged particles, called the solar wind, is twice as fast, but less dense, than near the sun's equator. (NASA Release 93-217; UPn, Dec 6/93)	* NASA announced that it was working with industry partners to develop a new technology for parts tracking.  The new technology, a small binary symbol similar to a checkerboard, can contain much more information and occupy less space than a bar code and be easily marked directly on a part's surface for permanent identification. (NASA Release 93-218)	* Space-agency officials from the United States, Europe, Canada, and Japan agreed to invite Russia to join them in building an international Space Station that would be the world's largest collaborative science project. (WSJ, Dec 7/93; B Sun, Dec 7/93; TTw, Dec 6/93)December 7: Space Shuttle Endeavour's spacewalkers were the first to wear new spacesuit gloves that provide not only more thermal protection but also a better sense of touch than earlier models. The gloves are the first to have breaks in the gray silicone-coated Keviar finger and palm surface so joints can bend easier.  They are also insulated with Nomex felt for added warmth in space, where temperatures can plunge to hundreds of degrees below zero. (USA Today, Dec 7/93)December 11: Director Dale Compton and Deputy Director Victor Peterson, the two top directors at NASA's Ames Research Center, were scheduled to retire at the of the year. The retirements come at a time when women and members of minority groups have complained that the center's top jobs are reserved for an "old boy network" of white men. (San Jose Mercury News, Dec 11/93) December 13: The Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at Cape Canaveral, Florida, after an eleven-day mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope. The flight was considered the most complex mission in more than 12 years of Shuttle flying, the biggest space repair job ever, and NASA's biggest challenge since the Apollo moon landings 20 years ago.	During their five spacewalks, astronauts successfully replaced two of three pairs of gyroscopes (used to position the telescope) and their control unit; replaced two solar panels that supply electricity; installed another set of corrective optics to compensate for flaw in signal to other instruments; fixed two magnetometers, which tell NASA the position of the satellite; upgraded the Hubble computer; and installed a new camera with corrective lenses to compensate for flaw in Hubble's primary mirror.	According to NASA scientists, Hubble's new optics would have to be fine-tuned and tested for six to eight weeks before NASA would be able to tell whether the repairs actually had worked. (RTw, Dec 6/93, Dec 7/93, Dec 8/93, Dec 9/93, Dec 12/93, Dec 13/93; APn, Dec, 8/93, Dec 9/93, Dec 13/93; WP, Dec 7/93, Dec 12/93; W Times, Dec 6/93; Dec 7/93, Dec 9/93, Dec 10/93; USA Today, Dec 6/93, Dec 7/93, Dec 9/93; Dec 10/93, Dec 13/93, Dec 15/93; NY Times, Dec 4/93, Dec 5/93, Dec 6/93, Dec 7/93, Dec 9/93, Dec 10/93, Dec 11/93; Dec 12/93; LA Times, Dec 5/93, Dec 7/93, Dec 9/93, Dec 10/93; Dec 13/93; CSM, Dec 6/93, Dec 7, Dec 10/93; P Inq, Dec 5/93, Dec 10/93; B Sun, Dec 5/93, Dec 6/93, Dec 7/93, Dec 9/93, Dec 10/93, Dec 11/93, Dec 12/993, Dec 13/93; Dec 19/93; APn, Dec 6, Dec 7/93, Dec 8/93, Dec 9/93, Dec 10/93, Dec 12/93, Dec 13/93; W Times, Dec 4/93, Dec 5/93, Dec 6/93; Dec 9/93, Dec 12/93, Dec 13/93; UPn, Dec 6/93, Dec 7/93, Dec 8/93, Dec 9/93, Dec 10/93, Dec 13/93; Time, Dec 12/93; O Sen, Dec 7/93, Dec 9/93, Dec 11/93; W Post, Dec 4/93, Dec 5/93, Dec 6/93, Dec 9/93, Dec 11/93, Dec 12/93, Dec 13/93; C Trib, Dec 5/93, Dec 12/93; Newsweek, Dec 6/93; WSJ, Dec 9/93; H Chron, Dec 9/93; H Post, Dec 9/93; Fla Today, Dec 9/93, Dec 14/93)	  December 15: NASA announced the selection of 130 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The SBIR goals are to stimulate technological innovation, increase the use of small businesses (including minority and disadvantaged firms) in meeting federal research and development needs and increase private sector commercialization of results of federally funded research. (NASA Release 93-219)	* Russia's space facilities in Kazakhstan appeared adequate to support the Clinton Administration's plan for a joint Russian-American Space Station program, but the United States may have to invest $100 million for various improvements, Representative George E. Brown, J., D-CA, said Tuesday. Brown, chairman of the House Space Science and Technology Committee, and a team of space experts from his committee toured the Baikonur Cosmodrome the week of December 5, 1983. (LA Times, Dec 15/93; Defense Daily, Dec 15/93; Fla Today, Dec 15/93) 	  		* Engineers from Russian and American rocket companies were at Marshall Space Flight Center, Huntsville, Alabama, displaying a pair of Russian engines for sale to the American space program.  Aerojet and Russian engineers briefed Marshall Center propulsion engineers on the design, manufacturing and test history of the engines, which date to the Soviet manned lunar program in the 1960s. (Huntsville Times, Dec 15/93). 	* NASA has begun full-scale development of the first spacecraft to rendezvous with and orbit an asteroid.  Called Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR), the mission received funding in the FY 1994 budget and was scheduled to be the first in NASA's new Discovery program of small-scale, cost-effective space exploration missions to be launched. (NASA Release 93-220) 	* In the wake of Shuttle Endeavour's successful repair flight, commentators expressed their views on the significance of the mission. Writing in the Washington Times, Al Rossiter Jr., assistant vice president at Duke University, argued that the Endeavour astronauts who fixed the Hubble Space Telescope during five successful spacewalks should have removed any lingering doubts about the usefulness of people in space and the value of the Shuttle as an orbital service station. 	Commentator Michael D. Lemonick, writing in Time, asked "What will NASA do for an encore"? noting that while the flight to fix the Hubble Telescope might have been a triumph the agency's future was still clouded. William J. Cook, writing in US News and World Report, after praising the Endeavour mission, argued in favor of building a U.S. Space Station and of adding Russia as a partner in the project. An Orlando Sentinel editorial agreed that the stunning success of the Hubble repair mission had put NASA back on track for greater challenges, such as creating a Space Station. This view was shared by the writer of a C Trib editorial. USA Today's "Opinion Line" recorded other positive responses from the U.S. media. (W Times, Dec 15/93; Time, Dec 20/; U.S. News and World Report, Dec 20/93; O Sen, Dec 11/93; USA Today, Dec 15/93; C Trib, Dec 18/93)	* NASA said that the agency had ordered special tests for all 44 of Shuttle Discovery's small nose-and-tail steering jets after a microscopic puncture was found in one of the thrusters. The tests could delay Discovery's next mission by as much as a week, possibly longer if any thrusters needed to be replaced. (Fla Today, Dec 15/93; APn, Dec 14/93)	* An unmanned probe was scheduled to be launched in 1996 to orbit the asteroid Eros, a giant rock that periodically passes close to the Earth. The spacecraft was to be built and operated by the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory for NASA. It will spend almost three years flying toward a rendezvous with Eros and then spend another year orbiting the asteroid. (Apn, Dec 16/93; B Sun, Dec 16/93; RTw, Dec 15/93; AP, Dec 16/93; W Post, Dec 20/93; Defense Daily, Dec 22/93)December 16: NASA announced that NASA and the Russian Space Agency had agreed to up to 10 Shuttle flights to Mir with a total of 24 months time on board Mir for U.S. astronauts, a program of scientific and technological research, and the upgrade and extension of the Mir lifetime during the period 1995-1997. (NASA Release 93-222)	* NASA and the Russian State Committee for the Defense Branches of industry signed a memorandum of understanding in Moscow to cooperate in eight areas of fundamental aeronautical sciences.  The agreement called for cooperative activities in the following areas: transition and turbulence, composite structures and materials, chemically reacting flows, thermal protection system materials, environmental concerns in aviation, hypersonic technologies, experimental test facilities, and advanced aerospace materials. (NASA Release 93-22)  	* NASA officials said that the Hubble Space Telescope appeared to be functioning well, but that they would not know until February whether or not the Hubble's vision problems had been corrected. (W Times, Dec 16/93; Fla Today, Dec 14/93, Dec 16/93; RTw, Dec 15/93; UPn, Dec 15/93)	* The United States and Russia formally joined as partners on an international Space Station and announced that the first Russian astronaut would fly in the Space Shuttle Discovery in six weeks. Russia also accepted an invitation to join the United States, Europe, Japan, and Canada in building a revamped Space Station. (NY Times, Dec 17/93; LA Times, Dec 17/93; B Sun, Dec 17/93; P Inq, Dec 17/93; APn, Dec 16/93; C Trib, Dec 17/93)December 20: NASA announced that scientists at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, had created the first geographically precise image of the Earth "breathing"--removing and releasing carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. The dynamic computer model shows monthly changes for carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere as microbes decompose plant debris in the Earth's soil. (NASA Release 93-223; UPI, Dec 20/93)	* A Washington Times editorial questioned the wisdom of the space partnership between Russia and the United States, finding significant problems with the agreement. First, should the Russian fascists come to power, the United States would have provided a hostile government with very detailed insights into the state of our advanced technologies. Second, the writer charged, the United States was being tricked into purchasing obsolete equipment for the joint station; third, Russia's space launch base, called Baikonur, was reported to be badly decayed; and, fourth, there were issues of crew safety--two fires were known to have taken place in similar modules of Russian Space Stations and the Russians had not provided complete details of these events.	An editorial in the Christian Science Monitor, on the other  hand, praised the agreement with Russia, noting that it was clear that manned spaceflight must become truly international because of the high costs involved with space programs. (W Times, Dec 20/93)	* NASA announced that it was phasing out support for six of the Centers for the Commercial Development of Space. The centers losing funding were the Center for Advanced Materials, Battelle Laboratories, Columbus, Ohio; Center for Commercial Crystal Growth in Space, Clarkson University, Potsdam, New York; Center for Materials for Space Structures, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio; Center for Cell Research, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania; Center for Space Transportation and Applied Research, University of Tennessee, Tullahoma, Tennessee, and Space Automation and Robotics Center, Environmental Research Institute of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (NASA Release 93-225)	* NASA announced that it had successfully boosted its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory into a higher orbit around Earth, a move that would keep the 17-ton satellite from reentering the atmosphere. The reboost extended the mission life of the observatory by five years and prevented a reentry in which large parts from the spacecraft could have struck Earth, said officials at the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, which managed the spacecraft. (NASA Release 93-224)December 21: NASA announced that its Perseus remotely piloted research aircraft had made its first flight, beginning an ambitious test program that was intended to qualify the plane for operational atmospheric science missions. (NASA Release 93-227)	* A feature in the NY Times about Daniel S. Golden, NASA Administrator, called him a "bold remodeler of a drifting agency." Golden was quoted in the article as saying that he believes "nonlinear thinking" is essential to the rebirth of NASA. (NY Times, Dec 21/93)    	     December 22: NASA reported that the agency had overcome a thruster glitch to successfully complete the reboost of its Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory (GRO), adding five years to the spacecraft's on-orbit lifetime. (Defense Daily, Dec 22/93)December 23: The final operational instrument on the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) spacecraft, NASA's first spacecraft to explore the origins of the universe, was scheduled to be turned off after completing four years of landmark research, including confirmation of the Big Bang theory that says the universe was created in a single momentous explosion. (NASA Release 93-228; NY Times, Dec 24/93; APn, Dec 23/93)	* NASA scientists said they were "ecstatic" over their progress in bringing the Hubble Space Telescope back to life after this month's repair mission. Hubble's ground handlers at NASA predicted that they would focus the observatory completely by the end of January, about two weeks quicker than expected. (H Post, Dec 23/93; APn, Dec 29/93; B Sun, Dec 25/93)




TABLE 3. SATELLITES, SPACE PROBES, AND HUMAN SPACE FLIGHTS, 1993														
Launch Date (GMT), Spacecraft Name, COSPAR Designation, Launch VehicleMission Objectives, Spacecraft DataApogee and Perigee (km), Period (min), Inclination to Equator ()RemarksJan. 13 TDRS-6 3BObjective: To deploy Tracking and Delta Relay  Satellite (TDRS-6) and operate the Diffused X-ray   Spectrometer Hitchhiker experiment to collect        data on stars and the surrounding galactic gasses.  Other objectives included the second Physiological and Anatomical Rodent Experiment (PARE-2), a Solid Surface Combustion Experiment, and the second group of Physics of   Toys experiments to be broadcast to classrooms throughout the nation.Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter with above  experiments and equipment. 307.0302.090.654.7Fifty-third STS flight.  Piloted by John   H. Casper and Donald R. Monagle. Mission specialists Gregory J, Harbaugh, Mario Runco, Jr., and     Susan J. Helms.  Launch from KSC    at 8:59 a.m., EST.  Landed at KSC 8:38 a.m., EST, Jan 20.Mission duration: 6 days, 23 hrs., 39 min. Jan. 13 TDRS-6 3BObjective: To launch the sixth in a series of communications satellites in the Tracking and Data Relay Satellites System (TDRSS) to provide communications with the Space Shuttle and other spacecraft in low-Earth orbit.Spacecraft: Satellite equipped with two solar  arrays, two single access antennae, a C-band antenna, a K-band antenna, and an omni      antenna.   35,708.035,704.01,431.90.5Designated TDRS F until in orbit.  Following its release from Endeavour's cargo bay, on Jan. 14, it reached its initial destination following two successful booster firings of the inertial upper stage.  In orbit.Jan. 24 Soyuz TM-16 Crew consisted of Gennady Manakov    and Aleksandr Poleshchuk.  Docked with Mir Space Station Jan. 26.  On July 22, 1993, the TM-16 descent   cabin landed back on Earth with  Manakov, Poleshchuk, and French  cosmonaut Jean-Pierre Haignere from Soyuz TM-17 on board. Feb. 3 GPS USA 88 7A Delta IIObjective: To provide radio positioning and  navigation, including position, velocity, and timing data to the DoD and civilian users.Spacecraft: A Block II satellite in the NAVSTAR Global Positioning System.20,359.020,005.0718.054.8Eighteenth in a series of operational GPS satellites.  System expected to   be composed of 24 satellites in inclined, semi-synchronous orbit.   In orbit.Feb. 9 OXP-1 9A PegasusObjective: To demonstrate new, commercial, global, mobile communications from low-Earth orbit.Spacecraft: An experimental, demonstration satellite weighing about 32 lbs., the size of a large briefcase, for transmitting brief messages with hand-held communicators.794.0732.0100.125.0Launched by Pegasus rocket, carried   to 40,000 feet for release and  first-stage motor ignition in a NASA B-52, which had taken off from KSC. In orbit.Feb. 9 SCD-1 9B PegasusObjective: To monitor cloud cover, rainfall, flood and tide levels, and air quality over Brazil.Spacecraft: Satellite de Coleta de Dados (SCD), a remote, sensing spacecraft that collects  environmental data from ground sensors in the   Amazon River Basin.793.0729.0100.125.0Launched by Pegasus rocket, carried   to 40,000 feet for release and  first-stage motor ignition in a NASA B-52, which had taken off from KSC.   In orbit. Mar. 25 UFO-1 15A Atlas- Centaur IIObjective: To provide communications and UHF links for the U.S. Navy, Strategic Command, and Army/Marine Rapid Deployment Forces.Spacecraft: A 6,319-pound satellite with a planned lifetime of 14 years and greater  communications capacity than the Navy's current communications spacecraft.36,108.036,041.01,450.927.1Because of malfunction of the Atlas stage, the satellite went into lower orbit than required.  With insufficient fuel to move it to operational orbit, the Navy moved it above   geosynchronous altitude and declared it a total loss.  In orbit.Mar. 30 GPS USA 90 17A Delta IIObjective: To provide radio positioning and navigation, including position, velocity, and timing data to DoD and civilian users.  Spacecraft: A Block II satellite in the NAVSTAR Global Positioning System.20,292.020,073.0718.055.0Nineteenth in a series of operational   GPS satellites.  System expected to   be composed of 24 satellites in inclined, semi-synchronous orbit.  In orbit.Mar. 30 SEDS I 17B Delta IIObjective: To allow scientists to compare data on actual tether dynamics with computer models of  predicted behavior.Spacecraft: The Small Expendable Tether Deployable System (SEDS I), an 85-pound  satellite attached by a 20-kilometer-long flexible cable to Delta's second stage.Not announced.During the 80-minute deployment,  the entire length of tether slowly unreeled until the payload began swinging like a pendulum.  Once it ceased swinging and came to a vertical position, it was severed and allowed to burn up as it reentered the Earth's atmosphere.Apr. 8 Space Shuttle  Discovery (STS-56) 23AObjective: To provide the orbiter Discovery and the Spacelab pallet as a platform for experiments   on the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications      and Science (ATLAS) payload, to monitor global   ozone with the Shuttle Solar Backscatter Ultraviolet instruments, and to study the solar  wind and the sun's corona, among other   purposes.Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter featuring 12 development test objectives and 15 detailed supplemental objectives. 307.0295.090.557.0Fifty-fourth STS flight, piloted by  Kenneth D. Cameron and Stephens      S. Oswald.  Payload Commander C. Michael Foale.  Mission specialists Kenneth D. Cockerell and Ellen Ochoa.  Launched from KSC 1:29 a.m., EDT.  Landed at KSC 7:37 a.m., Apr. 17.Mission duration: 9 days, 6 hrs., 9 min.Apr. 11 SPARTAN-201 23BObjective: To study the velocity and acceleration of the solar wind and observe aspects of the  sun's corona.Spacecraft: Shuttle Point Autonomous Research Tool for Astronomy (SPARTAN-201), a free-  flying payload with two telescopes, the White    Light Coronagraph (WLC), and the Ultraviolet Coronal Spectrometer (UVCS).  311.0295.090.357.0Astronauts released the Spartan  instruments platform from Discovery at 2:11 a.m., EDT and recovered it between 2:30 a.m. and 4:02 a.m.,   EDT, on Apr. 13.Apr. 25 ALEXIS 26A PegasusApr. 26 Space Shuttle Columbus (STS-55) 27AMay 13 GPS USA 91 32A Delta IIJun. 21  Space Shuttle  Endeavour (STS-57) 37AJun. 25 RADCAL 41A ScoutObjective: To test technology for detecting  ultra-soft x-rays emitted from space nuclear testing and to examine ionospheric distortion of VHF radio signals.Spacecraft: Array of Low Energy X-ray Imaging Sensors (ALEXIS) Spacecraft, featuring a smaller, faster, and cheaper spacecraft bus, x-ray detectors, and a very high frequency receiver and digitizer.Objective: To launch, operate and return Spacelab D-2, a German-sponsored payload for conducting   microgravity research, to Earth.Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter featuring a Spacelab long module with transfer tunnel, a unique  support structure for mounting experiments outside the module, and the autonomous payload, Reaction Kinetics in Glass Melts-all to investigate material and life sciences, space technology, automation, and robotics.Secondary objective: Shuttle Amateur Radio Experiment II.Objective: To provide radio positioning and  navigation, including position, velocity, and timing data to the DoD and civilian users.Spacecraft: A Block II satellite in the NAVSTAR Global Positioning System.Objective: To provide a platform for experiments on the SPACEHAB-1 payload and to retrieve the ESA's European Retrievable Carrier satellite  deployed from Atlantis Aug. 2, 1992.  There  were also 7 secondary objectives, 16 developmental test objectives, and 11 detailed supplemental objectives.  Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter featuring SPACEHAB,   a commercially developed, pressurized module   that provides about 1,100 cu. ft. of additional  pressurized volume to the Shuttle's habitable working space and supports primarily orbiter middeck-type experiments.Objective: To provide space-based radar calibration for over 70 ground-based radars and to verify GPS use for satellite positioning.Spacecraft: Radar Calibration (RADCAL) experiment.844.0749.099.670.0306.0298.090.528.420,342.020,020.0717.955.0483.0407.093.528.4883.0752.0101.389.6First such flight of an all-DoE sponsored satellite.  It cost $17 million for the satellite and its integrated components.  In orbit.Fifty-fifth STS flight.  Piloted by Steven R. Nagel and Terence T. Henricks.  Mission specialists Jerry   L. Ross, Charles J. Precourt, Bernard A. Harris, Jr.  Payload specialists  Ulrich Walter and Hans Schlegel.   Launched from KSC 10:50 a.m., EDT.  Landed at Edwards AFB, CA,  10:29 a.m., EDT, May 6, 1993.Mission duration: 9 days, 23 hrs., 39 min.Twentieth in a series of operational   GPS satellites.  System expected to   be composed of 24 satellites in  inclined, semi-synchronous orbit.  In orbit.Fifty-sixth STS flight.  Piloted by Ronald J. Grabe and Brian J. Duffy. Mission specialists G. David Low, Nancy J. Sherlock, Peter J.K. Wisoff,   and Janice E. Voss.  Launched from  KSC 9:07 a.m., EDT.  Recovered Eureca at 12:36 p.m., EDT Jun. 24. Landed at KSC 8:52 a.m., EDT, Jul.  1.  Mission duration: 9 days, 23 hrs., 46 min.Twenty-second consecutive successful Scout launch.  In orbit.Jun. 26 GPS USA 92 42A Delta IIObjective: To provide radio positioning and navigation, including position, velocity, and timing data to DoD and civilian users.Spacecraft: A Block II satellite in the NAVSTAR Global Positioning System.20,248.020,115.0718.054.7Twenty-first in a series of operational GPS satellites.  System expected to be composed of 24 satellites in inclined semi-synchronous orbit.  In orbit.Jun. 26 Plasma Motor Generator 42B Delta IIObjective: To demonstrate the ability of a tether to generate an electrical current in space.Spacecraft: The tether consisted of two plasma  contractors, or hollow cathode tubes, at either end of a 500-meter-long thin copper cable coated with teflon.844.0196.094.825.7Launched from Cape Canaveral AFS     9:27 a.m. attached to second stage     of Delta II.  Decayed 30 August 1993.Jul. 1 Soyuz TM-17Crew consisted of Vasiliy Tsibliyev, Aleksandr Serebrov, and Jean-Pierre Haignere.  Docked with Mir Space Station Jul. 3.  Haignere returned to Earth with Soyuz TM-16.  Serebrov,     and Tsibliyev landed in TM-17 space    craft after end of fiscal year on Jan. 14, 1994.Flight time: 196 days, 17 hrs., 45   min.Jul. 19 DSCS III USA 93 46A Atlas IIObjective: To provide a world-wide, secure,  uninterrupted communications capability in support of globally distributed DoD users.Spacecraft: Improved, third-generation Defense Satellite Communications System (DSCS) satellite.35,743.635,743.61,440.00.0Initial DSCS use of Atlas II launch booster coupled with an inertial upper stage for achieving Earth orbit. Satellite to be cut over to operational traffic in early FY 1994 in the West Pacific.  In orbit.Aug. 9 NOAA-13 50A Atlas EObjective: To provide global environmental   observation; land, sea, and air temperature, and moisture profiles; and to detect emergency beacons from ships and planes.Spacecraft: A 3-axis-stabilized, near-polar- orbiting satellite equipped with an Advanced  Very High Resolution Radiometer, a High- resolution Infrared Sounder, a Solar Backscatter Ultraviolet Spectral Radiometer, plus Search and Rescue instruments provided by Canada and   France among other equipment. 860.0846.0102.098.9The purpose of the satellite was to  replace the aging NOAA-11, but all communications with NOAA-13   ceased Aug. 21 and attempts to  restore them have not been successful.  In orbit.Aug. 30 GPS USA-94 54A Delta IIObjective: To provide radio positioning and  navigation, including position, velocity, and timing data to DoD and civilian users.  Spacecraft: A Block II satellite in the NAVSTAR Global Positioning System.20,257.020,109.0718.059.0Twenty-second in a series of operational GPS satellites.  System  expected to be composed of 24     satellites in inclined, semi-        synchronous orbit.  In orbit.Sep. 3 UFO-2 USA-96 56A Atlas-Centaur 1Objective: To provide communications and UHF links for the U.S. Navy, Strategic Command, and Army/Marine Rapid Deployment Forces.Spacecraft: Second of nine UHF satellites built for   the Navy by Hughes Space and Communications    Corp. to replace an aging Fleet Satellite  Communications System.36,446.035,140.01,436.55.1Successfully launched into  geosynchronous orbit and  transitioned to normal operating mode with all systems nominal.  In orbit.Sep. 12 Space Shuttle   Discovery (STS-51) 58AObjective: To deploy a satellite that will serve as   a testbed for new communications satellite technology as well as to deploy and retrieve a  U.S./German free-flying scientific observation satellite, among numerous other missions.Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter with Advanced  Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS), Orbiting and Retrieving Far and Extreme Ultraviolet Spectrometer-Shuttle Pallet Satellite (ORFEUS-SPAS), plus nine other cargo bay and  in-cabin payloads.307.0275.090.328.4Fifty-seventh STS flight.  Piloted by Frank L. Culbertson, Jr., and William  F. Readdy.  Mission specialists            James H. Newman, Daniel W.   Bursch, and Carl E. Walz.  Launched    from KSC at 7:45 a.m., EDT.              Landed at KSC 3:56 a.m., EDT, Sep.   22.Mission duration: 9 days, 20 hrs, 11 min. Sep. 12 ACTS 58BObjective: To flight test high-risk, advanced communications satellite technology for  providing up to three times the communications capability for the weight of today's satellites, 20 times the rate of communications between users, and other advances over existing technology.Spacecraft: Basically rectangular satellite equipped with two solar arrays, a 30-GHz receiving antenna, a C-band omni antenna, a steerable antenna, and a 20-Ghz transmitting antenna, among other equipment.  35,929.035,709.01,437.80.2Deployed from Discovery at 5:13   p.m., EDT.  Transfer Orbit Stage fired on time 45 min. later and boosted it to its planned orbit. Second mission of Transfer Orbit Stage and first use on a Shuttle mission.  In orbit.Sep. 13 ORFEUS- SPAS 58CObjective: To investigate very hot and very cold matter in the universe using the retrievable  ASTRO-SPAS spacecraft built by Germany.Spacecraft: ASTRO-SPAS containing the one-  meter diameter ORFEUS-Telescope with the Far Ultraviolet Spectrograph and the Extreme Ultraviolet Spectrograph, plus the Interstellar Medium Absorption Profile Spectrograph and the    Surface Effects Sample Monitor.304.0270.090.128.4The Discovery crew released   ORFEUS-SPAS on the morning of Sep. 13.  Mission Specialist Dan Bursch recaptured the satellite at 7:50 a.m., EDT, on Sep. 19 using   the Shuttle's robotic arm.  Oct. 5 Landsat-6 63A Titan IIObjective: To monitor Earth resources in support of global change research, coastal zone monitoring, timber management, environmental  monitoring, and other programs.Spacecraft: Landstat-6.813.0786.0100.698.5Satellite's kick motor failed to place it   in final orbit, and communications   with it ceased (i.e., launch was  successful but not satellite).Oct. 18 Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-58) 65AObjective: To determine the effects of micro-       gravity on human and animal subjects using the Spacelab Life Sciences-2 payload.Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter carrying SLS-2.291.0282.090.239.0Fifty-eighth flight of STS.  Piloted by John E. Blaha and Richard A.  Searfoss.  Payload Commander M.   Rhea Seddon, MD.  Mission specialists Shannon W. Lucid, PhD;  David A. Wolf, MD; William S.  McArthur, Jr.  Payload specialist  Martin J. Fettman, DVM, PhD.  Launched from KSC 10:53 a.m., EDT.  Landed at Edwards AFB 11:22 a.m., EDT, Nov. 1.       Oct. 26 GPS 68A Delta IIObjective: To provide radio positioning and  navigation, including position, velocity, and timing data to DoD and civilian users.Spacecraft: A Block IIA satellite in the NAVSTAR Global Positioning System.20,268.020,093.0717.955.2Twenty-third in a series of operational GPS satellites.  System to be   composed of 24 satellites in inclined, semi-synchronous orbit.  In orbit.Nov. 28 DSCS III 74A Atlas IIObjective: To provide long-haul, high capacity  communications system supporting the world- wide command and control of the U.S. Armed Forces and other Government agencies.  Spacecraft: Improved, third-generation Defense  Satellite Communications system (DSCS)           satellite.   35,533.0160.0623.326.5Cut over to operational traffic in mid-  1994.  In orbitDec. 2 Space Shuttle    Endeavour (STS-61) 75AObjective: To restore the planned scientific  capabilities and reliability of the Hubble Space Telescope and to validate the on-orbit servicing concept for HST.Spacecraft: Shuttle orbiter equipped with HST  replacements.594.0588.096.528.4Fifty-ninth flight of STS.  Piloted by Richard O. Covey and Kenneth D.   Bowersox.  Mission specialists Tom     Akers, Jeffrey A. Hoffman, Kathryn   C. Thornton, Claude Nicollier (Switzerland), and F. Story  Musgrave.  Launched from KSC at   4:27 a.m., EST.  Landed at KSC 26 minutes after midnight on Dec. 13.Mission duration: 10 days,19 hrs., 58 Min.    Dec. 8 NATO IVB 76A Delta IIObjective: To provide secure and reliable military communications between NATO member nations   and NATO military forces.Spacecraft: Military communications satellite built   by British Aerospace.35,914.0762.0644.523.3Launched commercially by McDonnell Douglas.  In orbit.Dec. 16 Telstar 401 77A Atlas IIObjective: To provide television and data  communications services for U.S. customers.Spacecraft: AT&T communications satellite.  35,804.0188.0631.223.9Launched commercially by General Dynamics.